Philotimus.

THE WAR betwixt Nature and Fortune.

Compiled by BRIAN MELBANCKE Student in Graies Inn.

Palladi.

Fortuna virtutis famula.

Imprinted at London by Roger Ward, dwelling near unto Holborne Conduit at
the Sign of the Talbot. 1583.

To the right honorable, Phillip, Earl of Arundell, Brian Melbancke wishes
increase of honor, with the full fruition of perfect felicity.
THE baseness of this present (my very good Lord) compared with the
worthiness of your honor, may argue me impudent in exhibiting such a gift,
and confirm your vvoonted clemency if you deigne to accept it.

The firstlinges of our fruits are due to the Gods, and men are discharged if
they offer them devoutly: the prime of my labors I give to your honor, and I
think my self acquitted though they be not very exquisite. A Caesar's mind
will vouchsafe a Codrus might, a courteous Laelius will give attention to a
stammering Lentulus, and Jupiter in that did show himself Jupiter, that he
refused not the supplication of poor Liberia.

Meet it were, feign I would, and I hope I shall gratify your Lordship,
edify the Reader, and damnifie none by this simple Treatise. If your Lordships
Triple be not to high for my Base, I doubt not but my music will be
indifferent, and if your honor disdain not my seely Pamphlet, I hope it
will be reasonably vvelcome to others.

Had PHILOTIMVS been served in at the first course, when your stomach was not
quatted with other daintier fare, his relishe perhaps had been something
toothsome: But since you are cloied with more delicate cates, thus fair
notvvithstanding I dare presume, to bring him in for a shovv among other
banqueting dishes. And as Olautia rejoiced, that Thalestris the Queen of the
Amazons received a hosegay at her hands, though she never smelled to it: or as
Cherilus the rural Poet triumphed, that the great Macedo had seen his verses,
though he never liked them: So if now and than you do but look on
PHILOTIMVS, when other vvaightier affairs do not otherwise employ you, I shall
think my self no small deal happy, that your honorable vievve has
ouershadovved my book.

The morning is meet for grauer studies, the postmeridian for pleasant
solace, so that, PHILOTIMVS which comes in limping at the latter end of the
day, though be be no author for knowledge of importance, yet may some
refection by reading his toies, lend recreation to your vvearied Muses.

Iuball first made the portatiue tents, ordered his flocks, and appointed
when rams should go to the eyves: Tuball devised the science of music,
Tubalcan searched out the commodities of metals, Parmenides invented the art
of Logic, Saturn first taught the conceit of shooting, and Noema found out
the mystery of vveauing: Yet neither the kind of Deiotorus his grasing, not
the commodity of Lagus his tent making, nor the commendation of Empedocles his
melody, nor the fame of Vulcans smith works, nor the renoune of Arist.
Logic, nor the praise of Lancus for weauing of his silks, nor the steady
hand of Comodus that never missed mark, are any whit impaired by their
predecessors praise: no more I trust shall my poor Pamphlet be defaced by
the eloquence of them that have forerun me, (though the comparison be far
unequal.)

Galen was a cunning physician, Saluius Iulianus an expert lawyer, Fon^o a
disert orator, Oppian a famous poet, and Maximinus of so strong constitution,
that he was able to support any pains: were the properties of all these
coniested in me, which am invested in none of them all, then vvoulde I try,
whether my service were able to stand your Lordship in some stead, to whom
my serviceable duty shall be ever obeisant. But alas (my Lord) a barley
grain can but yield an ear of barley, and two pence is large usury of a
poor penny: a mightles marling can afoord but a willing mind, and a
halfepeni-worth of skill, a two-peny Pamphlet.

If plain utterance be no blemish to a very truth, and truth do not breed
suspicion of flattery, I protest to your honor, that as you have won the
hearts of all them, who have heard of your demeanor: So I amongst the rest
(though one of the most that can do you least service) have in faith and
fancy, love and loyalty, done unto you such hearty homage, as is more possible
for you to conceive, then credible for me to declare to your self. And this I
say, that whiles you Mecenas are, a Maro shall you never want: VVhiles you
endeavor to be an Achilles, an Homers deuoire shall never quail to blaze your
praise: a virtuous Cyrus will cause Zenophon to be eloquent, and Alexanders
valute will make Curtius a good Antiquatie.

But least you think that Plato is turned to Gnato, and my philosophy
changed to flattery, I will rather refer my self to time and trial, then
vainly vaunt of loyalty, where there wants (ah) ability.

This therefore (right honorable) is my humble request, that in this war
betwixt NATVRE and FORTUNE, you will vouchsafe to be the vmpeere, whose fortune
is prosperous (long may it last) but far inferior to your nature, whom all men
admire. And if at any time hereafter, you see virtue suppressed by casual
calamity, you will lend your assistance to the rescuing of Virtue, knowing,
that Caesar was more commended for his courtesy then his cheualrie, and that
the only Virtue which made Theodosius the Emperor, surnamed the younger, so
famous, was bounty to the best and affability to all. Haud facile emergunt
(says the Poet) quorum virtutibus obstat res augusta domi, and oftentimes
shall you see inestimable virtues endarkened with the vale of a russet coat, as
the mithridate of Medicines (triacle I mean) is extracted out of the bowels of
most poisoning woormes.

I speak not this for mine own lucres sake. For as Isocrates says in his
pareneticall oration to Nicocles, I am not so baseminded to merchandise books,
although my want may stand in need to your Lordship, and urge me to crave your
favor, when my merits deserve no meed.

I am not ignorant that there be some, who will be as free of a good word to
Philotimus, as a poor man is of his harvest: who, for that they hate me
unadvisedly, will indiscreetly beat my dog: and because they envy Melbancke
with a peasantly despite, will dispraise all his doings, though they be for
their profit.

Plain dealing is a ^ewel, (though they that use it commonly die beggars) and
therefore will I speak plainly without a parable, though my simplicity may
impeach me of folly. If they like it, let them use it, and if they loath it,
let them refuse it: If they spite it, let them not spare, so they will promise
to amend it: and when this promise has perfourmance, then will I cancel all
my malice: But then I fear me they shall experiment, that it is easier to spy
a beam in an other man's eye, then to pull a moat out of their own: that it is
harder to see a great stain in the mantle that is behind them, then to see a
little wrinkle in a gown before them: and less difficill to say in an other
man's edifice, this stone lies not square, then either like Vigetius and
Columella to prescribe true rules of Architecture, or like Besaleel, Ooliab, or
Hiram of Tire, to buyld an house by good Geometry.

The buckler to break of all these blows, is your Lordships favorable
patronage, which if you will deigne to bestow upon me, I shall safely be
defended from all their garboyles. The burdens which they lay upon me with
all their might, of them your little finger shall easily unburden me: Their
malicious fire wherewith they would stiffle me, your very breath shall quickly
extinguish: One dram of the quintesence of wormwood will repel any poison,
and one good word of your good will, thall refell all their morninges.

Thus wishing your Lordship as many prosperous years, as virtuous properties,
and no fewer virtues, then the Sea has sands, And commending both me and mine
to your honorable protection, I humbly take my leave this 28. of November.

Your Lordships most duetifull to command. Brian Melbancke.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL and my very friends, the Gentlemen Students in the Innes of
Court and Chauncerie, and the university of Cambridge.
THe worthiness Gentlemen of your demerits, and the daily benefit of your
friendly courtesies, incite me to proffer you my simple service, and humbly to
entreat you to vouchsafe it acceptance,

I Heartily wish (Gentlemen) that Phylotimus had the property of the tree
Coccus, which bears ten sundry commodities all at once: or that it resembled
the herb Pauemis, whose emeralds gloss refreshes the sight, whose violets
favor delights the smell, whose sovereign juice does comfort the heart in
most dumpish fits of direful melancholy: or that each of you here in my little
garden, might gather a poesy of the three Phoenick flowers. Mirth, Money, and
Melody, the vvorst whereof may serve to deck a Princes garland.

But alas poor toy (if pity might prevail) it rather represents
grateful Tholies thankfulness, then presumes to present you with glozing
^ullies eloquence, and more submissiuelie craves pardon for this too audacious
enterprise, then loftily looks for praise for an undeserving travail.

Yet Brass is good Goulde in a Brasiers Shop, Pottage daintty fare at a poor
man's Feast, and murrye sweet beautye in a Blackamoores face: And therefore I
hope hautily, that if I inuit you to my homely banquet, (where you shall have
single fare for double cost) you will not thank me so ironeously, as Socrates
on a time did a poor honest man, who bad him for good will to his best, though
bare, supper. I pray thee, quoth he, who made us so familiar, that thou
should thus saucily incroch upon my courtesy, to inuit me so unmannerly to
a needy beeuer?

I have been pregnant, as once was Valentia, almost double the time of a
vvomans account, and now at my childbyrth, with the same Valentia, I am
brought to bed of an halfe-shaped Monster. I grant that for want of plenarrity
this time of vacation, I am vvorthelye fallen into your lappes, so that, you may
lawfully refuse to admit me to your favor, and give the benefit of your
friendship to some more meritorious.

Credit me Gentlemen, (I know not by what haps, mishaps I should say)
Phylotimus has been longer in publishing then in compiling, and less time in
penning then in printing: wherein he is not unlike all manner of fruits, which
attein not maturity so soon as they bad, neither are always reaped when they
are ripe: or rather a kin to the Bears confused Brood, which she is longer in
framing to a perfect shape, then she is in conceiving and producing.

Well (Gentlemen) now you have it, give it a vvelcome, read it with judgment
(as I know you can) peruse it with patience (as I hope you will) and mind as
you find, I require no more.

I know that ventrous Will does never sail surely, where practiced skill
does not hold the Helm, and that brainsick youth does never reign well,
where settled age does not bear the Bridle, and that it is more meet for my
vnmellovved years to be employed in the study of Phylosophicall axiones, then
take upon them to instruct others in literature.

Yet have I tried that the youngest pullet is both toothsome and vvholsom, and
that the timeliest harvest makes the best bread: now adays, that Parrat is
very young that will not prattle, and that Cock very bad that crovves not till
his age: the young cat cries mevv as well as the old one, and youthful
Aristippus will be regardant to Philosophy, as well as old Plato is a
professor of Wisdom: if June yield flovvers, May vvil yield Cherries, if
there be blossoms in the spring, there will be fruit in Autumn, and amorous
Plato in his adolescencie, is a grave Philosopher in elder years.

For the excuse of my obscurity, vvherevvith I have endarkened my style, I
aunsvvere, that I am not of Perillus his mind, that thought himself a
glorious Orator, if he were plausible to the Populer sort: I would rather
imitate our master Arist. who writ his Physics in so intricate a style,
because he vvoulde not vouchsafe every refuse Coridon the imparture of his
mysteries: And I doubt not but amongst you (Gentlemen) I shall find more of
Oedipus his line, then of Davu^ his lignage, more that can assoile a doubtful
ambiguitie with their learned resolutions, then vvil inuert a good meaning
which they cannot amend, and turn that to scoffing which was made for no
Skoggins.

If I have used any rare and obsolete words, they are either such as the
Coryphees of our English vvriters, Chaucer and Lidgate, have used before me,
and now are decayed for want of practice: or else such as by an apt
translation out of the Greeks and Latins (which Crassus in Tullies books de
Oratore allovves for lavvfull) are fitly contrived into our English language.

For that I have not kept one uniform manner of style (much like the Queens
Mules that never change pace) I think that I am no more tied to one order of
vvriting, in the universal tractation of my treatise, then a Gardener is bound
but to sovv one sort of seeds in a great plot of his Garden ground. He (says
Hermogenes) that adornes his whole Oration with no other trope, but a svveet
subjection or an anomination, may be thought a trim man in the ears of the
multitude, but in the judgment of the elegant Orators, he shall be known as
rude in his art of Rhetoric, as the butcher that scalded the Calfe, was in his
craft of Butchery.

Good Gentlemen, pardon the faults that are passed in printing, omit the
escapes that are committed by my negligence, and take that well in vvoorth,
which I wish were more then well. It may be Gentlemen, that my english Tables
of all Arist works (which some of you have too long expected) shall shortly
make you amends. Although all of you know that my Kingdom never consisted in
the English tongue, but if ever I had any thing wherein to vaunt, (as God
knovvs I had nothing) it was some small skill in other languages.

Thus not doubting, but you Gentlemen of Cambridge will give Philotimus
friendly entertainment, for that Melbanck his master was sometime a Scholar
amongst you (with what credit I know not, but sure I am in more then ever he
deserved, and in such, as for the love he bears you, he never intends quite to
forsake you) and that you Gentlemen of the Innes of Court will favorably
censure of Philotimus, because I may ere I die be a Soliciter in your law, I
humbly take my leave this 28. of November.

Yours as your own to use. Brian Melbancke.

George Wastnes Esquire, in commendation of the Author.
Vinum vendibile non eget haedera.
Feign would I praise my dearest swetest friend,
Yet do I fear my praise will work disgrace,
How shuold I praise where none can ought amend,
Nor any Momus this his work deface?
If Fortune would agree with natures gifts,
If God and Fortune once would deigne to smile,
A mirror of a man, were Melbancke than,
Whose wit, whose art, whose virtues, now surpass.
In these his youthful years to have such skill?
And now to virtues lore to frame his will?
What learned age with ours once dare compare,
Since Melbancke lives, whose learning is so rare?
God prosper thee (my sugared darling boy)
God give thee once thy hearts desired joy,
And if I live, my love shall prove no toy,
But thou shall find that Wastnes is thine own. Adue.
Thine as his own, G. VVastnes. Erras, virtus fortunae famula.

Philotimus.
The war betwixt Nature and Fortune.
An Interlocution of two distressed wightes, whereof the one more hardy,
harteneth his fellow. Pandolpho, Periander. MIne own best beloved and dear
Periander, well met, long have I sought the, and feign would have found thee,
and glad am to see thee, sweet Periander.


Per. Pandolpho, more heartily welcome then shall appear by thy cheer, though
better be away then have so sle^der entertainment: yet if wishing without hope
might increase my wealth, or sorrow for my want excuse my good meaning, neither
should thy pains be so coldly rewarded, neither shall my nature be suspected
of nigardize. But shadows without substance make brau^^alne fare, and sayings
bear no seals, but deeds be indented.

Ay me therefore and wellaway, and cursed be my miseries most waylfull wight,
whose remedy is patience, and that's a pinching pain, whose comfort is death,
which never will consume me. Sometimes it approaches with his manacing
torments, but still prolonges my life to augmente my martyrdom: I can be no
worse, and therefore I fear not: I shall be no better, and therefore I hope
not. Well Pandolpho, repose thy self in this shady brier, a semelie palace
for so dainty Cates, and in stead of music to make us meriment, recounte our
driery destinies as becomes our dole.


Pan. Good Periander to grieve thy self for these trifles, were to prevent me of
my purpose, and prove thy self unkind: for my coming was to lessen thy woes
with perswations, and thou sighest as soon as thou see me, and to continue
our mutual affection, and thou accountest me as a stranger. I am of
Themistocles his mind that had rather have a man without money, then money
without a man. And of Timolites the Graecians, that had rather have a root
which might hereafter budde and bring forth fruit, then flourishing blossoms
without a root, which must needs decay and wither.

It is not my belly I make my God, but it is thy good would feed and fat me.
The Elephant lives by the air, the Fish by the water, and thy Pandolpho semes
to revive in enioyeing thy presence.

Thou gratest on thy stomach because thou art hapless, and ratest on Fortune
because she is spightfull, either slothfully like a sluggard forgetting
Philosophy, (a sovereign medicine for all such maladies) or cowardlye like a
recreaunte yielding Fortune the conqueste, a faynte hearted crauyne if her force
be not feared.

With what madding mood art thou distraught (unfortunate Periander) when as
those distresses which the best have not escaped, thou alone so scornefullye
disdaynest, or the grief of these casualties which are common to al, thou
seelye soul do wreak on thy self?

If with Quintus Catulus always wise, but once forlorn, thou had rather
spille thy life, then live with shame, it is desperate folly. If with tears
thou meanest to move Fortune to pity, as Iphis would with mourning his stony
hearted lover, as she was deaf and would not hear, so Fortune is blind and
cannot see. If thou art loath ye others should be plagued with thy freting
pangs, and wilt with Ephigenia offer up thy self, one for all to appease ye
Gods, though they were well pleased with her sweet Sacrifice, yet they have not
vouchsafed a promise to thee for acceptance of thy service.

Belike Periander, (be it spoken by thy favor) thou have some ouerwening
surmise of thine own surpassing qualities, and conferring thy conditions with
others misdemeanour, can hardly brook these sharp calamities: thou either
think thy self more worthy then any man to be exempted from these
shattering storms, and yt is haughty arrogance, or else for these brunts that
you art worse then all men, and that is abject peuishnes, that either the Gods
should spare the for thy gifts, and that is self love, or yt they repent them
of their former graces, and that is broad blasphemy. Cease these sighs, cheer
up thy spirits, seek means of mirth, make end of moan. It is an argument of a
good man to be afflicted with crosses, but to bear them patiently a type of
perfect virtue. Art not thou ashamed Periander, that old wives accustomed to
pinching, can fast three days without grudging, That the boys of Sparta may
be tried with scourging to know their courage, yet never tired with stripes
because of smart, Nor ye rascal wrastlers at ye games of Olimpia, offer to
withdraw their heads from the block, or once cry oh at ye stroke of the
hatchet for fear of reproach, and yet thou, thou I say, whose wit is famous,
whose learning excellent, rather a pattern to follow as thou do seem to
others, then fit to take advise as I do deem by thee, should be so simple to
be blinded, or so weak to be daunted, or once to be dismayed with these vain
toys?

Thou art now a stranger from thy native soil, and so was Diogines: to whom
when it was scoffingly objected of one of his enemies, thou art now Diogines an
exile from thy country, nay rather (quoth he) my country is an exile from me.
Was it not a natural accident, fatally incident to best Athenians, most
unnaturally to be bannished from their thancklesse Cities, whom tenderly
they had cherished in all their extremities? much like ye snake that Esope
speaks of, which infected him with poison yt pampered her in his bosom. Did
Marius a Roman of renowned reputation, yet hotlye pursued to a foreign nation,
refuse to to crave aid of his seely clientes, whom erst he had saved and
sheilded from death? But lavish expenses and vntimly bravery, have worn out
your wealth, and bred unseemly beggary, and broching your coin without discretion,
it runs on ye lees to your utter destruction.

Tush man take heart at grace. Was not Cincius a gentleman of large revenues, so
far miscarried with ouer-lashinge affections, that for stately bower
gorgeously trimmed, and sumpteously decked with cloth of Arras, fit for an
Emperor, the gastlye hellishe dungeon must be his lodginge, berefte of all
sight and sollace of man, more fit for Pluto then Cincius a Gentleman,
where bracelettes, and owches, and ringes of Goulde, his amarous ornaments,
must free him from fetters and iron chains too troublesome Implementes, and
so was constrained by mere necessitye, for stynte of strife to sell his
patrimony.

Hard is the choice, and dangerous the chance, when either in pining
melancholye we must live without company, or making league with friends stand
in hazard of treachery. But so sweet is the heavenly sympathye of minds, and
so barbarous sauadgnes to live in no society, that we often contracte us with
those we like and trust, and find them by just trial more then villainous
traitors. Thy wit was to sharp not to be courted with friends, and thy
credit to light not to be inueigled by deceit. In all these thy bitter
plunging perplexities, (Periander) I know there is none more corsiue to thy
conscience, then that the swearing protestations of thy fawning friends should
turn to falsed faith of trotheles foes: that those which with dailye
soliciting sued for thy frendshippe, neither dying nor living but by the doom
of thy sentence, should now be so far from redressing thy distresses, their
own vowed Laelius, that they shun thy presence like some notorious fellons,
to the gaulling of thy heart, and discredit of thy person. But these are no
novelties but to such as be nouices, nor greater wonders to move admiration,
then birds which in summer do build their nestes in England, and in breme
frosty winter make other coasts their harborow.

Ancient antiquities can afford like examples, and it is good to follow our
forefathers. Did not Naso cry out with scritching and howling, that waters
should give heat, and fire make cold, and every source and every river run
back to his head, and flow to his welspringe, and all go astray with a
contrary course, backward, preposterous, and quite against nature? The reason
was, because those his familiar companions lincked unto him by dutiful oaths,
would neither entreat Caesar to restore him from banishment, nor defeat his
enemies of ye pursuit of their pray, nor releue his bare living amid the wild
barre^ Getes, nor visit his poor wife and children at home, with the least
supplye of their needful wantes. When Gisippus is on the hoigh in his
pontificalibus, and poor ^agged Titus lies groueling at his gates, how humbly
can he beg an alms of his master, when lofty Gisippus will not look a side?
Doves use no houses but yt be goodly to the vewe, mise haunt no barnes but that
be stuffed with the harvest, and no point penny no pater noster.

In this matter let me be a mirror worthy marking: for although I am a man of
the meanest making, yet a great torche may be lighted at a little candle, and
in this thou may be boulde to behold my advise, and show thy self wise, in
taking hold of my tackling. I can sit ye whole day long, and make me spoorte
at the spyte of the dizarde muffled Godesse, to see what game she makes at the
grefe of her subjects, this day lifting them up to her loftiest throne, and to
morrow throwing the^ down to her lowest foote-stoole, chopping and changing
from right hand to left, giving him a fan in his hand ye bore a Scepter
before, and laying a yocke on his neck that had a diadem on his head.

I deny the (Fortune) and defy thy frowninges, and dare vaunte with him in
Tusculans questions, that I have vanquished thy vanities, and intercluded all
thy passages, from the approach of my presence. I am poor, so have I peers, I
am homly, so am I honest. Marcus Curtius, Attilius Regulus, Valerius Publicola,
grave in their practices and praised in their graves, lived virtuously at Rome
with small scantling of living.

Fie Periander, so proper a man withowten manhood, thy stock so good and thy
stomach so badd.

Thy parents be dead. Death is natural, and Gods good pleasure, and the Iem of
their Joy, and greueth it you?

By your folly spendall is your store consumed, and by your God the sendall it
may be restored,

Your friends be fledd. In deed you brought them well up till they were flidge,
and therefore no marvel though they be flowne: but thrine you, and they will
strive for your frendshipp. There be too many friends that make great
semblaunce, and this has learned thee to discern their dissemblance.


Per. Ah peace Pandulpho, thy memory breeds my moan, and sight of pre^^^ times
brings sorrow in. I am more grieved with the reckning of my wrongs, then I can
be releued with thy weight of thy reasons. Thy counsel is Philosophical, but
my folly will not consent, thy physic is good, but my disease in desperate.

It is no dismal day, no week, no month, no one misfalling by chance that
mangles my mind, but infinite inconveniences that last all length of time,
increasing in number as they do in continuance* My fears must be fedd till
life shall faide, and I am constreined to languishe in anguishe.

As for thee, thou art less bound to Fortune for proof of prosperitye, then
behoulding to God for thy patience in aduersitye.

Entice me not with tales to follow fained fancyes, enforce me not to swymme
and shoue me on the shelfe. Delay works my decay, or ease me with aid, or
cease to vpbraide.


Pand. had he the might that has the mind, to rescue thee from myserye, thy
gaulling wooes should quickly be appaulde, and s^eringe sorrows turn to
sugar songs: but stay my figboye for a day, which once shall dawne with
glimmering streaming golden ^aies, and shedo this cloud of care.

Our fether-footed Phoebus, whose glymsing waine wends many a league, to ad fine
to his task, is sore attainte with toil and swinke, ere he have paste the
heavenly cope.

First before he take his Journey, he must wait the hours leisure, who are
placed as porters at heavens gates.

The morning way is steep upright, so that in coolest of the day, the
steedes have much a do to clymbe against the hill.

Amid the Heavens, they girde it out with splayed wings, and ouer-stripp the
Eastern wynds, whose hugye height augments the terror still.

The Evening way does fall plump down, that Thetis who does lodge faint Phaeb.
within her wide vaste surges, does stand in fear, least from ye heaven he
hedlong down should glide.

Besides all this, the firmament ay whiskes about with sails swift recourse,
and with his rolling drives the stars their breper course to shift, yet does
Phaeb. keep his beaten path, and does withstand the stoutest brute.

By blind bywayes, and ugly shapes of monsters must he tread: between the
dredefull bulls sharp horns, against ye cruel bow the which ye Aemonion archer
draws, against ye ramping Lion armde with greedy paws and tusks, against ye
Scorpions venimd claws, and eke the awry crabs crooked clees he weals his way.

Through all five zones direct he must not ride, but out askew a broad by
way, that bends on the side, contained within the bonds of three the midmost
zones does ly, which from the Northren beer and Southren pole does ^lye, yt is
his ready way: not mounting over hy lest he inflame ye heavens, nor drowping
over low lest he adure the earth, the golden mean is safest: not to the right
hand overmuch least he be driven upon the wauy sealed snake, nor to much
wresting to the least, lest to the Altar he be pusht that pitched against it
stands.

It is no moment of time yt brings mountains of treasure, but labor and
leisure, prudence and policy, must do ye deed.

Jupiter in his mood spared not his own son Vulcane, but by ye foot threw
him down from the skies, wherein ye air he tumbbled too and (...) a whole day
through, and fell at last with bruised bones in Lemnos i will, at which soul clap
he caught his haultyng haunch. Jupiters steedes of heavenly race, did sometime
need the ierke of golden whip.

The smith cools his iron to straight it and strenghthen it, and God corrects
thee with his rodd, to make thee recke more of his read. Thou have heard I am
sure, how Phoenix, Ajax, Ulysses Achilles, Patroclus, Antomddon, all grecian
Lords, have upon necessity abased them selves without any muttering to execute
ye function of sculls, to make ye fire, and broche their meat, yea worse then
this.

It is not with thee, as with those who have defect in the principles of nature,
whose pains are no boot to obtain the^ bliss, unless some vibootye do happ
the^ by hazard. Thou art not now to be made of the mass, but to be cast in ye
mould and burnished a new: you have exterior matter and interior form, and if
thou had a little pollishing, you might be published for perfect.

The heavenly bodies ar sooner healed then man's corrupted carcasses, as wounded
Mars immediately was cured by Peon physician to the Gods, and Hebes her sweet
baines.

Then since thou have infusion of celestial influence, thou may quickly have
conclusion of these terrene afflaightinges, and God in a tryce can make thee
thryce happy.

Those who^ virtuous constancy does control, says Horace lib. 3. Odisse 3.
are neither removed with vulgar Rumor, nor greatly fretted with threats of
Tyrants: and though that hills and dales should mete, do never change their
moods. But since that we are hear in this vacation of business, to imploye our
deuoyres to deuoyd our ill plights, I will recite yt a story to ye purpose, of
Melanthus his inditing and his poor posse.

Per. of Melanthus his, our old play fellow, and now only plaining fellow?
gramercye by my honestye good Pandol. we shall now be over pearears of his
closets close commentaries, which he has kept so obscure from all our
scanninges, either repining ye others should reap good of his travails, or
mistrusting his ability and misco^struing his good qualityes. But I pray you
of what or whom is this treatise comprised, or what opportunity had he to
compile it? Pand. two days ago I received his letters of salutations, not
forgetting therein thy recommendations, and therewithal he sent us this
present, as a preservative to prevent us of ioye-wrack. The contents of his
epistle were these, yt he having spent his thrifte on that baude Misfortune
common to us three, and having cra^ed his brain with the abstruce study of
some intricate quirkes, he thought that ye composing of this was a relaxation
to his mind, and that it being compassed would be a refection to us: with this
certificate moreover he gave me intelligence, yt though it might seem a fiction
figured by his imaginatiue conceit, yet it was not framed without allusion to
a proper subject. Herein shall then see decyphred by the princely gallant
nature of forw^rd Philotimus, and the pinching galling thwartings of froward
fortune, and by some pamplets penned to the same effect of the said Philotimus,
what bitter debate does ever abide, betwext good Nature and dame Fortune.


Per. Good ^an. let us hear this work, that will prove us wise because we
are unfortunate, and then perhapps by this wisdom we shall contemn fortune*


Pan. I am pleased.


Per. then I I hope I shall be eased.


Pandolpho his posie. Sapit qui suflinet,

The war betwixt Nature and Fortune. The historye of Philotimus.
NOt far from the confines of the south part of Italye, abuts a certain
City surnamed Mantua, neither contemptible for baseness nor desolate for
barrennes, but so well fraughte with traffic for all affairs, and pleasantly
situated for the verdure of the air, as both the poor by pains may here
find relief, and he that is destitute of other delytes, may yet have these
objects to refreshe his senses.

The cheefe-taine and governor of this City Mantua, was a noble young
gentleman called Cle^^ritus, who latelye had espoused his long betrothed wife,
the princelye gallant paragon Lady Castibula, daughter and heir to the Duke of
Bononia.

These two imps in their royal ruff, newelye surprised with uncouth Joys,
for a long season and tract of time, during the space of full five years,
with many an embracing and sporting pastime, ledd such a Lordlye life, as he
would wish that can wyshe aright, and you not knowinge it may possiblye
imagine. Of countenance and office among their compeares, though rather worthy
then willinge to bear any swaye: for competent wealth, of superfluous
abundance, when less might have wrought their settled contentation.

Now, when all things were patt for every purpose, and nothing amiss that
might be amended, to the absolute finishinge of a perfect Felicytye, the
greatest matter of all, in which the fruit of their labors, the staff of
their age, the end of their life were ioyntlye comprised, were all this while
a wantinge, children I mean, wherein we are as it were regenerated and borne a
new, even budding after death by the springing of our seed, which canonizeth
our memory with euerlusting eternitye, by continuance of their lineage, and
propagatio^ of our petegree. Which one backwarde let amongst other good
successes, was as it were aiarring discord in a sweet Diapason, a prickinge
nettle in a pleasant nosegaye, a foul mayme in a fair man. Yet they measured
Gods might not by the aptness of their age, nor his fatherly providence by
present occasion but referring his power to his maiestyes pleasure, never
repined against his judgments, but prayed for his mercy.

So in process, he which makes an end where he does begin, and plentifully
blesses the perseueraunce in trial, when fullness of time had expired her
date by Gods predestinate appointment, and teeminge at length was now unlooked
for, which heretofore had so been longed for, made them on the sodeyne
marvelous fertyle, to the accomplishment of their hope, and advancement of
his glory. And where before they were punished with sterile frutlesnesse, they
now seem ouer-laden with a burdenous charge.

But as all waters run in to the sea and it no bigger, and all stars borrowe
light of the Sun and it no dimmer, and all ye Gods do drink of Nectar and
yet it always over flows: so the n^mber of their children amounting to a
multitude, whose great expenses must needs be proportionate to the quality of
their calling, they were neither impouerished (an extraordinary event) neither
impaired of their wealth (a wonderful conseque^t) But as that Emperor, among
others that were summoned to his hye assemblye of parliament, espieinge an aged
gentleman attended with a troop of worthy bloods in account xxxi. which by
all inquysition were found to be his sonns, and taking their original from a
worshipful house, could not for their quantity have sufficient portions
allotted unto them out of their fathers lands to maintain a credit requisite
to their race: as his heart meltinge on them to see such an ofspringe in
ieoperdye, of beggerye, made them certain conueyances of his crown revenues,
to uphold their port: even so Gods omnipotency yelding such an issue, to the
great procurement of their parents pleasure, did not any whitt diminishe their
former profit, which still was made auneswerable to the charge of their
children. These grew up and prospered in such likely forwardness, being
courtlye brought up to break them of rudeness, and clearklye instructed to
furnishe them with knowledge, that manners and learning marchinge with due
equipage in the order of their lives, the precysest carper would judge them in
both exquisite, but in whether of both they would rather exceed (such resolute
expectation was of rare effect) that none durst give his verdit. They were
lovely and affable to the coursest inferiors, diligent and attentive to the
prescriptions of their rulers, so seruisablye obeysant to their parents
behestes, that for rod of correction to control brainesicke youth, lawful
for parents, and awful for children, they were mildely nurtured with meek
education, having suffitient incitements of their own inclination.

At whose good disposition I do not greatelye muse, although so good devotion
be little in use: yet is such a blessing worthy to be blazed, where by God both
is praised, and all men are pleased.

Mitio and Demea had but two to look too, which both were misled with
hair-braine lust. A postinge messenger bringing hastye tydinges to Dragoras
that his sonns had overcome at Olimpia, dye Diagoras, dye quoth he, for thy
sonns this day are both victorious. Such carke they take to tender their young
ones, which are subject to every cross overthwart of perverse fortune, much
like him that thought himself past peril, when he escaped Scilla, and by and
by offended against Caribdis, or him who being flitt from his fever lurdaines
fytt, the next day quaketh with an other qualme: or the dronken besill that is
reared from the grownde, and Incontinentlye rusheth into the channel.

These things are necessary briefelye to inferte, whereof a large treatise
were to small avail, and as great Indecorum it is to make a long preamble to
a short narration, as a war^de with an head bygger then his body.

And now (Pandolplio) prepare thy pair of ears to receive my Historye,
distill thy trycklynge tears to bewail my Tragedye, O let thy heart sweat
dropps of blood to record his auentures.

And thou Melpemmone the mournefulst Muse of nine, if I have ever daunced to
thy doleful tunes, when the alluringe timpanes of other sportinge Muses could
not once change my coppie, and shrynd thee for a Saynct in the bottom of my
heart, when the service I did thee has turned me to smart: then deigne to dropp
thy heavenly dew, and therewith sprinckle my rudest pensell, not to vaunt of
art, for my heart is not so vain, but to further my pretense in my purposed
description, grounded on no gain, but intending thy glory.

I require no guerdon of the pleasant hedded youths, whose humor this fits
not, nor any reward of the comfortless wights for whose cause I write this,
the one I fear me will scarce bestow readinge, the other is too needye to
bestow any recompense, the toil shall be mine, the thancke shall be thine,
and some profit perhapps shall redoune to others.

Then mighty Goddess, if love have no leisure to be troubled with toys, nor
thou no pleasure to meddle with tryffles, yet reject not the publishinge of his
piteous plight, so relygious a Catholycke in thy sacred Cerimonyes, or at least
respect the honor of thy portly deity, which the world shall brute through
the brunt of his myserye.


Per. What horror Pandolpho affrights my cr^sed heart? what manner Proaemion is
this devout prayer? me thinks I seem to hear his woeful plaining voice, me
thinks I see him tear his curious tressed locks, and feelingly feel the
impression of his sorrows. Ah God, that thou should make man to thine own
similitude, and give him over without thy purueiance.


Pan. War wing, quoth the huntsman to Bowman his hounde: what Periander, shall
the kyndnes to caytyues abate thy courage to God? art thou such a louinge
woorme to succourles creatures, to robb God of his due, which thou ought not
do, and pay them a debte, which thou owe them not?

Beware of Jove and lightning, and fly far from them. Though Venus were
assistant to Paris his adherentes, yet for contempt of Iunoes demand, both
Paris was slain, and Troy was sacked. Midas for faucines against Apollo, was
dubbed for a dolte with a pair of Asses ears. And Phaeton I guess if he were
alive, would not be to busy with Phoebus his chariott. Purchase not to thy self
Lycurgus his scotchlade, who for his rashness to the Gods gaind a wretched life,
and got a painful death. Upon the mou^teyne of Nisa, Lycurgus advised the
women to do Bacchus due service at his festals, with slips of vines upon their
heads: but he so pricked them forward with his sharp twible goad, that they
let fall their holy crowns, whereat he did rejoice and sport his fill: yea
more then this, to disgrace the God himself, he thundered out his threats, and
caused him to fly to escape his snares: at this offense the Gods did loure, and
forthwith did revenge the same in bereauing Lycu^g of his sight for a certain
time, and to punish him aright, and fulfill their will at full, in setting
wreakfull date to his wicked life. Juno boiling with rancorous hate against the
remnaunt Troianes, the good soothfast prophet presaging Helenus, exhorts Lord
Aeneas to win her by submission, least he weaue to himself a web of woe, by his
dissolute defiance. To disanul ye kings decree is to be attainted of treason.
For Pythagoras scholars to ask a reason of any one article of his doctrine,
was accounted amongst the^ almost heresy, and dare you impeach Iehoua of
fleting inconsta^cy, not to continue his gracious goodness, like a treuantlye
Poet in framing his fables, that begins to lagg in his latter description?
or can thou convince him of careless regard, like the brutishe serpente
that killes his brood as soon as it is borne, and brought into light? Or
go thou about to attach him of ignorance in the mystical workemanshippe of
all mankind, which has made him more perfectlye then Science can conceive,
even after the likeness of his spottelesse Spirit, and softereth him with
food as the earth does her plants, when he deserves to be copsse and cast
into the Fire: and when he gaddeth without a guide after whooring inventions,
wandering in a laborinth of his imaginations, when his kin is unkind, and
friends do forsake him, and he in cold shiuering is ready to famishe, he
fetches him home upon his shoulders, (O careful shepherd) and penneth him
in the fold with his chosen flock (more careful then a shephearde.) Shall
the pot ask the potter why he fashioneth it so, or the anuile the smith why he
strikes it with the hammer, or thou search a reason of Gods severe
punishmente, whose name is in Scripture. I am that I am (so incomprehensible is
his majesty) who renders his reason I will that I will (so incapable is his
wisdom?) If any man have tasted some extraordinary mercies, it was his free
will, not their deserte: if either the gentleman of whom the history mentions,
or thou Periander have felt his heavy hand, it is your merit, not his
desire. I reprehend not thy presumption, but reprove thy despair: for
prosperity puffs up with contempt of God his bounty, and adversity pulls
down to distrust his favor, Therefore Periander.


Per. Peace Pandolpho, stay thy wisdom, thou have beat ye child till he
cries again, now give him dugge, and burn the rod. I was to bold because I
was blind, and who so bold as blind bayard? But give me leave to recover
this fall, and rashenes no more shall give me the foil. Though I was incensed
with a too patheticall motion, to utter that retchlesly, which I now repent:
yet was I not driven to hellish desperation, taking Gospel for no Gospel,
which promises remission. But I will make no apology for my passed defaulte,
least thou think it apostacy to persiste in my error: now if it please
thee, proceed in the premises.


Pand. The recantation of thy sayings is a requital for thy escape, and
therefore I proceed.


The sequel of Philotimus his history.
OF all this their joyful progeny, their first begotten son named
Philotimus, did both in feature of body, sharpness of wit, and towardnes of
mind excel the rest. In so much, that as when Jupiter and Juno were at
contention, whether man or woman were more prone to lechery, they elected
Tyresias, by whose arbitriment they would be determined, because he had been
both manne and woman: so if there were a controversy, which of the Gods were
most worthy wonder in their excellent works, I think none more indifferent
to decide the matter, then this young gentleman: in whose courtly complexions
(so sweet was Philotimus) and courteous conditions (sweet lovely Philotimus) the
express Images of their heavenly Deities were so liuelye portrayed. And yet
if Philotimus should give his censure, which of their powers he thought most
puissant, though he have felt their mighty operations, and so might judge: yet
do I ween his best resolution would only be silence. For as an Unicorn
having most strength, does least know it: so he having greatest pith, did most
pity himself. Notwithstanding that the Gods being corriuals in the framing of
him, and never one suffering a fellow cockmate in this joint labor, they all
doing best without comparison it was hard to judge who did the worst, even ye
worst being placed in the superlatiue degree. Which his parents marking, and
meruailing at it, thought themselves especially bound to be careful on him,
lest either nature wanting nurture, it should be mard in making, and so the
Gods offended with their wilful negligence: or his good disposition being at
liberty, having no leader but his own discretion, they might reap less
pleasure in vewing his good luck, having taken no pains in his bringing up.
They therefore knowing that a young colte must be used to the bitt before he
come to the saddle, that sprigs sprout the better if they be lopped, choose
rather to be niggardes in pinching him of pence, then procure his nicenes with
vain prodigallitie, rather liking a wan look that comes of moderate diet, and
bewrayes a painful student, then a fresh ruddy cheek that is died with
Bacchus his buries, and breeds suspicion of lust.

Well, the Sun and the Moon and the seven stars, and all else that I can
name, according in an unity, to adorn with their Trinity this blessed
gentleman, he costed and posted with such light-foote speed, that coting and
bording all his coequalles: with whom he was conversant, he was ye gaze at
which all eyes did spy, the worst repining, the best envying, all admiring
this uncouth straungnes, and knowing the possibility of his wealth by descent
of inheritance, thought the revenues of his virtues would be inualuable.

His father seeing his diligent industry, friendly and freely counterpeyzd with
incredible increase, taking him aside on a certain day, brake with him in these
terms.

Although I am not ignorant, that liberty to the subject to do what he list,
does cause his losenes and the Princes contempt, yt the apprentise made whole
factor of his masters Merchaundize without any account, may leave him in the
lashe unless he be the trustier, and that giuinge the bridle into thy hands, to
use the rain or ye spur at thine own pleasure, may be a means of thy rashness
and my repentance: yet knowing that a horse may be brought to the brook, but
will not drink except he list, that an Orator may use his coulors of
Rhetoric, but cannot persuade unless you be pliable, that virtue is
voluntarye without constraint: and hoping besides, that Wit can discern, and
Will will desire, thy contentation, and my consolation, (which are one in
effect) I am content to do with thee, as King Henry the 8. of that name in
England, did with a Bishop of Canterbury, that is, make you commissioner in
your own cause.

Yet with this caveat, yt you deal not with me, as books make mention of S.
Beda his boy, who made his blind master preach to stones for a pastime, and so
thou trying my gentleness, abuse it with wantonness: much like the prelates in
Constantines time, who countnaunced by his majesty, as men of great
dignity, did at length checkmate the Emperors highness, usurping his
supremacy.

It is ill waking a sleeping dog. There be certain springs in the country of
Archadia, whose excessive cold breaks all vessels and mettalles, yet the
horn of an Asses house keeps together. In France, there is a Well of such
chilling coldness, that it will convert wood into stone, and yet oftentimes,
flakes of flaming fire have been seen to issue from it. It is hard for my anger
to be incensed against thee, yet may thy stubborn rebellion enkindle my cold
choler.

If powdered fish or flesh be soked in salt bryne which is newly made, the
brine does sooner draw the saltenes out of it, then the fresh water cold: so
thy vnweeldy crookedness and contemptuous, waiwarde will, may draw thee like
out of me in thy he half and make regardelesse consideration of thy thriuinge.

It is difficult (Philotimus) to quench my queint love, unless as a torche
that is turned downewarde, thy bounden obedience turn to sirly negligence, and
impossible to pluck up the roots of my care, so long as thou have a branch of
filial fear.

Yet misconster not these dreads as misdoubting thy well doing, but take them as
a pledge of thy fatherly duty. For as Stratonicus never went to bed without his
livery, (yt is a cup of bear standing by him) not for that he was always
thirsted, but always mistrusting least he should thirst: so I give thee this
charge, not as fearful for thy fall, but I tell it the at large, as careful
of thy standing. But if once, Well I will stay my self till occasion be given,
for though I cast the a bone to bite on, I would not have the choked. To make
short harvest to my seed long a sowing, this I have to say.

Thou know it was a time, when the three Aethereall Madams quarrelling about
the golden ball, chose Paris for their vmpeere, a shepherd then in Ida, to be
judged by his award, whereof each of them promising a large reward, to corrupt
his judgment, and he intending to get the fairest, snatching at the bayte, got
nothing but the hook, and thinking he had got a goodly young heafer, it was
nothing but ye devil in a cowes hyde, as Richard Farneyeares son was once
beguiled. Much like, as though Ulysses rejoicing in the smoke of his country
Ithaca, as a sign of his nere approaching, should have found at his arrival
his country on fire.

The same Goddesses and their rewards do I propounde to the, expecting that
thy choice will be charier then his, or if thou aymest at the same mark, come
nearer the white.

For true it is and an old said saw, that timely grows the tree ye good
ca^mock will be, and he that will be an old man long, must be an old man
soon, and he yt means to be singular in any kind of trade, must begin betimes
to inure himself with it. Therefore Hercules being young, consulted with himself
what course to take, and Cato being old, learning Music and Greek, wished he
had begun in his former years.

Now therefore descend into thine own conscience, and deliberate with thy
self, to which of these three thou meanest to dedicate the springing tide of
thy spring time.

Whether the first of all to Pallas, and to live at the University, there to
attain the profound and sound knowledge of the liberal arts.

Or honor sacred Juno with solemnizing her marriage, where looking to thy
tillage, and the grafting of thy plants, and tenting ye pruning of thy
ouerspreading trees, thou shall not only amplify thy possessions, but as ye
world goes now adays be preferred to promotion: which way if thou can
brook, I will provide such a match, as shall counteruaile ye honor of thy
house, and the humor of thy years.

Or if none of these will fit thy fancy, will thou vow thy self to Venus, and
court it a while? where heed must be taken that thou be not to he addy, for
there the trod is tickle and ye footesteps slippery, where many a proper youth
thinking to rise alofte, is magnified til he look as high as Lincoln,
climbing up by a ladder and an hempten coard, higher the he would by half a
yard from the ground.

It is a property common to most youths hunting at the inhauncing of credit
and iolitye, that if they see some advanced to wealth and estimation, rather
by casual then usual means, they think by imitation, to gain the like
succession, when gapinge for greediness with Aesops Dog, they scatter the
meat they have in their mouths, while they scratch for the shadow which
deludes them with show.

As for Pallas, she is dainty, but not squemish, hard to be found, but easy to
be entreated, to be far fetchte and dear boughte, but that we say is good
for Ladies.

This pilgrimage will be werysome, and yet it must be warye. For through many a
roaring wilderness, and stony scarry rocks shall thou make thy voyage, where
hips and hawes must be thy pittaunce, thorns and brambles thy pallet and
cabinet, the fire to warm thee, the scortching of the sun: thy clock to
time thee, the scritching of ye owl: and then thy pleasant prospecte to
recreate thy mind, a vast confused Chaos withouten shape or form: bellowing
and braying shall be thy music, teene and melancholye thy desired companions,
and when nights dark mantle ouerhailes ye sky, at calm quiet midnight when
all things are whust, and nothing now sturring but pale dame Cynthia tugging at
her teame to bring the night about, full many a Calcas dream shall rome in thy
head, and Morpheus present the with vgsome sights, where in place of a watch to
limit thy rest, either grimme grisly horror shall break the of thy sleep, or
a ball in thy hand (which was Alexanders wont) shall awake thee falling from
the in ye beginning of thy slumber.

These are thy iourneyes, this is thy soiourning, troublesome and tedious,
lothly and yrksome, but now take heed.

For stalking on with redoubled pace, for slowing no time to abandon the place
of this abode, suddeinly unawares on thy right hand, a flowring meade clad with
lusty green, (wherein stands built a regal portly palace) presents thine
eyes. In this palace, far from above and a lofty vewe, out of a goodly bay
window, salutes thy sight the rarest But (...) O Philotimus, now dread and
dolor both assail my heart, I fear the lines that foulers set, lest they
ensnare yt in their net. For from thence gazeth out the seldomst sweet, that
ever nature cast within her mould, with lilly white hands, and arms
outstretcht, with Iuory neck, and bared breast, and goldylockes flickering in
the air, her countenance roseall, embellished with alablaster, intermedled
yfere with party coulors: the virtue of her thralling looks so bravely gloste
with glimsing grace, that thou would wish no other books to read or look
upon.

To thee she rushfullye addresseth her complainte, the trickling tears bedewe
her dented cheeks, with many a sighfull sign she pleades for pity, and
cunningly prates (as she can ye feate) ye tears of truth may once appease her
plight, Good Sir respect her piteous plaintes, whom Fortune sierre so sore
attaintes, that ah for want of joy she faintes, (some pity good master.) And
meaning to plant her brinnish plaints within thy tender ears, hark how the
strumpet can strain her voice, to delighte with her deceit. (...) (Disdain
me not without desert, nor leave me not so sodeinly, so do the stony rocks
repulse the waves that rush them violently.) Thou standinge at the gaze, (as
the Dear they say at the smell of an apple, or rather in a maze, to see so
stout a kite stoop to thy fist without a lure, thus you hearing and seeing and
saying nothing, she will not lose her penny worth for want of good cheaping,
but thus again begins. What trylle the ball again my Jack, and be content
to make some play, and I will lulle the on my lap, with hey be bird now say
not nay.

But never trust thou these training toys, and ever restrain thy loving
glaunce, tread on the even path, not once slipte aside, for fear of Had I
wist prove a fool.

Thus when with fained tunes she has chirpt her yelden lays, and perceiues
that fauning can force no fancy, she will assay an other way to flap the in
the mouth with flimflam floutes, to dash the out of countenance, As that for
one: It is no fire that gives no heat, though it appear never so hot, and
they that run and cannot sweat, are very dry and lean godwot: but since I
lend my love to loss, fancy (says she) farewell, adue dastarde, a calfe be
your comfort, go mask among meacockes, a fig for your reasons.

But run thou on without return, least in striving against the stream thou
happily ouerturne, and if her iestes be joy to her, let her gibes bewray a giglot.

If thou pass these pikes and chance to escape scotfree, as thou may if
thou will, and must if thou do well, let not the sequel of thy journey be
directed with security, but intend a good end, and be watchful in thy ward,
and stick to thy tackling providing for more storms. For an ague has many
shifts of fittes. Jupiter has more liknesses then one wherein to transfourme
his feature, and when he cannot speak to Danae in the form of a man, he will
fall into her skirts as a golden shower, to quench the flame of his affection:
so coosoning Lust has many counterfit crankes, and when with Crocadiles tears
hardly wrested out, she can not move thee to ruth, she will make a
Metamorphosis of ye device, and shaping a new coat of an old blanket, bleare
thine eyes; if she can with stale sale-ware. For listen (my good son) again:
unlooked for, the most dulced melody that mind may imagine, more delicate to
thine ears, then honey to thy mouth, which thou would judge, I dare say, to
be ye consorts of the nine Muses, surpassing the modulation of Achilles his
viole, which he wan at ye overthrow of Aetions kingdom, and far surmounting
ye Philosophers harmony, which they forge in the heavens by a measurable
motion, and a just proportion of number. There thou shall see a squint eied
paramour, gingerly trip it, and minionly minse it, with dainty disdain of any
man's love. The fine divine concubine, soot nice and coye, (screuerence on her
peticote,) will scarce look askaunce, and all this (Philotimus) to bring thee
to ye bent of her bow. For women they say do ye which is forbidden them, and
fish bite more eager when ye bait is pulled from them, and men then are
soonest attatched with love, when women keep aloof with disdainful
dalliaunce. But remember thy lecture my good child, and always shun such
bitter sweets. Argos naytheles his hundred eyes, was napt with music, and
brought to hedd with Mercuries pipe, Ulysses would not once give ear to
Calipso, lest as castles that come to parlie do oftentimes yeald, so he giving
ear should be won to her whinings. Then do you resist with defiing alarm,
that never witching words thy marble ears do charm, stop thine ears and
make no tariaunce, trusse up thy packquet and trudg on thy way. Play with the
nettle never see nimbly and it will sting thee, touch ye pitch never so softly
and it will defile thee, and lend but thy listening to her warbling notes, and
trust me my son, before thou try it, her chaunting will enchaunt thee.

For hark awhile and I will decipher to thee these two deludinge trinketters,
maugre all their glorious gloss, wherewith they shine so sheene, do but
disgrade the^ of their robes, and they are the most unsavory creatures, Foe
filthes, I loathe to think of them, and thou would swound, if once thou
dyddest see them, our Curtizanes now adays, may well be their children, who
seek to color their ill-favored phisnomies, with painted confections of the
apothecaries coining. Well sir, these two of whom I was speaking, in show are
two, in substance one, and if thou art willing to know their names, in one
word it is Lust: which what a vice it is among Palaces apprentises (scholars
I mean, whom I cannot but moan) I am sorrye to know, and ashamd to
acknowledge: but to set thee foreward in thy attempted enterprise, and teach
thee sufficient cosmografie to conduct thee in thy voyage, this I will foreshew
thee.

The stormiest blastes are ouerbloune, thy suptelest enemies ouerthroune, only
with one thou have to encounter, which will make a great value of his small
valor, and boast it out with bumbaste bragges, as ready to pick a quarrel
without offense, as swift to take his feet for his own defense, if he be
withstood.

Mary if thy heart fall a kneelinge, foredone with fainting, and thy quailing
courage crouch to his gentleness, your Domine miserere will not reprieue you,
for presently you perish: he is not of Cneius pompeius his manlyhode, who
embracing Mithridates that lay prostrate at his feet, told him, it was more
honor to save a King, then slaye a keysar: for all his mercy shall be cruel
martyringes, thirsting after blood, and quenched with death.

A Gorgon like clown he is to see too, with gourdy gutts, and a graund
liricompaunch, made in ye wast like a row with calue, a cobbler may keep his
shopp in the lower region of his belly: a terrible tartarian bearde he has, a
notable harbor for the crablouse: a boisterous thundering voice, good to chyde
beggars out of a noblemans court: his nose may be a comfort in distres, and a
light in darkness, and serve for a linder box to light a candle at in winter,
if he cast up his nose against the sun with open chapps, by his teeth may be
discerned what is a clock perhapps: his garland is twyned of venomous snakes,
his attire made of poisoned vipers, his assaults be furious, his countenance
ferefull, no ruth, all rage, does reign in his kingdom he is comenly called
in one term, Despair.

The way to delay the heat of his stomach, is this.

Thou remembrest Maroes mention of the Troiane Aeneas, who after the intombing
of his father Anchises, desiring to visit him in the Elysian fields, got the
prophetess Sybilla to gyde him his way, and a sorcering golden spraye of
Dianas tree in Sycile, for his pasport to Charon the churlish boteman, to ferye
him over the lake. By these two he^ps did he atchiue his appointed purpose: so
if thou can please thy-lyues, lady Pallas, betimes in the morning saying her
service, with her grace for a preface at dinner and supper, and square thy life
to her direction, she will allow thee two servant, Diligence, and Hope, to
attend upon thee: the one to add have to thy business that thou loyter not in
the way, the other to add speed to thy skudding pace, that have make no wast.
For at the very sight of thy faithful Hope, this monster Despair is utterly
vanquished and vanishes from his houlde.

After this, thou rowest over a drenching gulf, which will purge thy stomach
of ill humors, and make it more fytt for Pallas her fare, where though thou
art tossed with whirlinge tempests, yet as long as diligence is thy loadesman,
thou need no other Palinure. For at length thy roughe tide will bring a
safe road: and then enjoy thy joys, for thine is the victory, and let thy
silver song, be so triumph.

Thus thy stormy showers, have bread fragraunt flowers, thou have won goulde,
now wear gould, loc what it is to labor?

Jason adventured to cross the seas, and by the means of Medea, gained the
goulden flece: but if thou do mean to give this adventure, and wilt follow
my advice, my counsel shall coin thee no goulden fleece, but a thing more
precious, and yet no precious stones, but a thing more worth gould then either
of them both.

For lo the royal seat of thy sovereign Pallas, so well appointed with all
kind of ordinance, and champions in pay to leuy any siege, that shall be
laid against her bulworkes, that neither policy by trayns, nor prowes by
force, but only those, which have deserved it by service, and she does deigne
to enterteine can come within her howlde. At the very portall, the first
liberal Art, as her function requires, does keeepe ye entrance: she examining
what profit thou have prowled by her profession, will admit thee to her house,
and so inseueralty, being orderly canuassed a all ye Liberal Siences in their
offices, if they find thee correspondent to the dignyty of ye place, they will
all subscribe to thy supplication. Then have thou access to thy princes Dame
Pallas, who after the suruew of thy worthy exployts, will crown thee with a
garland of her own green laurel, then shall thou wear the wreath of
worship, (as Sysamis says in an epistle to Theotimo) which mauger envy, and
mallyce, and all the spite of fortune, both in life, and after death, shall
extol thy name.

Thus have I discoursed the whole course thou must take, not vaynly to affright
with dreaming illusions, nor to terrify from learning with displaying the
danger, but that nothing happen vnbethought, without a ready buckler to award
the blow: for store is no sore, unless it be of sores. I have spent more time
in this first argument, because more pains with some expense, and greater
pleasure for recompense, are to be found by this the^ any of the rest.

Pallas has played her part, now harken Iunoes pageant.

The world my son turns westward, and begins to decline, and men are more
froward then in years of yore: the longer it lasts ye less while men live, ye
longer it lasts, ye less godly men be: the one is Philosophy, ye other
Divinity, both grounded upon too true experience. Yt is well therefore to make
hay while the sun shines, when wind is at willto hoyse up sail, to enrich
thy self in these vnmellowes years, yt hereafter taking ease, thy toyling may
cease, and thou enjoy ye fruit of thy hands. Unless thou weaue a web for
thine own wearing, thou shall have an hard peniworth to buy it else where.
Cloth is so dear, nowadaies (Philotimus) yt commonly they have two faces foe
one hoode, otherwise then it was in ye second King Richards time king of
Britteine, who calling for a pair of hose of the brauest fashion and most
sumptuous to put on that day, asked what they cost: one toulde him forty pence,
go quoth he, and fetch me a pair of a marcke, wherein thou may see, yt
either things were cheper, or me^ wiser then they are now.

Once have a smattering of the sweet of wealth, and thou will need no
persuasion to persevere in getting. An Emperor of Rome being loath to lose any
commodity, that might be saved, gave a strayt charge, that every household
within the City, shoulo save their urine, whereof in time he levied a great
some of money: his son standing on his pantuffles, and of a more
gentlemanlike mind, then his father (as most sonns are now a days)
secretlye and under correction, admonyshed his Father that it was a derogating
from his maiestyes highness, to make a gain of so vile excrementes, the very
sent whereof was so loathsome unto all men. The Emperor perceiving his sonns
nicetye, stood not to debate the matter with excuses, but incontynentlye
fetching a bagg of goolde out of his closet, held it to his sonns nose, and
demanded of him how he lyked the smell: he answered without pausinge, that
it was a very pleasant smell: then hereafter quoth the Emperor, be not so
hastye to condem the Lawful and honest gain of urine, whereof this comes. I
amplyfye this example to this allygation, for that I neither would have thee
deferr opportunitye to profit thy self, nor think any means too mean, if
they be honest

Poetrye, we say, is nothing else, but an heap of forged fictions, beaten
out of the brains of fantastical fellows when their heads were intoxicate,
and in deed it is true, the most be fables, yet parrable-wyse containing
great misteryes,

Tullye in his book de Legibus has these words, Phisica ratio haud ineligans
inclusa est in impias fabulas, and one commentinge upon Ouids Metamorphosis,
bouldelye affirms, that a great part of the very scriptures is couertlye
handled in these works, alludinge the Chaos to the world made of nothing: the
destruction there mentioned to Noye his flood: Deucalion and Perrha yt begott
me^ and women by castinge stones behind them, to Noye and his wife, whereof
all nations were deducted: Phoebus and Phaceton to God and Lucifer, Acteon that
for seeing Diana naked, was devoured of his dogs to concupiscence, who seeing
by wisdom how far he has digressed, tortures himself with grief, so yt
every Poeam may well be moralized to some good meaning, how precise and
captious soever some of our dimi^utiue divines are yt would not have the^ red.

Now this is it I would infer, the Poets feign that Plutus the God of riches,
when he comes toward a man is hault and lame, cree-ping on with a wearyed
pace like an hault mayemed cripple, but when he goes from him to have wings
like a bird, scouring a pace till he be out of sight

Then take time while thou have it, the haucke may check yt now coms fair to
fyst

When Miltiades the Athenian with ten thousand Greeks, discomfited 600000 of
his enemies the Persians, if he had forseene yt his recompense would have been
repentance, he might have stauld himself with sufficient bootyes, to have
prevented all writs of debte, which were his utter ruin: but prefering a
public profit before a private benefit, and being but a brau^ch of his
country, he was the cause that the whole root did flourish, and he himself
did wither away: for cast in arrearedge of a certain some of money, he was by
his unkind, contrimen condemned to perpetual prison, where dying indurance
he could not be buried, till his son took upon him to wear his fathers,
gives.

It is not the name of gentility will unbind the of bondage.

If a man by some misfortune chance to be impouerished, alas alas, shall be his
pitye, and the comfort they lend him to appease his cares, thou might have
done better if God had made thee wiser, but he that will stumble in the
midnoone day, deserves to break his shins, and he that will bear to beaten
with his own rood, merits to do no better, look to thy thy self, I wish thee
well, and so God be with you

Neither will kinn, nor acquayntaunce help to heal necessityes, whose
frendships are knitt with a true-tones knot made of silver copper, and when yt
is spent, they spare their friendship.

Ptolomie and Pompey were nowne carer coosins, while both were as ready to
requit as require, but when Pompey was put to flight by Julius Caesar, and
driven to crave aid of his old friend Ptolomie, he had scarce Jack drummers
enterteynement; for Jack was shut out withouten harm, but Pompey was cut
shorter by ye head the^ he was, whereof Petolomie making merchandise sold it
to Caesar.

Polimnestor was so dear to priam, that in time of war, when Troie was
besieged, he sent his young son polidor with monye for his charges, to be
fostered of Polimnestor, yt if Troy should be sakked all the whole house
should not be extinct: but (ah the wrecth Polimnestor) when he see Priams
kingdom environed on every side yt no rescue could ridd him from his enemies
claws, he slew polidor for his money and set priam at naught, whose eyes
afterward Hecuba scratched out with indignation, a vengeance more just, then
equal to his fact.

Wheefore let never trust betraye thee, where treason is shrouded, nor hope not
on friends, where happ is uncertain.

Thou see how Stedfastnes does fly with wings of often chau^g, a flying bird,
but seldom seen, her nature is so straung.

We do not use to set share in the shore, nor plowe the sea furrows that yield
no corn: but men use to till the fertile soil, that gives that it receives
with usury and interest, as Hesiodus says, claw me and I will claw thee,
though that thou Homer were with muses nine for ma^s, yet pack pesant from
whence thou camst if that thou bring no pence. Thy ma^ster (that must be)
Aristotle, I phisicks affirms ye exnihilo nihil fit, if you have nothing, thou
shall have nothing, and that thou have shall be taken from thee

Grafte my son, and grace will grow, begin to get, and thou shall gain.

It is Aristotle in his Ethics, that a good beginning is more then half the
work, of one grain coins ye whole ear of corn, if thou have one virtue
says our ground philosopher, all the rest will easily ensue, hold that thou
have with good husbandrye, and God will increase it with bounteous plenty.
Neither would I have thee a drone to eat the sweet that others sweat for, that
you eat ye honey, and they hold the hyue, they draw you drive, small reason by
my faith, when gentlemen lack grots, that plowmen pinch it out for pence and
patch their russet coo^es. but happily ye uncertainty of wealth and riches,
shall seem a good answer to my importunity, for who knows not Cresus his
substance which notwithstanding was imprisoned as a captive, shackled with
boultes, and feign to yield his goods into his enemies hands: and who has
not heard of Scylla his magnificence, which tho was consumed with lice, and his
money eaten with mothes? the merchaunt loses more in an hour then he gains
in 20. years.

To this I will make a replication, yt all reioinders of ye defendant shall be
barred.

If the state of Fortune be so ticklish builded upon sand, and subject to
tottering, then with more care ought we to carke for wealth of diverse sorts, yt
if one fail, an other may prevail, and make friends by liberalyty, in state of
prosperity, yt may give us hospitality, in time of adversity and therefore not
without great cause, did Alexander bestow gifts on his subjects, though King
Philip his father chid him for it, asking if he would be vassal to his
servant, with bribing to win favor, which they ought him by homage.

In my opinyon he red by rote and mard a good lessone for want of good
co^struction, for neither is there any greater sign of clemency (which only
virtue so much commended Pelopidas king of Sparta) neither more vehement
exhortation to be painful vpholders of present honor, or willing suppliers of
future wants, the^ the abounding of princely bounty.

This was ye which made Pomponius Atticus so plausible among ye Romans,
because he disbursed his money most franckly, to take away ye wrooting vice
vsery, for ye common profits fake: and so gracious among ye noble me^, yt even
those who were at odds, Antonius and Brutus, and all in general, held him most
dear.

Once was ye world in the first golden age, that learning was in price, and
virtue esteemed, when Gratianus aduau^ced Ausonias ye poet so ye consulship for
his poetry, when Cincinnatus was taken frm ye plow for his virtue to be
dictator, when Cato brought Ennius into Italy for his excellency, who^ Scipio
Affricanus had in no less reputation.

But now we are come to the last age, which as Ovid divide it, is ye 4. and the
woorst, squeasye and dogged, and wrought of hard iron.

Without multipling of many words, it is good to be mindful of ye Gods Juno,
lest as Cyauippus for abhorring Bacchus his rites, was pu^ished of Bacchus with
excessive drunkenness, wherein he discheueled his own daughter, of whom he was
slain, or as by Diomedes his wounding of Venus, Aegilia his wife was
transported into such an insatiable letchery, that any might have her chastity,
who was not chary of his own, (for all her holy days were feasts of Quicunque
vult): so the refusinge of her league that offers such tr^atyes of peace,
incensing her with contemptuous regard, do afterward feel ye battery of her
anger, which will be no less then sheere beggary: when you heartily wishest she
would raise her siege, and striking a truce renew her former offer.

As for Venus, I will neither dispraise her who was once my mistrisse: neither
can I commend her without a pair of lying lips.

But this I say, aspiring heads have seldom speed.

Remember the brave gallantes, that have spente their purses penniles, worn
their coats thredbare, and wroughte their bodies to the bones, to purchase
advancement, and yet haples, and hartles, have departed to other mansions,
good for blocks in the country, that were cast chips in the court.

O how few be there (says he in Tusculans questions) that may hope for
Metellus his hap? all may wish, and most shall want.

The Court resembles the image of Diana in Chios, who was wont to be smilingly
glad to those that entered into the Temple, and lowringly sad, to such, as went
out.

While Con is with whelpe, and cries ^hink at every call, they will fawn like
a dog that stands at receite of a trencher, they will smooth the with sweet
Sir, sooth thy person, and soke thy purse, but when all is gone and nothing
left, farewell dagger with dudgin haft: then thou may go like a dog that
has lost his tail and wander where thou will like a new shorn sheep, with
out more service at their commands, till thou have more wool on thy back to
pay thy next years fees.

If a a man should desire an herald to sift out her pettigree, and ask of an
armourer to blaze her arms, her stock would be found to be the maine sea,
wereof she is nothing but the ouerture and of scombe.

Her arms (as Poets trick them) are the head of Capricorn, for her right
honorable style. I will go as nere it as I can. A young Saint, and an old
Devil, and all at once: with honye in her mouth, and a sting in her tail, and
that for the nonce: a sweet swillings, I would the swine had her: trim tram,
neither good for God nor m^n: as kind to the as a coosen, and as familiar to
all as Tullies Epistles: current in sound, and counterfeit in stamp: as meek
as a lamb, and as necessary as a mare.

Whether it is better living contentedly with thy modicum, augmenting it with
industry, or set all on slay sink, whether thou shall have thine own or
nothing, judge you. I commend that sentence, though I hate the traitor that
spoke it. (It is better to be king of a mould hill, then to be subject to a
mountain.) And therefore said Alexander, if he had not been Alexander, he
would have been Diogines for his contented mind. It is good to be at freedom
where one may raunge where he will, rouse when he will, neither flattering for
promotion, neither fearing displeasure.

I were ill to be Aristotle de natura animalium, I am so in artificial in the
description of Venus, but Socrates by the report of Anthony in the books de
Cratura, saw he was eloquent enough that could open his mind simply, as I have
done.

A man may live thrice Nestors years, thrice wander out Ulysses race, ere be
gain that by service, that sometime has been a common pencion, or make a
just annalogy of credit, with his cost.

I deny not but it were good for young gentlemen to know this by trial, if
that were all: it would chain them at home from changing for new, and better
would they deem it, to sleep quietly in homelye cabin without gunshot of
danger, then lie like Princes, be served like Princes, with such imminent
dangers, as Tullye bringes example of one in the fifte of his Tusculanes.

But wit bought with the price of woe, is a little to dear. Better be wise by
other mons harms, then rue your follye by your own hurt. Believe him that
knows it because he has tried it, and tells you the truth, because he loves
you.

A Disciple of ye Philosophers must believe their principles, how absurd at the
first soever they seem, neither is he a faithful Apostle, that will believe
nothing but what he sees, then have him in one Article of thy belief, that
has the in all the peticions of his Pater noster.

Thus thou see thy fare (my child) fall too where thou likest, make thy
choice where thou will, of pretty Venus, pithy Pallas, or princely Juno.

Such as thou bakest, such shall thou eat, and such as thou take, such shall
thou stand too.

If thy fancy have a combat within yt self for the election, you shall have a
time to deliberate of it, and after consultatio^ deliver thy mind.

Young Philotimus perceiving his Fathers care, and more then motherly
affection toward him, (which is an opposite contradiction to the use of
fathers) and having a surrender of so larg a profer, wherein he might prosecute
his conceived determination, being privily circumspect in private conceit, that
neither his father should trippe him in any wild unwieldy attempt, nor he miss
of ye cushio^ he meant to sit on, made him this answer.

GOod Father, though Aristotle would have one long a deliberating, and soon to
practice, yet you have no sooner spoken then I am spedde.

To seek to wade deep, where the foorbe is shallowe, or to break down the
hedge, where the way lies open, where none of the first points of wisdom, and
the very doubt what to do in a lawful matter, say our divines, is a great
sin.

The mistrust in my behavior you spoke on at first, I have not found in your
after speeches, neither have I smelt the severity of a father, which most
children of (...).

By how much the more m^lde you are in your proffer, by so much the more
charie will I ^ee at my ^holie. The Lion fears the little crowing cock, the
strong and stern Panther quakes at ye presence of an Hi^d, He^aclides the
Philosopher by gentle handling, taught a ^^agon to follow him up and down, the
haggard by luring is (...) man^ed.

Never any thing happened more delightsome to me, then this your kindness,
honey within, and oil without, the one toothsome, and both wholesome.

Where your courtesy grauntes a privilege, I hope custom will grant a
pardon, if I hap not to have the right sow by the ear. In all my election,
I appeal from mine own invention to your judgment, willing to be disposed at
your good pleasure.

For Venus, I am to young to know her sleightes, and to old to learn them. If
I were a gander, I would never choose a goose of that kind. I love no bear so
old brotcht. Let Beauty shutt up her shop, and trusse up all her trash,
Luxury has stolen her finest stuff, and left her in the lash. I am content
to learn of ye market folks how the market goes, to teach my self, and
instruct others, but not to make an occupation of that profession. It is not
enfranchised in the same liberties that other sciences are, in which a man
after seven years apprentiship shall be made free, but at the most in this he
is but a iourneyman, where he may work for his mistress, crucify his carkas,
and serve till he sterue, while grass is a growing.

It is hard when peace hangs in the ballaunce of war, and my safety, in my
lovers honesty.

If I be zealous in affection, and jealous of her faith, I smoulder away
inwardly, without any remedy: If she make me wear horns and I not perceive
it, I am noddified of her, and pointed at of others: and so, they crown a
cuckold with a comb, and this is their desire.

Then for any office I get among honest folks, I may keep the geese on the
green, for breaking their teeth with grazing.

I have red that Attyla king of Pan^onia, slew eleven thousand Virgins at the
siege of Colonia: but a man might induce me, without a Sermon pareneticall
for exhortation, that he might seek both where they were and were not, (as
Skoggin did the bare) and press an army royal of arrand honest women, to
scale the sorttesse of modesty with friday fated scoulds, ere he could
triumph for half such a victory in t^ise so much space.

I could never forget a riddle that an old author of mine proposes in a pair
of verses.

Est arbor in siluis, quae scribitur octo figuris,
Fine tribus demptis, vix vnam in ^ille videbis.
This tree is Castanea, from whence take away N, E, A, and there remains
Casta, of which chaste things she parson of the parish may well tithe the
Tenthes to eke forth his living, and neither the town empayred, nor he
enriched by this extortion.

I request a favorable interpretation of my inuectiue (reverent Sir) without
glowing of your ears, with my ouerflowing eloquence.

I am not so crooked in nature, as ye crabbed ^ld men in Terehee, that thought
nothing well done, but that they did themselves: no^ so eger as the wolf, to
bark at the mo^^e. I cannot catch: ^e is to busye, that has an ore stirring
in other men's houses, without leave on their parts, or ^^ille on hi^ own,
that corrects Magnificat, before he can singe T^d^^n, that controles the
Court, which is not in his circuits, being neither a courtie^ by bringing up,
nor a carter by birth, ^u^^ mean man betwixt them both.

I reprehend not the court in general, nor cannot devise to amend the Prince,
from whence our welfare is de^^^ed, and to which, our duties must all retire,
as the rivers to the (...). But in great houses be vessels as well of tin as
of silver, where God buildes a church, the devil builds a chapel, and every
commodity has his discommoditye, says the sheph^^^^s old friend Mantuan.

The serpent lurkes in the grene grass, the mothes eat the best garments,
where Bacchus and Ceres be caterers for the house, Venus will have her gambalde
revels, where delicate dainties be their diet, as becomes a princes majesty,
and sumptuous robes their garments, where pride is a virtue of necessity (as
Tullye speaks of Capitolum, which being made to the most advantage, was most
beutiful to ye view, and must needs be so) ^her ^eaki^g Venus play the vice to
make them sport.

With Juno I dare not meddle, she is better for my thriuing, and unfitter for
my years.

A sword must not be given into a childs hand, least he hurt himself. He
that sets an infant on a great horse to teach him to ride, may peradventure
save the charges of a schoolmaster, to teach him his neck verse, and wish
for a surgeaunt, to set his neck bone.

But with writing I may learn to write, with practicing of of my tongue
become eloquent, and with beginning betimes to gather wealth, quickly grow
rich.

Indeed every thing has a beginning (as the parasite told his master, which
said he took his servant for no liar, and now had sound it contrary) and
therefore we must work by line and leisure, and not leap over the style,
before we come at it. No man I trow, will take upon him to write a volume,
before he can set his letters, neither learn his letters before he be of some
years. To exercise in Rhetoric (says Crassus) before he have discipline,
will make him ready to speak, and barbarous in speaking, as he brings example
of himself: and to commit wealth to him which yesterday came out of the shell,
and yet has neither learned by reading, nor use; how to add to it, neither by
either of both, knows the sweetenes of it, which would make him keep it,
does much in my mind (under correction be it spoken) resemble him, that leaves
his glove by the way, and bids his spaniel bring it after, that is a rude
whelpe, and never taught to carry.

A ship cannot surely sail without an helm, nor any fly without natural
wings: which Bladud king of England aduenturing to do by art, brake his
neck. So did the men of Gotam tie their rentes in a purse about an hares
neck, and bad her carry it to their Landlord: how well they were served, I
cannot but smile to think, neither at that, but at their follies.

Were it not very absurd for one that has no skill to begin to build an house,
and lay the foundation, saying that by building he would learn to build? or
for maids being scarce borne, to begin to bride it, and say in so doing they
would learn to wiue it? I wis it were, and most absurd.

But indeed to give any great regard to wealth at all, more then to expel
cold, and sustain nature, is nothing but vanitye. Alas what praise is it to be
covetous of that, which makes no difference of good men from bad, says he in
his Ethickes, and to say truth, rather a note of ill men. For Plutarch I
remember has these words. It is very probable that every rich man either
has been wicked, or ye heir of a wicked man, which though it be not true, yet
the Philosophers words do never want their weight.

It is good say you, to be stored with diverse sorts, because it is constant in
nothing but inconstancy.

Of diverse sorts it needs not, when one may suffice, of diverse sorts it boots
not, when all is uncertain.

For ye formers proof, let Marcus Curious serve, a Roman captain against King
Pirrhus and the Samnits, who at the spoil of any town, would take no more
then he gave his soldiers, saying he was an evil citezin, that could not live
with that, which satisfied others. When the servants of the Samnites brought
him gold for a present, as he sat seething rapes in an earthen vessel, he
refused it, saying, he had rather be Lord of them that owed the goulde, then
be vassaile to the desire of so contemptible pelf.

For the second, I have heard this reason alleged against Aristotle, to prove
a terrae motus, that is, an Earthquake, diffused throughout the earth, which he
denies. When the parts and the whole (says mine author) are all of one
quality, and the parts does move, as all may see, the whole likewise may do
the same: but the parts of the earth, and the whole lumpy mass are of one
nature in respect of firmnes, therefore etc. and since false fortunne say I, is
the gouernesse of of all wealth, if one part is frail, it is something like
that all is fragile.

Epaminondas was wont to forsake all presents, saying, he would do that was
right without rewards, and for rewards he would do no wrong.

When the kings fisher lays her eggs, the seas are calm till they be
hatched, and then with roaring fury carries them all a way the ore is made much
on for his hide, the Elephant for his tooth, and so shall I for that, which
they would wish my death for.

He that will be welthy, must conform himself to the fashion of the world
(says Plutarch) look a man in the face, and cut his throat.

Wealth is the harvest of fortunes flattery, which who so means to catch,
must be as it were a glass wherein others may see their conditions, much like
an ape, that mops and mowes as his master does, to make him sport. He must
laugh when they laugh, so shall he be merry, swear that they answer, and
that's a good figboy. If with Caligula one speak like a fool in ye senate
house, he must say with Domitian, that his eloquence shows him to have
laien with the moon.

The cunning Fowler is clothed with feathers, the craftye Raunger in a Deeres
skin, Alcibiades was at Athenes a Scholar, at Lacedemonia a Hunter, at
Tisapherne a carpet Knight.

But trust me, to gain all the wine of Calidon, ye fishes of Hircany, the
dainties of Media, I mean not to make my self an open president, for proof
of these matters.

For as well may he stand still, whom the Devil drives, as he leave of,
that once assayes to gather wealth, as you your self for-warned.

Sore eyes may not vewe the light without a scarf, nor ye credit of
cormorauntes show it self without their coin.

He that bestows rewards to insinuate himself into friendship, is like
Bath-kepers ass, that brought his master fuel home to make fires, and he
himself lived with smell of the smoke.

Those second sort of liberal men (as Aristotle terms them) whom you feed
with gifts, gape for them by custom, as they do for their die^, willing to
pick a quarrel, if they be not continued, and ready to cast you of, if you
stand need to them.

If you your self (dear father) would disclaim in this case, or give it over
by non-suite, and on other atturneye retained in your room, I could find him
sport by my little Philosophye, if I were disposed to play with his nose, or
cast pearls before swine in steed of brass.

he might trick his speech with a few superficial colors, but all his statly
style were not worth a straw, and his wiels wayed in right ballaunce, his
wit would be found to want weight. It is ill deluing for money quoth phalareus
lest one digg so low till he grub up the devil, gapers for gudgeons are soon
choked: one said to Alcmeon, ye way to increase his strength, was to diminish
his desire man was made with his face toward heaven, as a token ye heavenly
matters should be his meditation, and the eyes of beasts turned downward, to
seek nothing but gourmantize, and meat for their bellies.

The question of marriage is abortiue, and therefore must needs be a weakeling
too timely marriage says Aristo. in his Pol: filles the common wealth full of
dwarfes, and women: and therefore he thinks it good that men should live sole,
till thirtye seven years, and women till 18.

Homer scares me from these matches, who brings in Jupiter and Juno ever
brawling, the Massagets told Pompey they lay with their wives but once a
week, because they would not hear their scowldinges in the day, nor their
pulinges in the night.

If my wife were naught, I might wish her long enough at the devil ear god
would fetch her, and if she were good, I should fear ear she died she would
be turned into a fury, as Iphanassa the wife of Melampus, was for her bewtye by
envious Juno: it is more agreeable to my years to be termed ser boy, then an
honest man.

Among all forts of conceyted fellows, I reverence the Essenians, as most
co^tinent in pleasures, and contented with nifles, for they abhor ye company of
women, and detest ye possession of gold and silver. Thus Venus is wanton and
ever is wanting, treasure is tickle, and a iuell of ieopardy, marriage marrs
all, if it be out of season. I utterly therefore renounce these two Goddesses
and any content with the loss of a double game, to post it over to Pallas: yet
at our parting blow, to reco^cile my self with meek intermission, I heartily
wish they be not offended, and to make sure my atonement without fear, I will
deal with them, as the Romans did with Vulcane: for having received some hurt
of fire, they thought it good to hold a candell before the devil, and speak
him fair while their feet were in his mouth, and give unto Vulcan the honor
of a God, mary they shut him out of ye city to bannish him their company, that
he came no more there: and if that can please them, I can brook to call them
Goddesses, so they release me of their service.

Poor Aglus for his vprightnes in small substance, was preferred by Solon
before the cuffine Craesus. Agesilaus said, he had rather be king in Sparta,
then God in Theseus. One goinge about his business with an haulter in his hand,
chanced to find monye which a miser had hid, which money he took, and laid
down the haulter in the place: the old huddle missing his monye at his next
visitation, took the haulter and hanged himself, and venus herself passing by
Eurota, was enforced to beg some aid of Pallas and use her lance.

I will not blow retreat to every train, nor be a scholar and a traitor,
as Critias was to Socrates, I have not so soon cast my Philosophers head,
neither have I been hitherto bathed in Heraclitius his floode, to be changed
to a new nature.

In old time they were forbidden to expound oracles which had any botch in
their bodies, and they which would inuest themselves in an house of religion,
should impart all their goods, and give them to the needy, I therefore with a
courteous couge, humbly take my leave of Juno, and bid Venus adwe with a gentle
Vibaccio, nothing dowbting, that as when Hanibal laid seige to the city
Casilinum, one mouse was sold for two hundred pence and he that sold the
mouse dyed himself for hunger: So I for greedines to learning in this hard
world giving over my claim of wealth all at once (as Antiochus at one push lost
all Asia) shall in time feel sorrow and small bear run full near my heart.

In deed a lean fee befits a lasye clarke, yet may I well compare Pallas to
Amaltheas horn, which yields what fruit soever one desires, although, as none
knew the use of Hercules his poisoned arrows, but Philoctetes, so none knows
the benefit of Pallas, but her faithful servant.

It is written of Plautus, that spending all he had in plaiers garments, he was
brought to such poverty. yt for living he was feign to serve a baker in
turning a Querne, from which when he could be dismissed he writ comodies.
Policrates was so happy, that he sought misfotune by casting a ring he had of
inestimable value into the sea, which one finding in a fishes mouth, restored
it to Policrates, insomuch that wishing mishap he could not have it, yet
afterward was he hanged by Orontes a persian: notwithstanding I hope that
though I renounce my profit, and request in some sort my evil fortune, yet as
I shall obtain what I wish, I mean learning, so I shall miss that I do not
crave, I mean beggerye.

Iustinianus the Emperor descending of so base a stock that his uncle by ye
mothers side was a swynehearde, was advanced by Pallas to his immortal
dignity.

The labors I shall support ere I come to the port, do nothing quail my
kindled courage. Euclides could every night go to Socrates at Megaera, mount
Athos was made nauigable by zerxes, Caesar made two great bridges in one day,
and who has not heard of Hercules his labors, why then should I fear so
small a pains.

In a certain battle betwixt the spiders and the flies, the sielie flies
seeing them selves ouermatched began to pluck in their horns, where there
general inciting them, bad them decline their eyes from their enemies force,
and look to themselves to save their lives. Catiline in his conspiracy,
encouraged his soldiers with this argument-that they should look on the
standard, the silver Eagle, which was the old ancient of their mother Rome,
and sight for it. A pleasant pray entiseth many a thief. A lover of Cassandra
who was come to aid Troy for her sake, seeing her hayled and dragged by her
golden tresses, inflamd no less then Hercules with Dianiraes shirt, flange in
headlong among their enemies, neither could be restrained by any fear of
death, till he had rescued her.

Caesar at the river Rubrico, dowting of his passage, a young man suddenly
appearing all in white apparel, snatched a trumpet from a stander by, and
leaping into the river sounded it, by the which instigation Caesar gave the
adventure to pass the river. The Graecians somewhat couwardly in ye wa^
against the Medeans, seeing the shape of Theseus, as Coronell in the vauntward,
were by and by incensed te battle.

All these jointly, and every one severally, I allege, to show what heat ye
blazing hew of Pallas (which methinkes I see a far of) does breed in me.
Eneas having lost Creasa his wife in his escape from Troy, retired back again
amids ten thousand enemies to seek her, and when he could not find her by no
pryinge in every corner, he lifted up his voice inuironned on every side with
his foes, and loudlye cried out, Creusa, Creusa, neither ever would leave
ransacking til her ghost appeared to him and told him she was dead. How often
did ye said Eneas forage upon his enemy Turnus? how often did Turnus and
Eneas trauerse their skirmish for their dear Lauinia? It is a shame to give
over says Seneca when ye thing sought does recompense ye pains. I therefore
am purposed with an absolute determination (my duty to you reserved) never to
tire till I have found ye holy land, where pallas houlds her imperial seat,
which happy hour when it shall arrive, the^ shall I think my self in person
glorious, in doctrine wise, in deeds heroical, vnboweled of grief, entrailed
with virtue, embellished with a memory surmounting mortality.

The lord Cleocritus hearing this munificall speech compiled by his son, with
such dexterity in speech, and pregnancie in with (a right certain ensign of a
generous heart) was rapt with admiration, and almost captiuate with so ioious an
agony, yt he could not covertly conceal it with a guileful dissembling, but at
length all repleat with pestring joys boulted out these words.

A gospel on ye mouth (philotimus) and gods blessing be ever thy protection
for as there was no better token of winter, then to see phocion go shod: so
there can be no more manifest mark of valiant magnanimity, careful for him
self and his countries behofe, then to see youth hang up ye bitt of wanton
time, not like ye foolish lark, deceived with swetnes of ye call: although as
the same phocion was he who^ Apollo meant was contrary to all ye city, so this
is a contrary guise to ye frequented trade of all green years.

In deed (philotimus) though I vn^oulde the whole far^ell of dangers which
might seath thy journey, and teach thee a stopgaliard in the pilgrimage of thy
voyage: yet truth it is, as you of thy self art well advertised in remouinge
all offenses, which might escandalize thy courage. It ^ares with Pallas, as
Suetonius writes of Octauius ye Emperor, yt never any ambassadors came in his
presence, which at ye first sight were not touched with fear, and after in
communicating did not adore and love him because great was the majesty,
wherewith he did receive them, and after sweet were ye words, wherewith he did
dispatch them.

Yet if yt wilt not in inconstancy imitate the soldiers of Germany, whom
old Antiquaries have regestred to begin their assaults with choler, and
continewe the same with fury, and after with requests of collusion, to suffer
their sharp spurrs be blunted, and recalling their intents, fall into a relaps,
Thou must follow ye Roman victorers, who in their triumphant celebrations
first visited the temples, embruing ye aultars with fore-vowed sacrifices,
before they undertook any other solemnities in their triumphs, revels in their
sports, affairs forth weal publiques. For as it was inacted by the martial
laws, to be no less then the loss of his life, yt entered ye captains
pauilion without his leave for a warrant: so it will be prejudice to his
success, ye attem^^s pallas, induced with a toie or emulation, and not invited
by devotion, first get her benevolence with invocation of hartye prayers,
which pallas will be so much the more prone to license (if your tongue be not
too laxatiue, and utter more then your ha^t can digest) by how much ye more
oportunitye of time is now convenient

For as alexius afterward emperor spoke in an oration he had to ye senate, ye
sea that now may be spurned, sometime may not be touched, and Coonts that be in
season betwixt Christmas and Ca^delmas, after ye prefixed date expired may be
vagarant where they will without any man's eating. Notwithstanding philotimus thy
aptnes be quadraunt on every side, as fit as a die, yet you art not to learn yt
a great harvest, must have a great tillage, ye milk must be bruised before it
be butter, and lastly as to have is good happ, so to hold fast is a great
virtue otherwise you may for a time bleare men's eyes with a flourishing gloss,
but at ye length when ye cock shall crow, and ye day begin to dawne and you
shall be urged to publish thy skill, and bring it to light, it will befall unto
thee as yt did unto Veturnus Turinus, who being about ye emperor as one in
great favor, had egres and regres, neither hatch before door, noe meek before
his snow^, to intercept his patene access: which such as as had any suit to
dispatch with the prince perceiving, as men ye cast water in the sea, sooner to
win the haue^, or as fulsum huswiues greasing the fatt sow in the tail to
make better bacon, so they bribed him that was abundaunt in all possessions, to
have an end of their long trauersed suits: he something saucie with his liege
the Emperor, because gains were sweet, would now and than step into
presence, finding communication of other matters, and coming out of the
chamber, would give them this and that answer, thus and so I have said in
thy matters, and thus and so was I answered the Emperor having intelligence of
his vilianye, caused a foster to request him to move the Emperor in a certain
case, which he promised nothing niggardly, for such courtesy cost him nothing:
but all were served with one hand, he as the rest, and the rest as young
courtiours: by which witness Turinus convinced of his guyle before ye prince,
and other his robberies by exact inquisition found out, he commanded him to be
fixed aloft upon a stake, and under him to be set green wood and wett straw,
which being set on fire pestered his nose with a most cruel smoke, that in
short space thratled him, a crier with a loud voice making proclamation, he
that soulde smoke, is smouldered with smoacke.

The morrall of this, is an exhortation to thee, to take pains, not suffising
thee with ye show without matter of substance.

Hymeraeus ye poet writ against Helen, and not long after recanted: such
small persistaunce in thy consaites I would have thee avoid, neither as the
sun the nearer it mounts to the pole, ye slower it moves, so thou, when thou
art gone some degrees nearer learning, grow more sluggish in thy procedinges.

I would not have thee merchandise degrees, as some are accustomed now a days,
but win them by labor, and deserve the^ by learning Iulianus ye Emperor
buying ye empire of the Pretorians, scarce enioied it a xi months, when he
was deraind, and slain, and his wife and only daughter put to exile.

Young Philotimus daunted at his fathers so vehement exhortation, made him with
due reverence this answer.

Too much drought does shred the leaves, and too much moisture chokes the grass

If you had given me no fore-warning, I had not peradventure been so
circumspect, and yet to earnest speech does sometime agarise me. The rude
Sythian had rather hear ye neigh of an horse, then Orpheus his harp, and a
vain fool is he yt had rather have a pl^usible peale of ye populer sort,
deluding them with a counterfeite show, then with desert to be a king within
himself, without this ringing rumor.

If I employ not my endeavor, let me have ye execution of Draco his law, ye
deprived them of life, which would not labor, or be used as the drones of
Hetruria, which were reputed as vacabonds, they condemned to exile, and their
goods to the fiscall.

I do acknoweledg that now or never is the time to be wrought to ye rules of
litterature. If Mithridates had not spent his primetide in study, he had not
perfectly learned 22. sundry languages, and there fore was it well provided
among the Romans yt no man should bear office till he were 30 years old,
alluding to this principle, that his flowring season contained in former
years, should be reteind in attending good discipline: and this have I already
learnd, that though Arist. will not admit a young man to be a scholar of
morrall philosophy, because he can hardly repress his extrauagant affections,
yet he means says my master of young men in manners and not in years.

Well then Philotimus answered his father, since this is the determynation of
thy Imagination, thou shall have a cote cut after thine own pattern, and go
to thy chosen university.

But because as Laelius says, if one should be rapt into the third heaven, and
have a revelation of gods intricate secrets, and had no body to impart the^
too, his holy inspiratio^ would be converted to grief, neither can we repose
our familiaritye, in any man's company, so well as his which is like our
selves, I not will only provide a tutor to ouersee you, but allott you a
companion to drive away tediousnes, yt as Sulpitius and Litonus were wont to
study one thing, play both at one time, and mutually tend their aides each to
other: so he to you and you to him, may enterchaungeblye be abettours to your
studyes, hoorders of your secrets, and ministers of your pastimes. A gentleman
he is of no base blood, neither discrepant to thee in nature, nor different in
years, and thy daily playfellowe Aemelius, of whom being left orphant I am
the gardaunt, to bestow as I will.

Philotimus glad of this fellowship, because of al me^ he did most fix his fancy
on Aemilius, though living together they had many iarrs betwixt them, with
bonnet vaild, and knee bowed, greeted well his fathers purueiaunce.

Of all things they meant to have speedy dispatch, so that philoti. sent to the
country to take his leave of his allies and friends, Cleocritus had in store
against his return, such a tutor. as Phaenix was to peleus son, yt is, an
instructor to science, and a mirror in good life.

Now you shall understand gentlemen, yt as the ripest wits are commonly
infraunchised in all follies, so philotimus sauns all care of his late
protestation, having passed the term of 16. years, was as forward as the
best in acco^plishing his humor.

For as the unicorn is so strong, that he is not taken with any might or power
of hunters, but for to take him a maid is set there he shall come, who opening
her lap, the unicorn leaves all his fearcenes, and laying there on his head
falls asleep, and so is taken and thirled with darts of hunters, as though
nature had given him no armor to defend himself withal: so Philotimus which
was never gind with other parturbation, was by times and too timely, enthralled
with beauty.

This may be a cause of the small a bode in his bliss, the green blade yt
shoots too early is soon bitt with a black frost.

There was a gentlewoma^ by style, but as I have heard and partly guess by her
slippery dealinges, giving no peremptory judgment but by conjecture, a rare
iuewell scraped out of a dunghill, gotten by stealth by the wicked aspect of a
beggarly micher, when her mothers husband, her father by name, could not see
for horns growing over his eyes. but the fault you will say was not in her,
but in her mother, which in shufling the cards shufled in a knave too many This
gentlewoma^ almost of equal age with noble philo. her father being deceased, was
left in ward with a gentleman near neighbor to senior Cleocritus, upon which
occasion philo. sometimes in company with her, and often conferring her feature
with his fancy, felt at length such skirmishes of affection, yt he valiantly
proved himself a carped knihht* and as plato speaks of ye soul which
ascending after death up to the heavens, and meeting with natures semblable to it
self in all respects, stays there, and not before: so she seeing his posse,
corresponde^t to her velle, met him just in ye midway of all his love, gave him
pat for pat, love for love, as long as he would.

Now sir, Philotimus being comd home, and ready to depart the next morning,
sent his page secretlye to his mistress, requesting parley with her before his
journey, ye time he would come, should be when all were at rest, about ten of
the clock in the night. The boy dispatched it roundly, and she granted it
willinglye, yet something nicely, as maidens do their honesty.

Philotimus asking the boy how he had sped, forsooth quoth he, Danger yonder
kepes the door, and mistress Modesty the house. I knocked so softly at ye gates,
as if they had been my grau^dfathers soul, then comes mistress Antigone with
her whispering who is there. I told her who, and with what arraunde. As Soon
as she had certified her mistress, she toulde me her mistress would have you
come, and in stead of green rushes, she would provide a banquet made of three
let is (letters I would say) w, e, ll, which mente by my construction, that
you should be well-come.

Aurelia (for so was this gentlewoman called) made none privy to this counsel
but her woman Antigone, who immediately after these news, prepared by her
mistrisse appointment a very delicate banquet, of such drugs as she had in ye
house. Philotimus at the time prefined, accompanied with his page, repaired to
his castle of health, who being couertlye admitted by Antigone into mistress
Aureliaes chamber, found her sadly sitting upon a bench, with her hand for a
pillow to her heavy head. Philotimus panting for joy of his close entry into
this palace of pleasure of his mistress residence, and wondering at her powting
sadness, spoke in this manner.

All hail my best Aurelia, what mean these doleful dumpes? Is all as you
would, or do you hope for better? and receiving no answer or look of her
again, my mistress quoth he, is in Archimides his contemplation, studying how
to entertain an unbidden guest, and stepying forward, softly seized upon her
arm Aurelia quoth he, what study you on, when you study of nothing?

She shoaring up her eyes, as one newly awaked out of a slu^ber, what
Philotimus quoth she, you are welcome home, I pray God be with you, I am glad
to see you merry, I pray you commend me to all my friends.

Aurelia said Philotimus, is in a waking woman's dream, she dreams of cheese,
and speaks of chalk, speaks of my presence, and craves my absence. But
though I come like ill weather, unsent for, yet farewell frost is not so soon
said. Her answer is like Apollo his Oracle, that may not be assoiled but
with doubtful interpretations, and therefore I will assay to anatomize her
meaning. I am as welcome to her, as water into a ship, and if I will be gone,
Gods blessing be with me shall-be mine alms.

Nay, stay there Philotimus, (answered Aurelia) Juno turned them that troubled
the head of the fountain into frogs, therefore recall your ignoraunte
Paraphrase, neither note so fast in the margent, without better understanding,
least for corrupting the text, some penalty befall you. But seth I mean to
be angry with you, I will show you the cause of all my garboile. Your late
compacted journey, was not so smothered in hugger mugger, but that I had a
little bird, that brought me news of it: and when I heard it, I was aggreued,
as sick as a chick, but much more was I angry, when being in your mouth, (as
Plotina said) you spit me out like a sluttish morsel and being your next
neighbor, and of a little acquaintance, you would not remember all this
vacant time, to let me have notice of your intent, but left me desolate, taking
your flight sodeinly, and now when I have you, you are gone again by this time:

Alas said Philotimus, the bound must bend, if thou do but recount the
contents of my goodwill, which I know thou have capitulated in thy memoryall,
thou will rue the intestine war, which all this while I have endured in my
fancy toward thee, and the duty toward my father: at length I am comd to
ransom my self from evil suspicion, to represent my gratefullnes, and
present my service to thy good consideration.

Philotimus, I suppose, had the virtue of the herb Nepenthes in his phisnomy,
which could sack sorrow, and make his mistrisse as merry as a maid might be,
to whom she answered in this sort.

If any tongue in the world deserve to be gilded, it is thine Philotimus,
for thou can so portcolize thy faults, that if they be black, they are
engrayled with blew, and if they be read, thou make them white, wherein, as
in other properties, so in this you resemblest the fair lilie, which being of a
scarlet coulor within, is in outward aspect as hory as the snow. But I remit
thy crime howsoever or whithersoeuer thou wentest, though it were a feritting
for other men's conies. One dram of courtesy with you, may serve for a whole
pound of discurtesie, I had rather be woonne with an apple, then thou
should say I would be lost with a nutte, a beck of yours, is as good as a
Dieugarde.

Philotimus seeing his mistrisses melanchilie so soon chewed, and disgested,
thus replied. Either age or use has given me might to bear your gibes
(Aurelia) I cannot wish you less then my sovereign princess, you are so
merciful, yet by this that you say, I can turn my self from white to red,
from red to white, you may imagine, I am no chaunglinge, like the brood of
the Cameleon, who can change himself into all coulors, saving red and white.

I will say to you, as one said to Fabius Cato, who being a man little in
stature, was soon angry, and soon pleased. Since your chimney is so small,
you must beware to lay too much wood upon your fire, least your chimney be
always smoaky. There Aurelia made a Colon, bringing in her parenthesis, which
was this. Whereas we have offended each other without desert, let thy Squire
Parmenio allotte what judgment we shall suffer for our passed trespasses,
Philotimus was pleased. Parmenio answered. I thank our Ladies son, that I
am comed to the preferment of a judge, were I so ever, I might perhaps prevent
my destiny, which my fathers last legacy bequeathed unto me, and my coat
armor blazed by the Herauldes, does plainlye prognosticate, for thus say
they. Two trees rampant, with a tree iacant, and a knave pendant, in a green
field, is the badge of a younger brother.

Aurelia does not judge my conditions by my coat, for then I were to base for
this court, but a fox though he have not so gawdye a skin as the Leopard, has
more wit then the speckled fool.

Lord (quoth Aurelia) what a monster art thou, a man in my eyes, and a fox
in my ears? Parmenio held on, not hearing what she said.

If it were the part of a Judge to respect parcialitie, I should percase
remember my masters Evening brawlinges, and Morning whippinges, which many a
time God knows, poor I do feel, hear, and understand. But I would you
wist, Parmenio has emulation for trustines, with Anthony the Orators
servant, who being rackte and torturde to give testimony against his masters
adultery, when he had played fast and louse with a pretty wench, would rather
endure to die, then make an Apocalips of his masters priuities; therefore with
warrantize of my upright dealing, now to the purpose.

For as much as my master has offended you (mistress Aurelia) with his
ungrateful negligence, and you have grieved my master with your sinister
suspicion, whereof the one he has made auriculer confession, and of the other
you are not acquitted, I pronounce, that for pour bypartite sins, both of you,
till to morrow morning at six of the clock, do penance together in a pair of
white sheets.

They both smild at the boys conceit, and Aurelia not able to utter one word
for laughing, faintlye foltered out as follows. O God, O God, O Parmenio,
thou do me so much good I can not abide thee. Alas said he, I hurt you God
thank me, but when coltes cry wyhye, they are commonly lustye. I will not
kick quot^ Aurelia, least I seem to be gauld, but thou art t^o h^sty for a
parish priest, that consummates a marriage, before the banes be asked, and
bringes us to bed, before we be married.

Their banquet was ready, the board covered, and Parmenio and Antigone stood
in stead of sewer and seruitours. Parmenio seeing the night overtake them, and
acquainted with his masters hamour, who had rather have been talkinge with
Aurelia, then feeding of these viaundes, made so great have that he spild a
broth on her gown. Very well said Philotimus, so could I have done my self.
Me thinks you should, said the boy, when I do it before you. Aurelia smiled
at his answer, and pacifying his master, toulde him that since the effect
was so good to make them sport, the cause must deserve no reprehension. Nay,
quoth Parmenio, you have no honesty in your victuals. No, (answered Aurelia)
frowning at it, how than? No forsooth quoth the boy, never an herb called
honesty. Thus they merely past the while, the page willing to cheer them with
jesting.

But my young Lady was no Epicure at her meat, still staring in Philotimus his
face, and ministering meruailes to her self of that, which was no novelty for
her to view.

Parmenio marking how she played bo-peepe, spoke to his master in this sort.
If mistress Aurelia feed on your phismony song, as she does this night, she
will make you look with a pair of Lenton cheeks: whether it be for sparinge
of her cates or no^, I know not, but all this night she has neither other
sustenaunce nor taste, but such as come from your amorous countenance, to her
gloting eyes.

I have heard say Aurelia, that the nourishmente is always like the body
nourished, and if it be so, I hope there is some sympathy betwixt his looks
and my liking.

Par. In-deed that which nourishes, turns into the substance of that which
is nourished, and therefore I doubt not, but anon my master will find the way
into your little substance.


Aur. I trow nay, Philotimus will not do so, he is my best child.


Par. When you have borne him, and brought him forth, you may lawfully call
him child, and he you mother.

His master thanked him that he was so diligente a broker for his pleasure.


Par. It is not for disability in you, and that which I say, you must seal,
wherein stands the virtue. Princes you know in parliament houses have their
speakers, to declare their pleasures, and case themselves. If you have a letter
of good tidinges, it is no matter what varlet be the carrier, so you know his
hand who has signed it and sent it. mistress Aurelia takes no keep how great a
bragger I be, so you prove your self a valiant rider.


Philot. had done his deuoire, Aurelia was sufficed, and ye table taken up,
Antig. and Parmen, cabbished together into a bye lobby where they refreshed
themselves with the relics of their reuersion, and Parmenio played his reakes,
whose short colloquy you shall hear seiunctly.


Par. Now mistress Antigone, you have labored till you sweat, and I have
toyled till I am dry, therefore if thou be at leisure, I will be so bold as
drink to you, if you will give me leave.


Ant. I am not at leisure to give the leave, but take thee thy choice of a
thousand thanks.


Par. I have a su^^e to you, but that I fear the repulse, and a whelpe that
first does miss of his game, does never after prove worth an haw.


Ant. A Butchers curre does never alter his nature, as for water Spanyels, we
have no need of them in this place.


Par. If you have learnd the eight liberal science. I mean edgging. I will
set a spoke to your ^^gge Antigone, but good my wench, ^ooke with thine eyes,
and pity wi^h thine h^rt.


O quoth Antigone, I love the terribly, but it is a chief point of art to
dissemble art. I love thee well, but I trust in God thou shall never know it.
Parmenio seeing himself thus ridden, g^ue her a love tap upon the cneeke, as
though he would have bette her for mocking him, I will beat the bush quoth
he, and then peradventure I shall catch the bird: for whips and fair words
are the best to win women.

Antig. Indeed, thou art more like a stale to deceive women, then aproper man
to win them by might, yet such battes will scare the foul away.


But there rest they in their meriment till the next morning, and return we
to Philotimus, who is courting his mistress, recording oulde love without
vpbraiding, and requesting a contracte without resistaunce.

Aurelia although she were not inferior to him in fancy, yet did she doubt
though she were young, that youth would turn with the wind, for that as
Tully says, they love ardore quodam adolescentulum, and stood aloof in
denying his suite, insomuch that Philotimus very pensiuely protested she killed
him with obstinacy, their conference I have described dialogue wise.

Aur. Has not she action that kills, and he passion that is killed? How can it
then be, that when as he that loves does work, and ^he that is loved suffers,
she should kill him?


Philot. Nay, rather he that loves suffers, and she works.


Aur. But has not he free choice, to love or not to love?


Phil. He has.


Aur. Then he killes himself that loves.


Phil. The woman killes not because she is loved, but because she loves not
again. For whosoever may save, and will not, kills. O Aurelia, be not so
stern to him that has elected that and none else for his felicity, lest
Nimesis ye goddess, who wreakes all injuries with sharp reuengment, take my
cause in hand, and plague thee, though she help not me.


Aur. What would thou have me say?


Phil. But three words, that as I am thine, so thou art mine for ever.


Aur. This is a short song, with a long Epiphonema.

A matter of marriage requires deliberation.


Phil. But I have deliberated too long.


Aur. It is Love, not Wisdom, makes you think thus, and Love is blind.


Phil. No, no, my love sees, for thou do not seem such a one, because I love
thee, but I love thee, because thou art such a me.


Aur. Thou art not well acquainted with my manners, if thou ^addest worn the
shoe, thou might judge where it would hurt ^hee. Virginity is a fair
thing. Is it not a better sight to see a fresh Rose in the stalk, then
withered in a Gentleman's ^a^^^?


Phil. Had you rather have nothing but flowers in your orcharde, or the flowers
falling of, have your Trees swelle with apples?


Aur. But chastity is a good thing.


Phil. Therefore would I marry a chaste maid, and it may be a time we shall live
chaste, in the mean time we must learn it: or we cannot attain to all at the
first.


Aur. What? get virginity with violating of it?


Phil. Yea, why not? We learn to abtaine from wine by drinking little and
little. If virginity be so laudable, the^ it is not lawful to marry, but say
not so Aurelia, least like an unkind ^i^d, ye defoile thine own nest, accuse
thy mother of dishonesty, and thy self of basterdie.


Aur. I shall lose my liberty.


Phil. Nay, thou shall be Queen, and I King, and we will govern our family.
Is not your mind tied to your body, yet would it not be loosed, because it is
there willingly.


Aurelia desirous to shift of this talk, found every crafty hoal^ to thrust
her head in.

But it may be (quoth she) we shall be barren.

Phil. As though you are not so now. And it is better to live, to die, then
never to live at all: If we have joy, it shall be double, if grief, thou shall
beat but a part.


Aur. Our children may miscarry.


Phil. That lies in us: for if we be good, they will be good. Tigres are not
borne of lambs, nor doves of ravens, nor had children of parents that give
good example.


Aur. These things are hard.


Phil. Because they are good, and that is the cause that you are so hard,
because you are so fair.


Aur. Alas Philotimus, why do we reckon our chickens before they be hatched,
and trouble our selves about these matters, which may time enough be talked on
seven years hence? We are too little, and to young, for the delights of
marriage.


Phil. Tush Aurelia, a short sack has a wide mouth, and young kids lether
will stretch, and well thou know, a woman without a man, is like a ship
without a stearne, when I have left my affection here at home, it will be a cause
I shall sit at my study, not wandering abroad with wavering wool gathering
thoughts. And as the Dromeda, which runs a hundredth miles or more a day,
can long continue his course and running withowten meat, and after his
tedious iourneyes contents himself with brousing on the date tree, and a few
stones thereof: so can I endure pains all these our vnmellowed years, in hope
to possess thee as mine hire.


Aur. Thou art not like the Crocodile that wantes his tongue. Phil. But I am
like him in this, yt I would live either by water or land for enjoy the. I
think thou have the precious stone Sardonix, who has the propertye to make
one lowly and humble in their doings as thou art. which way look thou Aur.
not affording me a good countenance? my I read is dough, if ye be of the
nature of the bird Kalader, which when a man has been long s^ck, if he shall
dye turns a away her face from him, and if he shall escape death, streth her
sight upon him and behouldeth him cheerfully?


Aur. tell me this, would you have me married to a dead man as you are?


Phi. The herb panace can revive the dead: the touch of the saphyre can rid the
diseased of the grievous sore the Carbuncle: Orphens his harp raised Euridice
his wife from death: and your ^^^ning I know in this point will be as current as
neds, so your ^^nsent be not awanting. I give you the supremasie of my soul
use it as you list.


Aur: yea Philotimus the Eagle is called queen of all other birds, yet she
stirth from the little kind of swallowe which is all black, not daring to fall
on her pray till the swallowe fly abroad, and on the contrary, our hollow
father the Pope is cleped the servant of servant, yet he rules the roast
within most parts of Christendom: I now am misteris and you servant, this
order will be inuerted if we covenant th^^.

Nevertheless taking this frivolous talk for firm truth of your loyaltye and
knowing that the precious stones Ce^idom^, if you will have the^ virtuous, must
be taken out of the swallows womb before they touch the ground, and that as
one fruit of the figtree (which bears fruit three or four times ayeare)
rypeth, another springs, so thefarest have must be taken in time, which being
grounded upon long continuance, if it some time chance to quayle it will
spring again in the same for me, I am content to yield my self a vassal to
your desire,


Phil. Fie pleasure, fie, thou cloyest the with delyghte. Now Priams sone
give plane, thy belens how is stainde, O Troylus weep no more, fair Coes^d
thine is loth^ye soul. Nor Hercules thou haste cause to vaunt for thy sweet
Omphale, nor Romeo thou have cause to weep for Iuliets loss, if ever Amelia
had saluted your sight, whose bright eye beams like the precious Carbuncle show
so many reflections, that self God Cupid god of love, has chosen to be blind,
lest proper dart at sight of her should wound his breast. O Gods, and fates, and
rolling heavens, can I my loves dear love forget? God knows I wish I could
requite, but God confound if I forget.

I usurp any maistrie over thee? nay if thou will so far debase thy self as
make me thy fellow we will bear the bridle euenly with equal peyz.

Aur Pertinax in beginning of his reign thinking that the heavens were a mete
burden for none but Atlas, nor the imperial crown a congruent garland to none
but to those of divine excellency, defect whereof he bewatled in him self,
and the surplusage whereof he admired in others, would have instauled the^
Consul Glabrion in ye empire, and have placed him in the chayce of estate. In
whose refusal Glabrion persisting answered him thus. Thy humble humility
which thou showest pertinax, in the lack of merit of the Empire, makes thee of
deserving sufficient to be invested in the Empire.

Neither must I insult over thy subjection, but in lieu thereof, give thee a
counterpaine of my heart, neither is it proper to our sex to rule, but a
property in yours to proffer service, and because it should not stink for
stalenes, you leave it of at day of your marriage.

A picture portrayed in wax shows as fair as one engraven in marble, but
continewes not so long, thorns bear to the sight as fair flowers as the
geliflower, Crystal seems a precious stone till it come to hammering, and it
may be, though I hope better, that this love of yours is good for a flight, and
then casts of her bells,


Phil. use not, as you muse, and good enough. It is no shame to luke a fall,
but a shameful fall to lie long. It grieves me not that thou use objections,
but gauls me to the heart that thou will believe nothing. I am no master to
clock ill meaning in ^ire words, but thou do turn me to a manner to loose
my tongue for very sorrow.

Yet will I be as ready to spend my spirits in thy service, as am dull to spare
my speech in mine own defense. In hostag^ whereof, here take my heart in habit
of my hand, to bestow at your pleasure, but if you will give it hospitallity
in your breast, I will do as much for you in the like matter, she grasping his
hand, he offered to kiss her, which she r^f^sed. It is an evil cold (quoth
he) that may not lick his own fingers.


Aur. I may not kiss, or I must keep my virginity sound for you.


Phi. Does k^ssing impair virginity.


Aur. I pray you would you have me to give kisses to other men?


Phi. No, keep my kisses for me.


Aur. You boar me in hand, that the greatest part of your heart is in my
custodye. If you lay lips to lips, it may peradventure all flitt into me.


Philotimus did not day the matter, but used that force which uses to be
welcome to all women, when they make resistaunce as though they would not be
ouercomed.

Both parties pleased, many an interchaungable oath they took, that sooner
Zanthus should recule, sooner Hearts should feed in the air, sooner Eagles
fly the doves, then they would part wtth ought but death, whilst any
Grasshopper should feed on dew, whilst any Be should seed on time, whilst
any Turtles love their mates, they would not faint in faith, and after death
surumours heart should still concomitate corses ghost, and with these words
briefly concluded all their mistrust.

Aur. When love is 'cloyed, the royle at grass may run, I seat.


Phil. When hoof is hole, the hackney still is hired, thou know.


Aur. When corn is sold the market clean is done.


Phil. The Chapmans daily need will stul uphold the market.


Now nights dark mantle began to avail, the day bright star, dan Lucifer
icleeped, by office forerunner to Radiant Phoebus bedecked the sky, and none
but it. Now was the dolinge hour comd, wherein Philotimus must depart, for
fear of discryinge.

How often did they pray the slyding Night, so linger not a while? How often
did they curse the lyght-some lyefe Aurora, for her quick return? saying that
it was casye to know the cause of her earelye rysinge, because she lay with
the old man Tithonus, but if her lover Cephalus might have been her
contemporant, she had not been so hastye.

Now like the warblinge lark or other ayerye chyrpinge byrd, which all the
night is tongue tied, and descants it at sight of dewye morninge, so she
which all the night was as dayntye of a word, as Democrytus of a tear sunge
in the morninge a song of three parts, her tongue auouchinge permanent
constancye, her eyes bemoninge their hastye partinge, her hands beatinge her
tender breast, in remembrance of long sequestratio^.

She which before seemed to warm her self at Philotimus his fire, and learn
love of him, now her smoulderinge heat burst out to open flame, she whose
conduite seemed to be stopped or pipes cut of, now gushed out into seas of
tears, those hands that thrust him back before, begriped his hands, embraced
his corpse, and bound her fast for ay.

Aur. Thy heart I fear me is yet a wielidng, but if thou will plant it, as thou
have professed, within my breast, do not doubt but such grafts of grace will
grow of it against thy return, that for every corn thou shall reap an eere
of fifty grains. My good Philotimus, remember her that cannot forget thee,
think of her in absence, who will have thee and thy personage imprinted in
presence.


Phi. Aurelia, though I were Caluitius f ye orgot the names of his most
familiar acquaintance, or more forgetful then the doterd Messala, who forgot
his own name, yet cannot the remembrance of the be bloted out. thou shall be
my speculation, my meditation, my familiar with whom I will conferr, my joy in
prosperyty, my solace in adversity, only thou and ever thou, my sweetest
Aurelia.


There he gave her a ring, in which was ingraued the precious stone ye
Emeraulde, which might make her mind-fal of him, and recreate her sight with
the green gloss she in guerdon, bestowed on him an Amatist, whose force was
to drive away al evil thoughts, and sharpen his understanding at his book:
when he beheld the Amatist, I think, quoth he, the force of this Amatist has
kept you wakinge all this night. for such operation also do Lapidaries ascribe
to it.

Aur. philotimus She had not need to sleep, that wakes a quick corse, lest
her ^eame drowsines breed vn^othsome dreams, or sodeyne startinge affright
her sleapinge, with prolonginge time, day drew on apace that of necessitye
he must be gone. He calde his boy and badd him make ready, and claspinge his
misteris between his arms, with his head cast down into her bosom,
dolefullye took hls frnidlye farewell.

Phil, Mine own Aurelia. whose joy I was, whose pleasant sweet conceyts are
my delyghte, even the, so must it be, I bidd adieu, and once again adwe, I dye
to part.


The poor gentlewoman not able to wreste out one word for weepinge (for where
the fire is most the flame is least) At length bespake thine ever Aurelia,
or never mine own, wysheth thee better fare; then I have at this present, and
my self greater care, if it were for thy pleasure.

Thus thrice he took his leave, and touched the chamber door, and thrice he
did return, and took his leave again, and when he parted, Lord loathe he
parted, and sometime stood, and sametime went, and still looked back to passed
joys.

Permenio (quoth he) how might I bear this cheek yet of a prince and not a
pawn, and that is my comfort? a thowsande times I curse the hour, wherein I
went my saint to se, and eke ten thowsande times I bless the stoure, wherein
I saw so fair a sight as she now I have her, but I may not enjoy hertell me
thy counsel permenio.

Par. Is this your inuectiue against Venus, and your promise to Palls, that
latelye you made to your father, you would serve well in stead of a
wethercock, to show a man in what coost the wind stands, or else I hope you
will prove a good Astronomer at your study, you are so wetherwise, turninge
your tail into every wind.


phil. permenio, thou neither know me nor my love, nor the meaning of my
choice, Venus is changed, then why may not I? Venus is not Venus, my Aurelia
is Venus whom I will worship and adore as the primate of all Goddesses. my
fathers propose was, whether I would leave all other things and wholye
consecrate my self to the Court where Venus is Metrapolytane and bears the
swaye, which then I denied neither yet do repent. For neither will I abandon
pallas, to be an hunger-staruen slave of Venus, neither can I do Pallas her
right homage, unless my Venus, the golden Aurelia vouchsafe to be my guide.

Venus might blush if she were not impudent, and Juno be ashamed but that she
is a Queen, to see or hear Aurelia named.

The graces were not gracious: if they wanted Aurelia, neither beautye worth
praising, if she were away

Triumph then you Graces, that you have such a subject, and vaunt no more
Venus, but glory in thy Lady, she is the Son to every gallant wight, the
rest but twinclynge stars to wanderers in the night, for her Dame Nature
howles and weeps because the moulde that cast her shape is lost and gone, nor
ever can the like be framed again.

Such a pearl in a blackamoores ear would make him whytt. Such a paragon
would cause Galen shake hands with Chastytye, such an Alexis would make
Coridon go madd. One word and then no more, she dead, the world were done.


Par. I have heard that a club bound about with olive is a good cote armor,
because a violent weapon is ensigned with a mark of peace: aunswerable to this
say I, that a little infirmity covered with warines is very tolerable. One in
Bizantio, which now is called Constantinople, having an vrcheon, who by nature
is skillful of the coming of winds north and south, (for then he changes his
denn) would fore-warne his neighbors of storms, from what costs they came, so
that being an ignorant soul, for this one thing, which he concealed how
he came bye, he was reputed half a prophet: you have redd of the simple
fellow, which could not bear any thing in his brain, but desirous to be
thought wise, bought certain slaves boundmen, whereof some could say Homers
Iliads by heart, some Sophocles, some Euripides, and at dinners and suppers they
should rap them out, which made him be thought learned among his gestes, who
was in troth a plain doult: if you can counterfaite a face and dissemble your
late match, (though you can hardlye serve Gad and Mammon but be bewraide) yet
you may study on pallas and practice on Aurelia, and never be perceived.


Phil. I remember one askinge Hannibal, what his purpose was to do the next
day, when he removed camp, had this answer, that if the cote on his own
back knew his intent, he would disrobe himself and burn it, and I warrant
them, let them keep them selves from fire and water and horse heels, and I
will keep them from this secret, if thou can be closse,


Par. I? as close as a close stool.


phil. Fo parmenio, I smell thy lie stink hither have not I heard chee swear
an hundred times the falsest lies in ye wrrld? why then should not thou
as well doceyue me as others?


par. That perjury was for mine honesty. and this fidelity is for my
alleageaunce toward you, hope well and have well.


philotimus at these words took truce with care and put on his holy day look
that he wore on good days, and apostles euens. he knocked at master Aemelius
his chamber door, as though him self were newly risen: I would have brought
you a light (quoth he, but that I was a fraid t it would give no light. why
said Aenelius is ye day so far spent? by that time he was attired, all things
were ready and breakfast prepared, which done after philotimus, Aenelius and
senior Mondoldo, and the rest had taken their leave of the Lord Cleocritus and
lady Castibula and their children with others in ye house they set forward in
their journey.

Here I cannot pretermit to insert the complaynt of the Lady Castibula^, which
^hee had concealed before her sons face, and closelye in her chamber
disballassed her self of it as ensues.

Ah thrice unfortunate is she, tha^ ^^nce anhappie mother, and better it is be
to a barren covert barron, then a fertile mother of toward children: the one
lives in hope to shake of shame in time, the other dies in doubt to lose ye
fruition of her wombs fruit if the boy should be sick, which Jesus
forefende, can I be there too comfort him with mine own brothes, or see what
confections his physicians do minister? or if the youth want money, which is
youths wont, can I be ready with a fresh supplye to give a restoritye to
his consumption? No God he knows, and that I rue. Bot if I may have wit of
any such matter I shall send him angels which were no messengers this
seven years, who I doubt not but will fly without any wings.

But leave we the pensive mother, whose sonns sure saftye was all her thought,
and whose care of her son was sometime comfort to him, not by the cause, but
by the effect.

Philotimus dreaminge on his last nights work, ryd all the day long heavier
then he was accustomed, by a pound and an haste, and when there was no passage
by land, but they must imbarke themselves, and launch it out by water, thus
did he leeme to be conueyde: in shipe fraught with remembrance of pleasure
past, with scaldinge sighs for want of gale, and steadfast hope that was his
sail.

Aemi^^^s asked him how it happened, that he thus was changed from a pleasant
Phaedrus to a poutinge Cato, and told him ye his frowling made him look as
though he had newly comd out Tro phonius his denn* one hearing, said he, ye
Enatius was dead, and man quarellous, ambitious, and full of garboyle, said, I
marvel how he could intend to dye, considering his business both night and
day, (...) that I muse how thou foundest time to be (...) when I never knew
the hitherto to have one therling thought: I cannot divine what should be the
cause, unless you remember some old quarrel betwixt thee and me. For so it
was with them, as it is commonly with brethren that keep together, them would
often be brawling about their ^^^ting as and (...) kings. Here Philotimus
replied.

Indeed (...) your (...) wise, you can (...) a thing assoote as you see it,
see I am as sad as a pro^ikful^ of f^the (...)

If millers may compare with waultmen, (A^minus) (...) title gnats make
collation with great ^^^ints (...) that ^^remistocles and Arist^des being at
continual debate: while they lived at home in Athens, sent on a time
Ambassadors, in their countries affairs, buried their angers in a tertaine
(...) the their consentes. The Coceians and M^^^us, (...) noble families of
Italica, a city in one of the prou^^te in Spain, had over betwixt there
great contention, till wars were waged t^^^ne ye Rompetans and them, and then
they united them (...) in great friendship. Whatsoever we have h^^e a^ home,
we will now, when we shall be (...) in a strange ^^^^trie, ^oa^^ together
like neighbors children.

Their tutor and governor, seeing their could theere, a hearing none of this
talk, assign^ them a qu^^^n whereon to dispute, to drive away the time.

The question was this, whether it went botter to take pains in youth
afterward to enjoy pleasure, or first to reueil him in the leaze of liberty,
and in age be pinchte for his former sins.

The defense of the first part was given to Plulotimus, of the second to
Aemilius, the judgment and arbitorment to their two pages: Philotimus began as
follows.

I feel my head so far (...) it this da^^ neither to please my self with
disputation, or (...) we my matter with pith of arguments, that for once I
would wish the property of the fish M^^^hs, why (...) there go^^laid to
e^^^tare him, retires darke^, and taking his (...) but leapes over.

The hot stomach of a goose eats watery meats, and tastes no laurel, the
Peacock when he has lost his tail, hides himself for shame, till it grow
again, and I having for the time lost my best ornament, I mean some odd
foolish crankatiue conceited humor, and burning within, as cold without as a
clock, love neither this morning to confer with company, neither to taste any
meat, unless sadness be the sauce. Notwithstanding knowing that the crying of
the bird Fulica in the morning, betokens some tempest to ensue, and that the
eating of an Hearts flesh in the morninge, augmentes man's life, I will not
yield to sorrows summons, lest it be an Argument of my imminent ill fortune,
but be as hartye as I may, for the procurement of my solace.

And so much the less I need to doubt, by how much the more I am gardayne of
the truth. For truth is like a friend which in most cruel encounters of his
friends misfortune, does then most friendly bewray himself, or like Hidraes
heads, which the more they were coped, the more they grew, although for a
time the Sun may be shadowed with a cloud, the Fire may lie raked in ashes,
and Truth may be smouldered with malice, or dared with houering Fraud.

My friendly foe Aemilius, I will not use many words to aggrauate much matter,
but comprise as much matter in as few words compyled, as shall support and
prove a sentence to thee, already approved of all.

I once red these words, of the great matron Mesia Phoenicia, in l^tters she
writ to the sacred Senate, touching her Nephewe Heliogabulus. Many times age
does bring forth fruit, where reason did not yield so much as leaves. But I
say, never shall eld have leaves of lives pleasure, where they do not blossom
of the fruit of youths pains. Rapes and Turnups shall be sweet if their
seeds be soaken in honey water, before they be sown: but crooked benumd age
shall wast in woes, where the platform and foundation of ouergrowen years,
were not grounded with sour travail.

Vices may vanish, but their effects cannot perish, the felon may by hap be
dismissed from the rope, but the burnt in his hand must by law show him
guiltye, though distemperate harebraine youth escape sensual surfettinges of
wine and women, (whereof Cicero says that more cast their last gasp, then dye
by course of nature) yet in after process they bear the badge of beggary, eat
the meat of sorrow, sup the water of affliction, suffer hunger as a Lion, seek
their pray as a Lion, ramp abroad like a Lion, and fade with famishment, as
seldom does the Lion.

At a feast, the first service is of grosser meat, and the delicate eats
reserved till the last. When you break a colte, you first beat him for, his
wildnes, and afterward being weldy do cherish your hobby.

Though labor be loathsome, yet is it wholesome. Rue is most bitter, yet being
eaten fasting it cleares the eyesight. ^ Olive is not sweet, yet a plant of it
set, and a year or two after an impe of a Rose-tree grafted in it, it will
bring forth a sweet green Rose at Christmas. Brimstone and Veruaine are no
honey, yet bind them to thine hand or arm, and thou shalt never have the
crampe.

It is not with the pleasures of youth, as it is with the Juniper tree, which
will never putrify or stink, and has his branches continually grene.

Pliny reports, that the birds Meropes nourishe their parents in age, as
they were nourished of them in their youth. But trust you to your friends, when
you have consumed your flowring time in Riot, and you shall have of them
exhibition at least.

The virtue of the herb Alimon is such, that who so tastes it, shall not be
hungry. Get this, and thou may p^ay as thou listest, nothing needing to doubt
sustentation: but I fear me, you shall sooner find the way to seek your pray
in the night, as does ye bird Hiber, then by your searching get this herb.

Aurora men say, is a friend to Muses. In ye morning we see, men take their
iourneys, at night to repose themselves. In the spring we graft our fruits,
and youths tender brain is most apt for discipline.

In vear, the husbandmen lop their trees, to the intent that afterward they may
grow the better: so let youth cut of his disordinate affections, that
afterward he may prosper, and florishe more gloriously.

The juice of Betony does save from drunkenness, but then it must be drunken
fasting in the morning. Five or six sage leaves at once, taken in time, do
help the gowte, but they must be eaten in the ^ointing. The dark of a
wallnute tree stamped, and laid all night male or water, will make one
perbreake, and this must be locken in the morning.

The root of a fig tree is sower, and the fruit sweet. The emmot and the be
bear burdens in Summer, to the intent that in boary winter they may keep
their houses.

Was at not better for the two twinties Romulus and Remus, to be rast (...)
their swa^^ ^^owses, and drenched in the Sea, and by has being found by (...),
the Kings shepherd, and fo^^hered by Laipa his wife, (...) have learnd their
stock, and aspire to their kingdom, then like Saturn in his youth to wear
the imperial crown, and in his age be ^eaued of it by his own son Jupiter?

The orle of Tartare takes of any spot, and the interest of pleasure will
repaye all pains and made them quite forgotten.

When your ^^esh is prickle with thorns, wash it in a cloth that is washed
in urine, or with the head of a Lycerd being open the midst, or wi^^ the
roots of nettles braid in salt, and pow may draw them out: so when thou art
supprised with griefs, either think that thou art as puissant to bear them,
as others that thou have borne, or that they cannot always endure and last,
or that at length heaven (as the Papists say) comes by Purgatory, and thou
shall be comforted.

The plowmans toil has hope that makes him till: Love has a sauce that makes
his sorrow sweet: and every long Period has a Comma. Nemo often (says Tully)
quamuis in rebus turbidis, qui non aliquando animo relaxatur. If thou have a
desire to do well, thou will not start for an April shoure. Hungry dogs
eat durtye puddinges, and custom which in continuance remoues all sent of
sower, may be a cordial to a fresh water souliour to stand to his tackle.

I have red in good authors, that the Bird Lagopus which is seen in the Alps,
and never feeds but where she is bred, neither can be tamed (as Pliny
reports) being caught bytimes, in space has been taught to feed in other
places, and by art contrived, has been trained to tamenes. The captain
Masmissa never using himself to wear a bonnet, would winter and summer lead
his army bareheaded.

Those that walk as they will, wallowing in their beastly se^sualitie,
persuading themselves that they have the world in a string, are like the
ruffian Capaney, who in ye conflicte between Eteocles and Polinices, took an
oath, that though there were a convocation of all the Gods assembled, and all
in complete harness ready to their resistaunce, yet Thebes, should sack,
burn, perish, and lie even with the ground, when by and by her was stricke
from heaven with Jupiters thunderbotte, and so was my great bragger for want
of good ridinge, laid under foot, or like the sluggardes in Syria, who having
great store of iron and Silver, for sloth to seek it, have no gains of it.

Who would be cloyed with all deliciousnes in the world, and have fear of
ensuing misfortune to be his companion?

In my mind it is better to labor for a time with Castanean, to enhaunce
advancement, then swear it out for a trice with Commodus, and wrappe up his
life-warpes woofe with so evil a list.

I speak of my theme, as Aristides spoke of profit. For Themistocles on a
time sainge that her had very profitable counsel for the weal bublick, but
such as must be privately discussed on, not in open audience, the Athenians
gave him Aristides with whom to confer. Themistocles told him that the navy of
the Lacedaemonians which was conveyed to Githeus, might be closelye burnt, which
done, the force of the Lacedaemonians to be broken, and their hearts
discomfited. Aristides returninge with great expectation to the council
house, answered, that Themistocles his counsel was very commodious, but
withal dishoneste, whereat the Athenians not reputinge that profitable, which
was not honest, relected his counsel not having heard it.

My sentence is, that the pleasure which is not adjacent to virtue (as no
youthful pleasure almost can be) is to be fled and not followed, rather
refusinge her follies, then chusinge her defense.

That other sensitive, is common to beasts, whereof many excelling men in
corporal qualities, as an hare in swiftnes, an Elephant in strength, a cat in
seeing with her steeming eyes, do likewise, or at least should conceive more
delyghte pertinent to the body.

How far it is to be avoided of us, may be known by this, because those which
bewre ye munificall magnificence in contemning wordly trash, and desire to
hente honor for their prize, are noted of rashness, if for pleasure or credit
they stretch their hands further then their sleves will reatch, or lashe more
out, then the condition or that whereon they, bestow, and other circumstances
do exact.

Theophrastus in his book De diuitiis, writing many things well, is reprehended
for praising excessive pomp and charges in popular gyfts.

Demetrius, Phalaraeus blamed Pericles Prince of Greece, for to^ much cost in
the entrance of his buildinges to Minerua.

Quintus Mutius, P. Lentulus, and Syllanus, were subject to some slander, for
their glorious gorgeousnes, in the function of their Aed^lships.

Never was any man heard of long to prosper, which was sotted in voluptuousnes.
Alexander Medices king of ye Florentines, was slain for offering villainy to an
other man's wife. So was Pasistratus slain of Harmodius, whose sister he had
defiled. And for the same cause Aloysius king of the Placentines, Rodericus
king of Spain, Appius Claudius, and many others, have been deraigned of their
potentacies.

The tyrannical government of Ortagoras and his children at Sicyon, lasted but
an hundredth years, ye Oligarchie of Cypselidae at Corinth, 74. years and
three months, of Hieron and Gelon at Syracuse eightene years.

When there is intestine war betwixt Reason which by nature is crowned with a
diadem of regiment, and seditious affections, which are constituted to obey ye
state of Reason, ye state of thy being cannot long persevere, as ye vprores
twene ye tyrants Gelon and Thrasibulus, and also betwixt Dionysius and Dion,
do well declare, whose tumults caused slaughter to their subjects, and woes to
themselves.

It is not the outward munition of a well it need city, or the conjunction
of compacted houses, that makes a good incorporate commonwealth: for then
should the whole corporation of Peloponnesus, have been encompassed with one
wall, and some cities there be so great and huge (as Babylon, whereof the
third part knew not, til two parts of ye city were sacked and captiuated) yt
they cannot possibly be reduced to a good common weal, No more (good Aemilius)
is it outward sensitive voluptuousnes, that inuestes a man with the type of
true happiness, or ennobles his name with any dignity.

Therefore were the Graecians admonished, and we in them, to contain their
children from vewinge lascivious pictures, as the pictures of Machaceus and
Canace, son and daughter of king Acol, which were portrayed doing that foul
fact together. Such was Aegistus his ye lechers, as he lay with Cli^^nestra,
such was Alcides his, which subduing Euritus and his country, was so enthrald
to his daughter, that he spunne and carded among her Maeonian maids, and such
was that of Mars, deflowring the virgin Astyoche, whereof he begat two twins
and valiant captains Alcalaphus and Ialmen.

From reading wanton poems, as how Jupiter ye greatest God took upon him
Amphitruo his shape, and lay by deceit with Alcmena his wife, turned himself
into a bull, with cristall horns and dangling d^wlap hanging down, and
defloured Europas, and how he wiled the pretty boy Ganimedes from his father, to
have him the subject of his damnable buggery.

From seeing beastly adulterous Commodies, as almost all be which are extant
among us.

Of such as Calliphon and Dinomacus, that joined this brutish pleasure with
honesty, as who should join a man with a beast. I will not vouchsafe to
speak, neither have I (as Plato used to say of the Tyrant Demetrius) any
leisure to think of them.

How much better were it for us to do as M. Seius, which sparing from his
own behoofes, gathered corn in store, wherewith in time of dearth, he
relieved the city, and got himself love, where before he was envied: so we
to measure our mirthe with a moderation, that in time to come, when others
founteynes are exhaust, they may deduct from us some licour of life,
especially, when wickedness is maintained with as much travail and care, as
vprightnes in dealing.

A mirror whereof may Bargulus be, the thief in Illyria, of whose toil and
wealth, (speak Theopompus and Vitiatus) ye land porter in Lusitauia, who was so
vigilaunt in his affairs, yt the Roman armies were feign to retire at his
assaults. A thief does need as desperate a mind to scale an house, as a
captain to sack his enemies rampire. Dionysius the tyrant, Gorgias the
tyrant, Macrinas ye tyrant, and Catiline ye tirant, if we should commend them,
and they of themselves give reason, they would affirm and swear, that they
passed more travail, and found themselves in more peril in defending their
tyrannies, then Scipio and Cato in conseruing their commonwealth.

Wherefore to prefer this pleasure in prime, or make it equivalent to ye settled
joys of age, were to prefer the bark before ye tree, to take the shell and
leave the nutt, to eat the platters and leave the meat they carry on them.

To report at large all the reasons that might ratify my supposition, were to
emptye and draw dry, drop by drop, the river Nilus, or to wade the great
river of Danubie, because they are so so many and so common, that it should be
tedious to recite them, and lost time to read them.

The consideration of my proofs, I yield to our canonical judges, and the
replye to you. Thou feast how plain I have been in my decaration, as though
Tom troth had been my father, and Simplicity my mother. For Truth to tell, a
simple naked tale, that in it self has noe diversity, but always shows one
vndisguised face, and never fraught with contrarietye, ne is wont ike deep
deceit to seek a shrowding sheet, n^ needs to be with process pricked, and wrap
his words in guilfull eloquence.

Aemilius according to his ancient pleasant manner, answered. To be as short,
as you were swift, this mind of mine does fleet full far, from that farfetch
of thine: yet so neat have you been in traversing your treatise, that you were
able to prove wit in a woodcock.

An horse deserves hay, a sheep fother, and thou a bunch of baies to empaile
thy head.

The proverb goes, ye Apollo his words and Cato his works are worthy praise,
he that hears thy Pytho speak, and will do as I bid him, shall not be so mad
(which the scope of thy discourse semes to import) as if he fall in the mire in
winter, not struggle to get out, but say he will stay till summer, and then
the sun will dry it up, that he shall not stick fast. Thus taking him up
with a double gird for haultinge, he fell to arguinge in this sort.

Those that will lose no time from laboring in their youth, saying that the
gods will provide a repose for champerd elde, ar like the Perseans, whom
Diodorus reports, to contemn houses, calling them Ins, and in building
sepulchers to have spared no cost with folly, I cannot tell, whether the
Perseans were more ouer-seene in their first devising, or the EgiPtians
blamefull in directing their advice to an imitation: who ar^ recorded to have
mansion houses little better then tippling boothes, and some of them to have
bestowed on the work men, that ingraued their tombs, xx. thousand talents in
garlic, onions and cheese.

These Caterers for pittaunce which they know not who shall eat, resemble the
delicious men Sybaritae, who used to invite their guests a whole year before,
that neither the bidder might want time to prepare fare, nor the guests want
leisure, sumptuouslye so adorn and trick up themselves in gold and precious
siones, when in the mean time perhaps they were both of them woormes meat, or
like those fools, which moyled all the whole yerre, rejoicing in this that
they should have a feast in the month of february, which was called stultorum
feriae fools holyday.

There is a certain Italian history, ye tenor whereof is this: a gentlewoma^
on amoured of a young gentleman, whose garish gledi^e persuade a yelding bent of
will, sought with good courage to accompany and court her, in place where he
might plead with out other judge then her self* her neighbor feets, and other
vulgar tongues, so tatled of their privy conuenticles, that her brethren forth
with knew the counsel, which they were not called to the young gentleman on a
time in quiet well ycought (a queint commodity as he thought) a lonely with
his misteris, her brethren, as the harm of mishap would, took him napping as
Mos^ did his mare, I will not say between my ladies legs, they with trenchant
blades, bolne with ire, lokinge bigg, like Marquesses of all beef, with
griefull eine, clinging about him, protested, they would bowl his bellye, if
he did not confine his knavery with other bonds: but to this composition they
came, that if he would condiscende to lie a whole year within an old rotten
hagg (who was more like to consume with canker, then pleasure a gentleman) and
do to her as he would to their sister, he should have egress and regress with
his gentlewoman, and the choice should be his, with whom he would first begin.
When my youth hard this, glad he was of the one part, but which should be in
the first front he knew not, so shiuering fear flitt too and fro among his
flushing veins.

The Queen of a compame in a merry meting of gallants for disporte, having
this question propounded, gave resolution, that it was better wisdom to begin
with his misteris. and so he should be sure of his joy: and be better armed to
endure the groaning crone, partly cloied with former pleasure, partly with
remembrance of his first customer, and who knows said she whether he shall
live a year or no.

Nothing in mortality is long permanent* of all that I have heard to be most
fortunate in long life ^ prosperity iontly, was Argo^tonius king of ye
tartessians, who reigned fourscore years and lived an hundred and twenty,
which god knows was soon ru^. Those yt suppose a man cannot live youthfully
in his flowring m^ad, but that in age he shall pen up his pleasure in
repentance pounds, ar in ye like erroneus opinion as was Commodus, who hearing
that certain gentlemen upon the bridge of Tiber, were recounting the virtues of
M. Aurelius. and lamenting his death, out of hand commanded them to be hurled
over the bridge into ye river, asserting, yt they could not speak well of his
father, but that they must speak evil of him, which was his s^nne.

As for those, who think a man may not be wanton when he is a yongling,
because some have been so excessive, as seeking such as Aiulius of Larina,
(whose trade was to give young men potions to make them lustye) have been
daggers to their own throat, or like that prince who for that Quintianus the
son of a senator, was detreted of a conspiracy against him, bare such
immortal hatred to all the senators, yt whosoever named himself a senator, was
held for a traitoure, or like Brutus, who that all ye stock of Superbus and
the name of Tarquin^ might be abolished, took the government from his fellow
Collatinus Tarquinius, that had been a partner of his counsel in expelling ye
kings. The grave Ephori among the Lacedomonians which were as an anticipation
to the kings, that they should use no oppression or burden the people with
impositions, were all old men.

Natures hye derree has appointed, that young lambs should use their pastaunce
on sunny hills when old sheep are lyther and lustles.

Sprigging flowers ar in their baine and tender grows, better for poesies to
delight then medicines for diseases.

Therefore say I with the young man in Terence, that those old men have left
many a good lessone behind them, for want of learning, that would have a boy
by some strange metamorphosis convert into an old grandsire, using an
aldermans pace before he can well gange, and speaking at every word a sentence
of eleauen, when he has scarcely learned his Christ-crosse-rowes.

No man will lend a lock of hay, but for to gain a-loade, then why should I
take pains all my life, and have no more assurance of my promised profit,
but peradventure yea, peraduen nay, and if I chance to get it, be glad I
have mine own, much like a twhackinge thresher, or a thumpinge thatcher, who
must plye their bones all the day, and stand at night with cap and knee before
their good master, for their three halfe-peny hyre.

When I have slipped the flowere that fairest is of hew, when I have reapt my
crop of corn, I can be content you take the stalk, and make advantage of my
chafe.

Thou say that the root of a figtree is sour, and the fruit sweet*
therefore do we use to eat the fruit, referringe the root to other
necessaries.

The custom of feasts is (as you infer for want of other proofs) to begin
with gross fare, and end with banqueting dishes. I say, the users of such a
method, are not so wise as the priest that eat his best plummes first, and
let the woorst be mending.

It was prophesied to Anceus that he should never drink of his planted
vineyarde, which he to falsify, the grapes being ripe and pressed, got a
bowl of wine in his hand, asking where his could prophets were, that made
such a blazon of a false supposition: at that very instant, one running into
the house, cried a maine that the vine yard was like to be spoiled, which he
to prevent left his wine ^ there being slain verified ye prophesy, whereupon
this prouerbiall adage is grounded, many things ar between the cup and the
lip. Lucius was adopted to the Roman Empire, but before he had power to
command in the state of Rome, he was buried in his sepulture.

Pills ywrapt in sugar yield no bitter rellishe, one coming late from warminge
himself, is bettter able to abide astormie morning: to which two similitudes
my theme is Homogeneo^ yt he that has past his time in iollity, is in better
case to match with misery.

The refuser of his meat when he is hungry, meaning to take refection another
time, deserves no praise, in meede of his abstenency, but as an enemy to
nature, is well worthy to pine.

Such a thing is pleasure, so glorious in show, so noble in name, so
effectual in force, that all things, at all times in all exploites work for
her hire, bend at her beck, and quail in their attempts, if she fail their
expectation.

Well does she resemble the Pole articke, which leads ye shipmaister, and she
with the Astronomer the way to all other stars, and therefore must be first in
every ones intention, before he begin the pursuit of his end.

Verily wise were the inhabitants of a certain City bordering a little from
the province of Machai, in the East parts, which are reported to keep holy day
three days a week.

Neither is the drift of my devise directed to an Apology of elds unsavory
pleasure, which thou fondlye enduest with with a privilege of principallitie.
Heavy is their happiness, unless they be happy because they are so persuaded
of themselves (as Tully speaks of the Epicures) which lurk all their lives in
mourning Tons, constituting their felicity in vain speculations. How many
sporting hours were sorted to the Astronomer C. Gallus, who like the hard old
Demea, which neither in the twilighte of day, nor in the edge of any evening,
could ever be found idle from his Husbandry: so neither in the veil of
night, nor ye heat of day would lend himself one laughing minute from dimension
of his spheres. Do not you think that if Isocrates his Soul might rise
again from death, and enter into an other body, as the Pythagoreans sect
surmise (for Pythagoras said that in the Trojan war he was Eupho^bus,
Pantheus his son, slain by Menelaus, and that in Iunoes charge at Argos he
did see, and knew the Target which in his left hand there he held, whose
Soul dis^all^s^ of that body, did enter this in which he now was) that he
would redeem his misspent time with pleasure, who at ninety and four years of
age writ the Oration Panathenaicus? Much joy iwis had Leontinas Gorgias his
master, who in the tracte of an hundred and seven years, never fadged in his
infinite studies.

The purpose of their conceit, was no pleasant contentation, but a pining
desire to reach renown, a vain toye for so great toil.

It is disputed of all the Schoolmen in Philosophy, and of Arist their
chieftein, as I have heard, that nothing is in ye intellectua^ part which has
not been conducted thither by ye Senses. Of thi^ I gather, that your solid
pleasure which you do limitte in the minds muses is first derived from the
exterior senses, as from their fountain.

Now you see how old ages senses be be-dimmed, in so much that they have no
taste of their meat and drink, unless as it is in Zenophons symposion,
rorantia et minuta pocula do now and than relieve them, which taste of theirs,
is like salt water, which makes fresh beef salt, and salt beef fresh.

Their eyes do look by a pair of spectacles, like one through a cazement, so
that beauty might go a begging for their buying, unless there were some
other courts to entertain our curtizans. When one asked Sophocles whether he
did not use to accompany Venus, no, quoth the oulde dizzard, God forbid, I have
willingly taken my flight from her, as from a shrewde churlish mistress: and
Tyresias in his doting days for varying against Juno, was strirken blind.

Their ears be closed up like the serpents with her tail, that neither
Naecastron who by his harmony entangled every one with his love, nor Amphion who
with melodye gathered stones and trees together, that builte the city of
Thebs: nor Arion who so tickled the very fishes, that a Dolphin hearing his
music, took him on his back, being cast on board, and brought him safe to
the shore: nor all these together could make a meace of mirth of all the sad
sires in the world. Although I read that C. Duellus in his age, he that first
overcame Poeni by sea, took delight in a fife or pipe at certain times.

For their smelling, they were ill to be poor men's hogs, in this not far
differing from Fismenus non Nasutus, who having no smell, was hired for a wager
to live a whole year in a pair of Iakes,

Some touch they have, or else they could not be living creatures, yet it is
so dull, as may well give signification of their blunt wits.

Thus you see, that either their pleasure is very sleighte, or else none at all,
but only imaginatiue, like Argiuus his in Horace, who repaired every day to
the Theater, where Comodies and Tragedies were wont to be played, and though
there were none upon the stage, yet he by imagination made himself pastime of
no bodies presence.

As Plato in his dispraise of Orators, displaied himself for a most eloquent
Orator, to ye great credit of Rhetoric: so the most eger inueighers against
this liege sovereign youthly pleasure, ar the strongest vnderproppers of her
princely state. C. Fabritius when he was in ambassadge with king Pirrhus,
reported he had heard of Theslalus Cyneas that one in Athens accounting
himself very wise referred all things to pleasure, as to the vltimate end:
which M. Corius, and T. Coruncanus hearing of him, would often wish that ye
Samnits and King Pirrhus might be so persuaded, that giving themselves to
pleasure, they might more easily be overcome.

If it convey such inconvenience with it, as the overthrow of towns, and
cities, it is better to gorge our selves with the society of it in the
firstlinges of our days, when we have no charge of importance committed unto
us, then in riper years, when our own credit and country commodity stands
us more upon, to have impediments by her corrupting. For there is no man says
Seneca, but in one part of his age, if he be not intercepted by unseasonable
death, he feles the battery of his perturbations.

Old men are accustomed with great self love, to repeat youths pleasure, as
a recreation to repress sorrows, and abandon pensiuenes. Lovers (says the
Italian Castalio) are solaced with lookinge up to the chamber window, whence
of yore they have seen their desired Saints, and old cramped sires in their
stoop gallant age, when the Medium can not be a mean to receive ye object,
because the Organon of their sense is quite perished, they feed and nourish
themselves with the recourse of those blooming days, when in youth red h^rring
was a king: in this property, like Tymon of Athens, which being reviled abroad
for his insatiable nature, would at his return home open his cheste where his
old gold lay, and comforting himself with the sight of yt set it at his
heart, and cast their words at his heels. Except you think every man as
slothful as the ropemaker in Plutoes temple, which let his Ass eat up his
rope as he made it, never lookinge behind him.

It is said, that an Orator must begin well and end well, because these two
parts do tarry best in the Auditors memory, though he enterlace the midst
with baser matter, but you quite forgetting the precepts of your own faculty,
wind up your Oration with a palpable error, inioyning youth not to read
Poems, or gaze on pictures, or be present at Comodies, till his steps be
stayed with ripe judgment, and faded follies: when as in very deed, we are
taught of the best authors to acquaint us in our first elements with such
pretty slight toys, as Aesops Fables, and Hesiodus his, which stir our
capacities to a readiness, and our manners to a conformity.

Auaunt therefore with this thy drouping sauadgenes, which thou prescribest
youth, as a mediation to felicity. Wherein thy reioicing is like his, which
being on the gallows with a rope about his neck, bad them have him commended
to all his friends, and desire them to be glad of his welfare, for he was gone
to heaven in an halter.

If the persuasion of these few words, have brought you to a comprimise, I
have said enough: if not, whole volumes will not retort your stiff neck, to
bring you to my bent. Though I should weary you and my self, with an huddle of
more words, yet could I be no more effectual, then I have been in these. A
good Painter shadoweth a great counterfeit in a small room.

My hope is therefore, that as the river Zanthus turned the fleeces of all the
sheep that drank of it into yellow, of what color before soever they were,
or as Parisatis left of to love King Artazerxes, when he saw ye beauty of
Cyrus: so you repeating my reasons after the way of a retreat, wilt be converted
to an other opinion, loving thy self well, but the truth better, resembling
Bellerophon, who being entertained of Praetus when he left A^gos for slaying of
Bellerus, would not at the entisement of Antea, Praetus his wife, defile his
bed, more regarding his honesty then his ease, and thinking it villainy, so to
counteruaile curtesy, though it were her own entreaty.

Here be a bundle of reasons quoth Philotimus, gathered on a heap like an
vrtchin under an apple tree, in which thou have the property of an artificial
liar, I mean a good memory Aemilius, (for so goes the proverb) a good liar
must he memoratiue.

Parrhasius painted an erected statyre, and on the top thereof a Partridge, so
lively, that other Partridges pende up in a cage a little by it, would often
conte^d to fly to it, as though it had been a live bird, to the great wonder of
all men. Upon which occasion, Pasihasius marking the art of the bird so much to
be meruailed at, that it abated the excellency of the pillar, got license to
take it down: So may I say, that he which shall hear any one part of thy
Gration, will not on the contrary desire to hear any more, neither need search
any further to find out absurdities.

Trust me Aemilius, I should think him that could persuade with these reasons
of thine, to be instilled with some of Perseus his iugling Divinity, that
turned Cepheus into a stone, or him that would be persuaded, to be as foolish
as Phineus King of Archadie, who at the prouokement of his second wife, put
out the eyes of his first wives children.

I am not so austere as the Stoickes, to deprive a man of all affections. I do
disanull the Lacones, whom Arist. 8, pol. cap. 4. reproues, for bringing up
their children too hardly, with too much pains and trauaill, that made them
deuoide of all humanity, and hardened their hearts with blood suckyng tyranny.
I praise not those labor some and illiberall arts, whom Arist. calls
Vanausous and mistharnicas 8. pol. cap. 2. and Tully sordidas and mechanicas.
1. off. wherewith men's bodies are so^lde and made filthye. I name none, because
Satyrs and open nippinges of imperfections, which in old time, when Lucilius
and his crewe writ, was lawful in Enterludes and writings, to the shame of
the offenders, and the affrighting of others is abrogated, and they that now a
days are in most authority, and bear almost the greatest countinaunce among
us, scrape up their wealth, as a Cock does the corn out of a dunghill, and win
their renown be such occupations, yet there was an ancient law in Rome, that
a Miller, a Smith, a Baker, and a point maker, might not be a Senator, I do
not commend the violent excercises of those champernours who although they are
made stranger by their practices (as Quintilian says) lib. 12 Yet is their
natural growth prevented, abhorring from the likelihood and form of men.

I like not the custom of ye Carthaginians, by which they wore so many ringes
in their chains, in sign of honor, as they had been at victorious
atchieuements, nor yt of the Scithians, whtch prohibited any one to drink of
their festival quaffing cup, that was troled upon holidays, but him that had
slain some enemy, Nor that of the men Iberi, which provided so many ensigns
to be erected by the sepulcher of the buried, as they had killed men. The
custom I say of none of all these should be current in my kingdom.

For the cruelty of the sword (be it spoken by the patience of all ruffians) is
not to be ballaunced with the honor of peace. In deed Sipio wan fame in
beating down cities, but Cato Censorius got immortal memory in reforming the
peoples ma^ners by his sharp penalties. Although Pausanias and Lysander
enlarged their country territories by valor, yet were they not comparable to
Lycurgus his laws, from whence as from an Oracle, the first devise of their
enterprises, and the discipline of their manners were diligently fetched.
Neither was M. Scaurus a civil magistrate, inferior in public profit, to C.
Marius a warlicke captain, nor Q. Catulus an officer of peace, to Cn. Pompeius
a professed soldier.

I as far dislike barbarousnes in living for defect, as pampred wantones for
excess. Therefore thy misunderstanding, is as foolish as his litterall
paraphrase, that reading he must pull out his eye if it offended him, when it
was a little bloudshot plucked it out of his head, supposing if he did not so,
that he should go to hell fire

Whereas thou reasoneest, that right pleasure consists in external senses,
because they are the conueyers, and as it were the carriers of it to the
internal parts, thy proof is as bad as Ulysses hi^s in the strife betwixt
Ajax and him for Achilles his armor. There ^e lays claim that not only the
title of the armor is claimable, but that the praise of all Achilles his
prowess, is proper to him, because by his despatch ye armor was wrought of
Vulcane and brought to Achilles, and for that by his wisdom, Achilles was
brought to battle, as who should say, there were a care in the cart or the
horse, that should bring the monye and other necessaries from thy father, and
that they for the carriage deserve the thanks of thy maintenance.

Thou preachest a goodly spell, to infringe ye interdiction of youth from
hearing of plays, wherein the intent of thy speech, and the event of thy
speed, may well couple the in a comparison with that witles courtier in
Lodouicus his court, the eleventh french king of that name.

for so it chanced, that Lodouick being troubled with hurly burlies at home,
removed his court to Burgundy, where by hap in his hunting he fell acquainted
with one Conon, a silie clown of those quarters, to whose house (as great
princes take much pleasure in such simple souls) he straying from his company
would often resort and eat rapes. His insurrections appeased in process, he
returned home, Conons wife was earnest with her husband (hoping thereby for
reward) to present the king with some rapes, in remembrance of old
acquaintance. Conon condtscended, took his staff, and filled his wallet: but
being hungry by the way, eat all his rapes saving one, which coming to the
court, and waiting where the king should pass by, he presented to his maiesti.
The noble king acknowledged his old host, took his gift well in worth, and
commanded it to be kept among his best jewels, and him to dine at his own
table, and perceiuinge after dinner that Conon wished to be walkinge homeward
to Sislye his wife, he gave him a thousand crowns in lieu of his rape.

An odd gentleman about the court, seeing so base a present repaid with so
ample recompense, thinking with a shift of a another gift to obtain the like
gain in coosning the king, bestowed on him a great horse of no small
valuation, imagininge that if the king requited the rapes with a M. crowns, he
should be enriched with great possessions. His highness perceiving the shaded
drift, called a counsel of diverse noble men and gentlemen about him, and
seriously consulted with them, as of an importa^t matter, what he might bestow
on this courteous gentleman, to make him restitution with amendment* One
answered this, another that, the gentleman held in hope of goulden dales. At
length, the king rounded one in his ear, that he should set him the rape which
lay fair wrapped up in a piece of velvet in his closet which brought, the king
gave it the gentleman, tellings him there was a jewel of a thousand crowns
weight, in consideration of his horse: my joyful gentleman with knee bent, and
hand kissed, and ten thousand humble thanks to his noble lieg Lord, received
the reward* thereupon he departed the presence, longing to unfold the velvet,
where he looked for mounteines of mines, which as we say, brought forth
nothing else but a sielie dragled mouse, a worthles poor withered rape. Thus
he that with his craft would needs be an ingrosser of great merchandise, was
himself forestalled of his market, deluded of the king, and deryded of the
whole court. So Aemilius, thy words and good proofs agree together like harp
and harrowe, thou meanest to kill me, and set a dagger to thine own
throat. Thou alledgest Esop, and Hesiodus to the confutatton of me, and they
turn contrary to thy self confusion. I do not gaine-saye, but honest poeams
and fables are lightsome and lawful to every studious youth, and therefore
says Aeschines, and semblably Cicero in his oration for S.R. Amerinus, that
such poetry was fained to frame our fashions. The virtues of which being
praised, is a percing dispraise to these bawdy commodies, more noisome to their
auditorye then brothel^ ^tewes, unless to such, as have wearied wantonness with
experience, having as well will to leave the had, as they have wit to choose the
good.

Thou do attribute so much to senses, that as Alberna, for wishing all her
children might be like in color to ye crows (such love she bore to black)
brought forth ravens in her pr^gnancie, so thou for misusing the heavenly minds
delight, and yelding all to sense, art clean deuoid of all understanding,
which comes from the mind, and art led only by sense, like a brute beast.

But meaning no more at this time to build Castles in the air, nor wast my
words to a deaf man, Harpocrates the god of silence, a god to whom I have
ever done ear this, and will do ever my bounden homage, shall convince thy
Comus, the god of intemperancie, of hateful viciousnes in words, and hurtful
loosenes in life.

It makes my heart bleed to see thee so wise to wickedness, fearing thy fall,
which I will not divine, and devising ye means to fear thee from falling For
me to relinquish such apparent evidence and lean to thy bastardly reasons,
were to leave the hal and come to the kitchen.

I promise you (quoth Aemilius) I do not doubt but by Evening that we come
to our lodginge, your loftye stomach now haughty, then hungry, will be glad
to crepe from the hall to the kitchen, and this angry bleeding with the pearce
of my propositions, and with your own maliciousnes, for the grief of your
overthrow, will be well inoughe staunched with the leg of a Rabbet.

It fares with me, as it did with the estate of king Onomaus, to whom it was
truly prophesied, that duringe the singlenes of of his daughter, he should live
and reign in triumphant prosperity, but most vnluckely, as soon as she
married should be deprived of kingdom and life: so I, whiles my arguments were
in my own hands, was by any man's Judgment a patron of verity, but as soon
as they were coupled to your constructions, I streightwaie was by your criminal
collation, in substance superficial, and in opinion erroneous.

An Oracle pronounced to Pelias, when he should see one barefooted do rites to
his fathers ghost, then he should stand in danger of death, and I meeting with
a naked man shall seem by his brauing to be overcome.

Whereas you burden me with impotencie of sense, I answer, that I have as
little as an other, and as much as I use: yet thou love me well, that take
me up before I fall, to give me warning of falling.

Notwithstanding, not to halte before a cripple, nor dissemble with my feigned
friend, these thy Arguments resemble Ladies, which are fit for sheets, and
good for nothing But the Devil loves al colliers, and thou selflike reasons of
thine own warping, like the rusticke Shepherd in Maroes Aeglogs, which being
in in love with his less Phillis, preferred the chessnut tree before all
other, because she loved it. My sweeting Phillis chessnuts loves, while Phillis
the fine shall love these nuts, ne Venus myrt shall dare compare, or Phaeb his
laurel match these nuts.

Every color became Aristippus well (says Horace) ye nightingale, never
wantes Song, says Bacchis in Plautus: neither while you can shape your self
a shift to shade your knavery, will you ever want proof for pursuit of this
purpose.

Thou art more dainty in thy phrase, then trusty in thy speech, and less
pregnant by policy to prove thy folly, then prove with Hostillitie to deprave
my meaning. But thy impudent raylings which thou think thy protection, are
against thy Inuectiue a sufficient purgation. For a galled Horse never wincheth
till he be touched, and a Dear stands at the bay when he is hard beset, and
Menechmus Sosicles then feygned himself mad, when he knew no other means to
avoid his harms. Tullye says, when the people gave Gabinius an applaudite
upon the Stage, or else where, he feared least he had committed some evil,
and if thou had chirped to my Conclusion, I should have thought I had not
done so well.

I wonder how thou can assay to shame me with thy railings, and not blame my
Tutor, who allotted me my task. In this me thinks, thou resemblest Ajax his
Wife, that losing her Husband in the Ship called Argos, wished the Fur
beams whereof it was made, had never been hewed in the wood Peleius, when as
they were not the cause of his Destruction, but the wild fire thrown into the
Shipp: or those that praised one for presenting a Gift to Diogenes, and
mentioned nothing of Diogenes that merited the gift, or rather in my Fancy,
thou art most like Will Summer, which being hurt with any, though he
stood a Furlonge of him, would always strike his next fellow.

The Dogs which were watchers in the Capitol at Rome, for discrying of
Thieves, if they barked at a rightefull occasion, had their ordinary allowance,
if they quested in the day time when no filtching could befall, they had their
legs broken: the same is inrould of the Geese, which were to give watchwoord
by their gagling: So Philotimus, if thou have said as thou should, thou art
a good goose, if not, I would not have thy legs broken, which may stand the
in stead ere thou die, to run from a skirmishe, but I wish thy Tongue well
mauacled, to give no cause of such mishap.

The first part of thy Treatise has little reason, the second less sense,
the third scarce any life at all. Thou increasest in thy grosenes, like Fame in
Virgill, which is ever the stronger the further it goes: or like our holy time
of Lent, which (as Cassiodorus recites out of Socrates the ninthe Book of his
History) was first but three weeks, and by little and little aspired to forty
days. Thy Arguments are drawn from the disport called Hopenniho, wherein all
must say as one says, and do as he does, for all thy confirmation is but an an
exhortation to frame an imitation to other men's liking.

We must stand at reuersion of others men's judgment, and like sielie grooms,
gather their crummes when they have done: As who should say, because Apollo
Cianeius, and Fulgentius, the Bishop of Emv^is, never eat flesh, nor drunk
wine, therefore every man must be dieted after this manner: because some of the
old Seminary, have betaken themselves to wilful peuishnes, as foolish Hermits,
or Ancresses, and devoutly spend their times in holy Orizous, therefore
forsooth we must do so. This follows as well as that in Beuis of Hampton:
Some lost a nose, and some their lip, and the king of Scots has a ship.

Art thou ignorant (good Philotimus) to how many misaduentures our learning
is obnoxious: and how feeble Memory, the keeper of it, is lost with age, or
perished with a knock? Georgius Trapell. A man very learned, quite forgot in
his age, every iott of his learning, as though it had never been he. The
Emperor Claudius so halted in memory, that talkinge in bed with his Wise,
incontinently he would become unmindful of himself, and ask for his Wife
why she came not to bed, and having done to death a Noble man, ye day
following, made great inquiry for him, as for a trusty Senator, to determine
with other of his Counsel on contriuersies. Thou wouldee press us with
burdens till our backs be broken, and then we shall lie in bed and be kept
warm: imitating the inhabitaunts of the province of Carinthia, who having any
small mistruste against one for Theft, straightwaies by their Custom carried
him to Ex- to execution, and the third day after, straightly examine all such
as can give evidence in the case, whether he were guilty or no: If he were, he
hanges on the gibbet till he rotte of by pieces, if he were not, they bury and
honor him with solemn obsequies.

But the way to make a Parrat leave pratinge, and the leave tatling, is not
with talking to you. I will here pitch my pauileons, neither fkirmishing any
more with so desperate a dastarde, nor waging battle again, though thou dare
me with urging.

Then belike (quoth Philotimus) you are a right noble champion, as glorious as
Erastus, that burnt Dianaes Temple, and ran away by the light.

But I am content that thou shall be the scowld, and have the last word. I
fulfill the Camels humility, which then sloupeth and kneleth, when he is
charged with a burden.

Now Parmenio, and Clitepho, it restes for you to decide your masters
variannce, with your even judgments without partiality.

Parmenio stepping forth with as grave a grace, as might well become Epidicus,
Plautus his parasite, thus bespake.

Master mine Phlotimus, and Senior Aemilius, your discretions, are sager as I
suppose, then to sound the depth of your affections, by light flying words,
which neither can sink, because they want force, nor stick in your
stomachs, because they want weight.

If words should way the will, or speech direct the disposition, Atreus for
playing a tyrants part in a Tragedy, might well be demed a manquailer, and
Terence for writing his louinge lays should be impeached for an Adulterer.
Corriualls that combat so bravely in their listes, that neither matcheth other,
and both surpass, may triumph that their valor is counted peareles, and
embrace each other for alliance of quallities. Were it meet that Ennius
excelling in Epicks, should dispraise Cecilius a Comicall Poet, or despite
Pacunius for his woeful Tragedies.

Take heed therefore, and be not quarrelons, strife is soon sown, but hardly
weeded out. Impacable Ate the Goddess of Sedition, thrown down from Heaven,
had wingrs at will to further her speed, in dispersing discord, but the three
Sisters Litae, Jove's high offspring, that united peace, which she had dissolved,
were left a loose behind her far out of sight, not able to keep pace with such
a swinger.

The singular art of M. Aemilius, has left such a sting of admiration within
my breast, that I honor him for learning, whom I loved for manners, and assure
me of his rarenes, for which I ever hoped. His words so well couched, his
moderate gesture, his countenance correspondent to his fil^d Tongue, might
make him seem truthfull to those that are fools, and prove himself witty to
those that are wise.

I think it no modesty to prattle further of his praise, or of the credit he
has woonne But to give plain specialtie of his curious cunning and augment
the prailes of his clerckly work, I give Judgment o^ his cause, that it is in
deed wrong, and seems in show Truth by his learned Apology. If I have
offended him, I have also commended him, the one he deserves, and I look for
no thanks, the other I deserve not, and he will do me no injury.

Clitipho whose censure was by course to follow his fellows, whose judicial
majesty he thought surpassd modesty, began a tale of Jack a nail, which I
am afraid you will not tarry till you have heard.

It was an halt King, and a blind Queen, and they got a lame son, and he
would go to the nine ends of the world to seek his fortune, and when he was
there, he was there, he met with a pilgrim, God give you good even, which is
the way to Poclinton, a pokeful of plummes, he clamb up into a Thistle tree,
and cut down an Hasyll twigge, and broke his head till it was whole, and when
he came home, he was as wise as a Woodcocke.

Here is a dry Tale (quoth Parmenio) laughing heartily at it, and well deserves
a water pot: What Is this to the purpose?

Nay quoth Clitipho, it is never dry speech, when there follows slauer so
fast down your lips. My purpose is not so profound, but sense may be pickte to
prove you a noddie, nor your foolish laughter so sage as your sentences and yet
concordant to so opinionate a fondling. Whether think thou better sport and
more absurd, to see an Ass play on an harp contrary to his sex, or hear the
little Robbin descant his mean note agreant to his kind? Thy stately
rhetoric, is such a non sequitur to thy boyish rachalisme, that better I
cannot lay ape^t thy absurdityes, then by intrusion of this frivolous fable,
less liked of Parmenio, and more agreeable to his personage.

Thy exhortation to those, that know twenty for thy one, is as if thou
should bring Owls to Athens. By my troath Parmenio, construe it as thou
list, I cannot abide to hear the Deuell talk of holidays, nor the pezant to
preach so diuinelye. But you will prattle no more of his praise. To prattle of
his praise, is a pretty phrase, and well compilde I wis. Nor of his won
credit. Take heed what you fay, if he have won it, why does he not wear it?
For you think it no modesty, you might have said duty, but that you are more
in love with modesty, then modesty with you.

My verdite concerning our masters, is as wide from yours, as both their
co^me^dations ar, be-yond our possibilities. Had not thou rather being put
to thy choice that thy master would give thee a lease to support thy prime
with merriment, then serve seven years in laborious drudgery, and then stand
to his pleasure what he would bestow? If thou had Parmenio, reuolte from
thy resistaunce, if thou had not, God send thee thy choice.

Permenio not able to digest this hard meat, and loathe to make broyle or
stain his gravity, returned an answer in this sort. That pate of thine,
that can infatuate so well, and make a man sottish if he be but simple, must
needs it self be well repleat with grosnes. Much like the wels which be in
Norwaye, whose licour is so gross, and extreme could, that if wood be cast in
them they turn it to iron.

Tell a mare a tale and she will iadishly winch. Lidius courteously bringing
bees honye, was for his labor stung of the bees, and I franckly giving thee my
fairest talent, am laughed to scorn of a roperipe rachell.

I have so far past the bonds of honestly, that if thy vaineglorye be joined
to my surquidrie, of an inch it will quicklye extend to an elne Yet had I
rather confess my self sorry, for offendinge a fool without a fault, then
stand upon the defense of that, which no man can iustlye find to be faultye.

As for you Clitipho, your are nothing peuish proud, an arrogant patch is one,
and you an other, if you will not give over your ignominious brawlinges against
my modesty, my modestest part I promise you, that for his shamefastnes does
sildo^e show him self abroad, will have an action of the case against your
nose. I will not ride an Ass to death, but thus farewell good nody body.

Their tutor and governor partly agreued, yet moved to admiration on every
ones part, more then he would make semblaunce, and fearing the young gentlemen
would not discontnue their discord, unless his persuations took some better
order, mutilated their scouldinges, and thus began his counsels.

Philotimus and Aemilius, since your judges have pronounced that both have done
well, and cannot determine whether has done better, be not angry for the
victory, which they will not give you, but be pressed to preserve your gotten
credit. I hope that the great joy, which your few words have bred me, shall
not fail to further your timely towardnes. It was Democritus his hap walking
abroad to take the air, to mete with protagoras the^ a badger, bearing a
bundle of stix very curiously compacted, toward the City. Democritus musing
how a rude and rural fellow, could without any knowledge of Geometry, use
such art in laing these sticks together, desired him to unfold his fardle,
and try if he could with the like method knit his burden together again.
Protagoras fulfilled his will, and used the self same art in his second
binding, which when Democritus saw, by the promptnes quoth he (my son) which
I perceive in this light matter, I see thou art initiated in the foundation of
far weightier sciences, and thereupon taking him from his servitude, and
teaching him Geometry, Protagoras became so excellent as he did: so say I,
with premonition you be not proud, though I praise you to your teeth, that the
aptnes which I see in this Disputation of pastim^, gives me courage to
conceive some future felicity.

For this matter of variaunce, because a Kingdom divided is not long
established, and friends falling out are hardly attoned, be content to claim
no interest, but bear the bridle euenly.

Nay said Philotimus, a little chafed with arguing: It was Solous opinion, that
rewards and punishments were vphoulders of the City, and therefore since one
must needs do best, let your censure of our doing, give him reward of the
best. For an Aristocratia must never take place, where the Monarchy may
possibly govern the whole.

Aemilius as one ex Academica, thinking himself able to mantaine any
controversy, and somthinge moved with the indurate stubbornenes of his friend
Philotimus, had him prove that, and hent the honor.

Philotimus briefly concluded in this manner, Jupiter has the dominion over
all the Gods It is monstrous for one body to have 2. heads: all ye members
are ruled by one heart: all the parts of the Ship stand under one keele: cranes
follow one crane: the heard has one shepherd: one bushe faith the Proverb,
can not harbor two Robin redbrestes: more wars have been raised, because
many would command, then by their disobedience which would not be
commanded. What fierce fightes were those betwixt Scilla and Marius, Caesar and
Pompey, Augustus and M. Antonius, Galba and Othos, Othos and Bytellus, Bytellus
and Vespasianus, Seuerus and Iulianus, Seuerus and Albinius? Tyranie, is worse
then usurping of the peers, or all the commons aduauncing themselves, and
therefore a Monarchy is the best.

Aemilius answered: The similitude of God may not be drawn to man. Liberty
being the greatest gift, that the Gods bestow upon men, by what reason should
one man's authority take away the liberty of so many men? One man's judgment
is soon subdued to evil affectes, as one bucket of water is sooner poisoned,
then many several vessels. Though one crane guide al, yet not always one and
the self same Crane, but now this, now that, the comparison of your Shepherd
will not hold. For if the flock be great, the Shepherds must be many.
Again, the whole flock is of a sociable, agreaunt, and uniform nature, never
disdayning his fellow, or Lordinge over him, neither feeling the yoke of any
government. One City has been governed many hundred years by a Senate,
that ruled more quietly then any King, having kings of many Provinces under it.

Philotimus replied: It is not liberty to live as we list, but by the law and
ordinance enacted by Nature, some to govern, as the most wise and virtuous,
some to obey, as less excellent in gifts. And because it semes hard, that
one should rule all, the Gods have promised to rule the hearts of Kings and
Princes, as Ulysses says in the second of Homers Iliades. He says also in the
same place: Great fame and high renown, are things deaurate, and of weight,
if they be marshalled in a King. As it is easy for one vessel to be infected:
so is it easier to find one absolute man, then a multitude meet for an entire
Empice. Every one of the Kings that were subject to that Senate, ruled his
several Province by himself, as well as the Senate did all in one. Lastly,
there is one chief in every Senate, to whom the rest do some obeysaunce,
and in whose sentence they stand and rest.

Here Aemilius saw himself in the lapse, and almost drawn dry of all
replies, and weried with perturbaunce of this civil dissension, with these or
such like words yielded himself.

Whether victory be an appurtenaunce of a rightful cause, or a subtle
conueyaunce of thy slight matter, has bleared our eyes, I know not: or
whether enorme causes do want solyd matter, or a trewantlike barrister must
needs be pitched over the peark, now it boots not: but to co^discend to our
covenant wherewith we are combined, as I grant me ouercomen in our latter
discussion, so I give thee the Trophies of all our disceptations.

Philotimus, who was ever more covetous to be accounted famous, then willing to
hear his land exalted, returned his friends courtesy in these words.

If there be any credit in taking these praises, which I have received,
what honor must be in the gift of this credit, which thou have bestowed?
And since you are so willing to depart with all your glory now of a sodeine, I
will not do like ye alehouse clerckes, that divide the world into four parts,
and take three to themselves: for I will not only make partition of the whole,
but bind my self grateful to requite it as I may.

By this time they were come to their lodging, which now they neither looked
for, nor all this while had thought on, where repose they themselves till the
next morrow.

The morning following, as they rid parling of such matters as were obuious,
Senior Mondaldo, which never misspent time unfruitfully, interrupted their talk
with these words.

PHilotimus and Aemilius, since we have nothing at this instant, wherewith to
be well occupied, and you were staulled with yester days Disputation, I will
prescribe you certain Inductions to be performed at the University, which if
you follow, you shall neither repent you of your present attention, nor repine
at the prospering of other Gentlemen: and because contrary to ordinary, you are
grounded in the liberal arts, which is not usual to freshmen, when they first
come to study, I will set you down no childishe samplers, as though I mente to
impleade you of Ignorance, but such as serve Gentlemen of your estate, and
may beseem Students of a good standing.

First abase not good letters in your imagination: for their art is more
behoofull for the government of Gentlemen, then their want is material for a
private Subject. When Camillus triumphed over the Frenchmen the day of his
victory, he wrote these words in the Capitol of Rome: Thou have been mother
to all Wisemen, and stepdame to all Fools.

Be studious in your learning, but not sottish in your labors: for moderate
pains employed in due times, increases knowledge without bodilye damage, when
intricate endless triuious toylings, plunge the wits, and crucify the carcas.

Trifle not your times in vain settes of words, but let your greatest
travails be Philosophical Institutions: for it is not hard for the Tailor to
shape a fit garment for a straight body, but it is impossible for a crooked
body to be framd by his art to fit a straight garment. It was one of Socrates
his Emblems, that he is eloquent enough, that delivers his mind plainly.

Among all other Arts, forgett not the Mathematikes. for the Etymology of
their name, exhortes you to learn them.

Turn over the volumes of ancient histories: for so you being young without
experience, your knowledge shall stretche further then your fathers
remembrance.

Have a sight in all Languages, though it be but superficial: for so you
shall be Citizens in all Countries, and be able to calculate their conditions
and manners: and that which is not specified in some of our Languages, is
explaned to the full in an other Tongue.

For precepts to be eloquent in any one Tongue, I can assign you no
resolute certeintie: For neither are all Orators taught by one master, (says
M. Cicero) neither do they use the same ways and means. Sweet were the
sauce would please each kind of taste, straung were the vein that some man
thought not vain: yet that which is generally received of all, is conuenable
for you. First in your entrance to every Tongue, read those Authors which are
sound without blemish, as Caesar, Tully, and Terence, in the Latin tongue: for
Liuye and Salust, chiefteynes of Antiquaries, being generally perfitte
touching their whole woorks, but mancate here and there with some scattering
faults, are not to be neclected of the Students in Eloquence, but to be
diligently read of those that have judgment. Secondarily mark their phrase and
Elocution, and then that which is commonly lightly regarded, be painful to
make a sweet round number. An example of this number, does Sturmius point out
in the beginning of Tully his Oration for A. Cecinna, the very first
Sentence, of which, because Tully speaks somewhat, and Hermogenes at large, I
omit to treatise any thing at all.

Of all other things, be charie of your company. For we commonly say, that
like will to like, and gather suspicion of ones disposition, by his compeeres.
When great Scipio came from the war of the Poeniens, better accompanied with
dastardlye michers, then with valiant Captains, one Oruetus a famous Orator
said unto him: of troth, it is great shame to thee, and small honor to the
Senate, yt thou have overcome the wise Affres, and art so wise thy self, and
of the blood of the wise Romans, and will be accompanied with these Fools.
I say unto thee, that thy wit is in more peril here in Rome, then thy life was
in Afric. The frequenting of P. Mutius his house, made the young Gentleman P.
Rutilius, be thought honest in life, and learned in the Law. The small
acquaintance, which M, Celius in his youth had with Catiline, was after in a
controversy concerning him nere, something prejudicial to the vprightnes of his
cause.

Let your companions be at least your coequalls: for yt is comely, insinuating
to your betters, if you may without presumption, and affable to inferiors with
a sober submission.

Use the company of your equals with emulation, be directed by your betters
with imitation, contemn not the basest for any occasion.

Learn wisdom of the ancient, but affect not their gravity: gather wit of
the wantons, but detest their corruptions: learn manners at the Court, there
are few at the University.

These lessons, with a request to print them well in your minds, shall suffice
at this time: what books you shall read, and in what order, we will assign at
our iourneyes end.

Philotimus with a gracious bashfullnes gave him thanks for his good Lecture,
with protestation, that one thing wherewith he had comforted him, in saying
that their procedinges were more forward, then theirs are usually which come to
an University, he either feared was not so, or else much meruailed it should be
so. For I have read said he, that no man was sufferable to enter Plato his
School, unless he had good knoweledge in the perspections of Geometry, and
then I muse why our masters of Florence, should be so far ouerseene, to admit
either Children that be over young for their studies, or ignorant trewants
that be too idle to learn, or blockeheaded doultes that have no capacities.

Senior Mondaldoes answer to this, shall be Counsel, for I think it better
to rest in the midway, then run my self out of breath, and get no goal.

To make recapitulation of all their communication they had by the way, were
more troublous to my pen, then now it can in tend, and therefore intermitting
all interlacing of many a good discourse nothing unprofitable, I will bring
them now at length to their wished University, where thus much I can say in
the young Gentlemen's behalf, but in especial of Philotimus, that in
application of his book, he was as industrious, as if his living had laid on
his Learning, and so curious and circumspect in mainteyning of his credit, that
he only was the man, whom all men admired. In all points of learning
Philotimus was commended, in all comparisons Philotimus excepted, in all
exceptions Philotimus preferred.

His life was more virtuous, then his line was noble, and more notorious was
his virtue, then the brute of his blood, and his name better credifed, then his
personage acquainted.

In one and the only thing that belonges to an Orator, in sovereignty of
style, and a sweet and treatable pronunciation, he exceeded all others of whom
I have read. It is reported of Tullye, that for one sentence brauelye
delivered, all the people at once cast up their cappes, and gave a shoute: Then
trust me (Gentlemen) I do think, that if Philotimus had lived in those days,
and spoken to that people, that at every Period they had been amassed.

His manners were mild, and very amiable. For though he were of a choleric
sanguine complexion, whose operation does use to make his Subject sodeine: yet
he could so well refrain his choler, and make exchange for cheuisaunce of
curtesye, that these Sentences were often rolling in his mouth. Arist. says,
that Those are fools, which cannot be angry at an occasion: But Plato says,
that Those are more fools, which will be angry with out great occasion. I well
believe Arist. for he seldom lies, but I will follow Plato, for he thought it
sin to lie.

His body was decently made, and featlye framed, containing an absolute
constitution, and conuenience of liniaments: his head not a slope cornered, but
round and globewise fashioned. His hair auburne or chesten color, and so was
Hectors: his forehead smooth and vnwrinckled, beautified with comelye
eiebrowes, and such were the brows of Alcibiades, and gallantly garnished
with a pair of amiable eyes, not hollow, but delightfully standinge out,
cherefull to his friends, and churlish to his foes, and such says Heliodorus
were the eyes of Theagenes, his cheeks roseall like Phoebus rising in the
Oriental sky: of stature he was semely, neither dwarfish like a man cut of at
legs, nor a lungis like one that stands upon stiltes, but just in the
mids, wherein consists virtue His port and state of body bolte upright,
his gate framed to comeliness, not nicely affected, nor curiously
counterfayted, as it were plaiers, and disguised masquers, who by a kind of
vpstart gate, unwisely ween to win commendation In community of life he was
very jocund, neither to ba^latiue with flattery, nor to whust with morositie,
which Arist. 2 of his Ethics cap. vii. terms the two extremes of courteous
humanitye: familiar in communication with gentle mildnes, seasoned with
pleasure and a reverent gravity: without prattling and tatling, without biting
scoffs or vpbraiding taunts, pleasauntlye conceyted and merry with honesty,
using therein no filthiness or ribauldrie: and as he was most far from malapert
scurrility, and scenicall gesture, so was he free from sulleyne stern
severity, and stoicall indolency.

This for the most part was his behavior. In tongue he was sylent, in this
resembling Cato Vticensis, which never spoke but being urged: in countenance
sad, and yet not so sullen as M. Crassus, which never but once laughed in all
his life. From company solitary, but for this only cause, for which Sophocles
in age would sequester himself vz. to quiet his mind with vntroblous
co^tentation and increase the gifts of knowledge and learning. And as Hermes
Prismegistus says, that Plotin us the philosopher, made as it were to all
ornaments of virtue, choose him a secret place of rest, where he might be far
from human conversation, and bestow his time in divine contemplation, free
and feareles from all the insultes and counterchecks of fortune, and that he
contemned all titles of honor, and all possessions of riches, accounting that
true honor and wealth, whereby a garnished mind does know the oryginall of
it own authority: even so was Philotimus affected, that trade did he
trauerse, and that mediocritie.

For he often would say, that since no man might enter Dianees Temple at Craeta
(where Dedalus has eternal memory, for his worthy monuments) unless he went
in stripped and naked, it was probable that none were docile Disciples of
learning, but such as cast of the care of worldly pomp.

His diot was moderate, his dreams not vain and reauing, joined with idle
talk, as commonly theirs are, which abou^d with read choler, which Iuuenal
well describes in his 7. book: With grislye dreadful Dreams by night their
heads are vexte, with ghastly visions in their sleep yelad with vgsom shapes.
For of choler are enkindled burning Agues, and fantastical Imaginations,
doting of burninge of Towns and Houses, of murders, of hurlye burlies, when
the fumositie of the choler strikes into the brain. The continuance of the
disturbance of this, is voyded by vomit, sweat. and euacuation by siedge,
which may be done with Radix pontica, and such things as provoke urine, as
these herbs: Alkakengie, Sperage, Gardeyn Parsely, Annyseede, Fenellseede,
and by the forbearing of all hot, fat, and sweet meats, which are very apt to
be turned into choler, except reisons, licoras, and by eating such things as
will quallify the heat of the blood. Sleep also must be provoked by Lactuce,
and sallet herbs, that do humect the brain, and all the parts of the body,
and Venus, anger, unseasonable labor, long fasting, must be avoided, and
sckanting our selves of victuals.

His Dreams were such, as after the first sleep, the brain not stuffed
with fumes, do presage some news approaching. As Valentinianus dreaming that
he saw his wife altered from her merry glee, and wear a mourning gown, the
next day had it so brought to pass by his sodeine death. And Augustus his
mother dreaminge that she brought forth a Star which illustrated the whole
earth, had it verified in the Acts of Augustus.

To prosecute the Chronicle of Philotimus, be on a certain day, hearing a crew
of litigious ruffia^s, belching out their fuliginous fomentations against him,
and insulte with hateful spite over some of his doings, thinking no body had
heard them, but they among themselves, covertly stood on the other side the
wall, and gently and friendly admonished them, as though he had been one of
their own companions. I beseech you Sirs, speak low, least Philotimus hear,
for this is sometime his walk, where he takes the air. And arguing on a time on
some Sophistical points, with a Gentleman named Papius, who stood very
stiflye to his own assertion, and ouerheated with chafinge and anger in
disputing, condemned Philotimus for an heretic in Philosophy: then (quoth
Philotimus) I appeal to Papius when he is sober, to debate the dissension.
Which meek answer appeased Papius, and revolted him from his error.

It was native to Aemilius his nature, to counteruaile all injuries with a
contrary counterbuffe, and never to die in the debt of his trespassours.
Hereupon would Philotimus expostulate with him. What if an Ass or an Ox should
kick or spurn thee, would thou think it manhood to strike again? But I
will advise thee of a good medicine in such a case. Go to morrow morning, and
kneel the down beside the great Oak in Siloes wood, and look whatsoever it
bids thee do, that do, and nothing else. Aemilius thinking that Philotimus
meant to work some enchauntment, went thither to see his devise, but when he
came there, he heard nothing but aniayerie murmr among the Trees: at his
return home, Philotimus asked him what he heard. Aemilius in a pelting chafe,
thinking himself derided, answered: I heard as much speech, as thou have
honesty, and that is as much as an egg has otemeale. Then quoth Philotimus,
say to thy accomplices as is commanded thee, and that thou say is nothing at
all, and tho^u shall never damnifye thy self with such effluence of
choleric sominges. He quoth Aemilius, that will know the construction of your
meaning, must conjure for it before, or use such herbs as Cynocephalia,
which Apion used in calling up ghostes, to know of them where Homer was borne.

Philotimus his friendship and Aemilius his, by this time was perfect, and as one
God could not vadoe that which another did, so what either of them avouched,
the other would not disanull.

His joy was most full every way, till time it pleased God to visit Mantua, and
therein his fathers house with a grievous mortalitye and plagne, whereof ten of
his brethren and sisters died, so that only one sister named Fuluia (besides
his father and mother) was suruiuor. Of these news philotimus heard nothing
till the residue were amended, the town and his fathers house clear from the
plague, when the Lord Cleocritus and the Lady Castibula, meaning to solace
their sorrows with his presence, sent for him home.

About this time was philotimus greatelye troubled in mind, he knew not why,
and the very same night his fathers men came to Florence, he dreamed
fearfully. The servant were unwilling abruptly to show him these vnwelcom
news, and therefore foretelling Mondaldo and Aemilius, desired them to use the
matter so, as their young master might not take it to much to heart. The next
day, philotimus rehearsed what fearful dreams he had, using these words. If
dreams divine, or heavenly visions be not vain, and Gods be just, whom we
may trust, that no errors train, some luckles hap approaches.

He feared lest as Sextus was forewarned in his sleep by a dead man, of the
heading of his father, so these apparitions should forhight some drouping
danger

The burning of his right ear stunted him likewise, for yt it is one of ye
parts which Saturn an evil planet governs, and so much the rather he was
aggrised, for that he had not heard of long time from his father.

Mondaldo hear took occasion to check him for his dreads, discoursinge what
calamities the best had suffered, and how peaceblye they had borne them, till
with his pholosophicall catechisinges he had fortyfyed his mind against all
all the force of Fortune.

At last Mondaldo, after much talk, demanded this Question: whether if he had
diverse precious Jewels in a Ship, whereof two or three Gemmes were of more
valuation in his accounte, then all the rest, and the Ship should suffer wrack
these only saved, he would more lament the loss of his Jewels, or rejoice
at the safety of his Gemmes. Philotimus answered, yt though a little grief
daunt a great deal of joy, as a little leaven leauens a great trough of dough,
yet if his Gemmes were of such worth as is supposed, they would be a good
comfort to so bitter a corsine. Then quoth Mondaldo, rejoice, that in Gods
visitation of thy Fathers house, he has taken to his mercy ten of thy
Brethren and Sisters, and yet of his great mercies has left thee thy Father
and Mother, and thy dearest Sister Fuluia.

At these words Philotimus scritched out, and as a distraughte Beolemer,
vnuisedly raued against all the high Aethereall powers. O cruel Gods (quoth
he) feed on my friends, yea feed your gluttie hearts, and ouergorge your
gulpinge weasants with my griping smart. In Corses ten, I ten times dead,
am carried to my Grave.

Here Mondoldo rebuked him, and told him, he knew not with whose folly to
counterpeize his frenzy, except with Heracleates Dionisius his, who having
learned of Zeno to be hart-hole in all afflictions, as soon as he felt a little
pain in his reins, bad Discipline adieu, and fainted in his sickness.

Well they directed their Journey homeward, where after the Lo. Cleocritus, and
the Lady Castibula, and M. Philotimus and Fuluia, had in tracte of time
assuaged sorrow, sittinge on a day after Dinner, at the Table with one Telamon
his very friend, and other Gentlemen, Cleocritus began to appose Philotimus and
Aemilius in their studies, and inquired of them the state of their University,
whether yt were, as some boldly would slander it, decayed in study, and grown
to unseemly insolency.

Philotimus answered, that it could not greatly be blamed though it were
so, considering the small regard was had of Learning, yet comparing that he had
experienced in his time, with that he had heard of others in their time, he
thought it was like it self at all times: and if there were any abuses it was
not his duty to tell School tales. Papirius his mother (quoth he) demau^ding
of him what was done in the Senate house, he gibingly answered, that Husbands
might have two Wives, thinking it lawful to answer that with a lie, that
was not meet for her to demand with modesty. Myrmice the maid of Athens,
that Minerua loved so well, for displaying the Ploughe that Minerua made in
despite of Ceres, was turned into an Emmot. The same Minerua was aggrieued with
Aglauros, for saying her secrets. The Romans bearing the Minotaure for their
ensign, hid the hinder deformed part, and published that which resembled a
man: and therefore (said he) if you be inquisitiue of any crime in Florence,
which is rather to be amended priuatelye, then reprehended publicklye, my
answer is, Nihil scio, nisi nescio.

Every one at the Table commended the witty answer of Philotimus, yet
Cleocritus willing to be resolved in his question, urged it to Aemilius, who
gave him this answer.

You are not ignorante (Sir) what copy not only of zealous preachers, expert
lawiers, learned phisitio^s, but also excellent yo^g men in all arts and
tongues, do daily flow from our University. Yet this will I say, which neither
can be hid, for that it is commonly known, neither should be hid, for that it
requires reformation, that they have as little respect of persons, as any
Judges need have. For the veriest stunted fool, distorted criple, rudest
loobbin, and the hob-hansomest man may be for his fee admitted to their
society. In the cooptations to their Fellow^hipps, in the Commencements for
their degrees, not he that best deserves, but he that has best friends,
oftentimes has the most suffrages.

Indeed this must I needs say, and sigh when I say if, that if one beautified
with frugalitie of wit, and all manner good habits that can be placed in the
Predicament of Quality, be either poor from the beginning, or by some
casualtie be impouerished, he shall not only be debarred of his preferment, but
the least falt he can commit, shall be imputed to him as a notorious crime,
and if in word or look he offend, it shall be cast in his dish in time of his
petition.

For the study of Liberal Arts, it is almost decayed, and in their place
Toys wear an hoode to cover their nakedness.

For our Preachers, though some be most exquisite in life and doctrine, yet
know I diverse which are so far unable to maintain a controversy in the
Schools, that saving a few Catechismes and short Epitomies, which may furnish
them with some Divinity out of the Pulpit, I think they have little more
Divinity then your Lordships mule. In the face of the world they are searchers
of sins, exhorters to punish sins, inueighers against the sparing of
sins, and yet they themselves in private corners, and so forth.

And these I warrant you, will sooner be incumbentes in a good Benefice, then
they that better deserve by the frugalitye of their knowledge.

An other sort there is, by whose behavior, you would judge them
Metrapolitans of the whole Realm: so stern they are in looks, so Maiesticall
in pace, carrying up their ioltes like hoigh headed malt-horses, so sirlye in
words, so coy of their cappes, contemning their inferiors with a peazantlie
despite, and flattering their betters to get them liuinges.

I think they would imitate Days, Vulcans Priest, who was one of the richest
of all King Priams subjects.

And for their lordly minds, it may be, they take warrant out of Plutarcch. For
Plutarch in his Problems supposes, that hence comes the doing of our hattes,
for that, who in ancient time did Sacrifice to the Gods, held during the
said Sacrifice their cappes on their heads, when Princes and great
personages, to do fit honor to the Sacrificatour, uncovered their heads,
to the intent it might appear, they reckoned themselves baser the^ the Gods
and in respect of their functions, inferior to the priests.

Let their excuse be this, or what they list, but I hold them accursed that
offend in the premises, though I will not accuse them to bring my self
into briers.

Peace for shame (quothe Philotimus) what an unmannerly Bird art thou to
defoile thine own nest? I can iustifye said Aemilius, all that I have said,
and more, if need require. But I had better slander them truly, which is no
Slander indeed, then flatter them falsely as thou do. Not so said
Philotimus: For Diogines termed Slander a wild savage beast, and Flattery but
a tame one.

Telamon and other gentlemen at the table were importunate to hear this matter
of Flattery and Slander canuassed, and therefore Aemilius began as ensues
against Flattery.

A contention betwixt Flattery and Slander whether is the worse. Aemilius
against Flattery.
O Most dissembling crafty vice Flattery, not ocularly to be seen, and yet a
palpable coosener. Clisophus one of the train of Phillip king of Macedonia,
because his master sometimes had the gouts and halted, he would limpe with him
also as a co^passionate, and when the king was well, he was well, finally what
passion soever pressed the king, he expressed the same in imitation. Nicesias,
when he see the blood of Alexander gushe out, would exclaim. O what noble
blood is this, it is ye blood of Gods, not of a man. O that gnat which tastes
of this blood, must far surmount other gnats.

Such an insinuating stinge is Adulation, that Hercules wise and wary, was hood
winked with the pleasant clawe of Cercopes, and Jupiter incensed with auckward
spite against his daughter Pallas and all the Grecian pack, with Thetis her
loutinge Flatteries, and humble stick speech with touching of his beard, and
culling of his neck, and kissing his knees, and tears wrested out with much
wringing.

great men of the world are like great pottes (quoth Diogines) which he they
never so great, you may carry them about by the ears. But I would they might
say as Pindarus said, that he had already rewarded the travail of Flatterers,
because he had not made them liars: or would do, as Diomedes did to the
notable Harper, who promising him a talent for playing, and he demau^ding it,
answered: I have already paid yt thy day. For my ears were but filled with
an empty sound, and I have tickled thine with a bare promise.

It is good bowing the body to catch others on the hippe (says Aristippus for
defense of this fault: who being reprehended for kissinge the kings feet,
when he solicited a suite, answered, I am not worthy blame for stouping, it
is long of him that has his ears in his heels. See what Flattery can do
Philotimus, what say you to Slander. Philotimus answered.

Philotimus his Inuectiue against Slander.
THE Slaunderers, have as many heads as Hydra to inuente wickedness, as many
legs as Tholus to run to naughtines, as many hands as Typhoeus to put it in
practice, fifty men's voices like Stentor the Grecian, to be the cole carriers
of many a loud lie. They are furious Centaures, by formed Scyllaes, huge
Cyclopes, fretting Furyes, monstrous Harpies, as cunning in shooting their
fiery venomous shaftes, as the men Abantes were in throwing their darts, as
gredy to devour men's credites, as the great Bore of Calidon was to depopulate
the fruits, which Bore Diana sent thither, because Oneus the King of the
Country, gave each year of his first fruits in Sacrifice to all the Gods,
and not to her.

A Flatterer can insinuate with weightines of sappy words, gravity of
Philosophical Sentences, and oftentimes make the Truth serve his turn: But a
Slaunderer, is an vnflidge nestlinge unable to fly, an unnatural abortion
borne before his time, an imperfecte Embryon not able to persiste, without
supporting of others.

This Envious Slander, kepes her house in drearye, yrksome, dimmy Den,
repleate with loathie stinking silth, and frozen joy could deuoyd of Fire, and
Air, yet almost chokte with smouldering smoke: and there she sittes fast
gnawing on the flesh of snakes and toades: there slothfullye she walks with
lumpishe leisure like a snayle, her lips are ever pattering, her chekes are
bolne, her face Saturnian swart, her never sleping eyes do look askew, her
three rowed teeth are fued with filthy dress, her goumes are waryish blewe,
her festred gall has made her stomach green, and all beuenimd is her
spirting tongue.

The hellbound never lau^hes unless at others harms, her body is as lean as
any rakes, she freats at others good success, as if her self were harmde, yet
seeking to anoy and work ristresse to other folk, her self she does destroy.

In night, when sunnie streamy light is cladde within Hells black mournful
weed, when none does see nor hear (for why? her face she dare not show, nor
once avouch her name) she stalks to them abroad, that are themselves most
de^elish Hipocrites, and most suspicious of others demeanor, she whistles
this or that into their patent credulous ears, and forgeth all God wot. If any
circumstaunce of where, or when, or whom, may make a probable Argument, she
tells it with a grace, and binds it with an oath. This mandat does she give to
all her brokers, ye at every iumpe they steal a yard, and at every Declaration
add as much more, and after this she eft returns from whence she came, and so
God send her to the gallows.

If any say that it is she from whom this tatling is deduct, she stares and
startes abacke, and swears amain it is not she. Her throateboll swells with
puffed veins, her heart it sweltes with flaming fury, her eyes began sparckle
fire, there stands about her smeared chappes a lothlie foming froth, she
poysoneth all she deals withal with this infection. That like the bablinge
Echo, they shall never restrain their wambling Tongues, but strain them out
when others speak, to carpe and cut of the best part of their meaning: she is
more venomous then the slimye Serpente Python, with fiery blaring mouth, and
forked wagging Tongue: whose combrous harm did mean to charm Latonaes seed.

Now Aemilius what say you to this slander, I doubt not but by this time you
think your flattery a saint in respect of this devil.

This question was left doubtful Cleocritus and the company rise, accounting
this small time after dinner well spent.

The unkindly love of Telamon to Castibula his friends wife.
NOw (sir) understand that Mounser Telamon soiourninge and commoning with the
Lord Cleocritus, had suffered his freewill to be witched, and gind with the
beautye of Castibula. which though he saw adverse to all humanity, yet was the
heat of his lust so unquenchable, that it smouldred reason, and burned with
beastlines. He had protracted the disclosure of it hitherto, and perceived his
procrastination to be perilous.

Castibula having set sorrow apart for the death of her children, and relieved
almost with her lief old joys, as she walked one day in her verdurant garden
alone, after other ordinary communication, which he made as it were a portall
and preludium to his cause, he boorded her in this sort, yet not in bourde as
the consequence gives evidence, but in hard earnest, which was the earnest of
her death.

Telamon. O madam the mistress of my heart, I have a suit, yet am I mute and dare
not speak.


Castibula, if semely it be, speak on and speed, if not, conceal such suts,
command ought else.


Telamon. can that unseemly be, whose grant does save, or whose denial
spills my life.


Castibula. I would not with to save my life with wrongful means.


Telamon. yet give me leave to speak, and liberty to live.

Cast. I give you both if either I can give. Say on.


Tell. I will say on, though loath. For long I mingled bashful shame with love,
till love at length surpassed shame. One of the old Philosophers, Diogines by
name, an odd fellow, and full of quirkes, demanded on a time of a prodigal
youth an unreasonable some of money: The youngs man amazed at this impudent
begging, asked him what he meant to crave such a boon. Truly (quoth
Diogines) I see thee so riotous in lashing out thy money, that I thought if at
this time I had not thy reward, thy ability would not long too so decay,
that it could not though it would, yield me succor hereafter, and therefore
I mente to beg once for all: Even so good Lady, though my request may seem
unpious in uttering, extrauagant from reason, and to tax my affections with an
dishonest inclination; yet if your Ladyship afford me not this bliss, ye
shortness of my life will in few days to ceme prevent all swetenes of
medicinable electuaries. Now good Lady, if by this little you can judge the
whole, cut of the course of my sequel process, with present accomplishment of
my brief demand. The Cat would lick milk, but she will not wette her feet,
and I would feign have, but I dare not crave all.


Cast. I fear I know not what, yet ascertaine me of my doubt.


Tell. I need not at all, thy Deitye has presaged what it is, and must amend
it with thy pardon, if ought be amiss. If I should tell thee all my
torments, which alas I cannot, and thou believe them, which I fear thou will
not, thou might vaunte that thou had the truest Servant in the earth,
and I not doubt but obtain the best Mistress in the world.


Cast. Jupiter foreshield these dreaded mischiefs.


Tell. It is is not Jupiter, but Venus, that has hurt me, and must help me.


With that Castibula looking wistly upon him, in furious rage ^lange hastilye
from him. Telamon mistrustinge noe less at the first, and trustinge yet to
conclude this wooful Epitasis with a joyful Catastrophe, grasped her in the
mids with both his arms, appaulde at her displeasure, and scarce able to
speak, till comd to himself, O Lady (quoth he) what mean you to shun me, more
like the frantic foe, whom fell Erichtho has in chase with many her twifold
turninges, then one more beloved of him you have in presence, then ever.
Andromache was of Hector? The Law forbids to do a man to die before his cause
be heard. First let me plead at the bar of your beauty, and then let
your will pronounce his Judgment. Doom after death is rigor without reason. O
that you had Cassandraes gift, to deserye all secrets of the heart.

Cast. A Rat is soon judged by her rank smell, and Hiena bewraied by her
counter fayt call.


Tell. Bulls blood of it self is contagious and pestilente, but in composition
mixte with Eolewortes, is solatarye against an opilation. My bare suile of it
self bluntlye weighed, semes to auerre against all honesty, but conjoined
with the circumstances of my long smothered love, and the peril of utter
perishing but ye give me gale delivery, it may be a warning to you to salute
yt with a welcome, and not to debar his reasons of right.

I have received enterteinment at my Lord your husbands hands, far better
then by service I could demerit, for ye which I deny not me more indebted,
then if it had been less I can ever discharge. And so received Paris of
prince Menelaus, when he committed the rape of Helen, I am thancklesse to my
Lord, because I am thrall to my Lady, and for that which I owe to his manifold
good turns, my liberty is impaund and imprisond to you. Think not me
graceles for laying siege to that fortress which never any before me durst
attempt: but think me more fervent then other your vassals, which see your
beauty peerlesse, and your virtue invincible. Dan Phoebus angrye that you
excelled him in beauty, could no otherwise have pretexte to minister his
malice, but by casting his beams into your radiant eyes, to dazell the looks
of all the beholders: And this is the cause, that all that vewe thee wish as I
do, but not able to abide thy glittering glaunce, close up their eyes for
fear of blinding, and give over their desires overcome with necessity.

Now square my love with a direct line, which with no canuassado will take ye
repulse. It is natures instigation, to make choice of that, to whom we are
dearest and best beloved, then give me (O Lady) O give me my justice. And here
he pausinge, either in meditation what to say more, or expectation of her
pleasure, Castibula answered.

Thou look I should thank the for thy lawless love, and I look thou
should abate it because I am thanckles. Thisbe a Graecia^ maid, beloved of
Thermutes an Aegiptian Thief, wrote in a letter to a friend of hers, that she
had rather be hated of the civil Grecian, then he beloved of the rude
Barbarian: and without offense be it it spoken (but under no correction) I had
rather wish the my capital foeman, then after this sort to have the my friend.

It fares not with women, as with Trophonius his den, into which whosoever
entered, was without respect of persons, rapte with a fury of diuinatio^: but
whosoever shall like a woman must not be rewarded with a guerdon of ye like.
Do not thou know, that pease sown in cold ground turn to tares? That
whea^e sown in stony ground turns to darnell? That there is a kind of Rye,
which being carried into France, changes his grain? Let either the
beastlines of the cause, or the friendship of my hushande, or the honest
affection I have always borne thee, be a Supersedias to stay thy suite. Go
not about to get that with thy toil, which you can not but forgo with
shamfull foil. Thou do not only offend in a monstrous crime, but
deseruest a a grievous penalty for excusing thy crime.

Thy suite a Gods name, spiced with the gleames of of thy stailes love must
mitigate ye odiousnes of thy request. Nay Telamo^, the river Hypenis descending
down from Scithia, is a water wholesome and sauourie, the which after the
entrance of a little salt spring, waxes so salt and brackishe, that none can
drink of it. Much virtue is blemished with a small spot of vice I have read in
Vitrunius of the river Chimera, whose water in taste is very delectable, but
parting into two sundry troughes and channels, the one continues sweet, the
other conuertes into bitterness: no otherwise my husband and I as long as we
live in wedlock bands, shall have comfort of our friends, and credit in our
country, but if I disseuer this sweet society, he shall keep his honor
directed with honesty, and I kindle reproach detected of disloyalty.

Indeed Mariners commonly sail by night when other sleep, for that the winds
that come then from the earth, do calmly fill their sails: and thou think
perhaps that I have now opportunity, when my Lord is secure and unadvised of
my fetch. My Lord and spouse has the virtue of a Diamond, which is of power
to try chastity. But that shall not need Telamon, for sooner shall my soul
to weightles air ywaste, and time untwine his date, and azure heavens stand
still, ere I recule one inch from thee (O dearest Cleocritus) I dare compare
with the Lady Sulpitia, whose husband Lentulus Crustellio being banished into
Sicilie of the Roman Triumueri,, and she kept diligently of her mother that
she should not follow, yet that her faith to her husband might not be
violated, took upon her a servants apparel, and with two men and two women
stole after him from her mother.

Never shall it be said, but there is some Lady in Italy, which will be as
quirie in wedlock rites, as ye insulans of Pteleon, who in this point are
accounted most religious. If I should commit this abhominatio^, not to be
spoken of, I were more cruel the^ ye widows of Lemnos, which killed all their
husbands, and many degrees worse then ye daughters of Danaus, which al (save
Hipormnestra, that spared Lincius) the first night they lay with their new
bride-groomes, be reaued them of life. I rather would to shield mine honor,
and prevent his shame, like valiant Penthisilia, which with her pollar stiffly
stood in ^roies defense, so venture life and limme.

It is neither a show of great pleasure (though the sweetest poison pearce
the deepest, and fair words can soonest deceive) nor all the torments in the
world, no though my soul (as once was Prometheus his) were pinchte and gnawne
with Vultures strayned talantes, that can reduce me from my constancy.

And can thou think (Telamon) that Cleocritus would not with eger mood
exulterate this iniurye, whom thou know to love me more then lightlye
Aristomenes deigned to defend his domes of price, whom he in wars had won,
and rather chose to dye in their defense, then filthy men should foil their
chastytye: then would Cleocritus do greater things then that for spousall
loved wife or do thou ween he should not know it? yes, yes, send sot:
can thou or any else ent so near a morsel from him, and he not feel it?
Eratis a sheepehearde sleapinge on the mountain amiddes his flock, was slain
by a a male goat jealous of his mate, with which Eratis most abhominablye
and yet very closelye had subverted the Laws of Nature. It is hard to blind
the eyes of him that loves, who not only seethe more then all other men, but
also has the potence which noe other has, to see in his steep and in the
absence of his lover.

Restrain therefore these saluaged cogitations, and since thou fawnest
friendship on my Lord and husband (and not vnworthylye) show such fidelylye in
thy demeanor, as sometime one Alexander did to his friend: who lyinge in naked
be^ with his friends wife, and by his friends grant, laid a naked sword
betwyxte them to keep them asunder.

Thy fair protestations lie prostrate at my feet, any little prevail. For I
never liked an affected finenes in an evil face, nor good words in so bad a
case.

If then can bring under thy gaddinge appetits, and submite them to the
frendshippe you owe my husband, Cariclia was not half so glad, that her
Theagenes overcame Ormenes in the race at Pithiaes games, a^ I will rejoice
that my husbands deserts, have daunted the force of thy illegitymate desires,
and as the same Cariclia, rather purposed to receive that which is destinied to
death, then by having Alcamones deceive Theagenes, so shall these hands
first pull out this tongue, or a braundishe blade first pearce this heart, ere
I foil my name with so soul a consent.

The bird Charadrius, if one that has the king evil so her heals him
that is so diseased, but dies thereof herself: and I by this remedy rescuing
thee from sorrow, shall exalperate my bane with ten thousand griefs. If my
beauty which you say is glorious, bread these bickeringes to my great annoy
(as Dionisius and Milesius men famous in the liberal arts, because many
provoked by great report frequented their schools to learn, for envy were
banished by the Emperor, when he had no occasion to kill them) then do I wish
that either my beautye had been less and my fortune more, or else that my
fortune be agreeable to my beauty. It was death among the Delphians to steal
away a maid, O then what death deseruest thou, so disloyal a wife?

Refrain my company for the time, for it may be that often presence setts a
fether to the flight of thy affection, or marrye some gentlewoman convenient to
thy calling, for so thou shall not maculate the heroical virtue continency,
and maiste by the suauitie of her society, forget other forms that are not
for you, or if both these mislike your humor, carry the dust about thee,
wherein a male sweating has wallowed, or anoint thy self with the stale of a
mule, and this thy love will turn to hate. Follow any of these prescripts
above pres^^ed, and if thou die for love, though I could not love thee when
thou wast alive, I will honor thee being dead, Neaptolemus slain at Delphos
by Orestes Agamemnons son at the altars side, was in adoration of his virtue,
and worthy recompense of unseasonable death, every fourth year in the same
city duly honored with a devout sacrifice. But if thou chance to dye at
this present, I will not sacrifice to thy soul (which is superstition) but I
will praise thy loyalty that loved so well, and curse my hard hap that might
not requit it, and so wail thy obit with doleful tears and himnes, that if
sorrows can do thee honor, thou shall pass Neoptolemus.


Talemon. I humblye thancke your ladyship for your honorable curtosie: I am
almost as much behoulding to you, as Boristines Adrians horse was to his
master: for this horse being very ready foe hunting, that he would stay and
make ready as does a man, when he understood the chase coming, and
therewithal running very surely down the hill, and very swiftlye up the hill,
Adrian loved him so well that when he was dead, he not only caused him to be
buried with solemnizing his obseq^ies with great pomp, but commanded arich
sepulture of marble to be erected for him. Nay madam, better a (...) dog,
then a dead Lion. If in my life I obtain no remorse my pleasure will be little
after my death. O madam your counsel is not current, you give me the devil
to drink, and bids me beware poison, first kills me, and then bids me fly
death. Deny not your abilitye to the indigent and needye, Cannot she that kills
willingly save if she will? yes sure you can as quick and good; and wilful
will is eke to quick, to shed my gi^^les blood.

But I must lige deprived of you and then go seek for other booties. No sure,
hereof be sure, my life were so vn^ure, and though I live, yet so to live, were
better death endure. When I behold this corpse of yours, and your celestial
feature, the windows of mine eyes are glazed with such delight, as each new
face semes full of faults that blazeth in my vewe. Our stately dames in ^ourt,
then years do wear about their necks, to beautify themselves: but you whom I
dostrue, your pearls do wear closed in your mouth, and smiling show the same.
O Lord what foultringe of my tongue I feel, what sodeine vulnes of my wi^t when
I begin thy praises. I know the cause. Dame Pallas envious at thy fame, and
full of angry garboile, has well forecaste to dash device as often as I indite
it. I cannot greatly blame her. for if my Ladies gifts were known, Pallas
should loose her praise of price.

Were not I than more foolish to abandon thy company, then the priest
Calasiris, which being in love with Rhodopis, forsook his country gods, his
country soil; and friends; and lands, and all, to avoid the concupiscence
that might grow other presence.

A Bear blinded becomes fearrer, and I not seeing thee should wax more eger.
These thy medicines therefore, are as much to the purpose, as that good wives;
who having learned of the physician that her husband must get anappetyte, got
him straightwaye an ape and tied it to his bed, thinking that would heal him,
or hers who being taught to give her fraud bugloss, gave him blew glass that
killed him.

If thy husband loved thee not (the contrary whereof I know) this were a
revenge, and if he love thee, the fact shall be pardoned. Tertia Aemilia
perceiving her husband Scipio African to love one of her handmaides,
dissembled the matter, and would not see it, for that she would not seem to
blame her lord of incontinencie* yea after her husbands decease, she made her
free, and married her to one of her freemen: and thy Lords being of as good a
nature, why should he not use thee same manner? Sweet than, put pleading out
of place, and in his room enstall sweet peace.

Yet if I must reedifye my suit with new coi^ed soothings, and exemplify you
some by whose imitation you shall not only be pardoned, but also hent fame by
this lite deceit, call to mind the Lady Fiametta, who was so earnestlye
courted of a noble man, that she had no vent to void his suit, but by the
inioyninge of this impossibilitye. If he would exhibit her the sight of a
gardeine, odoriferous with the smell of all sorts of fresh fragraunt flowers
in the month of January, she would yield him his borne, and for the gage of
it, her faith should be the burrowe. The gentleman forechusing the event of all
hard auentures, before the loss of his Lady (like Dioclesian, which would
rather die of poison by his own hands ministered, then he would live deprived
of his Empire) took her offer: for performaunce of which, having trauerced
many a nation to search cunninge and all in vain, at last met by chance with
a sorcerer, to whom deploring with vaporous eyes his burdurus taste, and
enfeoffing him in a deed of gift in ye one moity of his lands for some
remedy, the sorcerer both promised and in short space performed this
execution. Fiametta seeing that she looked not for a gardeine in this season
with herbs, flowers, ar bours, and every thing agreaunte, neither able by
covenant to defeat the gentleman, nor willing by loyalty to defile her
husbands bed, told to her spouse the whole matter. The good man her husband
po^deringe the grateful goodwill of the gentleman, reuoluing eft his endless
triuious labors, to which the desire of his Lady did summon him, bad her with
expedition return to her friend, and pay her promise with supplye of his
pleasure.

A kingdom is as proper to an heir apparaunt by succession, as a wife to her
husband by espousall promise. Yet the Inhabitaunts in the Isle of Nerae which
bordereth on ye river Nilus, elect their prince not by regard of parentage, but
by a reverent aspect or representation of personage, and by the opinion of his
virtue and valor.

Antiochus the son of King Seleucus, fallinge in love with Stratonica his
fathers wife, and his mother in law, and very sick with concealinge it close
to him self, had by the policy of Eristrates the kings physician, his
disease bewrayed to his father, the immoderate heat of whose passion Seleucus
considering with animaduersion and the danger immiment to the defeature of his
desire, frelye forewent his proper interest, and bestowed his wife upon his
son. Then let me atteine thy love, though I sustain it with sorrow, and
depart from it afterward with my annoyaunce.

Whereas thou do comfort me in mockage, with a promised celebration of
magnificall funerals when I am dead, I swear, that in lieu of a former
beneficence, which I hope for at thy hands, I will not only publishe thy
clemency whiles I live, but when thy soul shall leave thy body as is
forefined, thy sepulcher shall be engraven with a more glorious epitaph, the^
that kings, which was writ in four pillars, placed upon the mounteine Arcadio
in the I Will of Cipres, so much renowned of M. Aurelius and of him recited. But
if my sighs, and sobs, and throws be sown in vain, O then Castibula, without
Castibula, that of Castibula houldest nothing but the outward shape, with a
conscience more cruel then Gracchus Valerius his, who for his crueltye was in
hatred with all the Romiane empire.

As of serpents teeth, which Jason flunge into the ground, there sprunge a
troop of stern soldiers with sword and shield, till time ye earthly
brothers twixt themselves to civil co^bat fell, and fought yf^re a grislye
fight: so of every denial that you denounce* shall a myllyon of cares arise
within my breast, that shall never cease to work civil wars twixt my soul
and body, till time with fearce combat the one be dispatched.

Stay nymph, and fly me not. The lambs so fly the wolves, ye Staggs the
Lions so, the doves so from the goshauks fly, and every creature from his foe.

Its somewhat from the fraughted boughs to pluck the fruit at full, and
somewhat from the tender stalk in prime to take the primrose, I am both young
and youthful yet, unspotted of beds pleasure, and would to you, O goddess
you, give up my first fruit offeringes.

The agony of my passions are like the biting of a mad do^ge, whose
rancklinge rage endurethe even unto death, O Lady show thy mercy. One snare
may easelye take two byrds, and one Goddess vsuallye hears two men's
prayers, sweet Lady show thy mercy. she that gives quickly, doubles the
gift, give me quicklye, or else I dye presentlye, good Lady for thy mercy.


Casti. dye Telamon? I pray you of what color shall your clothe be died?
trust me, if you dye any thing, I think it will be a cote of chaungeable
coulor, which I wish as hartilye as mine own welfare, and will thank you for
it as for a benefit.

I speak flatlye that thou may know my mind, that thou neither linger in
an endeles hope, nor I deceive thee with painted words. It was enacted by the
Laws and statuts of Rhodes, that none should give counsel to destr^ssed
wights, nor seem to tender their miserye with piteous words, unless they had
some remedies to assuage their calamities, and plaster the misfortunes that
deared the patients. Therefore since my former advice could not work with
you, I cannot give you any more consolation, but leave you where I found you,
to the Gods their compassion. I will not double with you in driuinge you of
with fair language, when my meaning is nothing more then to disappoynte my
appointment, and so Imitate the waterman, which lookethe one way, and roweth
another.

Marvel not Telamon, that my curtesse propice ever at your prayers, is now
found refractarye in rigor, and unlooked for of you. Lucius Clarus consul
being sent by the senate to the Oracle of Apollo, to demand what the
Romans should do, beseiged of the Frenchmen, with many tears and great
offeringes kneelinge fortye days upon his bare knees could get no answer of
the God. The cause was, as Apollo afterward told ye Roman priests, which
came of ye same message, that Lucius Clarus was an evil man, and besieched a
great demand.

Certes though it be meet that brute beasts be chastised by other brute
beasts, and the bitinge of a scorpion with the liver of a scorpion, and heinous
faults with smarting corrections: yet I will not punish you with open penalty,
neither publish your secret crimes, if you will bridle your brainsicke jade
with an hartye paenitet.

Great and abstruce is the mystery of chastity, which who so violates,
deserves no less torment in every member, then the whole body is able to
tolerate.

When a certain ship, wherein was the diesse Berecyntthia mother of the Gods,
arrived at the port of Hosty, it ran upon the sand, from whence by the space of
four days, xxx.M. men were not able to remove it By chance came thither one
of the virgins vestals named Rhea, who with her girdle tied to the shipp, drew
it to the land as easelye as she would have drawn a thread from the distaffe:
so although my beauty, as you term it, be strong to deteine you in your
doting mood, yet let the goodness of my virtuous chastity, withdraw you from
your naughtines to a love of mine honesty

You say that one snare may take two birds, and I resaye, that one garment is
not meet for many, neither shall one Castibula fit diverse men's lusts.

It were more brutishnes in thee to defloure thy friends wife, then Clodius his
incest was abomination, which discheueled his own sister: and as mad an
excuse for me to say I made the partner of my priuities, because I loved thee,
as Ca^us Blessius his was, which having conspired with Tiberius Gracchus to
subvert the common wealth, asked forgiveness of Lenates and Rutilius the
consuls, and Ladius which the^ sat in counsel with them, because he made such
acount of Tiberius Gracchus, that whatsoever he willed him do, he must needs do
it, yea though it were to burn ye Capitol. And good cause has my husband,
which now uses me as a Lady like the old Romans, then to houlde me as a
slave as the Barbariens do their wines.

An husband is to his wife like a spider in the mids of her web. For if any
part of the said copweb be but touched with the point of a nedle, forthwith
the spider feels it: And if the wives honesty be never so little cracked, she
shall inggle closelye but he will perceive it.

Trachinus a merchaunt having robbed the Phoenicians of their merchaundise,
coming ashore, commanded his men to buy whole dearies of kine, whole heardes
of oxen, and swine, and sheep, to do sacrifice, and make good cheer, and pay
for the^ whatsoever was asked at the first word: so it is an easy matter, but
most wicked, to be liberal of that which is not mine own but my husbands.

(Telamon) it befits not a gentleman to bath himself in these brothell
conceits. One of the Marranes of Italy (for so were their kings called) for
shuttinge up his gates by night, that he might sleep surely and take delight
with his concubine, was deprived of his realm. Neroes scholemaister would
often say: though I knew that Gods would pardon me, and men knew no miss of
me, yet for the villanye of the flesh, I would not sin in the flesh.

There was a law of the Romans, that nothing should be denied to women with
child of that they asked: and never any woman longed more for that she saw,
then I long for reformation in these thy most horrible detestations.

Therefore good Telamon, let reason be intercessor to freewil, to depose these
inexpiable perturbations. I cannot declare yt I feel, neither you feel that I
will declare. I am more tormented inwardly at thy sodeine assaults, then those
poor creatures were outwardly, which the cruel Alexander Fereas buried
quick, and fastened together face to face: or those among ye Scithians which
for any great fault had the Statute extended upon them, which commanded them
to be put in the bellies of Horses or Oxen sown up again, and there rot till
they were dead for those which came under the rod of the Tyrant Maxentius, of
whom Virgil entreats.

Faustine the wife of Aurelius louinge a Fencer, could not be brought to hate
him by any Apothecaries drugges, till one devised the Fencer should be closly
slain she not witting, and his blood given her warm to drink as a potion,
which indeed immediately made her loath him: so if nothing can mitigate your
affection but my utter confusion, I rather yield to dye, and give you a
confection of my blood, then so oppositelye to my foreled life, degenerate from
honesty, and derogate from mine honor.

Seneca his wife prosecuted her Husband with so dear love, yt after Seneca
was slain, she did not only offer to kill her self for his sake, if she
had not been stayed, but also after the same manner that he was slain. And let
this hasty warninge wreste she from thy suite, yt I would not only be as
desperate, if any mischaunce should befall my husband, but if it might
pleasure him, incur the like at his command therefore desiste.


Tell. As it is death to women, to be denied of that they demand: so is it
natural to them, to despise the thing is given the^ unasked.

Julius Caesar the Emperor was blamed, because (as ye cust^m was) he rise not
up courteously to the Senate, that saluted him on their knees. And I might
impute it to thee for discurtesy, that thou guerdonest not my kindness with
equiualente clemency. Yet that you may know, it is not your beauty alone
has bleared mine eyes, but your virtues rather, that have subdued my
affection, and that it may be proof how well I love you, I promise never
hereafter to solicit this suite, but moderate my self according to your mind.


This contented Castibula well, who after this used his company many a time,
and never heard word of former toies.

But wicked Telamon went an other way to work. For whereas he saw Castibula use
him more familiarly the^ all other me^, and himself in despair to atchieue
his wi h, he after some inter^ission of time, indented with 2. cut throat
v^cabonds for a 1000 crowns, to w^ite one night for Cleocritus in 1 little
grove, where he used to walk after supper in summer eueninges, and there slay
him, and that they might know when he was alone, he would give them inckling
of it. All these contriuementes were accomplished out of hand, Cleocritus
slain, the murderers fled, and never heard on, neither who, nor where they
were: great search was made, and Telamon most busye among the rest to
examine before the Justices suspected persons, and those who had been at any
odds with Cleocritus.

But woe begone Castibula misdeemed the worste, and gessed a troth, that self
Telamon was accersary to his death. But waiting for a time of revenge said
little, only closetting her self in her bedchamber, vexed her mind and body
with x. thousand cares, and in her racking torments sc^itche^ out these
words.

O day which ay shall me annoy Castibula, alas Castibula, now strain thy
howling Him^es, let grief be-wraied by grisly lays, surmounting seais^
Alcyones, and passing Pandions fowls, Not Tellus fretting at the Gods to their
despite and to our pain, vphurld more v^ly monstrous feend (whom siphon men
ar wont to call, whose bloody paws purgd Cities bounds, and skowring
scourged poor sackeles Souls) then is this No man Telamon.

O Father of Heaven, why do thou throw thy rattling boults in vain upon the
whistlinge woodds, and will not deigne to spend one Brande on this pernicious
freake, to wreake thy gawly ire?

My plighte more piteous is, then was Octauiaes erst, whose Sire was slain,
and Mother bere^te of breathinge life, of Brother eke deprived was she by
Treason not by guilt. And more unlucky is Castibula, then was unfortunate
Deianira, whose Father was at last decay, Tydeus her brother a poor exiled
Squire, Hercules her husband killed by the shirt that Nessus gave her to make
him love her (as he said) and Hill her pretty boy left a poor Orphan.

When slumber sweet in pensive parts does reign, and sleep in eyes all
tired with tears does rest, I apprehe^d Cleocritus genial face: me thinks these
arms they claspe their wonted phere, me thinks his foming foes pursue his
flighte, and then me thinks he does recoyle a back; and fenceth blasing
brondes with naked fistes. O state wherein I stand, O present pining pain. O
death, no death, but ever dying grief. With ease Electra I repeat thy case,
whose father slain, thy brother yet might venge: but nothing can revenge
this haggishe deuelishe fact.

But be sure (Cleocritus) that if Portia, Cato his daughter, and Brutus his
wife, her husband being slain among the Phillipians, when she could not get a
knife to kill her self, eat hot coals to reaue her of her life: If Turia the
wife of Quintus Lucretius put her self in deaths hazard for her husbands
sake: that thy Castibula will not be said lagge in as bold attemptes.

These matters a little ouerblowen, Telamon began to comfort^ her, and tell
great tokens of his good will, and though unworthy of such success, yet did he
crave Cleocritus his succession: Castibula was very tractable, and consented to
contract her self, thinking this a trick time to work her teene.

When the matrimonial rites were pompously consummated in the open
congregation, Castibula (as the Brides are wont) drunk to her husband, which
drink she had provided for the nouce, and brued it of deadlye poison: both of
them having drunken, in Propatulo she unfolded the primordies of his adulterous
sollicitinges, assuring them and her self, that the dart that thirld her
husband came from his device, and this was all the amerciment she could exact.
The Law of Talio is a good Law quoth she) and therefore none can attach me of
cruelty. What musings and mazinges there were in the Church, what tears and
outcryes, cursing Telamon, and playning Cleocritus and Castibula, I will not
recite.

Telamon with heavy cheer repaired home, and immediately dyed. Castibula
returned home, cast her self upon her bed, and calling for the remnaunt of her
children, Philotimus and Fuluia, bespake.

Come little Orphans, and take your last conge of your lost mother. You are a
small mease left for so great a family, and therefore my hope is, that I need
not doubt of your good demeanor after my departure. If you can agree about the
participation of your goods, and let your goodwill be interchaungeable, it
will be a bliss to your other banes, but if you disagre and serve strife,
your famelie will be ruinated, your substance dissipated, and you confounded.

Sevlurus Cheronens^s bedridden, and re^^y to appear at the Tribunal of death,
having lived the revolution of many a winter, called his Sons, (which were
80 in number, and had every one take an arrow and break it: when they had
done, he bad every one of them take a sheafe of arrows and break them, which
they could not do: Thus you see (quoth he) that the conjunction of many in
an uniform unity, cannot with ease be crushed and suffer wrecke, but every
one singled by himself is easily dissolved. The three Horatij marshalling
together in the combat, queld their cou^termarching enemies, but separated and
disioyned, were all one after an other slain by one of the Curiatii: therefore
peace which is the preservation of all cominalties, and my motherly blessing be
with you both. Let the ill luck of your parents, be a pattern to your good
life.

Ah Fuluia (for I seau^ Philotimus to his own discretion, being a man, and
Gods good direction, who I trust will man him) be courteous to all with
modesty, and coy of your honesty, but not with disdain. For many men think
you love them, if you look but fair on them, and Pride said old Briana is
the sauce of a fool.

Your father in his life time did not meanly provide for your marriage, who
espoused you here to your friend Aemilius, therefore thank God of his mercy,
obey your husband as your Lord, and only love him without countinaunce to
other. If any man shall molest you with such temptations, as latelye the
cursed Telamon meant to anticipate mine honor withal, cut him of quickly. For
a small disease delayed becomes desperate, A little spark spreading burns a
whole City, and where delay is the tree, danger is the fruit.

Thus embracing them both, and kissinge them a 1000. times, and still
blubbering on Philotimus his cheeks, with whom she could not find in her
heart to part, and taking a short farewell of all her other friends that stood
by, and commending Fuluia to Aemilius, and Philotimus to the counsel of his
Tutor, meaning to make amends to God with penitencie, for her twifolde murder
committed on her self and Telamon, prayed as follows.

O Mighty God, most great, most good, that wreakes thy wrath on them that
break thy vows, forgive my sins. O your thy precious oil into my wounded
heart, and let the drops of mercy swage the rigor of my smarte. Thy blessed
will I have despisd, thy lore forlorn, my crooked will I have disposed, thy
statutes to repeal. But now my Lord, my loadstarre bright, my former deeds
do dule my heart, and sorrow does her self submit, to take death for her
dowry: yet not that lasting death (O Lord) O God prevent that prejudice,
though merit say Amen to Hell, yet let thy mercy deigne me heaven. The
humble heart has daunted the proud mind, eke wisdom has given ignorance a
fall, and trial has taught ye folly could not find, and penitence has
cruelty her subiacent thrall. Thou that did grant ye wise king his request,
thou that in Sea thy people did preserve, thou that forgauest the wounding of
thy breast, thou that did save the Thief in state to sterue, wipe out of mind
my faults, and this new moody fact, and since with faith I fly to thee, and
hope by faith to attain desire, let prayers appease thy righteous ire, and me
enjoy thy heavenly throne.

Oh God thy name be praised, dear sire I feel thy ghostly comfort, continue
it till I be dead. O Death where is thy stinge? Hell where is thy victory? My
God will not forsake me. O Savior bless my siely babes, and cheer them with
thy grace, and sanctify their hearts, that they may glorify thy hestes. I
die, I die, sweet Lord receive my soul when I am dead.

Herewithall she yielded breath. Great mourninges were excited in every corner,
and woeful Philotimus swounding three or four times, could scarcely be
relieved with life, who in time recovered a little, compiled these herbycall
verses, to bewail his own and his sisters piteous plight now left desolate.

When root is old, or rots by decay, then woe to the branches.
when sun abates, and moon is eclipst, the^ ay to the less stars.
How can a blind man go without some guide for his ayder?
how shall a realm keep rule, unless some prince be protector?
Sigh siely heart and dye, since the head thy chief is erased,
since Gods will is to work rhy woes, serve his auowry.
Castibula buried, and Philotimus and Fuluia having compounded for the division
of their substance, Fuluia was married to Aemilius, and Philotimus hauking
after honor, and desirous to live with Aurelia, who was now a maid of honor
to the Duchess of Venice, would mauger the counsel of Senior Mondaldo, and
all his other friends, in all have post it to Venice, and there live a
Courtier. And when his former flagge of defiaunce to Venus was objected to him,
he alleged the good Emperor Traians example, who studying most painfullye
till he was sixtene years of age, then gave his Book leave to lie shut,
and practiced himself in other excercises: much more lawfully (said he) may I
be dismissed, who am now full twenty years old, or very nere.

He was no sooner arrived at Venice, but he sent for Aurelia, who accompanied
with other Gentlewomen, came to him without hunching: at the first meting their
sudden joy stopped the co^duits of their speech, but at length Aurelia saluted
her sweet heart. O friend, O sweet and my desired friend, these eyes they see,
these hands of mine thee touch, yet scarcely can this mind believe the same,
and scarcely can this bruised breast sustain the joy that is enclosed therein.
O gladsome glass wherein I see my self. Philotimus was earneste with them to
take a small pittaunce with him at Supper: Aurelia and the company would needs
comstreyne him to take the pains with them. I will not be dainty (quoth
Philotimus) such Guests as I be plenty, but easily condescend.

The Supper they passed with merry glee, and joined Mercury to Bacchus, yt is,
good communication with good cheer, on every side.

And because Philotimus was now to be initiated in the Court, mistress Valeria
one of the company and an ancient seruitour, prefined these precepts.

Let your apparel abroad be robes, though your homelye attire be rags, be
courteous with your hat, though you be currish in your heart, and if the line of
your living will not reach out, either improve your Lands, and rack your
rentes, or court some Lady and coossen her of coin, or flatter your Prince and
purloine some good office.

Philotimus answered: I wish to clime withouten crime, or not at all: I will
not wringe out wealth from others, to bring about mine own toy will. But you
use me as Clitomachus used his Spaniel, who would cast him carrion, to try his
clearnes, as you give such counsel to know my honesty.

I had forgot to tell you what graund gretinges were betwixt Parmenio and
Antigone, but as I remember these were Antigone her words. Old acquaintance
and new remembrance, welcome to ye Town with a very vengeance.

Par. O Antigone, I can tell you a tale in your ears, will do you good in
your belly.


Ant. You Sir? What occupation are you of?


Par. A Brewer, if you will lend me your fat: and thus they two varnished
their their old vain, meaning never to leave it, while their tongues were
sharp enough, and their backs broad enough, to cut with their floutes, and
bear each others frumpes.


Philotimus seemed newlye enchaunted with Aurelia, neither without good show of
reason. For what color appears by Phaeb his broken beams directly shining
upon the clouds, or mark ye color of the morning clouds before the Sun
does show, or or as the cluster and ere the grapes be ripe, with orient purple
red are striped here and there such sanguine glowed in her face. In my mind
(quoth Philotimus) Grea the chamberer of Helen, was not so happy as thy maid
Antigone, that may enjoy thy company.

And at his depature, he brake out into this exclamation. With thee is Phaeb in
love more then he was with the nimphe Leucothoe, on thee alone he fastneth
those eyes, that he owes all the world, sometime more rath he rises in the
East, sometimes he makes it late before he go to rest, and for desire to
look on thee, he does prolonge the Summer days. His light sometime does
fail among, the fancy of his faulty mind infectes his feeble sight, and
makes men's hearts afraid by daunting of his shining.

Parmenio his tongue was very fine and voluble to run over his masters whole
life this time of vacation from his mistress, wherein he showed her that she
only had the regally and pre-eminence of his heart to queme at her pleasure.

Truly I thank you always (said Philotimus to him) for your good
remembrance. I think thou kepest a notarie of my doings. Trust me quoth
Parmenio, it is small reason you should keep a dog, and bark your self.

As they were wending to their lodging, Philotimus doting on his mistress, what
say thou, said he, Parmenio, to my choice of Venus? It is not that beggarly
whorish Venus, whom Jupiter begot on Dion, but Venus whose majesty is
engrossed among the gods (as Plato deuides them in his Symposion) O Parmenio,
if thou did see with mine eyes, and could discern with my judgment,
the inestimable virtues of Aurelia: then saying would judge Aurelia to be
pearelesse, and judging would honor her as thy princess.

By my troth quoth Parmenio, if I had no better capacity to conceive then you,
I would cut of my head, and go a vowing with my shoulders. Well said Philotimus,
it is like to be a fruitful year when boys be so saucie

Philotimus was in great favor with Aurelia for the time, and as francke he
was as the Princes son of Athens, who would not enclose his granges, that
the fruits thereof might lie common to the gathering of the poor, and would
never walk without a mass of money, to give to the lame and impotent in ye
streets, and kept an ordinary table for all such as had no sustenaunce. But
two contrary planets can never abide jointly in one house, nor prosperity and
prodigality long agree.

In brief, aspiring Philotimus sparing no horseflesh, had need for his speed,
and a gulf for his port. Neither had he landed where he leueled, neither could
he launch toward his haven, when his Argent by a straung kind of
Alcumisticall art, was countercoyned to open beggerie, and Dauie debte stood
watching with a mace at the door, ready to arrest him without bale or
mainprise of any friend in the world.

One Cornelius a stale hacking Courtier, who had long fed his fancy on
Aureliaes well thewed shape, but hitherto had bare commons, for that Philotimus
had wiped all the fat from his bearde, gubd Aurelia with gold to make his fare
better, and backed Philotimus with rebukes, to joint him of his iointer.

Now did Aurelia fly and follow both at once, as every wave drives other
forth, and it which comes behind, both thrusts and is thrust it self: so
she beloved of Philotimus avoideth his demerites, and loving Cornelius pursued
his possessions.

Philotimus winding Aurelia to have munched on this carri^, and mouze no more
on his poor meat, trotted to her lodging once or twice, where she would not be
seen, flying the light because she had done evil, whereupon he wrote this
letter following.

Philotimus to his dearest Aurelia.
WOe worth ye man whose wealth consists in wishing, cursed be ye wretch who
knows not what to wish him: the one wastes his wind, and rowls a restles stone,
ye other spe^ds his sprites, and quenches thirst with tears. But if my
chance be both, as both God knows it is, then let all mortal wightes resign
to me their sighs, and damned souls in Hell, rejoice to have escaped my
snares. And why I do complain, give ear, and say your mind. I beard of late
a tale, too late, and yet too soon, of falshooode in Aurelia, and Treason to
Philotimus. Wherein I quickly wished, and yet I knew not which to wish, that ye
broker of it had either been dum, or I the hearer had happily been deaf.

Is it true Aurelia, that you are revolted, whose constancy hitherto Brute it
self has blushed to blame? Or is it false Aurelia, you have reuersed your
judgment, to deface flying Fame with your steadfast faith? The fame is spread,
that you are sped, and chaungd your pasture for better commons: my mistrust is
grounded upon love, and may be coniectured by probable surmises.

It was my will of late to visit thy lodging, where I found ye shrine but not my
Saint: the next day after I came again, and knocked at the gates till my
knockolls were sore, but none would open: yet thinking that gains would
recompense pains in time convenient (not unlike Baalls priests, that thought
to wake ye stock Baal with incessant crying) no long space after I came
again, and then my mistress was a sleeping.

If our long acquaintance, the trial of my service, the oath taken between us
to confirm our contract, cannot move you, yet my sweet Aurelia, let thy
plighted faith by chaste Diana, thy covenant sealed in presence of Juno, thy
vengeance denounced to ye breakers of faith, even by thine own words to the
great God Jupiter, defend the from perjury, the greatest impiety, that may
be committed

What is the action thou commencest against me, except too great love? Or
wherein did I ever offend thy person, except with straining my golden string,
I have stretched it so far till all is broken? My strongest accusation is a
brainsicke prodigality, my greatest discredit a few foolish debtes: The one
too true an Argument of a good mind, the other a common sickness which in time
may be recured.

My matching with you shall recover some credit, and your endowment shall
stop their mouths. I know how honorably they think of Aurelia, and when I
have something they will grant me respite, hoping that the interest of my good
husbandry in time will be able to disburse their discharge.

The Bird which finds her nest despoiled of her young ones, often lets her food
down fall, much like my self, which frustrate of thy presence am much
appauld? O Aurelia, if thine ear be tied to every lying tongue, which wisdom
forbids, or you should give me over in the plain feilde, which thine honor
denies, what a blemishe would it be to the brute of thy lignage, or to whom
might I address my grievous complaints, thou attainted of Treason, but I a
captive catiffe. If it be known that I am defrauded of thee by false
suborning wretches, and then to have nothing, every one will be snatching glad
to get any thing, and so bring me to worse then naught.

If thy wealth be great, it is a gift worthy such a giver, if it be little, it
may be made more with thy sparinge at home, which is rightly called the
greatest tribute, and shall be increased with my labor abroad, which shall be
so much the more, by how much ye less my substance is slender.

For Gods sake Aurelia, pardon my bluntnes in misdoubting thy loyalty, and
blame flying tongues which breed thy dishonor, and my unrest, and never
hereafter let them be of thy court, which are meeter to be counselors at the
market Cross. Let us either confer in speech wherein I will detect the
slanderous reports that have gone of thee, or at the worst fall meetinge in
mind, send me thine answer for a sure testimony of thy certeintie, which
shall be as welcome to me, as I was bold with you.

Your servant Philotimus was, is, and will.


Aurelia to Philotimus, that was once her servant, and is she hopes her friend,
sends greting.
Would destiny yield to pity (my good Philotime) or ability counteruaile
hartles sorrow, thy griefs might be relieved, which I cannot but lament, our
loves might continue, which necessity dissolues. But friezing cold adawes
the frying heat, weak croned eld benumms youths lusty lims. The pereles
beauty of None such Niceus in time is invested in Thirsites deformity, and
every thing is turned by time. Gold wasted, yet what so solid, credit
defaced, yet what more glorious, friendship forgotten, yet nothing so firm,
thus eueri tide does eb in time. Then curse we our chances, that we cannot
cure our losses, time beckes, and fortune bendes, and every surfeit forerunnes
a fast. Fortune has her fits of frowninges, endure them Philotime, if she
bring better, we are sweetly deceived, now force perforce mixeth honey with gall.

As hard it is for faithful Philotimus, to doubt of sincerity in Aureliaes
love, as uneasy for me to moderate affection, without unspeakable torments to
my loyal breast. Yet must I turn my Tippet ere I burn my bones, and lack
inlooked for love to cloy thy gulping gluttony, ere I cast my self away with
bootles attempts, and ad heaps of woes to our joint decay. The undoubted
certificate of thy long known feruencie, does give me a warrantize to term
thee my friend, and may give thee a caveat to prove thy self trusty, not
seekinge thy preservative with poisoning of me.

If I should give thee my poor portion, too bad to be boughte, and too much to
be begd, and solemnize our childish unadvised contract with a sond celebration
of weddinge, perchance thou had a servant to dance attendaunce (as the
Gods had wretched Vulcane to minister at their Table) but the smallnes of your
profit which scarce would be any, would quaise the force of pleasure and sauce
it with despite.

Nay Philotimus, had Medea suspected that before, which too late experience
taught her, that Iasons voyage had been undertaken for the lucre of goods,
not the love of her goodwill, he had hopte shorter, and she had sped better,
and Euripides had wanted some matter subject, to underprop his bloody style
upon the mounting Stages. Perseus brought Andromeda from the black Indians, I
wis with small wealth. And what had the Trojan for his Graekish rape? I wis for
wealth both war and woe. The worst sort of men, says Terence his Charinus, be
those, which get their profit by others disprofit, and gorge their extorcion by
poor men's windefalls. Scylla and Caesar both are noted for Landpyrates, for
robbinge Peter to pay Paul, filchinge from others to feed their friends, a
very part of the essence of coosining prodigality.

Did thou never read the properties of the pretty Merlin, who holding the
Lark all night between her little talantes to keep her warm, as soon as it is
morning vnfastens her hold, and lettes her fly, and marking which way she
takes her flighte, will not all the day following set winge to that corner? But
have thou not heard of the crooked natured Trochilus, who breeding in ye mouth
of Crocodilus, where he is nourished, becomes afterward as they say, the
Crocodiles Physician, I mean Philotimus, utterly kills him. The former of
these do all men commend, but the latter they most abominably detest.

Alas Philotimus, by what reason should thy eating of grapes, set my teeth on
edge, or when thou have spent thine own stock, seek a new booty with praing
on mine?

The gleade and the Dove do not match together, the Lion and the Lamb are not
coupled together, equality must be in marriage, or else it is not conuenable:
the year is apportioned into even parcells, Justice her ballaunce is of equal
peize, and the heavens are moved with an uniform equality, ye ship does whelm
or sink if either side be ouerweied, the right Democritia has no difference
of persons, and the virtuous mean is equally placed betwixt both extremes.
The^ Philotimus, since thou art a Gentleman by style, but a beggar by
misfortune, and I a poor Gentlewoma^ yet of so^e living, accuse me not of
perjury, wherein I am sackles, but blame thy mishap, whereof thou art causer.

I pray you be content to foster your Cuckoes birds at home, and carry them
not as the Cuckoes use, to an other birds nest, to bring forth. Content your
self with your own lot. It is vain for the Dutchman to wish himself an
Englishman, or the Thracian an Athenian.

Thou that displeasest thy self, how can thou please me? Indeed Jupiter and
Juno, Venus and Diana, were called to witness to my oath, and you had both word
and oath, and all but heart. Yet the vniuersallest Axioms have their cautions,
every Obligation has his condition, and this I added in mine oath, if you
were no chaungling: which condition being broken, I will not envy thee as an
enemy, yet must mind as I find without any faining.

Juno I hope will dispense with mine oath of love: for she was ever an enemy to
Venus.

Venus I doubt not, will be entreated to forgo the company of sorry wowers,
for she is painted of the Poets ever laughing, as one that loves no mourning.

Diana I dare say, will not be angry for forsaking sorrow, for she does
nothing but hunt and sport, and in her meriments falls in love with Endymion.

Jupiter I am sure, will not think that I have offended, for Homer calls him
Anculopetis, for speaking one thing, and thinking an other.

Not much unlike a child that having hurt himself with falling, must have an
other bett that never came nere him: so you by your reckles merit losing my
love, accuse an other of falsehood in fellowship, you neither know whom, nor
wherefore. This is worse then war knave quoth Tomkins to his shadow: for he
seeing his shadow in the night, took it for one that came to spoil him, to
whom, knauing it, and slauing it, he gave many a good bang: but you not yet
having learned the first point of hauking to hold fast, bitterly rail you
know not on whom, and shall have amends I cannot tell when.

You bring store of reasons to inueigle me with subtelty, whereof I will not
deny the effectual force, but opposing to them my continency, I will cross
me from such blessings. For as he is more continent, that amid the daintiest
banquet can use his abstinence, then he that refraines because he wantes: so if
I can shun thy seducing reasons, I shall think my self more temperate, the^
if thou had showen no reason at all, and I forborne thy company. For
every of thy reasons I have an hundred affections. Therefore desiste
Philotimus, and spurn no more against the prick.

Orion for offering to defloure Phaebe was slain by a scorpion. Thou art as
insatiable in thy kind, as Arist. philoxenus, yt wished himself a neck as
long as a Crane, to have his meat long a swallowing.

He that has served ten years in war, by the law of Arms may be priuildged
from all service. And since thou have played the amorous knight so long and so
truly, I am now content to give thee a discharge.

An Italian Soldiour in Charles the fifth his camp, having past many offices of
credit in Arms, was challenged of a young Gentleman, a nouice, scarce of two
years practice, to whom he made this awnswere. When thou haste trod the
impression of every my steps, and stied to the seat of my dignity, and
have combatted with all my perils, I will meet thee in the feilds, otherwise
I will not so much embase my self, which is as if a Nobleman should fight with a
ruffia^: so Philotimus, when thou have redeemed thy morgaged lands, and for
thy living may say to me, well overtaken, I will match with thee, and not
before.

Yet trust me Philotimus, feign would I help, but alas I may not. Thy
incrementes will be my detriments, and thy consumption now is almost past
remedy. Cynthia could not call her son Hyppolitus out of Hell, nor Theseus his
friend Perithous, nor Aurelia heal her cureles friend. I have not Venus her
skill, that made Phaon of an old man a yongman, nor thou art not a Bacchus to
be twice borne, once of his mother, and once of Jupiters thygh.

If I might have Alcests luck, that dying for her husband Admetus was restored
to life by Proserpina, I would show thee favor for so little harm. Yet my
good Philotimus, caskes will ever taste of their first licour, and I shall never
forget our old friendship. And therefore as Antoninus pius when he could not
help the poor widows son that was condemned to die, wept with her to bear
some of her grief: so though I can do thee no such good as thou look for,
I cannot but jointly wail thy woes.

Your friend as she may Aurelia.


As the fire, the more it is blown the brighter it flames: so he with
disperpled locks, and hair discheueled about his shoulders, set fire to his
desire, with an incessant meditation on his almost irrecuperable mistress,
wherewith he answered as follows.

Philotimus sends health, which he has not, to Aurelia his mistress, and
wishes her the mercy she should have toward her servant.
THE skillful that behold the picture of Aesculapius, commend not the picture,
but the painter, we extol not so much the taste of our meat, as the Cooks
cunning that seasoned it, no man estemeth his coin for the stamp, but for ye
right metal when it comes to the touch: neither do I Aurelia, like thine
aunsweres, but commend thy wit from whence they came.

You say you cannot boot me, yet do stumps of old love stick in your stomach.
Indeed well I know, that an hand chafed with flowers will after smell of them,
when they are gone, and that some cycatrice of ancient benevolence will
remain, when love it self is perished and maimed. Whereby it will fare with
me, as it did with Democritus, who goinge about for sorrow of his sisters
mishap to famishe himselfe^, was relieved three days with the smell of new
bread: Or as with the Philosopher whom Oribazius says in his time he knew
to live awhile by the sent of honey: and I shall live by the shadow of thine
old love, the substance whereof is as good meat for ghostes, as may be.

O Aurelia, what equity is this, to inchaunte me with thy Angelicke glaunces,
and now to deprive me of thy presence?

I may welll compare thee to the lake of Bytamin, whereof me^ that pass that
way, dare not venture the vewe, much less aproch the smell, except Eunuchs
that be gelded, which fear not to behold, neither are indaungered by the
smell: And he that gloates on thee, except such as feign would and cannot (as
Pythias says in Terence) may chance either wish his eyes were out, or that he
had fewer stones by one and an other.

For as at the great earthquake in Antioch, there escaped none saving one woman
and a slave) that was not hurt or deadlye wounded: so there be few beholders
of you, that lose not their liberty, except it be restored by your
liberality. But as the pillar which Traian the Emperor erected in the place
named Datia, of wonderful height and breadth all of one stone, was more
admirable to men, and did more enoble his person, then if he had composed it of
diverse stones: so you making and taking me your only mate without ever
chopping and changing to any other, shall perpetuate the peace of your mind,
and win commendation of unstained constancy.

Now to the canuasse of thy letters, whom I surueyed diligently without
delighte, and will answer speedily without despair.

Could it not suffice Achilles to slay Hector, but to dragge and hayle his
body through the duste? Was it not sufficient for Anthony to loppe Tullye by
the neck, unless Anthonyes wife did mangle his body, and wear his Tongue in
her hatte, to work his greater obloquie? Was it not enough for thee to untie
our true loves knot with the breach of truce, but to kill me again with
opprobrious words, Si modo qui periit, bis periisse potest? Your learning I
know more then your honestye, and that makes me speak Lattin to cover your
dishonestie.

Is it thine, not thee, thy gains not goodwill, that I do wowe? Lie not
Aurelia, when thou know the truth. It is a great shame, and a greater
sin, and almost coossen to that pleadelesse fault that cannot be forgiven,
either here or else where. No Aurelia, it is mine hosts not mine Inn yt I am
a guest for. It is the flock not their wool, for whose cause I so sadly sit
whuppinge all the day under a hill. Indeed lucre is a lure to much
dissembling. But though I am needy, yet am I not greedy, but well sufficed
with a small sise of wealth, and my minds music were well in tune, if thou
would but add one string of thy consent. The relation of my misery to the
mystery of your wealth, was to persuade you not to shrink in the wetting, but
like a Kentish cloth that stains with nothing, stand inuiolated.

Cupid is blind, and sees no riches. Lycurgus the Lawgiver of the
Lacedaemonians, commanded those of his City, that they should offer to the
Gods, few things in number, and not rich in value. In the law which God gave
unto the Hebrews, he was so limited in the things he demanded, and so
human in ye things he commanded, that in order of the sacrifices which they
should offer, he did ordeine that the poor man which could not offer a
goat, should offer no more but of the hair thereof. The consideration of
these gave me hardines to embolden my courage in this amorous encounter, though
I have no pay to counteruaile ye semblaunce of a Captain: the same efficacy
may humiliate you, for want of better Harvest, to take oats in part of
payment.

Paulus Aemilius vanquishing Perses King of Macedonia, rather desired honor
then a quarrie of treasure. Anthonio offering to die before the Emperor that
sought his death, was received into former grace. Though I were Iris or
Codrus, and thou in potencie might match with Rome, in riches with Tyrus, in
beauty with Helia, in opulence with Tarence, yet the repulse of my love
without remorse, will show thee more cruel then all the beasts in the
deserts of Africa, or those of ye great India. India. A wayfaring pilgrim
taking a thorn out of a Lions foot, meetinge after with him at the games of
Olympia, and being brought out to wrestle with him would not use his furious
force but with a grateful recordance acknowledging his curtesy fawned upon
him. It greues me to exhort thee to square thy imitation to a beasts
clemency: then let thy courtesy be a ready remedy to make me ashamed of my
unequal comparison. As Telephus had nothing to cure his hurt, but the launcing
of the spear that gave him his wou^d, and as the mind is conceived with
nothing but the mind: so nothing can counteruaile the value of love, but an
aunswerable conformation of the desired love.

For which cause, poor unbegotten wether beaten Qualto, an hobhansom man god
wot, and a bow wow to his Lady and mistrisse, serving a Lady in Italy as a Tom
drudge of the pudding house, or a groom to her close stool, or a seruitour to
such slavery, asking on a time after the disclosure of his loyalty, some
guerdon requitable in lieu of all his pining thoughts to win her affections,
and pinching pains about her drudgerie, she was content to imbezle some part
of her goods to notifye her larges toward Qualto. But this, nor any thing
could enforce him to relinquish his suite, saving the yelding of her battered
breast. Wherefore never giving over (which Ovid commaundes us in his Art of
loving) as small drops in time pearce the hard marble: so he with urgent
instaunce in his attempted enterprise, got her in arms that had his heart in
hold, and like a valiaunte waterman setting his ores, was permitted to row in
his mistress boat.

But my love thou know is noe weed for wantons wear, no fancies freake
with knackinge fetches, not like a bow long bent yt in process weakens, but
like ye natural motion of an eleme^t which in going gathers strength. Thou
telst me of Orion, who for offering to defloure Diana, was killed by a Serpent:
wherein thou imitates the Devil in his alleging of Scriptures, for he never
bringes out an whole text, but so much as is for his own enorm intended
purpose: and thou take the half serving thee, and leaves out the moitie
making for me, that utterly overthrows thy whole province. For though Orion
were bereaved of this tra^sitorie life, yet that which is more glorious, he
was by imputed elevation translated into a star.

If as Rams retire to strike harder, so your love recule to return with more
vehemency, I shall think, that as ye best vines in Germany grow on hard
rocks, so the surest love inhabites the heart hardliest attoned: and as the
praise of a Judge is not given to his scarlet gown, so your good liking is not
framed by your lookinge. Then shall I curse the Eclipse of my waininge
Judgment, that of late have judged your demeanor measured by your favor, an
apishe deformity in clothe of Goulde, and your ill manner, scarce agreeable to
so great a Lady.

Phoebus I know does not always harp, sometime he shoots, Triacle does not
ever cure, sometimes it poisoneth, and friends must not ever love, but by
intermission, sometimes mislike. Iars of necessity must be among friends, but
thrice woe be to them by whom they come.

Ah Aurelia, feign would I singe, but fury makes me fret, and rage has sworn
to seek revenge of wrong. In dread and danger would I pass between the
stringe and bow, to have my will on that birds bushed cage, that does incense
my care. O that I might have a shoot at one of the Deares in his Park, if yt
were but his Heart, Aurelia, it would suffice me.

I know there be vnderminig easinge droppers, that have wroughte this
estraungment between us. But since the Myll will needs about, the pin
whereon the Mill does go, I will assay to strike it out, and so the Myllne to
overthrow.

The mind I have is of gold to serve thee, but of iron to break their pride,
and if I want armor wherewith to fight, I want not a mind to abide death.

Thus thou see Aurelia, I am not like the stripling Pertinax, who used to
sell his wood so dear, contentious, and pinching, yt if they gave him not his
first demand, did rather leave his wood vnsould, then abate one blancke of his
price. For though I suffer a sower repulse, yet am I content to awaite thy
leisure.

Your most faithful servaunt Philotimus.


Aurelia at the receipte of these letters, was moved wish a marvelous disdain
of Philotimus, who durst be so boulde as threaten her new friend, his letters
she answered in these words.

I Cannot tell Philotimus, whether thou art better to keep an hold, or to play
a prating beggar. For thou and thy purpose stick together like burres, neither
though forbid, wilt ever leave of thy iangling. Thy commendation of my wit
enhaunceth no pride. For the Satyrs thought poor Martia to surpass in
music, Coridon preferred his oten pipe, before Apolloes silver Harp, and
Poliphem the blind Giaunt, thought sielie Galataea to excede the beauty of
Mars his concubine.

Good simple soul, would you pick a quarrel with them, that as you say,
would pick a thank with me? Alas pretty figboy, an hasill twigge in your
hand, is an whole haulbarde.

Thou art better to be a gunner under a Ladies targett, then Lieutenaunt of a
pitched field. Indeed? And is your barking tongue turned to biting teeth? you
are now fleshed in impudency. If you be chafed you shall be walked, if you be
hot you may be cooled. A young colt plungeth at the first prick, as though he
felt no ground, but being chafed a little, champes on his bridle and stands
still.

The more a sore is rubbed and handeled, the less it heales: the more busy you
are to be a stickler in your own cause, yt further aloof am I of: you cannot
shift your cards so cleanly but you ar seen. Do not tell me, yt I am a
whetstone to set every dainty tooth on edge, and so clawe an Ass till you
have rid her.

Physicians use a contrary plaster to those patientes, that will not heal
with the rules of physic, and I must handle you roughly, whe^n fair words
cannot serve to make a fool feign.

But this I cannot forget, how full of guts you are, at one blow to kill God
have mercy on his soul. You may if you will, but do if you dare. Alas good
Philotime, thy force of arms be no force, no harm. Thou art comd of a gentle
kind, to gave so wide and not to bite. Indeed you are all heart but head, and
that is horns, but if you be lusty, you may go louze you. Me thinks when I
hear thee tell of thy valor, I see ridiculous Bacchus, whom Aristophanes in
Canis brings in drunken, marching in Hercules his armor, and saying he would
go down to see the Tragedies in Hell.

Nay holla squaring Dick, I am no but for every boult. Thou do but chase a
shadow in the sun when thou followest me. Though thou sweat blood, as the
Bird Eradius does in the time of treading, it will sooner bring thee to a
bloody flixe, then to my favor. I am not so blind, that thou can make me
believe with a wink, it is midnight at noone day. The bird Osprey is of such
whitenes on his breast, that houering over the fishpoole, all ye fish turn up
their bellies, and so he takes his pray. Keep thy fair promises in thy purse,
for with me they little prevail, and less persuade.

When the Lion is old, all the beasts of the feilde condemn him, and as you
are too old a friend to be good, so your heirs be of age to take your place,
expecting your resignation.

Thou art like the Apes called Callitrices, which at the new of the moon
rejoice, and at the full and waining be triste and sad. You in the beginning of
our love were very iocunde, and at our diuorcement use your terms of
railing. But though the Dragon cannot abide the Panther, yet all other beasts
resort to behold his colors, and smell of his odor, and though the Batte hate
the light, yet is the light nothing the worse.

When the Eagle has two or three birds, she castes out one of them, fearing
her self not to be able to nourish them, whom the Bird Ossifraga receives
and brings up, as though it were her own. Aeneas lost Libye, yet he found
Latium. Traian could not live with Domitian the Emperor, yet flyinge to Nola
in Campania, he found Plutarch for his master, Plotina for his wife, and Nerua
for his father, who afterward being Emperor, adopted Traian to be his son.
Comfort thy self, there be more maids then Maukin and though thou lose me,
thou may find some other. Coridon shall be loved else where, though fond
Alexis do disdain.

The serpent cannot blame the Heart though he be his enemy, and his bane,
because it is natures ordinance: neither may the Raven rightly accuse the
little bird Easalon for breaking of her eggs, because their discord is sown
of nature. Neither can the Swan look for friendship of the Eagle, yet neither
of both to be discommended. The fishes Muges abound above measure in love
toward their own kind and sort, and list not meddle with the fellowship of
others. Minerua turned the hairs of Medusa who^ she hated into adders, yet who
does obiecte it to Minerua for cruelty?

Have thou not heard of the foolish marriage that the Emperor Heliogabalus
made betwixt the image of the Goddess Pallas and the God Heliogabalus, which
being consummated to the great laughter of his enemies, and the grief of the
Romans to see their Gods defaced, he made them likewise a bed in the midst
of the Temple, where they might sleep together? Under as small guard and
veneration shall our marriage stand, and as little joy I fear, should we feel
yfere, as did the two insensible pictures.

If thou think thy interest be better in me, because thou have been at
some cost on me, this I say, yt I never meant to prove my self a noddy with
refusing offered gold, neither am I of such power as the Popes holiness, to give
a pardon of thy sins, for a few Peter Pence. Certain men brought from
Graece to Rome a false will of one Lucius Manutius Basilius, a rich man, the
legacies whereof that they might more easelye compass, they writ in with them
two Noble men of Rome, M. Crassus, and Q. Hortensius both expert civil
Lawiers, and eloquente Orators. These two Gentlemen, although they suspected
it to be forged, yet notwithstanding knowing themselves giltles of all faults
in the devise, were well enough content to be parceners of his lands.

It is the law of arms in many places, that he which is first in the
skirmish, though he submit himself, yet being taken, shall be wounded for his
offense. Then neither think me tirannous for giving you the glieke, though you
were my first friend, neither imagine your fortune adverse, neither vex your
self with impacable sorrow. That flower must not grow, that can abide no cold:
you may not warm you by a fire, but you must feel the flame: he that has his
beard most curiously washed in the Barbers shop, will take no snuff to have it
cast out into ye open streets.

But since sielie manling, thou art so obstinate in straining the fault to
inexorable Aurelia, I will give thee a specialtie what guard I have of thee, in
showing thee an electuary against thy love, which thou being a student ought
to know better then I, yet art so busy in bootles business, going about to
get a Cock with egg, that thou can not or wilt not see wood for trees.
Read Cadmus the Milesian, who has written a whole book in the remedies of
love, and that Ovid which has infected thee with his lasciuiousnes, has given
thee a mean to clawe of his itche.

The beast Fiber perceiving himself to be pursued of the hunter, biteth of his
stones, which are merueilous good in medicines, and lays them in the sight of
the hunter, knowing by nature yt he is hunted for the same: so (Philotimus) I
can yield, if thou want money, and a little may pleasure thee, to let thee
have of my small store, knowing very well (saving ye reverence of your
protestation (that it is the coin, and not the woman you seek after. Or I
will deal with thee, as a noble man of Rome sometime did with his ancient
manor house. This noble man behoulding the follies of Commodus then Emperor,
the tyrannies of Pere^nius vicegerent of the Empire, and the spoils of the
commonwealth, he both sincere in judgment, and severe in life, departed from
thence to the country of Liguria, to live in a poor village, where sometimes
his father had made his habitacle, and buying that poor cottage, built in ye
compass thereof a stately building, permitting the old to remain in the midst,
without addition or diminution thereof: and since I must needs condescend to
your importunate entreatie, you shall have the title of mine old friend now
ruinous, as one of who^ I have ere while smackt the relish of reposed rest,
marry an other platform I have laid, whereon I purpose to erect an edefice of
some more stately frenship, in whose breasts I mean to situate my mantion house.

It is not for me Philotimus, to deal with him that can card more in one
night, then I and many a good huswife can spin all the day. Martia, Letus, and
Electus, killing Commodus on the night, commanding certain slaves to bestow
his body at their appointmen, wrapped in an old seron, wherein the ordure of the
stable was wont to be carried out, chose an other before day, to the end the
Empire might have an owner, and they have defense under his protection: and
since I have forlorn thee, blame me not though I have elected an other for
mine own safeguard: farewell Philotimus, and be answered with reason.

Aurelia your old friend.


Philotimus reading these letters, was nothing appaulde, but with confidence
of recovery, answered as follows.

THe Leopard pursues his pray leaping and startling, and if he take it not the
third or fourth leap, he stinteth for indignation, and goes backwarde as
though he were overcome.

When the Elephants of king Porus, were a little wounded by ye soldiers of the
great Alexander with their weapons called Capidae, and were put in fear they
were more hurtefull to their own rulers, and casting them down and tearing the^
in pieces, ran out of the battle like sheep. But I neither mean to be as
short as ye Leopard in his hasty huntinges, nor so cowardly as ye Elephant in
his attempted assaults. And yet I cannot but yield to you, and pray to your
pleasure for a comfortable remorse. The gray mare is ye better horse,
especially if she be a curtal, it must be as ye woman will, when all is said
and done. Though Mars were the God and Bellona but a Goddess, yet she had the
pre-eminence in all martial attemptes.

But would any man have judged you a backeslider, so soon to have turned your
tongue to your tail, and for continuing of your sensual pleasure, to have
flitted from an old friend to a new flatterer? As none rould heal Philoctetes
poisoned feet, but Machaon, Aesculapius his son: so you labor of a disease,
that none can heal, but he that will pay for lending of his patiente. It is
not my purginge pills (which, you say, would poule you of all your coin)
but Cornelius his sweet suppositorye, that must minister you physic.

It grieves me less Aurelia, that you have given me over, then that mine
innocence being known, as shortly it will, you shall be noted of lightenes
and lewdenes. Whereby it will come to pass, that as the name of Iulia among
the Romans, was an ensign of a common adultresse strumpet: so the name of
Aurelia for thy sake, henceforward shall be detested as a note of frail
inconstancy.

Ay me but cast away, Ah dear Aurelia, my power is too weak to make any
war, and yet I can find no peace, I am not scorcht with any fire, and yet no
cold adawes my heat: I cannot die as ye happy dye, to ye end to live for
ever, but I must live, as misers live, to the end to die for ever.

O that every hair of my head were a man for his adherentes sake, who is no
good curre, for that he bites behind, much less a whelpe of the princely
Lion, who being chased with hounds or hunters, seeks no couerte wherein to
lurk, but sits in the field where he may be seen, and araieth himself to
battle. I do not level by guess (as thou do burden me) at him, that does
this villainy, but know him, and can name him, in this resembling the Lion,
who being vulned, takes such heed, that he knows who first smote him, and
rises on the smiter, though he be in never so great a multitude. If there be
any poison prepared in an house, a partridge pende up in a cage or coupe, will
byte and scratch, and cry out, such Divination has she by nature, and such
have I by Gods predestination to descry mine enemies trains.

Yet take you heed you lean not to hard on a broken staff. It may be, it is
for small goodwill to thee, but for envy to me, yt he busieth himself: much
like the Griphon in the Hypeborian hills, where being bred plenty of gold and
precious stones, as ye Smaragde, the Jasper, the Crystal, neither has he use
of the^ him self, neither suffers them to be taken from thence, as diverse good
writers affirm: or the Cameleon, who drawing to the goshaukes, against whom his
most might stands, they also fly unto him, and by this means he takes them,
wilfully to be devoured to other beasts. But as the Linx perceiving that his
urine does turn in to a precious stone named Ligurius, and naturally enuyinge
yt should be any use to mankind, hides it wiih sand or earth, when he has
pissed, which is ye very cause yt it sooner hardens, and turns into a
stone: So I do not doubt, ^ut this labor to put me out of conceit, may in
time after trial of my faith and his falsehood, convert to my greater grace
with thee, and credit with others

You after your scoffing manner put me in the predicament of the Apes
Callitrices. Yet those that laugh at me, for triumphing before the victory,
and reckoning my shot before mine hostess, and thinking I had thy heart before
I searched thy reins, may deem thee a light huswife for thy cracked
fidelity. It is no maisterie to deride one in misery, but it is convenient to
banne the causers of it. Thy untoothsome tauntes may well compare thee to the
sorcering Sirens, who are merry in tempests, and heavy in fair weather.

If it be the destiny of him that first wooes you, to be forlorn, as it was
prophesied that he which first stepped on the Trojan ground, among the
Grecian host, of neceessitie should be slain, which was verified in
Protesilaus (though he might vaunte that he was slain by Hector, and I repine
to be undone by a coward) Or if as the monster Sphynx slew all that passed by
her to the city of Thebs, if they could not expound her riddle, so you will be
the bale of all that cannot display your sleightes: It may fall out that as
Laodamia wastfullie mourned for her Protesilaus, or as when Oedipus had given
Sphynx a solution, she brake her neck for grief: so thou may wish ere
thou dyest for poor Philotimus, and when thy cautele fetches shall be laid open,
follow Phillis in the end, though far unlike her in thy life.

Now then recule with reconciled grace (my Alderlieuest Aurelia) a name unto my
soul as sweet as balm. The shield of love, the force of faith, that trusty
targe, has long borne of, and broke the thrustes that malice at me throws.
Mine only shield has long forwarded a sorry man, now quickly lend me yours,
or else you do me wrong. Still are you bound by faith, though fancy would
be free, still are you fast by oath, though loath to lau^e it out. En bon gre
take a pouer boy, for I am yet Philotimus. Ten thousand times a day desire
does live and dye, feign would I live to gain thy love, or die with grief to
leave with loss. If Desire thy darling be wayward, let thy yielding remorse
sing alullibie lullie, if I be in presumption a Giant to solicit my suite,
which am in power a gnat to perform any service, yet shall my deuoire do his
endeavor to gratify thy cu^rtesie, and work thy delighte: and know that
nettles and egshells are good for something, which being burnt together to
powder and put in your nose, will stau^ch the blood of wounds or nose. If thou
think for my craft I have a Foxes tongue, or that for my smart I am a thorn
in your foot, yet wot you, that a Foxes tongue laid to the sore in thy foot
or hand, will undoubtedly heal it.

Though in your conceit I am knauishly mannered, yet do thou imagine me
apishly witted, and if your fleetinge phantasye think me crabbedlie favored,
a foul ground for your fair cou^terfeit, you know, may well agree. When the
field is Argent, and that which occupies the field is Sable, that shield is
called fairest in field. Full often ye whitest Doves with speckled Culuers tread,
and often we see the Turtle brown with Popimay does wed. If you mislike my
droupinge pace, with my ragamuffin vesture, one good word of your goodwill, may
make me cast my lothsame sloth, and yet renew my lusty liuerie. The Bears
whelps lie blind in a confused lump, till their dear dams do lick them:
the best Pearls have no show, till the Lapidaries clear them: neither can
you use the best mettald knife, till the Cutler have glazd it.

Ambages laid aparte, if thou had a counterpane of my tyring languor, or how
as waxe^ torch with sulphur touched, I burn, I neither needed Gracchus his
poynaunt eloquence, at whose Oration the whole congregation wept: nor
Symonides his doleful skill, that invented the waymenting order of verses
termed Lyrici, and was excellent in procuring men to tears: nor to be expert
in the woeful Elegies, to move thee to pity a disconsolate wretch. Who can
give to me a fountain made of moan, that I may weep as much as is my will,
and fouse my sorrow up in swelling tears? O that I had her love in link, that
has my heart in hold. Then would she procure, the Sea seem calm, the
billows calm, the earth rejoice, the air to singe, no surge by Sea, no
smarte by land I should endure. Plisthenides, thou were yblest, what cares
soever did eucroch: For whether winds did toss thy bark, or surging seas
dismayed thy breast, ay thy wedlock went with thee, with clinching arms thou
her embrast. In this thou art happy (Aurelia) that thou can not see me, for
if thou could, you would die for woe, and most unhappy that thou will not
see me, for now thou shall live in ignomie.

Mine heir, whom thou say has outgrowen his minority, looking for his
fathers inheritance, will neither wish to feel the pursuit of the like pain,
by pattern of his pear, neither long to be enfeoffed in such lands. His
forefathers name is Love, his lands are Loss, a common hire for such an heir.

I am tedious in ye prolonging of my letters, and eftsoons in their
reiteration, because that as Paracelsus used to say, in every natural thing
there is as well fresh oil, as salt brimstone, which by art may be extracted:
so I hope that in thy flintie stomach there is not only an harbor of cruelty
and disdain, but some deal also of merciful courtesy, which by my diligence
may be derived to the behoof of my distres. In the hardest flint may be found
some live lie spark of fire, the knottiest piece of box may be wroughte to a
dudgen hafte, and Aristotle says, that out of the salt sea foam may fresh
water be sifted. Then may I hope, that as these apparaunt impossibilities do
naythelesse work these prefixed efficacies, so out of thy stonye heart, may
yet flow such water, as may wash and purge my yearnfull wounds. Think some
and some is honest play.

O let not (was) work all delight, let (is) and (shall) have part in pay:
command, and I will slay my self that yours may be ye guilt, but bately bid
me die, and I will die forthwith for joy, that never yet I showed my self
ungrateful to my mistress. Yet if you will not so, but keep me still alive in
vexed plighte, for some offense I have committed, then show in what, or where,
or when, I stumbled in my steps, when it was my part to go vprighte, and as
Sceuola when he erred in slaying Porsenna the cruel Tyraunte, and killed his
Steward for him by a mistake, thrust his hand that did the deed, into the fire
for a penalty, and there consumed it: so ye part or member that has offended
thee, shall to make restoration of my love, and satisfaction for my fault,
dearly abie his leasings. I can endite no more for tears, and it is no
doughtie manly deed to fend my self with tears. Thus then noe more by me,
for me, but to thy mercies I appeal.

Your trustiest servant Philotimus.


These letters were delivered by his page, who had much ado to get the return
of an answer. For Aurelia weary of his wooing, and loath to hear of her
dealing, and given all to her darling, could not spend one vacant hour out of
Cornelius his company, scarce to read his letters, much less to answer
them. But at ye boys impudent entreatie, she vouchsafed forsooth to write
these two lines ensuing.

Aurelia once again to Philotimus.
A Robe whereof many men must wear the liuereies, must be used sparingly, and
not all spent on one: And Aurelia that has more to serve then you, must not
trifle all her time in giving you attendaunce. When I red thy letters in the
presence of Cornelius, and made collation of thy qualities with collection of
his properties, only this I had to say. A puttocke set on pearche fast by a
Falcons side, will quickly show it self a Kite. If this construction be
applied to your stomach, it will be a good confectio^ to stint your shameless
love. Farewell. I warn you that I see no more of the bastardly brood of thy
letters, which have neither head nor foot, nor any good substance. Thy
reasons be so cold, that they have frozen my love.

Aurelia willing to be your friend, and urged to be your foe. Amor quo serior eo
verior solet esse.


Philotimus having red his mistress sharp censure, writ presently without
pausinge to his pretty paunce, not so sharply as she, but as swiftly as he
could.

IT is a custom of purloining burglairers, to strew pepper in the tract of
their steppings, that the blood hound snuffing it into his nosthrilles, shall
not be able to trace them: so to make me run counter, or give over the chase,
you cast me a fuming fancy, and a flaming freewill, which whiles I feed on,
the game is gone.

There is a Well in Illirica, into which if any thing be put to cool, or to
extinguishe, it smouldringly burns it to very cinders: There are found
certain stones in a river in Pontus, which the^ take on fire, when ye wind is
greatest, and by how much ye more they are covered in water, by so much the
fearcer and brighter they burn: and how it comes to pass I know not, but
the less hope I conceive of thy liking, the more I desire and crave thy love.
The wallnut tree well bet when his nuts are shaken, bears more fruit the
year ensuing: the more you strike iron upon the stidhy, the harder and tougher
ye iro^ is: It is ye nature of a wild Irish man, yt the worse you use him, the
more service he does you: such and so luckles am I in my cheuisaunee, which
having feendly food corsed for love, and being sourelie rebuked for fawning on
thee, am yet as fruitful in thy love, as the beaten wallnut tree, as toughe as
the iron to bear any blows, and as mad as the Irishman, to give love for
lothinges.

For though my wits be blunted and hoodwinked, ye panicle of my brain damped
and discrased, and my spirits surcharged with griefs visitation, yet is my
hope ancored on thy qualification, and stoutly indurate against misaduentures.

When thy prick me dainty Cornelius, shall be vacased of his vain vizarde,
and disburdened and disballassed of his hypocritical apparitions, then shall
my poor habit be anteposed his proud heart, and the simplest diet prove the
best Physic.

Aurelia, to elect me to the calling of thy most intimate friends, and
reject me to the number of thy greatest foes, were to call me to the roste, and
beat me with the spitte, to shoe my horse, and prick him in the quick. But
as the River Lycus swallowed up by gaping of the ground, a great way thence is
in an other channel found: and as the Brook Erasine among the feildes of
Arge, one while sinkes, an other while runs in ouerflowing measure: and
Amasane eke in Sycill land does sometime rise afloat, and sometime sloppeth up
his spring: so will thy faintinge love recover with new recourse, whose
pleasure is at this time to give thy Hawke tyringe, that hereafter he may be
stronger and sharper at his game.

An Ass lives by the course of nature 30. years, and a sheep but ten,
therefore I doubt not but that cowardly sheep, will be soon defeated of his
hope, as well as I sielie Ass was deceived of my trust.

It were hard dealing, if in payment of a good gub of Gold, of full weight and
poise, one poor piece somewhat clipped and lighter then his fellows, may not
be foisted in among the rest, and pass in pay for current coin. Good sweet,
be not saunce all pity, but let ye right of ready will my lite poor wealth
excuse. O how you cut me in calling me Kite, much like as the thunder cutteth
the tree. For as that pearceth the bulk, and never hurts the bark, so
though you grieve my heart, you hurt not my manners, but if you can cut me no
otherwise, your wits will rust for want of good usage, and that you should
cut in such a matter, you had need go set them to a grindstone. As all Women
be evils, yet necessary evils: so though the Kite be a vermin, yet is
she a very necessary vermin. The Kite can weed the worm, can kill the
Moulewarpe, can cleanse the streates, and saving the Hens poor progeny, none
can accuse him of fellonie.

As the snowie mulberie, that bore before white Lilly leaves, having her white
beires besprinckled with true lover Pyramus his blod, became all purple black:
even so thy fair etheria^hew be stained with the guilt of sackles blood, shall
loose ye the grace and favor.

The victor has his price, when he has run his, race and so let me. Precious
stons are tried to be true if they be rubbed with lead, and change not their
hew, for they never receive any other color: and gentlewomens loyalty is
then experimented, when neither want of wealth, nor any frown of fortune, can
work loves alienation. You say my letters have neither head nor foot: then in
deed I grant, they are none of my brood: for I am sure I have both, I feel
by the weight of my head, which you have set with horns, and by the pain in
my feet, which I have got with running after you.

Thus trusting that you will not take my liuerie from me, before it be half
worn, nor bereave me of love in his best prime, I commit you to the protection
of the great God Cupid, who I beseech, even to direct you in your doings, as he
rules and governs me and my heart: for my self, I pray nothing else but ye
God and Saint Aurelia give me their blessing.

Your Servant Philotimus, who wishes himself as able to be your friend, as he
is unwilling to be your foe. Better late then never.


Amor qui prior, eo potior debet esse.
When Aurelia se, that neither ye wile of fair words, nor yt revile of soul
writs, could intrept or let his letters, the^ as one reading a riddle, or
constring an Embleame, she stood in a mamering what mean to make, or how to
thwart ye cost to shu^ his gu^shot. In this deur both dau^geous and doubtful,
she meant not to dallye being brought to this baye, nor to delay judgment in
taking day, but in few words and those well thewed, to manacle his
melancholye and mue up his love: wherefore in an abreuiat compendius of this
speedy speech ensuing, she gave him a general acquittaunce for all his
queint conceits, that his Memoradums and bills of debtes should never after be
flapt in her mouth.

Aureliaes discharge to all the debenters of her coosninge freende Philotimus.
Fools and little Dogs, are Ladies play fellows: A sower sallet may long be
eaten without satietie: the conclusion these premises is, that I can once
again vouchsafe to make me sport with the nody Philotimus, and answer his
displeasaunt untoothsome letters.

Men used to drink the waters of the brook Anigrus heretofore, but after what
the Centaurs vanquished by her Hercules in fight, did therein wash their
wounds, it was abhorred: the well of horned Hammon is at midnight passing hot,
and at noonetide passing could: So could I have brooked thee before I see thy
good conditions stand on the condition of wealth, whom in the night, yt is in
thy scarcity I have found as hot as Hay haruist, who^ in the day, yt is, thy
prosperity, I have known as could as a Chrismas evening.

You say better late then never, and I answer, as good never as to late.
Surcease thy sighs and flattering freaks, they naught prevail. Bacchus in
licknes of a grape beguiled Erigone yt suffered rape. Neptune in a Dolphins
shape, enforced Melantho to her shame. Then eft I say, and often before have
wished, that thou leave these crouched vows and orisons, icrested with triple
treachery, for as lickelie is that which Didimus writes, that if one put wool
in his ears, sheep will follow him, as that a fair word wrought one Arts
forge, can seduce me to the sequence of your wish.

Though I envy thee now, thou should not vye it with malice. It used to be
the guise of religious hostyers, to drink wine their fill, and ^ate while they
listed, and to offer the residue in Sacrifice to their Gods, and to pick the
meat as nere as they could- and give the furbished bones in immolation. The
Grecians in, tending to gratulate Ajax for his brave encounter with Hector,
roasted a bull, and eat him up, and presented Ajax with horns and hide: no
worse then this will I deal with you.

Have thou never heard how Homer describe Strife, that though it be basely
borne yt is take original of a slender cause, yet ^esteth not til she touch the
heaven with her head, still keeping her feet below on the earth, and therefore
thou may surmise my hate to be hotter, and shall miss of thy purpose if thou
look for better.

It is wholesome for the, Philotimus, to wear horns. It is a-tried medicine
that if the right side of thy head do ache, a comb made of the right side of
a Rames horn, will help it, and if the left side ache a comb of the left
horn will cure that Megrim.

Thou praiest that God and Saint Aurelia will bless thee, I adioyne, such a
Saint God send thee-Disdaine not I say once again, that want makes me for sake
thee, for outward things have great force, look of what color you would have
your chickins be, paint it on the outside of the eggs and they will prove:
and if you will have Venus her love, you must maintain her outward bravery.

Celmus for clinging most faithfully to Jupiter, became an Adamant: but by my
troth (Philotimus) I never mean to incur the like displeasure, for being too
faithful to thee. For thou art neither sweet for smell, nor seemly for sight.

Thou ask if I do thee right, and I answer, noe, worong, short talk to
make, thy tyring lu^st no loytring lodge can find within my breast. A Circes,
as I am can set thy ship on sand, I utterly renounce both thee and thine from
henceforward for ever more, if thou seek to exulcerate thy supposed injury,
as thy gaul is greater then thy guile, so I hope thou will breast for very
malice, ere thou matchest me to do me harm: at one word farewell forty
pence, too dear of three shillings, I never mean to be at more cost with you.

Thy vowed enemy Aurelia.


As Soon as Philotimus had read these letters he waxed pale as any box, a
shuddering through him struck, even like the sea which suddenly with whissing
noise does move, when with a little blast of wind it is but touched, with
driueling and with vapoured eyes, and frying fearce with straingie glead, and
lyinge groufe upon his face he still exclamed upon Aurelia, he meynt his
weeping with his blood, where with in stead of brine they were embrued, in this
cureles ecstasy, he left himself one min nuts respite to send this Aurelia
fainting farewell.

EVen as the snowish swan does singe before she dye, upon Meanders winding
banks, that sheds his straglinge streams and shears the fruitles sand with
wrakfull waves, so singe I now not notes of joy but lays of deep lament. I
write not, for I think my words may ought prevail: For why? I know the
haughty Gods at this my purpose spite. But since my wealth, my corpse, my fame,
and spotles mind, are lost by canckred hap, to wast my words I recke it little
cost. New love remains for thee (but not a new Philotimus) with other troth to
be impaund, which thod again may break.

O now I see (Democritus) that vain were they, and most ridiculous, which
derided thee when thou soughtest for Truth in the bottom of a Well. For well
know thou, how Truth was disperaged immediately after the death of our
forefathers, and glad for the avoiding of Falsehoods sentinels, to seek some
little corner to shroud it self in.

And your assertion (O Laureat Poets) wherein you affirm, ye Mars the God of
Discord and sower of all Sedition, was borne of Juno without the company of
man, semes to me to bear no small palm. For no offense need be given to
incense them to ire, they are teastie by nature, and have disdain by heart,
without ye instruction of any Schoolemaister. The Bucke is enclosed in the
park, a bridle rules the horse, an hook catches the fish, the Woolfe may be
tied, the Tiger may be tamed, only this is veritable, a Woman is vntamable:
no spur can make her go, no bridle hold her back, no courser sit her,
finally she will never forget injury, nor give thanks for benfites.

Would God that it were constituted for a law in Italy, which was a custom
among the Brackmans, that every Woman which entertained more then one suter in
all her life, should have her body divided and distributed equally to all her
lovers, so should neither sielie suitors be lyrched of their due, nor Woomen so
often have cause to say, full seldom comes the better, they would not seek
further and fare worse, but stay at home and live in security. Yet for thy
sake (Aurelia) I had rather wail mine own want, then wish thee that harm,
and will rather pray for thy speedy repentance, then curse thy disloialtie
that has spilte all my speed.

Sir Meleager adventured to kill a monster for fair Atlantaes sake: but for
thy sake I wish, that either Venus had never been bredde, or that I and my
swath cloutes had been drowned in the billows of Cytharis, from whence she
and her ofspringe is derived.

On me ye swarth Em^es fling the flames you bear: On me (O Hecate) work thy
sorcering tirannies: on me try both your teenes, and for my sake yet spare that
wretch Aurelia.

Thou say (Aurelia) thou will never be at more cost with me. God knows,
thy cost was small, and thy courtesy is less, but though it be some pleasure
to unthankful wightes for to obiecte the good forepassed tournes, yet will I
pretermit to show how chargeable thy service has been to me, and dismiss
thee from such reckoninges. Ah Aurelia, farewell for ever: and I pray God give
thee better speed then thou deseruest, and no worse then I wish thee.

By thine and Fortunes prisoner, Philotimus.


He received no answer of these his letters, neither did he look for any,
but restles flung up and down, neither seeking comfort, nor findinge any,
but in his agony traced from place to place, much like to Bacchus Nuns, or
to Cibeles braine-sicke Nymphs in Ida Mount he ran, resembling those whom
Driades and Faunes do force to fly. But when he saw himself busy bootles,
nothing to prevail, he satte him down, and entered straight to this
consultation.

Forget that pranked paramour pert, and let her go. Forget her Philotimus.
Nay, sooner shall the roaring froathie Seas ymatch the lofty Firmament in
height, and hellish Plutoes feltered den, with starbright heaven shall sooner
coupled be, and shining light with gloomye shades agree, and with the clear
dry day the drearie night conioyne, and smoking stifling scaldinge fire
convert to frostie ysicle snow, ere I forget, whom I have forgone, ah
dearest Aurelia.

And herewithall the tears ran down his cheeks apace. He was daily
troubled with this Quotidian, neither eating nor drinking, nor sleeping, but
fed I think with Aungells food, and by Gods imputation, dispensed for the time
from humaines usual conversation. He spent his time sometime studying how to
recover wealth to win his Lady again, sometimes composing Epitaphes for his
Tomb, thinking he could not long live, sometime in Meeters to praise his
Aurelia, on whom to think it did him good, and sometime in complaining the
frowardnes of his fates, among the rest these few that follow I thought good
to insert.

Who loses Love, and conquers care in lieu,
who pightes his pains, and pines for want of food,
His lossfull lot and crimeles curse I rue,
yet would he view my cause, his case were good.
His hap may be to fancy yet else where,
ah speme spent, my love and I am done.
Or he may drench and die in deep despair,
O that I might for bliss enjoy that boon.
Long have I served, and well deserud some meede,
yet do do I sterue with strife and sternefull nayes,
My constancy was causer of my creed,
that cruelty is cursed, that trust betraies.
A chearles case must needs cause chilling care,
O pale wanhope, when wanton wantes his wish
No dastard to be da^de where dole does dear,
as good to fast as feast where dearth's a dish.
What metal can resist the flaming fire?
no heart I think can hate those crystal eyes,
How can a bounden thrall retire desire?
The Eagles force subdues each bird that flies.
These rimes were made in great agony and anguish. But as every hill has his
dale, every tide his eb, and every tempeste his flawe of fair weather, so
had he some intermission of hi^ sobbinges, though he could not have remission
of all his sorrows. For thus he began to straighten his affections with
reasons rule. Though he were in disgrace with Aurelia, and defaced of all his
friends, yet God would either send remedy, or take him to his mercy. Though
his body nothing proportionable to his valor, were not big enough to beat his
foe Cornelius, yet did he see that the little dapper carcass was the tabernacle
of wit, and the louby bones a tipe of a dullard. Though in the ruin of his
riches he were brought to an exigent, and like to be exiled the precincts of
his country, yet did he reconsolate himself with his readinges and
experimentes, by which he found that Wit commonly wears a wallet at his back,
when Follies robes be veluets, and to this effect did he frame this petty
Pamphlet, whereof here I make illation.

When we have past the day in the Sea with perrill, the night of death does
take us in at the port of health. For who has a pattern or a lease of his
life, or what Obligation in this case may serve, without the performance of
many a condition? As often comes ihe lamb to the market as the elder sheep,
as often blastes the bloome as the riper fruit, and Gods joy in garlands, that
be fresh and green. Then let youth claim no prerogative, where no privilege
is granted, but wish and pray for the coming of his Christ, and watch and
ward that he come not unawares.

I have always thought that the guiltles prisoner with his clogged
conscience, lookinge for nothing but his fatal final sentence at the next gale
delivery, is not so subject to the summons of death, as we that are out of
circuit of such crimes, and free from the sentence of the bloody Judge. This
has ever been mine opinion, preferring the lingering of a certain death,
before ye lasting of an uncertain life.

And of all other, the sharpest wit (says Titleman) has the shortest life.
Because heat, which is the cause of quicknes, having pre-eminence in the
temperature of his body, does eat up the natural moisture which is a
sustenaunce to it, and so having nothing to feed on, burns up the carcass.
The matter of cold hail is thin and warm says Arist: warm water sooner
freezeth then cold lycoure says Velcurie. and I auouche that the hottest
constitution (which by the way, is most pregnant in wit) is the readiest
procurer of cold death. Soon ripe, soon rotten: quickly spent, that's easily
gotten: bauin burns brighte, but it is but a blaze: the flashinge lightening
is gone at a gaze: then this is my verdit. As those abortiui which are borne
before their time, never prove sightly men: so these forward youths (and too
forward says M. Askam) never prove old men.

If any man appose me in what sort of men I deem this passing work of wit,
for my cock, I would choose the little dapper Dick, take Robbin Hood who list,
let me have little John. Be not angry with me if I speak amiss. Aristotle is
my author, and will answer all replies: who making a bypartite division of
all kinds of men in his books of Policy, gives the burly boned bou^sers
(neither good for man nor woman, unless it be to lubber-leape them) the orders
of servitude, and to little timbred fellows (who want in weight, if you poise
them by bodies, but ready in wit, and quick as a Be) the government to rule,
the one appointing what to do, like Master Oiconomus, the goodman of the
house, the other taking aim at his masters mouth to execute his pleasure, So
that the masters: ^ye fattes the horse, though the Groom of the ^^^le give
him prouander.

The same Arist. assertes the most fools to be mos^e boulde and fierce.
Because as gross blood wherewith he aboundes, increases his strength, so it
must necessarily weaken the wit, and make a grossum caput. Contrariwise ye
tender blood, from whence thin rare spirits do breath (as our Philosophers
clepe them) enseebles the body, and kepes it down, whettes the wit and stunts
the stomach.

Folly aduauncing herself in that best book of Erasmus, his Encomion moriae,
and bragging her to be the mistress of al noble exploits, will admit none but
monsters into her muster: small men are scarce sufficient for a foot garrison
to watch the walls, not able to endure one nights cold, without a well
defencing shelter. She leuieth her army of huge boisterous hobs, well be^eming
for their understanders to be the ofspringe of Giauntes, who not only will
courageously forrige upon their enemies, but durst and would for their bigness
and folly, lay a second siedge to the hold of the Gods.

The politic Prince Agamemnon was of a middle pitche, and widly Ulysses of
somewhat less stature, whose words came forth like winter snow, such store he
had, as good Antenor describs him in Homer. Those therefore of hot composition,
and of mean rate in stature, liuelye, neat, and nimble, do, as Virgil
speaks of Bees in the fourth of his Georgickes, within that little corpse of
theirs, right noble stomachs bear.

For though they be not so rash and feareles as they of ye other sort, yet by
reading or reason, experience or policy, they dare in time do as much as
they, and for the others one matter well compassed with success, they will
bring ten thousand to happy end, if luck be aunswerable.

Lycurgus, not one clad with the stuntliest courage of all other, and far
beyond Aereithous in strength (I mean that Aereithous that bare the massy
club, wherewith he fighting got such praise, that he christened himself by
the name of Clubber) slew him tho by sleight, to whom he found himself
inferior in force, and Ereuthalion that mighty champion, was slain by good
foresight of the wi^e Nestor.

I have red that in an old smokie author, which the^ I thought worthy noting,
and here I mean to insert, and this it is in our vulgar tongue. I have seldom
seen a long man wise, or a low man lowly. Now this aspiring haughtines is
vsuallye joined with an excelling wit, whereof it proceeds. For having a sharp
capacity wherein he does most resemble the Gods, he desires to be seated in
some exalted throne, near to the Gods and therefore says one of Alexander, if
he had had a quantity of body, measured out to the quality of his mind, with
the one hand he had caught the East, and with the other he had raught the
West.

I mean not to make an Inuectiue against goodly corporal men, of whom for my
part I think very substancially, nor think not, but that as Aristotle says,
great heads, if they be not too great, have the best capacities, so great men,
if they be not monsters, have no want of wit. For Paulus Eginetus, I remember,
in his first book De medicina says, that a very little head is a certain
sign of a weak judgment, and want in quantity of brain: and I suppose,
that if their frame and match be even and equal, Nanes and Dwarfes must
needs be topped with such heads.

I can use no sharp aunsweres to excuse my self to these huge Polyphems,
neither have I any sound arguments to polishe the praises of such as be of ye
little reasonable sise: but this I can aledg drawn from Natural Philosophy,
yt the wittiest sconce has the greatest inclination to Venerie, wherewith
beginning to dallye too soon, though for a season it help the grouth, yet
does it prevent the natural grouth, and if Apolloes Physic be not wouen with
Apolloes wit, cuttes of the course of his years, before the fates have half
run their date, unless his peragons had the power of Dan Aurora, who
prolonged the youth of her friend Tithonus with supply of her moisture. Yet
this may be his comfort, that though he want Paris his personage, which is
common to many, he may have part of Achilles his prowess, which has
fellowship with few, and be endewed with Ulysses his wit, which I will not say,
is appropriate to himself.

The hills are not fertile, nor the valleys barren. The Sun in the highest
delights in the shadow which is shortest, and nourishes the Tree, whose
root grows deepest, not whose top springs loftiest.

Naythelesse, that seasonable air, and breeding up, and worthy race, may
quallifie a coward with courage, and portcolize ye pate with policy, Ajax
Telamon was wont to say, and I assent. And therefore those 9. worthies of the
Greeks, who at Hectors challenge to combat with any one single man, offered
themselves to wage battle, each of them severally, had not only braund
boisterous bodies, but well bumbast also with acute policy,

I dare not be too vehement against these champions, because as they be fools,
so commonly they be fortunate, whereas the other sort their co^riualls in the
former comparison, are God knows, more lofty then luckie. Which how it
comes to pass I know not, but that we see ragged walls have painted clothes,
when sound marble is naked: a crooked back must have a bumbast dublet, when a
straight body wears no such bolsteringes: that ill woods grow apace, when
good herbs sproute at ease: and that Nick Noddie has the luck, when
Welladay Wit lives in lack.

Bellerophon, whose shape, wit, and mind, were more meet for a demi God, then
for a mortlinge, whose semine race, and patrie breed, foreheld deaurate
scepters in Ephyra of Argos I Will, with how many forraies of enemies was he
afronted, and worse the^ any driuill assailed with azerd steel, to reaue his
life by stealth? What monsters had he ministered to be his combatantes? What
veins of lanes enforced to threede, but that God whom he implored to be his
gardaine, renforced him with armipotente and impugnable mart, to bring the
palm away, and prove them dastard parnels? He spending his young years with a
King in Graece ye hight Proetus, had caught (not cautele of it) in his love,
the Queen Andia, to whose disloialtie because he would not consent, she bare
her husband in hand, that he sought her dishonor, and besought him to reueng
it with austeritie of punishment. Proetus would not murder him in hugger
mugger in his own house, but forged letters of guile, wherewith he sent
Bellerophon to his Father in law King Rheon, the Lycian prince, with this
tenure, to reiourne the bearers return from time to time, and by some occasion
to put him to death. Rheon to give good enterteinment to his son in laws
entreatie, inioynes this Bellerophon to slay the dire monster Chimere, a
ghastfull thing, and for no man to do, as he supposde. The head and breast of
him were like a Lion, the middle like a goat, behind like a Dragon, and his
breathinges terrible flames: him, after much tiring toil, Bellerophon slew.
That done the Solymes down he hackt. Then the King appointed him to try with
many an Amazon: but still he was so steeld with hardy heart, that he laid the
life of these Amazons in morgage with Pluto, for his favor at such atttempts.
At length, to make a sure end of him, Rheon provided an ambushment of the
Lycians to set upon him hard by a fountains side, yet all this packed crew
Bellerophon murdered. With these dangers vndeseruedlye was noble Bellerophon
distress, though at length it pleased the Gods to innoble his innocence, and
the foresaid king to mount his credit.

This story of Bellerophon I thought meet to restore you, being once before
recited by Homer, because if Pegasus, the flying horse of Fame were alive
again, he could not be better busied, then to carry his renown through the
whole world* such store make I of it.

I could make you an inuentory of ten thousand more, that deserving well, were
meeded as ill, and fill a Pedlers pack with my rehearsalls, but this may
suffice for the drift of my declaration, and enough they say, is as good as a
feast.

And for the party opposite how well fools can fadge, I need but relate a
short alligation.

The cockscombe Phrixus is said to ride in the Sea upon a golden Ram: the
interpretation of which Embleame is, that he had all things ^t will that are
in the world. A doltishe Ass, and sibles stranger, enjoyed rich Phenops
wealth, the heritage of whose twain and only sonns, Thoon and Zanthus, was
intercepted by slaughter. Megeros the noddie had gathered an hutch full of
gold, when his elder brother a learned Phtlosopher, was urged to beg.

The compiling of this small volume, Philotimus thought some comfort to
himself, and would sometimes read it to help to rid his melancholye. But
now by Philotimus his favor, I must borrow a little leave to bestow on his
adversary Cornelius.

I will you to wit, that this Cornelius had been a long lover of one Laida, a
gallant courtly Gentlewoman, and one of Aureliaes fellows. This Laida (saving
Aurelia) was compere in heau- to any in the Court, and (saving brave Aurelia)
was fancied of Cornelius more then all other. On the other side, she by
disposition was very light, and therefore soon enamoured of his gracious
personage, covetous of coigne (as most women be) and therefore condiscended to
depose to all his interrogatories. Finally she see him more then her match in
any thing (except a little pelting wit) and therefore yielded to be his mate in
every thing, I except not bed pleasure.

This she did under guarde of his oath, which promised that in time convenient,
bridal banes should make amends for all: but when she see him started from
his hearts foredelight, and such a block as Aurelia laid to stumble at, that
never thought one straw would lie in her way, she set the hares head to the
goose giblings, and Spanyerdlike was as careless as he: marry she meant not to
hurt herself with keeping her choler close, but sent it wrapped in a scroull to
be an eyesore to him.

Laida to Cornelius.
Were ye so hot in my sacred service, that now you ar fled for holy religion?
Adieu sir Duns, a botch on your britch, God keep you from sickness, till sores
have consumed you.

When I got you, I gaind a flatterer, when I lost you, I f^^n a flincher, what
have I gaind, or what have I lost, judge you.

I know not whether is better to wail my good weal, that I received
unwillingly of a frantic foe, or smile at his sottishnes, embracing hardhap,
which gives him a serpent, and tells him its fish. Yet can I not choose but
weep, with an onion in mine eye, and an apple in my mouth, and better do I
think it to weep out mine eyes, never to see ye like caytiff again, then
laugh out my spene at his fickle folly, and hurt my self with extremetie of
passion.

Hey ho for Lucius, my mind is all on Fabian, Lysiteles is mine only joy,
Dinarchus want does make me moan. She is scarcely weather wise, that knows not
how usually the wind does chau^g, from East to West, from North to South: but
she is far less worldly wise, that stores not a choice for every change.

He that rides with one girth, may fear to be unhorsed, and she that feeds on
one friend, deserves to live with leauinges.

I grant by my folly I was inueigled with deceit, and hope that by patience,
I shall be comforted in distres.

The loss of hope abridgeth lamentation, and light belief has commonly
light love.

Thou art more meet for a widows joy, which lastes but a moment, then fit to
be a maidens phear, whose faith outlastes the heavens in durance.

I have been so undermined and countermined by thy overthwart ways, that
Theseus was not more glad of his deliuerye out of the Laborinth, then I reioise
to be freed of thy leasing forgeries. When my offense shall come to scanninge,
which has alienated thee so sodeinly from me, thou will be found as
fantastical as Nausicles a Merchant in Naucratia, which being in love with
Arsinoe, and often gratulated with her company, began in process to loath his
Arsinoe, because, when she sunge at his entreaty, her cheeks swelled, and her
eyes stared: or like ye Wife, which seeing one behave himself valiantlye in a
Tournement, fell in love with him, but when he put up his Beauer to take the
air, and the Woman coming apace to see him, perceived yt was her Husband,
she made a mock at the matter, and cared not for him.

Pray therefore for thy self, and so would I do for thee (although thou not
deserve it) but that the Gods would be offended to pray for so wicked a
perjured reprobate, that the reckoning of thy new hostess, be not rackt to a
more unreasonable rate, then was Aristippus his the Athenians, which by the
mischievous means of his second marriage was banished his country, and his
goodds confiscate. But like will to like, says the old proverb, a flinching
fool, to a fleeting flatterer, and this is true, and trusted of old, ye ever
a slouing, slim slam sibi quaerit.

I have been more liberal to thee of my maidenlye store, then now I am proud
on, and I fear thou art more prodigal in blabbing it out, then thou have
thank for: yet good beast, do not boast of thy shameful gettinge, for I gave
thee that, which then I had not, and thou receiuedst ye, which thou tookst not.

I know what I write, when I indite of thy knavery, and thou can level at my
meaning, by the aim of thy subteltye.

Surely there has happened a prodigious wonder in thy love: for whiles thou
louedst me, there was neither Winter, nor Summer, nor Spring, nor Harvest. Thou
did love me from midday till hye noone.

Yet I nothing marvel at it. For I never knew Capon yet love Hen: neither am
I ignorant, why your paramour is so passionate over you, she does it not I
warrant you, without consideration: for her ship being fraught, she may take a
passenger, and her belly being sped, take thee for advantage.

I see (Cornelius) that thou art one of those, that will run vii. miles to
kiss the stake a smock hung on, though thou haste more work at home, then
such a tinker as thou, can well botche

I was a threede too course for your spinning, for so you make semblaunce: yet
if your wheel had been steadfast and not casten the band, my web had been
fine inoughe for your slouenlye wear.

Mustard and pepper received into the stomach, hurt nothing at all, but being
applied to the outside of the skin, do blister and inflame. If any trespass I
have committed against thee, had come from inward malice, thou had been
excusable, but being so superficial, or not at all faulty, yt does quite
condemn thee.

Although the fixed stars should sooner fleet, then I would swear and
swerue, yet my reason being at liberty, teaches patience in adversity. The
same Jove which gives the Sun his splendent globe, has given the Moon, all
as he would, her horned head, yet as the Moon, by how much the more she is
distant from the Sun, by so much the brighter is illuminated: So, the
further I am dissociated from thee, the fitter shall I be to dissolve all
follies.

Farewell, and choke of it: for I never knew Rouer of any continuance, but at
length he rushed against the rocks, and so I trust will thou. And as Juno for
spite turning Parrhasis into a Bear, was the cause, that Jove for amends,
exalted her to be a neighbor star to the Northren poale: so the inckling of
this thy fact, will make my life exact, and esteemed among thy betters. I
commend me to thy cogginges, and salute thy ingratitude with an vnhartie
greeting.

Golden loookes are painted hooks. Beware.

Laida, once thine, and now her own.


These letters were as welcome to Cornelius, as a storm of wind to the month
of March. For this he looked and longed for, to be so lightly forsaken.
Immediately he resente an awnswere, which I imagine was of his writing, and
Aureliaes enditing. For when his apparel was of his back, all his wit was
dear of twopence.

Cornelius to Laida.
MY Lady, sweet Beauty, Sluts whelpe and her darlinge, I g^ete you well. I
received your letters the first day of my malice, dated the eightenth year of
the migne of a should.

When I had red thy ramping style, I feared thou were giddy, or in some
frantic ecstasy, and then I recald my thanckles fear, and hopt that thou
were even so indeeed.

Thou art like Menechmus Subreptus his wife, who thinking an other had been her
husband for their like resemblance, falsely burdened him with her husbands
knauerie: and I, because I am like my self, am slaunderouslye impeached of
inconstancy. As the bragging ostentation, of thy accusation, seems to
importe, I now am an other then I was before. For then I was reputed of
sufficient honesty, and now am descried of much cogging varletrie, so that my
good manners are grown out of fashion, and men's good opinion turned to
despair. If I am not as I was, as you say I am not, but straungely changed,
I cannot tell how, then praise Cornelius, whose credit is current, and blame me
no whit, for I am not the same.

Thy canckred rancour shows how far unfit thou art to have a loving spouse,
and thy hasty teatishnes, grounded only on suspicion, bewraies thy starting
fancy for every jealous freake.

Thy husband shall not need to be Justice of peace, for his wife will have a
charter to make her Justice of coram. If he punish others, and examine them of
wrongs, thou will school him, and ask him accountes. I was glad when I see
thy vproring brawlinges, that then my being was out of thy reach: else either
had I got an odious conquest, in giving a woman the overthrow, or else had
suffered a shameful conflicte, in taking of her the Bastinado. Have thou not
heard of biblinge Phiale, Dianaes Nymph? her in all points art thou like.

But could I depart from her, who has (ah) loved me from the beginning, and
who nouer meant but continue to the end? I dare say (Laida) thou louedst me
well. Well quoth I? Yea and so well, that thou could have wished with all thy
heart, a pair of pinsons of my hyde: you are a sweet nut, the Devil crack
you.

I had no cause to doubt thy flinching: for whithersoeuer I had gone abroad, I
might have carried thee in my cap.

Thou know (Laida) that the lees and dreggs of wine draw always to the
bottom: yet if honey be put into a wine vessel, the lees as ouercomen with
the honey, rise up to the top, and the honey takes their place: even so, thou,
which in foretime have enjoyed the deepest part of my heart, though thou were
as sour as lees, as soon as the honnie Aurelia, exhibites herself, must by
necessity brook to yield thy self. Lay the Crystal stone against the Sun,
and put any thing nigh it that is combustible, and incontinently it is set on
fire: such is the potence of Aureliaes virtue, that whomsoever it approaches,
immediately it inflams him. He that sees such a game before his eyes, and will
not let thee slip, has small skill in hunting.

As for me, I am not without the stone Tabrices, a stone, whose color is
consonant to the Crystal, which Euax and Aaron, and the old Philosophers say,
gives favor, eloquence, and honor, to them that use to bear it about.

Small drink seems stronger to one that is fasting, then to one that is full:
so Laida, every sip of thee seemed to be sauced with a pound of sugar, till I
had tasted of Aureliaes banquet, and then it seemed to have neither taste nor
relish. And no wonder, though thy sweetenes be so soon sowred. For sweet
milk, and sweet blood, and other sweet things, are soon altered in
concoction, and when the stomach assayeth to digest them and can not, then
turn they immediately to be sowred: Even so, thou: But apply this parable to
thy self, I have no leisure to intend thee from Aureliaes business, and any
time is lost that is lent a thankles person.

To wind up all in a short conclusion, this thou haste heard, ye hot wines
ingendex cold diseases: and this I tell thee, that my scalding love is turned
to cooling hate.

They aee evil horsed, and worse wiued, that ride on coltes, and marry young
giglittes: both these I will avoid as nere as I may.

Neither thine, nor his own, Cornelius.


To avoid all tedious prolixitie, because many more things will occur to be
spoken on, know you, that Cornelius and Laida, ever after this lived as
denounced enemies, sildome meetinge, but he with powting, and she with
flowting, incensed many a knarrie jar

But poor Philotimus he was tried with alll tribulations, he was abused of
every refuce rascal. Cornelius and Aurelia to excuse themselves, accused him
of trecheries, of coosenage, of every villainy that may be named, which the
rather was believed, because he now was fallen to poverty, and so constrained
to live hardly. His creditors were most of them such, as had wasted ye
revenues of his lands, and now were most importunate for the discharge of
his debtes. Philotimus did often send Cornelius his daring challenge (though
his strength were far inferior) to meet him in any convenient place, which
the coward would not be brought to do.

Thus loaded with more grief, then can be borne with Geometry (whereon the
body of man does hang) and sendinge out more sighs, then can be numbered by
Ciphers, or told by Arithmeticke (wherein man's Soul consistes) the poor
forlorn Gentleman entered his chamber, where shutting the door, he closely
with himself debated his distres in this sort.

Ah Philotimus, thou wretched wighte Philotimus, that can neither live with
credit, nor die with honor, cursed be the hour wherein thou wast got, a
cloud dim that day wherein thou wast borne, damned be the parents that
brought thee to light, and whelmd be the World with fire and brimstone, that
with rebellious insurrections, and inordinate commotions, all and every one
have conspired my decay.

Am I that Philotimus, whose bare word was wont to be of more weight, then
ten thousand pounds of some man's money, and now am called in question of petty
shameless coosenage, which (O Lord) thou know how much I abhor? Am I that
Philotimus, whom all my friends have ye best flower in their garla^d, and now
am cast out for a rotten stinking weed, trod under foot of every
passenger? O Lord save my credit from shipwreck, and bring it to safe harbor,
where taken as a wrecke of ye Sea by way of escheate, in time it may be known
how unspotted it is. Thou haste all men's hearts in thy hands to dispose at
thy pleasure, forget my transgressions, mortify my affections, and renew
their good opinions, who now despair of me.

What is becomd of him, that sometime was the Gem of all ye Jewels in Athens,
then praised of all, to encourage him to virtue, now prased for of some, to
restrain him from vice? Is he not now thought a sensual reprobate, deuorced
from all piety, lulde in security, given up of God to his palpable lusts,
with the bitt in his teeth to flinge where he list, like an harbourcles
vacabond, or a brother of Caine?

My long acquainted friends, combined to me with egall faith, why fly ye touch,
why start ye from me? If I have taken stand, why cast ye not forth your wonted
lures? Or if as yet I be not well mande, why make ye no labor to reclaim me
from haggardnes? Arraigne me at the bar of Seurre judgment, exaggerate my
crimes with amplification, impannell an inqueste of Russet coat Robbins, let
Cautle Subteltie be the foreman, and Summum^ius the Judge, and Cuthbert the
cutthroat commense his action, what amercement or penalty can they assign
me, or wherein can they say I have offended, that should alienate any man
from former liking? Indeed I have wastfully spente (more caytiffe I) the
surrender of my fathers lands, and run my self into desperate debtes, and now
in steed of blew coats to wait at my table, have a couple of Sergeants to
attend me through ye streets, that I slip not the collar. But of what sparkles
did this heat glow, or from whence did these exspences take their Exordium? to
glut mine own insatiable appetites, or to feed the ve^ues of foisting mates,
who never held out fiste while I had a groate, that they pulled it in empty,
and now not only all of them have abandoned my company, but some that have
soaken many an angel out of my bag, if they reckon but two pence that I
borrowed ^t theirs, are ready to send out process to attache my body?

True is the Proverb, save a Thief from the gallows and he will be the
first shall do thee a mischief. I have clothed these ragamuffins, I have
fed these clammed michers, I have been their harbinger, when they had not a
cave to couche their cockscombes in. I thought their boulstered names had
stuff to show, ye praise did hight. I raisde a star whereto direct my course,
in whose prospect my tackle faild, my compass brake. I threshed for corn, and
all is turned to chafe.

O that I had either been Zopyrus, to have disciphered their falshoode by
Phisiognomye, or they had been such as Socrates, to have changed their
crooked natures by education. I have red that if Basil be put ^ouertlie
underneath the dish where a woman should eat, her queaste stomach straightway
lothes it. O that I had such a virtue to have stayed my friends falsehood. But
letters that are made of the powder of Rochalum, can not be red but in clear
water, and those that pack their cogging in a cloak of dissembling, cannot be
descried but by a wary forwatch. Adrianus painted grapes so artificially, that
birds pecked at them, neither could any descerne them, but with diligent
marking. The Hollin tree bears bark, and berries, the one kills birds, the
other feeds them: and such fellows bear aungells in their faces, and devils
in their devises, the one enticeth good natures to follow them, ye other
entangles them in their deceites.

Because I have dug mine own ground, till I come at the clay, and now ask
some licour at my neighbors Well, they not only deny me with a snub, but
out of my hearing r^^ile without cause, and make ladders on my back for
Slander to climb on.

Erect your Trophies (Captains) you have got a goodly conquest, and gained
knighthood this day, by bringing a sackles soul into a fools paradise, as
Clytus taking three or four ships, called himself Neptune. When a man's
hose be down, it is easy to kiss him where he sat on Saturday. Your scoffs
be out of season, far from the documents of Euangelical Gospellers, which
preach both in season and out of season, but taking an holier text then any of
you, and affoording a little more profitable notes.

Hanno with durable pains, taught birds which he pent in a cage, in time to
cry Deus est Hanno, Hanno is a God, and you with crafty forged dealing, have
(ah Craft) made the common sort extol you to the skies. Because you would
cast of the yoke that is laid on your neekes to be the means of my ruin, you
bear them in hand when you are in corners, that as the Salamander is cause of
her own death, by spirtinge out the fire which does nourish her: so I with
prodigal expenses, not procurd bp any of you, have ruinated my state, and
brought it to this stay: and therefore have I foultred, because I followed not
you.

Woe to the Geese that have the Fox for their priest, ay for the Lambs that
are nursed of the Wolf, in the ditch falls the blind that is led by the blind.
It is hard to draw water in a dry soil, or fish out skill from an empty
ponde. As to be heard where ears are none, or Lead to be graven in Marble
stone, so hard it is to hear counsel of you, which may accord with any good.

Good souls, you have nothing within, but gutts and garbage, neither heart,
nor liver, nor any good entrails. Go sleep in a Trunk with Clearchus, catch
flies all day with Domitianus, or go to the plough with ye Aracosians. You may
sooner be Doctors at Dawes cross, then Sergeantes of the Quoife, and commense
Coridons with your clownish conditions, chen be created Counselors for your
policy which is none.

Well, the time which was, will be (says Plato) where he speaks of hi^ great
year, and I my self hope for a year of Iubile. The Sun which falls in the
West with Eclipse of his light, rises in the East with his fiery garland: high
springes may cease from swelling, but never dry away. In the mean time though
they speak me as fair, as Judas did Christ the same night that he betrayed
him, can a Gentleman's courage put up this injury? Shall they spurn and I not
kick? I will use mean and maine, sack their souls, and ransack their
dwellinges, and send them vengeance with advantage, I will assail to scale
their fort, or else will smell of smoke. The banks will undermine, if the Sea
flow not over, and if my fury have no vent, my heart will cleave asunder.

Nay, since they say what they list, they shall hear what they list not.
Though I be an Ass, and borne to bear, yet they shall snaffle my tongue to
wrappe it up in silence. Thy tongue Philotimus? A goose gagles, and an hen
cackles, and will thou gain the game with tatling?

No, send them thy gauntlet, challenge the combat, wage battle, match their
malice, Innocence bears a shield to break their blows. Pursue the
fugitives, make havoc of them, hail them by the hairie scalpes up and down
the streets, chop them as small as flesh to pot, let not a parcel of their
memory remain by the remnaunt of their ashes.

O Philotimus, thou have eaten bulbeefe, and braggest highly: you touchest
near, but draws no blood. Every hooked nose is not a conqueror: few cursed
kine have long horns. Where be thy burgonie, thy beauer* thy collar, thy
corslet, thy powldringes, thy tasies, thy vollie of shot, thy planted
ordinance, thy casted mounts, with all thy garrison of well araied soldiers?
A rustie rapier is no trusty rampire. It is not a sharp sound, that proves a
full battle. A Caesar's mind, and a Codrus might, can never agree.

Tush, thou art like a Thief, that thinks every Tree a true-man. Thou may
as well be feareles, as he that holds ye wolf by the ears: new wine will
seaech to find a vent, and wit will walk where will is bent: when the wind
is not in a good coast, we must ship our ^ares and further our course: venture
and conquer. Have thou never a knacke in thy so^s head, never a shifting shoo
of an Irish Hobbie? Can thou not feign a hot mouth, when thou have a cold
maw, sound the trumpet of great friendship, and then begin the skirmishe with a
false alarm? If thou can not compass thy whole desire, be content with
that which may come to pass, flatter for advantage, and be not ashamed (quoth
Phormio) in Terence. Go burning sighs unto their frozen hearts, go break
the yse with pitties painful darts: and when they are within thy reach, give
them the cup of bitter sweet, to pledge their mortal foe.

Then may thou chaunt thy cheerful chance, but interim, thou chats about
mooneshine in the water. Thou shalt as soon make music with a puddinge and a
capcase, as a current gloze of this device. Climb the Sun by the beams, and
any thing thou say, begin to assay it.

Alas, what helps the dial the blind, the clock the deaf, or wit him that
wantes opportunity? they hate thee, and shun thee, and will not now hear of
thee. Though the Mariner have cunning to govern ye vessel, it lies not in his
skill to calm the Seas. It is enough to point to the straw where the pad
lurkes. The smell of the Radish killes the Serpent, and therefore they avoid
it: The smell of burnt Penniriall kills fleas, and therefore they cannot abide
it: And they, because they know thy craft, will beware of thy trains. Onions
and Garlic sown near Roses, though they touch them not, draw all the gross
and sour moisture into themselves: and though at this time they are not in
thy bosom, yet have they the Art optic to search out thy drifts. They will
know thy visage by thy vizarde, thy pretended subteltie by thy counterfeit
simplicity.

Well then, since this is a sauce too sharp for thy diet, and these be herbs
too strong for thy nose, leave of this Phrygian melody that incenseth to
battle, and take the Aeolian harmony, which appeaseth the tempest ot the
troubled mind. Thy taint is past anointing, thy burnt is past balming, no
remedy remains, but death must be surgeon of thy sore. Come death, and throw
thy pearcing dart into my panting breast: Death is a port, whereby we pass to
joy: life is a lake that drowneth all in pain. A chief relief to conquered
men is desperately to die. Adieu delights that lulled me asleep: farewell my
joys, and dulced bed of rest: sweet were the joys that would both like and
last: strau^g were the state exempt from all distres.

Happy was I (that was a woeful word to saine) ah happy was I, that now am
most miser. No miser Philotime, wast thou ever in thy life, and that at this
time makes the most miserable. The stricken Dear withdrawes himself to die,
and so will I. Brutus will first choose to make a Cutlers shop of his own
bellye, with his own hands, before he will fawn for his enemies favor: Lucrece
receiving a private skar, would never live with open scorn: let these be
preparatiues to thy speedy dispatch. Do thou not remember them, that hearing
Platoes Phaedon of the souls immortality, cast themselves headlong into the
Sea, to rid them of their lives, and enjoy the souls pleasure?

Auaunt Satan, thou preuailest not. Though thou set me upon a pinnacle, and
offer all the kingdoms that are in the world, thou loosest thy labor: my God
will defend me from this extremetie. Shall I pull down this bodily building,
that his Fatherly providence has erected to his own similitude? No (says
Plato) and he after Plato, in his book entitled Scipioes dream, A prisoner
committed to ward by commandment, may not shake of his shackles when he
list, nor come out of prison but by authority. Since his Godhead has bestowed
this corporal mancion on a sinful wretch, and framed me likewise after his
caracter, I will not dissolve it as though I mislikt it, but continue his
goodness with thanksgeuing.

Aristotle ouercharging his fantasy, with too subtle a search beyond his
wits reach, did himself to die, to his own conde^natio^ and hinderaunce of
us* Judas and Saul may terrify and edify, judging themselves by their own
censures, and warning us all to fear, but with faith. No violence is
permanent, and Opinion is sometime of impossibilities: the one may persuade us
that the other slakes grief, but the other deceiving with deluding
contrariety, shortly returns to his former recourse. The corruption of one, is
the generation of an another. Our misery in mortallitie, which is but
momentany, be it dispossessed without Gods appointment, newly begets, and
renewes a fresh, a never parting pains in the life to come.

Then let inward spirit better outward speech (as Alcibiades speaks of
Socrates in Platoes symposium:) there meaning to commend his master Socrates,
he compares him to Syleni, as they sat in the Ingrauers shops: for without
they were ingraued with pipes and instruments, but being ripped and opened, they
had the Images of Gods. Ulysses could forbear his maids choakinge checkes for
a certain proof of suspected probabilities: Etrascus loving thirty years,
could not atchieue his hearts desired choice, yet at ye end, found reward of his
mistress. Achilles for a time fair Brysi^s did forgo, and yet they met again,
the^ think you may do so: the Lord may restore thee to former state, the^
first seek his kingdom, and all shall be ministered. If he have given thee a
bill of diuorcement, never to join issue with wealth nor pleasure, he requires
no more service but prayer for patience, and constancy in this service, till
thy Audit day in heaven.

It may be, he has brought thee trom bench to bar, to plead for thy safety
with care and sobriety, least being exalted to sit on the bench, thou had
judged thy self with dissolute haughtines. As ye yongman Tuscus, by Petrarches
report, seeing his feature, as it were a lawnd for beawties bloudhounds there to
draw, which was perilous for his credit, and dangerous for their safety,
thinking rather to make grief of his gain, the^ that should hurt any which
could help none, all to gashed his face with voluntary knockes, to deforme
himself, and defraude them.

Far therefore be that from me, which Epiucrus thinks in Tullies books of the
nature of the Gods, that nothing is governed by the providence of God, because
says he, those yt be immortal, take no pains, but being idle and vacant,
trouble not themselves with any manner meddling. No, not a leaf falls to the
ground without Gods good leave. Therefore let every part either in Commodie
or Tragedy be willingly played, as he shall assign.

Ah doting Dido, sie pholishe Phillis, unfortunate Camma, misborne Medea, more
cruel then Atropos, to untwine your fatal threedes. What mente ye to
disinherit your lawful tenauntes for term of naturalll life (your bodies I
mean) more easelie disioynde, then knitt together, as Cato says in Tullies
Oldage? Though every one of you had silver feet, as Philostratus in Heroicis
reports of Thetydes in these words Guropes a thetis: Though you had such
grace in your eyes, as Homer reports of Juno: Though you had Jove's hair,
which he speaks on in his first Ilias: or brave Achilles his, when Pallas
coming down from Heaven at Iunoes request, pulde him backwarde by the golden
hair, which Homer calls Zanthen comen. Yet if a man should make Epigrams on
your best virtues, your praises would be as mean, as Euphorbus his the
Trojans* which Homer did give him when he was a dying, in whom he bewailed
nothing but his fair ruff of hair.

Well then, though I am loath to unload my deeringe cares to my dearest
friends, and bewray all my wantes whereof I am ashamed, yet it is virtues lore
to seek means to live, and war^e ventering shall give the onset. I will write
to Aemilius, our au^cie^t friendship is yet but memorable, and my good welfare
to him is estimable, he is my best friend, and my best belouing brother, and
therefore I know he will give me assistaunce.

Then taking pen in hand, in which for fear ye ynke did seem to freeze, for
that he blushed, and was abasht to beg, he wrtt to his brother of all his
distresses, contriuing his Arguments into these two heads: That for the
indissoluble bond of their sacred sworn friendship, and natural regard of their
near alliance, he hopte without pausing he would send him purueyaunce, and
renew ye state of his passed life with the imparture of his new relief.

His page Parmenio, which never departed from him, was the carrier of these
letters, and for want of an horse poasted on foot. M. Aemilius was aghast at
the tenure of these letters, and half and more ashamed to retain such a
guest, and so far he was from ayding his ill apaide brother, that he charged
Fuluia his Wife, and Philotimus his only sister, not to meddle with Philotimus.

Nay (quoth he) the Crow that has no care of her own birds, will not tender
the nestlinges of blackebirdes: the Be that cannot feed of the sweet of the
honysuckle, will hardly make honye of the juice of the Thistle: he that sees
not his blemishes in a Crystal glass, will not blot them out by looking in
black marble: when hemp will not spring in a fertile ground never tilled, it
will not grow and flourish in a dried heath: since he could not keep pace, when
his legs were lithe and leenie, and his horse and footecloth at his command,
how can he outrun his fellows, when his limbs are all lamed, though you lend
him a crutch to lean upon? His answer he returned in this order.

Aemilius to the luckles Philotimus.
Poor soul Philotimus, God send thee more wit then thou use in begging,
and to bag better alms, then thou gettest by bragging: but he that spendes
all, deserves the like blanke, and a proud hearted beggar, has sildome proved
better. Whilst you study on the stars with lofty looks, and scale the
skies with taratant terms, you stumble at a straw for want of good footing,
and diue in the ditche, where I fear you stick fast. Had you craved my help
with humiliate submission, it had caused your health, and medcined your moning:
But you entreat me not, as I am your better, but charge me with duty,
because I am your brother. It follows as well of our fraternity, that I
disburse money to acquit you of debt, as that Arthemioes nurses son should
succeed in the Argiues kingdom, because he sucked ye same milk that Arthemio
did, who deceased intestate without an heir apparaunt. Neither consanguinitie
of brotherhood, nor aunciety of acquaintance, shall seduce me from my
caueates, or reduce me to your cautels. For friendship has no form, when his
matter is perished (which is honesty) and brothers have freewil, not custom
to constreyne them. By the same steps you came to beggerie, return till you
come to your mineral of riches, and when you amend, I will chaung my mind.
Farewell.

Your friend that was willingly, and unwillingly is your brother, Aemilius.


These were tidinges vnbethought on of Philotimus, no sooner heard, but taken
to heart. Yet though his best joint were ^rased, he would not for choler
deface his other members: though his likliest graft did bear no fruit, he did
not condemn and contemn all his plants: though in the fairest goblet he had
found poison, he would not refuse to drink in a meaner piece: imitating Hylus
ye Persian, who defrauded of his Lordships, by his nearest friends, used the
means of alians to obtain a kingdom.

Philotimus then having recordation of an old companion of his in the Court,
who friendly had professed much, and was proficient in nothing (as occasion
gave proof) thought, that since there was one ace left that might do him
good (though he had mist of that cast, which might have won the game without
co^tradiction) to try the dice, which never were constant, and consequently
with confidence setting pen to paper, writ these few lines.

Philotimus to his friend Erogazus.
GOod friend Erogazus, health to thy person, and wealth to thy friends. O
Erogazus, I now must write thee woonders, and crave thee for my Sanctuary. My
plenty has bred me poverty: my fair and sunnie downye day, has all beburnt
my hew: my strength has given me a fall, much like Narcissus fate, whose
too much beauty was a bait, to catch him in the brook. My wealth was
weary of his welfare, and never deignde to wowe that Lady Wit, till Woe
entistte it neither to despise nor spite her hestes. I am now more vncouthly
transmuted, from my ancient state, then he who with looking on Mineruaes
naked side, did loose his shape, and was transformed to a Beast.

The blind Poliphemus did not more mournfully and wastfully cry unto his loved
fair Calatea, then I a poor blind forlorn Gentleman both of friends and
affection, do with dole and despair, call till I cough, but without an
answer, to my Lady Aurelia.

Aurelia (dear friend) has forsaken Philotimus. But why? God knows, not I,
except it be for this, to make me a pattern to my peers, of fortunes frailnes
and beauties lightness, and herself a sampler to light huswiues, of love for
living, and inconstancy in love.

My creditors were not so ready to lend me money, as they are unreasonable
for a sudden dischardge: in this resemblinge the Epycures stomachs, who
having a great Service brought to the table at once, would not eat any meat
but having every (...) brought seuerallye by it self, like inglun^ous
corm^rauntes gu^d up all: so they in my time of harvest would ^^k me no co^^e,
but in the depth of winter, will needs have a crop.

My lands are morgaged, my demanes leased, my apparel pawnd, nothing wanting
in me to the accomplishment of all misery, but that I wear no gives, with
which they think to gin me: for my chamber is a prison, and I pend up in it,
out of which I dare not look, least some evil eye look on me.

My solace in this agony is too sorrowful to recite, and my pleasures want a
name, unless Pain be their nickname. My Lute lies mute, my Cytharin sad,
my Virginalls (whose quauering notes Aurelia often has caused) being bereft of
her that was a virgin saint as they thought, are iarring out of tune. If
Thales (who with music cured the sick of the plague) or Zenocrates (who with
melody helped frantic lunatickes) should make me harmony, I should rather
think the Gods had sent me this joy for my further pains, then take delighte
of their lays with my discordant ears: so often have the Gods deluded me with
doatinge, so disturbed is my mind with disordinate carkinge.

In this extremetie, I crave thy help to appease my creditors, and ease my
pains: and though my ability be skant to counteruaile your cost, yet
inconstant fortune will once batter for better, and then a grateful mind shall
requite with double guerdon. I am not ignorant, how little thou owe me, nor so
impudent to demand ought of duty: yet must I commit an inconvenience, to
prevent a mischief, and for ancient benevolence, crave your benificence. Few
words may suffice a willing mind, and one syllable is too much for an
unwilling miser. Farewell (good Erogasus) on whom only I cast the ancker of
my care. I expecte thy speedy answer, and hope for present help.


What entertainment these letters of entreatie had, you may judge by Erogazus
his awnswere, which follows.

Erogazus to Philotimus.
THe malignant nature of thy entice malady, does notify the danger of thy
disease, and warnes us to decline his perilous contagions. The infected of the
plague, do naturally covet to contaminate others: the Drone deprived of his
wings, does seek to clippe the Bees of theirs: when the Raven feels herself
draw near to death, she kills her yongones to lead the dance: and I suppo^e
(Philotimus) thou think it a comfort in thy misery, to have a companion in
extremity.

If one trea^ bar-footed on the bird Drymus, forthwith his skin comes of, and
his legs swell, and they also that handle him which is hurt, lose their skin:
the crystal waves that beats against the muddie rock, do purge the rock,
but do pollute themselves with filth. Alphenor offering to rescue Phedimus and
Tantalus ystrick with pearcing shaft yfere, and lying groueling on ye ground,
was gride himself through bulcke, with dint of deadlye dart: your part must be
minsed by these comparisons, and your festered wounds you wish me swadle up,
must seek another surgeon, or remain without remedy.

Though the River Peneon run in the Lake Titaresis, yet is it never mi^ed with
it: though for old acquaintance sake I can take pains to see you brought to
the gallows, I mean to be no partner of your ha^ter.

As the Colt will not be brideled, so the Ass must be spurred: as no rule
could rain you, whiles you were in your huffe: so skant must tame you, when
you are in your need.

To beg, is no way to get my friendship. If you will keep friends, you must put in
practice this old delectorie. Give, take, seek, all things, few things,
nothing, else you may put your flock in ye common, but it shall hardly find a
shepherd, and seek for an alms, but find Gods seath For proof whereof,
because you shall believe me, I my self will be as provident to keep my right, as
you were nothing wise to demand without reason. Farewell good Philotimus, I
have not for you.

Yours if he might, Erogazus.


When Pilotimus, had red these letters, ah wretch (quoth he) that have no end
of thy goods, nor beginning of goodness, no cause to spend thy money on thy
self, nor honesty to lend it to thy friends, that had rather reserve thy
coin to a needeles use, then deserve well of others, with parting from a
penny: the mothes eat thy money, the worms wroot thee out, and utter decay
be both your destinies. Now when he see no truth, neither in lover, nor
brother, nor friend, divided as it were into choler and grief, he writ this
Pamphlet following.

Mihi creed, credendum nemini.
HE whose trust has wrought him treason, which treason causeles, has brought
him misery, warns all good natures to beware by his folly, and gives the^ this
pamphlet for a friendly caveat.

Vouchsafe to read it, though you ride him that made it, and if (as I wish)
it be to your benefit, (which shall be my comfort) let it not miss to be my
bale, which is my custom.

Rifle it to the bottom, though it be but a trifle, fools bables may serve to
make wisemen sport: search it to the sinews, and try out his entrails, though
his stature be small, his heart may be big: leave what you like not, and believe
what you list, you have scope to escape harmles: It is my theames bidding to be
dainty in choosing, respect or reject to your private contentmentes.

Thus under protection of your friendly benevolence, and undoubted ascertaunce
of willing attention, I will prove my purpose manifestly, by discoursing
dispersedly, through al or the most creatures extant in the world, and least I
incur that idiots fault, which intending to write ye life of Priamus, began
many degrees of with his great grau^dfathers predecessor, and so spent his pith
ere he came to his purpose, to avoid the like, and needles superfluity, I
begin as follows.

BE sure to those to whom you plight troth, but be slow to trust any with reposed
confidence: for he yt makes breach of his passed protestation, is far worse
then Pythius the deceitful Siluersmith of Syracusa: and he that trustes too
far, though upon some trial, is like the foolish Beara^d, which having tamde
his Bear, will thrust his hand into his iaws, or venture so far within his
gripes, that sometimes he is urged to cry for help

ARct seems the knot, and indissoluble ye bond of mutual goodwill twixt ye
parent and the child. Yet Tullia Tarquins daughter for couetize of the empire,
not only berefte her father of life, but in spite made her couch to be drawn
ore his body, and with her trampling Iades bruised his corpse. Seruius Tullus
was molested of his children: Zan^ppus persecuted his Father Pericles: Oedipus
was imprisoned of Eteocles and Polinices: Bassianus sought the death of his
father Seuerus.

Although Aristotle say S. Ethicke^, that Love descendes rather th^n ascendes,
that parents love children more then they requite it, ^et does not this love
always indiuidually concomitate and follow parents. Justinius the abridger of
Trogus Pompeius writes, that the wife of Demetrius for desire she had to
reign, betrayeth one of her sons, who was an obstacle to her enterprise, and
by that horrible fact dismissing all motherly affection, when another son of
hers named Grippus had recovered his fathers dominions, she, as though she had
been imbased by this conquest, attempted to embrew her hands in the blood of
him, although it happened most diametrically opposite: for offering him a cup
of deadly poison, when he came thirsty from exercise, he of duetiful courtesy
desired her to begin, and urged her so far, that he found but great proofs
of her intended purpose, wherewith the Queen being overcome, poisoned herself
with the potion which she had provided for her son. Phaenix deflowred a
damsel, whom his father Amintor kept in cube, and did affectionat, for which
cause, his sire thundering bitter curses, inuoking the fell condemned furies,
bequeathinge to his hire the hateful harms of Hell, and wishing such a son
might never be sire, or beget babes to be his nephews, whom he might cherishe
in his bosom, he fled from his fathers malediction, and left the hope of all
his wealth in Hellade, where then Amintor reigned. Meleager, when the turretts
of his native City Calidon were battered by crewes of Cu^et land, could not,
having taken a little displeasure, either be cal^^ed with the Lords fair
offers, or be entreated with the Cleargies prayers, or be induced by his
Fathers beseechinges kneeling on his knees, to save the City, till time,
paste time almost, not for their socour sake, but of his own disposition, the
toy took him in the head.

If that were law now, which was lawful in Sophocles his time, for children
to disposesse their doting parents, we should find, I doubt not, no small
multitude, that with Sophocles his sons, would go about to prove their
fathers fools, that they might enjoy their lands and goods. I cannot forget
here to insert the condemnation of these children reluctant to nature, by ye
char^e piety of the storke to their dams, who relieve them in age with food,
of whom in youth they received satiate sustentation: and the godly duty of a
poor woman, who (as Valerius writes) having her mother delivered by the
Praetor unto the Iayler to be executed in the prison as a malefactor, and a
straight mandate given, that none should visit her (saving that her daughter by
the gentleness of the Iayler, got leave to come to her, who notwithstanding was
narrowly searched that she brought no food, because he purposed to kill her
with famine) a great while aslaked her mothers hunger with the milk of her
breasts: the Iayler merueyling how she lived so long, at length perceived the
honest guile, and reporting the straung fact to the Counsel, procured her
pardon.

When the brood of the Pellycane waxes hoar and haughty, they violently smite
their dams, and grievously wound them. Nero made a funeral corse of his
natural mother, and this Tiger Nero, a straung begotten swain, was preferred
by Claudius to the Imperial throne, before his own son Britannick.

BRethren descending from the same loins, having copulation of near
consanguinitie, should not, me thinks, degenerate from kindness, and turn
native Love to defiant Hostility. It were straung in these days, to see their
natures perverted, but that it has been so among our forefathers: yet it was
no wonder in their golden days, for so it has been from ye worlds first
foundation.

Petosiris the Junior son of Calasiris, Priest at Memphis, by guyle meant to
defraude his elder brother Thyamis of the succession of his Fathers Priesthood,
for the which they sought a combat, or at least should have fought, if
Petosiris his heels had not served him better, then both his hands and heart
were able to do. The Empire of Rome being left in even moytie, to the two
brethren Bassianus and Geta, Bassinus to the intent to have the sole regiment,
fraudulently butchered his brother Geta. Abimilech slew threescore of his
brethren that he might reign alone, when only Ionathas by Gods provision,
scapte the sckowring.

Record the quarrels of Marcus and Lucius, Titus and Domitian, Tyberius and
Germanicus, Numitor and Amulius, Saturn and Titan, who upon the point of
commandment and government were not as though they had been brethren, but
maintained wars as most cruel enemies.

Ovid says in the first of his Metamorphosis, that the violence of the
boisterous winds (which brothers are by kind) are so turmoilous and so cruel,
that every one is pent pur partiewise in sundry place: and therefore to the
gray Morning, and to the realm of Nabathie, and Persis, and other lands far
underneath the morning star, did Eutus take his flight: the setting of the
Sun, and shutting in of night, belong to Zephyr, that braies his balming
breath: the blastes of blustering Boreas reign in Scithia, and in other lands
under Charlsis wayne: to Auster is appendaunt all the Sotherne coast, who
bears showers and mists continually in his mouth.

FEw Husbands marry wives, unless misled with lust, but with some foretriall
of their honest manners, and none there be after long time of marriage, but
having found them honest, trust their demeanor: yet give ear what I will
tell you. When Hidaspes King of Ethiopia had been married to Persina the term
of ten years, who in all this space had not conceived, and was known honest
from all other, at length with great joy she was pregnant by him: in the act
of which generation, Persina looking on the white picture of Andromada naked,
brought forth (contrary to ye Ethiopian color, a child very fair and of
singular beauty: the mother vewing this wonder in her child, and fearing her
husband would suspect ye wrong, yt such a colored child could not be of his
getting, to avoid ignomie, was driven to this shifte: She laid the young one
forth in a certain private place, exposing her to the unstable state of
fortune, placing her Fascia by her, to declare what she was, and store of rich
Jewels, that the finder might foster her: all this done, that the King might
not see her, Persina told the king that his daughter was dead: see here, how
little Persina credited her husbands disposition, who never had showed her any
unkindness, neither could she in herself find any cause, that might offend him.

I have hard of a certain married wife, who at certain moons would feign
herself mad, that under that pretense she might do what she list, and
accompany whomsoever best pleased her humor, her name was Paephaca. Arsace the
great kings sister of Persia, marrying Oroondates a noble Gentleman, and the
kings deputed Lieutenaunt at Memphis, of how many far inferior to her
calling, was she enamoured? First of Thyamis, after of Theagines, and of others
many mo. This Arsace was accustomed to say that, which most women prasume upon,
that in her greatest trespasses, Oroondates would be pacified with one
flattering welcome, or the least tear wrunge out of her eyes.

Who was more meek then M. Aurelius, yet who ouermatched with two deceitfuller
queans? If a woman hold an opinion, who can draw her from it? warn her of her
fault, she will not believe you: give her counsel, she will not take it: If
you look at an other, then is she jealous: if you love her, then she disdaines
you: threate^ her anon she complains: flatter her, she waxes proud: rejoice
not in her, then are your surly: if you forbear her, it makes her bold: and if
she be chastened, she turns to a Serpent: finally a woman will never forget
injury, nor give thanks for any good deed. Though Claudius were a cruel
king, Hanniball a meek king, Alexander a valiant king, Phillip a wise
king, yet was Claudius cooled with his wife Agrippina, Hannibal kindled with
his Thamira, Alexander his courage abated with Rosane, and Phillips wisdom
sotted with Olympias.

Yet Cecilius Balbus says, that one obiecting to a Gentleman named Damelius,
that he had a stinking breath, and he chiding with his wife for not telling
him of it before, truly (quoth his wife) so would I have done, but yt I
thought all men's breaths had smelt in ye sort, and therefore it is like she
never joined mouth to any man, and yet it is red, that the wives of certain
Lacedaemonians (who were taken by the Spartanes, and imprisoned) coming into
prison to them, changed apparel, and by that cloak intruded themselves into
danger, and sent out their husbands in habit of women, muffled as though they
had wept for their distressed Husbands.

Homer says, that Juno the wife of Jove, Neptune his brother, and Pallas his
daughter, had conspired to bind his hands, and throw him down the Heavens,
had not Thetis descending, caused Briareus, called Aegeon, the hundred handed
Giaunt, climb up, who fearcely there resiaunt in their sight, did so agaste
both Seaishe God, and all their route, that Jove did escape this bickering.

THere is some regard of one kinsman to an other, more then of an aliaunt, or a
transmarine stranger: yet would I wish you, to use your kinsfolks, as on
should use a fair staff made of reed, which he may carry in his hand, to
fear his enemies, but if he lean to it or use it, it snaps in sunder. If you
chance to prosper, your kinsfolks will use your countenance for their
credit, and others will fouourably and gently entreat you (as it was a custom
in Rome, none to be put to Justice, but first the ancient books should be
searched, to se if any of his predecessors had done service to Rome, whereby
the captive should merit to have pardon of life: whereupon Marius Consul
triumphing of Iugurtha King of the Numidians, and Bochus King of Mauritane, who
favored and aided Iugurtha, Iugurtha was beheaded in prison, and Bochus saved,
because the graundfather of Bochus had made learned Orations before the Senate,
and profited the commonwealth with his wise sentences) but if your welfare
impair, then your good kinsfolks renounce your kindred, least you diminish the
copy of their countenance. As Antiochus being banished his country,
comforted only with his poor daughter, fellow in his banishment, and after
having his houses broken down with an earthquake, and his daughter slain all
in one day, and hearing that an old friend of his was come to the town, to whom
he would ease himself in bewailing his estate, came to him, welcomd him, and
began his plaining moan. The other knowing him very well, but seeing he could
reap no great reputation by his acquaintance, asked him what he was,
Antiochus told, and wondered he had forgotten, thinking it had been long of
the macerating of his body, which was misshapen with sorrow: truly quoth the
other, I know one Antiochus well, a Noble man in Rome, and my especial friend,
but as for this fellow, I perceive he is a counterfeit, and therewith
commanded him to be voided his lodging. This is like Gentlemen in our days,
who will he cozins to all of any port or great report in the whole shire,
though their gransires dog scarce leapt over their grandames hatch, but if a
poor man be in the second degree, he is not in the catalogue of their
genealogy. Tlepoleme Alcides son, slew his fathers friend Lycimnion, to whom
also he was allied in love, for which fact he fled his country.

Friendship which has been, or should be the Sun of all the world, which
should give life and light to all good minds, is now endarkened, or quite
extinguished.

Aeneas loosing his friend Deicoon, quickly forgot him, and got a new one. Q.
Curtius writes, that Alexander at his return from Babylon, renewing his
accustomed feasting, and invited by Thessalus his physician to a banquet, was
poisoned by him: but ye truth is, that there was treason wrought against him,
ye chief of which conspiracy, was his friend of friends, Antipater. It is hard
to find Senecaes Arthesius, who having two friends, whereof the one was poor,
and yet for shamefastnes dissembling his need, priuelie put a bag of money
under his pillow, that his friend might rather find that he wanted, with joy
of good hap, then through his good nature being ashamd to ask, should want
that he needed through his default.

I Need not admonish you to give no credence to Loves wil^s, whom neither law
with fear, nor wisdom with discretion, ca^ restrain.

Agorastocles in Plautus not knowing how to compass his lover, had counsel
to eircuument Lycus that kept her in this manner: to send Colibiscus his
bai^iffe to him, who feigning himself to be in love with her, should give
Lycus a great sum of money to be shut up with her in a chamber, to have his
pleasure: therewhile Agorastocles should enquire at Lycus his house for his
servant, and thus he assured himself, that Lycus knowing no servant he had
but his parasite, whom he supposed he meant, would deny him: then the impastor
Agorastocles ^a^^^king hie house, and finding his servant and his money in
Lycus the house, should have him and his whole house confiscate to him, and by
this means should be Lord of his love.

How loose Love is, and how briefly expired, the sequel shall give
specialtie. When Iris the common messinger and purseua^t of Jove came to Helen,
in her loved sister in laws fair Laodices shape, and brought her word how it
was pacted that Menelaus and Paris should s^int ye strife, and were buskling to
battle, Hele^s mind was sped of her first spouse, and country town, and
alienated quite from her lover Paris: and when Venus had in a trice with a
slenting slight shifted out trick Paris in a mislie air from the camp, and
brought Helen to comfort him at his chamber, she bedlemlike began to rave. O
would to God my husbands hap had been to dau^t thy vaunting hoighes, thou
wontest to vaunt he durst not meet thee in the face, but thou would eat
him at a gobbe, which now have showed a pair of leaden heels: assay his force
no more if thou be wise, least yt it do thee ill apay.

What fumish brawles, and pettish tetishnes were betwixt Areitho king of Arna,
and his pretty bulchion and loving fuds, ye fair glassy eyed Philomedusa, for
whose love not long since, but even ye day before the bridal, he would needs
dye the loving death, and bequeath his body to the ^irie feast.

As far in love as Achilles was with Brisis, he could be content in her absence
to make sport betwixt a pair of sheets with his sweet heart Diomed, the kings
daughter of Lesbos, cleped Phorbe, and this knew the comicall beldam Misis in
Terence his Andria, that lusty crustie loytring love, as extinct vapoures
soon remoues, who gossoping with Lesbia her friend, flattered her in this
sort: It is even (Lesbia) as thou say, few true to women shall thou find.
It is a Proverb in England that the men of Tiuidal horderers on ye english
middle marches, have likers, lemmo^s, and lyerbies.

THe Gods themselves will now and than dispense with deceit, and retaile a
fallacy to such as they can and list delude.

Jupiter meaning to give Agamemnon an overthrow, sent the God of dreams to
him in his sleep in old sage Nestors shape, (whose persuasions he had ever in
price) and subornd him to give ye Trojans battle, under protection of Jupiter
his warrante: the prince obeyed ye vision, but had effect quite contrary, for
he and his garrison were both foiled.

The green eyed Goddess with her cokesing words, set Pindarus a gog to
infringe the compacte ystricke between his confederates and the Pelasgians.
Apollo to front Aeneas from death, ridded him out of the battle, and to abuse
the army, erected his portrayture in his wonted station among his soldiers as
though it had been he, about which the knights of Graece and Trojans both, yt
one sort spending their trauails to defend it, the other bending their mights
to defeat a senceles thing of life) made many a widdowe and fatherless
child: wrangling cracking Mars did swear full stoutly in aid of grekish
crews, but the self same day he periuredly deard them.

Neither are the heavenly bodies lind with such minds, as we imagine, nor their
strength so rath as surpasses all puissance of million legies, and not to be
thirlde with any thwart. For admit ye all the Gods and Goddesses descending
from the earth, could not hail Jupiter from heaven with a golden chain
fastened to him (which he insulted of himself) yet Ephala and Otus the sons of
great Oloeus, bound God Mars and imprisoned him ye space of 13. months, where
he had consumed with setters and stinking, had not Euribaea their mother in law
besought Mercurius in his behalf, who stole him a way closely in a braide.

Juno her breast with triple headed shearing shaft was hurt by Hercules. Pluto
sable God of vaste infernal Tartarum, did give the hand of self same man, a
badge of his blood in Pilie soil among the murdered carcasses, of which
wound he was healed by Paean phis^ion of the Gods.

POrtending Sothsaings of gospelling Augures, to whom ye Ethnickes were
tributorie in devotion, were superstitious collusions to supplant the
credulous, and more authorized by custom, then allowed for commodity.

When ye Graecians were in suspense, whether to march on to give onset of
battle, at that same stoure, drad flakes of lightning fire were darted down
from heaven, which falling at their right hands, were, said Nestor (and true
he said) accounted certain diuinations of prosperous luck: yet for all that,
their luck was at that time, to loose both man, moyle, and machins belonging
to war. These presagings be as true, as yt, which ye schoolmaisters of Padua
taught, that in the instant wherein you shall see a Cuckoo, not having seen
any that year before, you shall find an hair under your right foot, if you
stand still, and remove not when you see her: if this hair be black, you
shall have evil luck that year,, if white, good luck, if gray, indifferent
luck.

Unreasonable therefore are their assertions, which say, to hear an Heron cry
when thou go on Imbacie, is a sign of speeding (and yet this they ground on
a place in the tenth of Homers Iliades:) and theirs which say, to see a black
Swine before the Sun rise, is a sign of evil luck that present day (and this
has his original from a proverb of Empodocles.

Then recke not of the Augures, ne yet of ghostly prophesiers. Eunomus
prophecy was esteemed a touchstone of truth, yet could he not discuss to fly
his fate, and escape the fiste of fierce Achilles. Euridomant a prophet not
profane, but judged a right interpreter by divine infusion, could not cast his
sonns unlucky fate, Polidus and Abantes his, whom Diomede cut in pieces.

Indeed it was Calchas his cunning, or rather good chance, not so much by
sanctimonie of prophecy, but as I think, in flattery of the potentates, to
hit the truth in unfolding a secret hid: when the Graekes were in Aulis a
town of Beocie, sacrificing to Jupiter under a green beach tree, growing upon
a lively spring, an hideous Dragon crepte from the Aultars foot, with painted
scales like the scarlet grape (which creeping up to the lopiest and tallest
part of the Tree, where he found 8. young peping sparrows in the leaves, which
he rauend up, devouring the dam also, while she lamented her yongones) by and
by was enrolde in another shape, and of a monstrous Serpent became a stony
rock: the Graekes amassed at this, Calchas calculated, that as the Dragon had
devoured these 9. little ones, so in 9. years space should they be tired with
the proud perucke and pranke Trojans, and as the dragon was insensuated, so in
the tenth year, Saturnus heir would give them for their hire, the Trojan
squadrons, and their batled City should go to sack and pillage, and as he
said, his saying theed.

AStronomy is a perfect skill. But as Aristotle says in the 6. of his
Ethickes, that Prudens who is the absolutest politic man, though he be
genarally perfect, may stumble in particularities: so the best Astronomers that
ever I red, tell most palpable gross absurdities.

Ptolomeus says, that he that is borne, when the Lord of the 7. House is in
the third or ninth degree, and any evil planet behold him, will sodeinlie
die, by falling from some building, or else will die of something, that shall
fall upon him.

THe sugrest tranquillity is soonest transitory: who seeks to mount above the
moving skies, their ruin grows, where most they reach to rise: who whilom sat
in chair of high renown, adowne are headlong hurld to bottomless misery.

Sardanapalus king of Assiria, one of the richest Monarchies in the world, amid
his pompous elevated royalties, was miserably slain by one Arbactus:
conuenable to this, Cyrus king of Persia, which as well by means of other
victories that he had obtained, as also, that he had subdued Craesus king of
Lydia, was waxed of all others most rich and renowned, when he had reigned full
thirty years, was himself discomfited, and beheaded by Tamyris Queen of
Scythia.

After Brutus and Cassius the manquailers of Caesar, were, as Plutarth gives
specialtie: exiled by Octauian and M. Antonius, they for restoration conspired
against their iniurours, and pitched a field Of the faction of these seminaries
was M. Varro, a Gentleman of great honor and fame, who with the other
coniurates and adherentes, was likewise discomfited: he then seeing ye danger
which he was opposed too, incontinently disrobed himself of his own apparel,
taking another habit, who by this transmutation being reputed for a common
soldiour, was among other captives soulde for a vile price to one Barbulas a
Romayne Knight. A good while after this, one knowing him discovered him to
Barbulas, which without semblaunce to Varro that he knew any thing,
privately procured pardon of Octauian, who franckly enfraunchised him again,
and from that time forth held him in the number of his friends. After this,
Anthony and Octauian falling out to be capital enemies, Barbulas leaned to
Anthony, and with him was ouerrun in the field by Octauian, at which event,
dreading the furious wrath of Octauian, he used for his own safety, the
above remembered policy of Varro, that is to wit, he did on him the coat of a
poor soldiour: Thus M. Varro, for that he had not long seen him, as also for
that he had changed his apparel, among other captives unknown bought him
for a bo^d man, but after short time remembering him again, practiced with
Octauian, that he wan him pardon of his prince, and eftsoons possessed him of
his wonted liberty. So that Barbulas which first was good Lord and master,
was now at the check of his vnderlout vassaille: and Varro, which before was a
bounden villain, had now prerogative of his awful master: which two contrary
casual chances, gives us a certain certificate how frail and fragile the
loftiest fortune is, and how shortly her smiling lasts and endures, in so
much that as Philemon, beholding an ass eat figs from of a table, brake into
such an extreme laughter, yt he dyed with laughing: or as Philistione a poet
comicall, and Denis the tyrant of Siracusa, with surpassing joy made sudden
change of life: so we, not only when we seem most firmly seated in
immutable prosperity, are sodeinlye beraught of our unstable happiness, but
often with the surplusage of abundant pleasure, as we swine afloat in midst
of bliss, do sink and drench in depth of bale.

The Thebanes banqueting with merry, glee all careless, full of chat, had
dole of death dealt among them.

In Baldach a city in Armenia the less, which lies toward the South, there
is a prince resident called Calipho, which is among the Moors chief
governor, the king of the Tartars called Alan, hearing that the Calipho which
then reigned, was meruellous rich, invaded the city, and took it by force,
being in it one hundred thousand horsemen, besides infinite number of footmen,
and there he found a great Tower full of gold, silver and precious stones: Alan
appauled at this sight, said unto Calipho. I much marvel of thy avarice, that
did not give part of thy great treasure, to maintain valiant men against
me, knowing I was thy mortal enemy: and perceiving he could make no
answer, well quoth he, because thou love treasure so well, I will thou
shalt have thy fill of it, and caused him to be sparred fast in the same
tower, where he lived four days, and died miserably for hunger. Prester John
warring a long time with Bur, without any advantage of him, sent him 7.
young Gentlemen to his Court, showing, as though they departed from Prester
John in great displeasure, and offered themselves to serve the King Bur, who
retained them as squires and pages in his Court: after 2 years, having groate
confidence in them, the King ridinge abroad for his pleasure, took the 7.
Gentlemen with him, who being the distance of a mile from his Castle, and
perceiving they had opportunity to execute their purpose, carried him to
Piester John, who made him Shepherd two years, and afterward sent him to his
Castle with horses and men as a Shepherd.

Niobe, whose father was Tantalus, her mother a sister of the Pleiades, and she
the Lady of Phrigia land and Cadmus palla^e, bewtifull in her body, and
endewed with seven sons, and seven daughters (in so much, that she repined
Latona should have the honor of the Altar, and not she) was barrenned of her
twice seven issue, and she with sorrow changed into a s^one, where upon
the Mountain top in Phrigia Land she weepeth still in stone, and from ye
stone the drearie tears do drop.

Might I therefore be so bold as give them counsel, who are heaued up to the
type of dignity, I would wish them often to parlie and practice that, which
Cecilius Balbus in his Philosophers toys, writes of Agathocles king of
Sicilia, whose descent being base, would say of himself, Though I now be a
King, a potter was my sire,
Then call to mind thy base estate, before thou gotst thy hire.


REpose not too much affiaunce in monumentes of histories, neither settle your
confidence in a bare hearsay, unless your reading be experimented with
express proofs, and your rumor be raised from a sure ground.

Auerrois a man in most men's judgments, whose advise is worthy to be
advanced, and whose testimony is to be taken, reports, thot he beheld a
poor unfortunate patient being beheaded, walk hither and thither in the sight
of all the people: which can not be, because by heading, the veins are
sundered (the only organes and sole instruments of motion in all living
creatures.) It is also written of Dyonisius Areopagita, that his head being
stricken of, he went from the place of execution one full league or more. Noe,
it is not with them, as with the adders tail, which being stricke of will
skippe up and down, like the adder it self: and far are they unlike
Philomelaes tongue, which being cut of, wrigled up and down a long season,
as though it had lived.

In the time of Romulus, were seen in the fyrmament, as is written, two Suns
at midnoone, which cannot be (their original being natural, as it is reputed
to be.) For as the crown or garland, which is seen under the Sun, and is
called of the Meteorologians, Halon, is a waterish round cloud, upon which the
Sun beams beating, represente the same show, so a smooth and equal waterish
cloud placed by the side of the Sun, receives his beams like a glass, and
expresses the Idol of it in the same fashion: This cloud must not be too
near, for then the Sun disperseth it: nor too far of, for the the beams
will be too feeble to be reflected: but in a competent distaunce: neither can
yt be at noone day, for the heat will soon dissolve it.

A little before Galba, Otho, and Vitellius striued for the Romayne Empire,
there appeared three Suns, which were after thought to be supernatural
prognostications of consequent contentions, but such diuiners were scarce good
natural Philosophers.

For those miraculous wonders, which are in scripture to glorify Gods name,
and found in old Annaleis for the confirmation of the efficacy of Christ's
passion, I must and will dispense with my incredulous nature to believe them.

For the first, all meruailes that God wrought by the hands of Moses and other
his servants, of going through the Sea dry, of striking water out of a
Rock, of Manna sent every morning, of the Suns course stayed in the
Firmament, and many such like.

For the second, that for example, which Eutropius writes, that at the instant
of the birth of Christ, brake up a spring of oil in an Inn of Rome, which
ran by the space of one whole day. Cammester says in his history, that at the
dedicating of a temple to ye Goddess Peace, Apollo gave oracle, yt til a
virgin bare a son it should stand, which they thought would never be, and
therefore yt for ever it should persist. This Temple says he, at the delivery
of the Virgin of our redeemer, fell and severed each piece from other. Eusebius
writes to Theodorus, that a Ship sailing by ye Isle Paraxis, a great dreadful
voice admonished a pilot of ye ship, that passing by the gulf Laguna, he
should give notice that the great God Pan, (who I think, was some captain
master devil) was dead. He fearing to do this legacion or Imbacie, was forced
nevertheless by the staying of the ship (which at his arrival there arested,
and would no further) to mount up into the pomp or hinder part of the ship,
where he did his embassadge as loud as he could: which words uttered, such
dolerous lamentatious, and terrible cries were heard, as if Lapithauri and
Centauri should howl together with a diverse deformed bellowing, as huge a
noise, as when high Jove did let his thunder fly upon the adder-footed rowte,
that battered heaven with hundred hands apeece, the dint whereof the aierie
toys of high Olympus brake. Then to conclude, in generaall this I say. The aged
man is like the barren soil, a woman is a reed that wagges with every wind,
no trust is to be found in tender years, the surety of all ages is unfound.
Most women be evils (I might have said Devils) yet devils without horns, for
these they use to place in secret corners. And most men, but here will I stay
with an abrupt Aposiopasis.

Here I confess I have writ somewhat plainly, thinking, that as when curious
Euperices and his fellow, could not agree about the curing of Crysippus king
of Trinacria, it was enacted that they should not mingle or compound medicines,
but minister the^ simply as they were: so it is most requisite for redressing
these impieties, to correct the worlds Elenchs plainly and sincerely, and not
with doubling to bolster his errors. But as Pisistrato the tyrant used to say,
that Damonidas the philosopher could persuade him any thing, and therefore
would never permit him to speak in his hearing: Or as Isocrates writes to
Phillip, yt if he were in presence to pronounce his own oration, he would not
doubt of his wished success: so (courteous Gentlemen, who shall deigne to read
this treatise) if I were in place with you, to make manifestatio^ of all the
disloyal trecheries which I my self have sustained (and you may conceive by
implication) you would neither judge me a miscreant for my mistrust, nor exhort
me to a reprisell of my former credulity. But as the Graeks contending after
ye death of Ipocras and Chrysippus the philosopher, to whether of their
doctrines they should rather cleave as most canonical, at length were so
indifferent that they allowed neither of both: so you shall do best, if you
neither believe too confidently, nor faithlesly distrust, but be equal
intercoursers betwixt both extremities.

AFter the compiling of this patchie pamphlet, which in my conceit was not all
the finest web, because liberty of affection, not learning and judgment, laid
the loome, he tossinge up and down his incurable misfortunes, recalde to
memory his antifrend Cornelius, the original of them all, to whom he sent
this consequent challenge, experimenting if as yet he had got a courage.

Philotimus to the wretched dastard Cornelius.
IF I knew thy worthy style, and the dignity of thy house, I would not steal
thy title, nor conceal thy honor. But thy public deserts conjoined with
the intricate doggednes of nature, would appose the skilfullest Oedipus in
their description, and do parlie me a pardon if I be grauelled.

Thou will vaunt perhaps that thou art a gentleman by blood, and I will grant
(the worse my hap) that thou art a bloody Gentleman. And yet (varlet) if thou
were but a man, thou would never have endured so many manacinges, but once
ere now in so eger challenges, have taken courage to enter the combat. A man
said I? Yes sure, you are as honest a man, as any is in the cards if the
Kings were out: and as manly a champion, as the Comicall Thraso, who rather
thought to fear men with looking big, then meddle with the^ for fear of hurt.

Though thou have injured me, and perjured my mistrisse, yet yt thou may
know, that a worm frod on will turn rgaine, and that the chips of the tree,
which thou would hew down, may fly in thy face, I dare thee to the field,
and send thee my gauntlet for a gage of revenge: appointe the place, and bring
none but thy self, and as I am a Gentleman I promise to meet thee, my self
single alone, though I grant me as simple as any one: then shall you try,
though Aurelia have my heart in pawn which I cannot redeem, that
notwithstanding I have a gall which shall gaul the to the reins, and a body
to bear thy blows, and dear thy bones. Farewell patch and coward, and as
spedely as thou dare, prove thy self a Captain.

Philotimus thy foe, and thine accursed.


THese letters in Cornelius his absence, were delivered to one of his
servants, and by this means came to Auraliaes reading, who, had not
Cornelius vnbewares showen himself, would to stay this suite, have returned a
writ of non est inuentus, but since it happened otherwise, that all minght
cotton well, this was her rescript in Cornelius his behalf. For as I erst
said, he was a gentleman that had great store of small knowledge, one belike
conceived in ignorance, and begotten when his father was a little scared.

Cornelius to the glorious soldiour Philotimus.
O Preclare stratagems, and your erected Trophies, you flourish fair, but fight
at leisure: you make as courageous a challeng, as if you were Laelius Atticus
Dentatus, who was an hundredth and twenty times in battle, unto which he
went always with such courage of mind, and force of body, that he seemed
to presume of victory: but though thou art the prowdest that ever I heard
brag, yet art thou not the most prouedst that ever I dealt with, though thou art
one of those groyling gruntes (which Perseus speaks of in his fifth Satyr)
whose choleric garboyle pipkius full of purging drugges, can neither quench
nor quell, and one of that ruffianlike number, that will dragge the Devil out
of Hell for thirtene pence, yet your puffing and snuffing will be well enough
snaffled, your choler will be coold and your ire relent.

No feet shall be my fence, nor fear your kilkow chat: though Buten were
brag, yet Dares was his match: though Dares were frolic, yet he found his
fellows: though Teucer with his bow made havoc in hacking the Trojan knights
and coronels, yet Hector at length with his heaued codgill, paid him home with
heave and how: the yonker Antilocuus butchered Ecepholus, but for his hire
Agenor sent a Iauelin to his bared breast, and laid him loubring on ye
ground: Dyodorus his soul was sent to Plutoes Court by Pirus, Thracian
prince, he struck his leg with mighty pibble, and burst each vein and
cord. But what ensued? Thoas could not blin, but slitt Lord Pirus paunch with
teeninge sword, and many a soldier more in his reueng were dold with deadly
swoune, the purple gore whereof did flow as hilly springs are wont to spread.

As Stenhelus, friend to Diomede, was never from his back to aid him at need:
so if thou by trains or tretcherie (for I defye thy manhood) shalt do me a
mischief, I have both friends and servants too, the worst whereof will crack
your crown.

Think thou, I will so far debase my self, as to debate a quarrel with thee
by dinte of sword? In faith Sir no. The greyhound sent to Great Alexander by
the king of Albania, having an Heart, a Bore, and a Bear, brought to him, lay
still wagging his tail, not vouchsafing to look on the^, but having a Lion
brought leapt at him and strangled him, and seeing a great Eliphant, seemed to
rejoice at the bigness of him, and after two or three questings rowsing
himself, slew him.

But thy father thou will say, was a ndble man, and therefore thou my equal:
admit thy fathers honor, and aduerte what I will say, if an Ass were borne of
Pegasus, being an Ass what cause has he to compare with any horse? If you
love discord so well, beware you accord not to wear an hempton cord. For after
a collar comes an haulter.

The winsing kickenest Jade that will not abide to be shod, if you put but a
lile round f^intstone in one of his ears, and then hold ye ear hard, is very
quiet, and if you put in either ear one, you shall have him as mild as a
sheep: so if a man should but whisper in your ear, and tell you he would
meet you in such a place, you would singe, I fear me, a palinodie.

Let Pluto send thee peace of mind, and stay thy moodie manacings, and as in
years and wealth thou wantst of me, so yield thy nauale forces. Against him its
best to fight and animate thy mind whose pith thou can withstand and mate his
might: remember well my words, and tender their performaunce.

Ulysses wished to have forehayde the Lycians Prince Sarpadon, but Gods they
would reserve that fact for some more worthy champion:

You strain no courtesy to call me knave, as one that has a deep insight in
a knave, and think no scorn to call me patch: I give you to understand, that
your patches clothes be worn, and the rags stick in your teeth. Desist
Philotimus, for it will not be thy luck to resist Cornelius. When thou art
wiser in thy challenges, and fitter to fight, I will be readier to answer
the^, and not disdain the victory.

Thine as thou his Cornelius. Hazard dwelles next hardines.


It grieved Philotimus to the heart, that he could not hurt Cornelius by
neither wile nor weapon, and this he though not the least addition to the
heap of his miseries. But he quoth Philotimus, that will needs be a sheep,
cannot greatly grudge to be bitten with a Fox, and since the coward dare not
manfullye meet me in the field, let him think it no villainy though I catch
him by a train. But as the water flows, when it is at lowest eb: so one
Archaretos who had often sought for Philotimus his friendship in his
prosperity, and still was set at naught of the coy Philotimus, til time of
adversity, was now a sovereign solace to all his steering sorrows.

This Gentleman Archaretos keeping in the country, heard of Philotimus his
hard haps, and how his creditors on the one side meant perpetually to imprison
him, and his enemies on the other to dispatch him out of the way, and now this
he thouhht a very convenient time to show his loyalty to Philotimus, of
whose recovery he had good hope. Wherefore finding a means at his own
charges for Philotimus to avoid these dangers, he writ to him this epistle.

Archaretos to Senior Philotimus.
THe recordation of that amity wherewith I once affected thee, when thou not
regardedst it, and the consideration of true loves property, which is not to
relente for any unkindness, moves me in thy misery to animate thee with
comfort, and to proffer thee such aid as my ability can afford. The vine
which we see grows about the elm, will not wither and leave to grow when the
elm does die, but after the elmes decaying keeps his growth as before, and
with clasping about it embraces his elm. Certes, the fine gold conserueth
his quallities in the quick furnace.

It may be, that as the Rauen-leaueth her yongeones for three days, till she
see whether their color be congruent to hers: so thou laidest aloof for time
of trial, which might be a touchstone to try my promis: howsoever the
matter was, whether disdain took delight in dalliaunce, or procrastination
was for some purpose, let that slip: in thore days I wearied thee with my
wel-willing, and yet I am not tired to procure thy welfare.

I profess to thy person (Pilotimus) that as I have ever been enemy to none,
so have I only friend to one. When I hard of thy ruinous destinies, I could not
hold my hands from shaking, nor my lunges from sighing, nor mine eyes from
weping, so that I thought, as it is the greatest nigardize of all nigardizes,
when a man may do much and will do little, so it is the greatest infortune of
all infortunes, when a man may do little and would do much.

It is indeed impossible to make sinews of blood, of veins to make bones, of
a craggie rock a plain way, and to give absolute counsel in a case without
c^ntrolment: so that I cannot tell whether is more dolorous to me, thy unhappy
heaviness almost past propitiation, or my debilitie and impotencie, insufficient
to help thee.

Augustus dreamed on a night how he was warned by Phillip his physician, that
he should be killed in his pauilion, whereupon he avoided, and in very deed
the next day after, the soldiers of Brutus entering his tents, stabbed many
holes with their puncheons in his couch, thinking he had been there. Before the
battle against the Phillippians, a certain soldiour thought in his sleep
that Julius Caesar bad him tell Octauius, he should fight the luckier, if he
carried something about him that Julius had worn whiles he was head
governor: Octauius understanding this, got the ringe wherewith he used to
seal letters, and the same he wore, and overcame his enemies. These
presidentes endoctrine great matters. He that has been brought up with flesh,
cannot feed on bones: and you whose burgeyning and springing time has been
nousled among the wisest in Italy, will think your gold soon changed to
copper, to be shored and propped up with my Paradoxes.

Notwithstanding here thou see the two regal Emperoures directed by their
servants, and so dyrected, as they had cause to thank the Gods for their
merciful provision, and to reward their servants for their luckie
persuasions. So it is Philotimus, if thou will take a little pains at my
entreatye and for thine own ease, I would have the come the tenth of this
month to ye house of one Carnus, in a little village named Merio, distant from
the City about three leagues, there I will meet thee, and tell thee such
traynes, as by inquisition I have found to be laid for thee. We will confer
by what means thou may shun them, which is only by flying. How and when
that flight must be, I will then show thee, and furnishe thee with such money
as may relieve thy necessity. Return me an answer by this bearer what then
wilt do. In the mean time the Gods of their goodness give thee that thou
desire, and then have I all, I do desire.

Thine to use Archaretos.


Philotimus without pawsing resent him these words.

Philotimus to his most faithful friend Archaretos.
Never was travail more toothsome to thee, nor legacye sent with quicker
embassage, then the delivery of thy letters was consolation to me, which shall
be accomplished with acceleration.

If thou had seen which thou saw not, what sorrows I susteynd, then
should thou know, which thou know not what solaces surprise me.

My spirit was betwixt the Anuile and hammer, ready to be thrown into
Vulcans flames, and thou haste swaged my rages greater then the furies of
Bacchus his priests, and conducted my esperaunce to a restfull paradise.

Because I cannot thank thee as I think of thee, take (Archaretos) the whole
Alphabet of letters, and coin such thanks by their coagmentation, as
possibly thou can by the aid tf thy eloquence. Then think, that feign I
would utter those in words, and do mutter much greater in secret thought.

Doubt not (Archareios) but I will come to the place of appointment, and if my
lasie legs were ioyntles, and for that should deny to make this voyage, my
heart would repute and hold them for rebels, and substitute my hands to be
their vicegerentes.

In the mean season, I meet thee in mind, and greet thy person with ten
thousand salutations, which, because they are neither so many as thou
deseruest, nor so hartelye written as I do wish them, I leave space of paper
for the to write more, making a sign where I cannot singe. Farewell
Archaretos, whose bounty has quayled my disquiet. And as Possidonius says
of the rainbow, yt it is a glass wherein we may see the Sun, because in it are
his beams refracted, by whose reflection more manifest apparition of his
clearenes is seen, so those that have not erst known thee shall view thy
magnificence in me, and with ferlye himnes herrie thy praises.

Thy poor friend to command to his small power, Philotimus.


NOw Sir, Philotimus began to recounte Archaretos his letters, and to take
account of his passed life, how he should deserve his passing goodwill: he
pondered what might be the cause of the renewing of his goodwill, which he
thought had been obsolete and abolished. I muse quoth he, yet know not, I
meuaile, yet cannot conjecture. He was guilty of former contempt, in regard of
Archaretos, and fearful of present guile, to reward his proud haughtines: he
did well know his meeknes in manners, yet did he fear least he mocked his
miseries: he had proved his true meaning in the effect of his dealinges, yet
doubted least his persuasions were a mean to deceive him: he had experienced
his friendly affection, yet did expect that Archaretos being expert of his
poverty, would be procurde by this allurement to repay his peuishnes. Alas
(quoth he thus quoting these surmises) will he work me this despite, because
I have despised him? he may if he will, but the valor of his might is nothing
the more. The streyuing of a gnat is not swallowing of a cammell: an action got
in law by a false inquest, is no lawful commense, nor lawdable co^queste: it
is easy to strive with him that sitts in the stocks, and small manhood of a
captain to break ye skull of a dead man: laugh not when other men's houses be
on fire, least the glaring sparkles light on thine own. Pentheus for mocking
an old blind father had a cold prophecy verisied on him. I have heard, yt
the hardest block comes soonest to a knock, and that the common est flowter
as one without escapes, may be a cunning skogin in his own conceit, but shall
become a common scoff to all that know him. But I am impudente in coniecting
the worste, because I now am impotent, and have rejected his goodwil. Though
honor harborow yt us but for on hour, yet homely honesty will keep her old
nest: though my currishnes be a sign that he should delude me, yet his
constancy has sined to perpetuity of love. How can it be that he should
seek means to bereave me of breath, who studieth to strengthen and lengthen
my life? No no, his friendship is firm, and my affection shall be reciprocal: he
endeuoreth to broch a better tap to make my bear go better down, and therefore
I will not say nay, but assay to drink, apply me to his pleasure, and be
correspondent to his counsel. Upon this confidence of Archaretos his
fidelity, Philotimus at the day prefixed repaired to ye foresaid place: what
their meeting communication and the drift of their conference was, I will give
you notice by their mutual colloquy, which I have enterlaced dialogue wise.

Archaretos. Philotimus. PHilotimus, my wished friend, and welcomde guest, how
do thou?


Phil. O Archaretos my savior, ill to all, and worst to my self: all the
world is otemeale, and my poke left at home. I will not say to to thee as the
old beggar man said to his dame, God send you your health as long as I
live, but I wish that his life may be set on a long last, whose love has eased
the wrenching of my heart, and that his prosperity may never quail, whose
comfort, as a cullisse, preserves my weal.

Dear Archaretos, forget and forgive my passed ingratitude: for then for want
of years and good discretion I could not discern my friends (as whelps
cannot see till they be nine days old) and now for shame I could eat mine
own ears (as Ajax after the slaughter perpetrated in his madness) at the
recovery of his wits killed himself.


Philotimus, quoth Archaretos, ingrate men men indeed deserve hate, yet would I
be loath to minister you cumber for a medicine of comfort, or follow your
hresident of former malice, since I mean to give you precepts of new
goodwill. Thy hot choler I perceive is turned to cold coals, and the remnaunt
of the ashes utterly dispersed: though therefore I cannot appease thy pains
with pleasure, yet will I please thee if I can with my present parlie, and
though I cannot effectually furnishe thy wantes, yet will I most faithfully
further thy wish.

Alas (good Philotimus) my fear did ever divine this hap, though my well
wishing impugned my presagings. But a man shall hardly be deceived, where his
heart does fully advertise him. For neither did Silla err in that which he
prophesied of Julius Caesar, neither Ptololomeus fail, in that he foredeemed
of Alcibiades: because the one deprived Rome of her liberty, and the other
depraved the glory of Graece.

The Romans puissance could not be infringed or brought to expuguation,
either by the Carthagenians or the Frenchmen, the Huns or the Epirotes, the
Sabines, the Samnites, or the Etrurians, but by reckles pride, and licentious
living, it was remunerated with utter ruin. I speak it to this purpose
(Philotimus) because if thou had been as wary in thy life, as thou art
wise in thy learning, or as frugall in expenses, as thou waste frolic in thy
sportes, thy state had been firm, thou had needed no friends, and all then
too Well, had not now turned to Woe.

But no man is borne without a blemishe, and the Gods themselves had their
imbecilities. Saturn was peuishe, Jupiter adulterous, Apollo wanton, and Titan
envious: Alexander was furious, Archidamus ambitious, Demetrius vicious,
Hannibal perjured, Traian a wine bibber, and Homer a vain talker. Then (my
good Philotimus) since as I hope thou art penitent for preter ouersights^, be
not dismayed in thy self, nor despair in thy fortune.

But first of all I straightly inhibit you for your better thriuing, never
once to enterteine one thought of Aurelia. Mamea was proud, Medaea cruel,
Martia contumacious, Poplia unchaste, Myrrha malicious, Domitia rash: Assiria
complained of her scandale Semyramis, Armenia of Pincia, Graece of Helen,
Germany of Vxodonea, Rome of Agrippina, Spain of Hecuba: but all these
jointly with every their several faults, may not compare with thy compeere
Aurelia, of whose wickedness thy testimony is a perfect proof.

Muse not Philotimus, that I dehorte thee from love, and persuade thee to
liberty: for I have red more in Hossienus that instructs to give counsel,
then in Ovid that learneth to be enamoured: and more shall thou profit in
following a Stoycke, then in practicing the toies of coy Dorcatius.

Philotimus answered. My dearest Arcaaretos as I had rather pledge thee in
water then any other in wine, so one syllable of thine shall more persuade
me, then the sage sentences of any other. The words of the Philosopher
Theomastes, did more prevail with some of the Graeciaus, then the huge armies
of king Phillip, and more effectual (good Archaretos) are thy gentle
exhortations, then the threatening torments of any calamities.

But alas this haste thou heard, and I have tried it, that the cruel beast
Love, does suffer herself to be taken with a thread, but will not be thrust away
with a percing lance. In this case I remit you to Hermogenes, to Tesiphontes,
and to Plutarch, who have spent much time in writing of Loves remedies, and yet
at length have been urged to say and confess, that it is a more incurable
disease in the mind, then the gout or plague is in the body. Let Ovid say
what him pleases, Nigidius what he dreameth, Samocratius what he thinks, but
in fine, they shall find it harder to get a salve for this sore, then for the
Alcumistes by their art and creticke days, to find the Philosophers stone and
the Quintiscence of nature. Nay (Archaretos) these three usurping physicians,
died persecuted and banished from their native country, not for the offenses
they committed in Rome, but for the loves they attempted in Capua.

Oh how many times did Hercules desire to be delivered from his love
Mithridata, Menelaus from Dorrha, Pirrhus from Helena, Alcibiades from Sabina,
and M. Antonius from Cleopatra, whom they would never not only forsake, but
with them or for them yielded to death? Good counsel and affection agree like
iron and clay, which by no means can be brought to stick together,

Though I were as light of foot as an Hind, as swift as Polite, Priams son,
or as speedy as the coursers of Eumelus, yet could I never leap over such a
block as is Love, or ouerrun such a mate as is Affection, or keep pace with
that precise iniunction, ye prohibites all fancies.

But yet me thinks that a denial to any of thy requests must needs be a
prescription to my honesty. And therefore since thou art no otherwise to me
then Solon was to the Athenians, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Asclepius to
the Rhodians, Numa Po^pilius to the Romans, and Phoroneus to the Aegiptians,
impera and impetra apud me, demand and command, and I will obey.

Archaretos made replication in this manner. Indeed (Philotimus) Lactantius
Firmianus says, that the common wealth of the Sicyonians endured longer then
either that of the Graekes or of ye Aegiptians, or the Lacedaemonians, or the
Romans, because in seven hundredth and forty years, they never made new
laws, nor brake their old ones, so that constancy in good matters is ever
commendable.

But he that continues his suite to her, that flies faster from him then the
hare from the horn, is much like one of the Mirundins (who at Peleus his
prayers were turned again to men) which was so enamoured of the Suns brightness,
that incessantlye he perseuerd in travail and labor, meaning to meet it at
the end of the world, there to embrace it and enjoy his pleasure.

Thou art now to leave the confines of thy country, and with a speedy
perigrination, and diligent inuestigation, to seek a mantion in some other
soil, and therefore thy heart must be on thy halfpenye, and thy mind
deuorced from the contemplation of Aurelia. And yet thou must be of a bon
couragio: for no place is a banishment to virtue says A Milo: I have no place
of abode, said Socrates, but am a citezin of the world: whithersoeuer thy
pilgrimage shall conducte thee, we are all in the compass of one heaven,
protected with the providence of one God, and once shall be united with one
consolidation.

So near neighbors are we all, that even our Antipodes whose dwelling is
opposite to us, are daily traded too for erchau^g of traffic. Alezander wept,
that there were no more earthes for him to conquer but this little one: Alas
says Scipio Affricanus, how base a thing is populer glory, which is
comprised in ye earthes limitation.

I cannot tell (Philotimus) what place is best for thee to soiourne in, because
thou art furnished for any kind of service, neither can I allot thee any
residence, because like a snayle I have ever kept my home: but search and find,
and if thou will vouchsafe to let me know of thy staying, I will not be
slack to aid thee with necessaries. Let no imaginary conceit of thy great
pains appaule or dismaye thee, for when thou art once inured with them, thou
shall find small difference betwixt thy good labors, and the daly sports of
the greatest potentates. Arsaciades his pastime king of the Bactrians, was to
knit nets: Artaxarxes his, to spin: Arthabanus his king of the Huns, to arm
for rattes: and Viantus his, king of the Lydians, to fish for frogs: vain
pleasures God wot, and far from right contentation.

Philotimus bespake. O Archaretos, no durance of danger can affright me. For
her sake (whom from henceforward I will not once remember) I ^urst undertake
Orestes his voyage, that follothe Nymphs into Hell: or Hercules his
enterprise, that for his friends cause brake the gates of Hell, and bound the
Giant Aetna, and the triple headed dog Cerberus, and entered combat with the
triple-bodied Pluto. But now farewell dear Country, adieu gallant courtiers,
farewell sweet Aurelia for evermore. I will accomplish thy pleasure
Archaretos, and seek an harbor for my self in some foreign nation, where I
shall never once hear of these, ah forefined miseries.

From 5 years to 5. the Samnits did solemnize their Lustra, from 4. to 4. the
Graekes did celebrate their Olympiades, from 7. to 7. ye Aegiptians did renew
the Temple of Iris: from ten to ten the Romans visited their God Apollo at
Delphos: but I am for ever abandoned my country, whose joys these eyes shall
never renew. The tears trickled down Archaretos his cheeks, and Philotimus
his speech was interrupted with extremity of grief. At length Archaretos
recomforted him, hasting him forward to his journey for fear of preuentions,
he appointed him well with gold and jewels, such as might well pay his
charges till time of better provision.

Alas good Philotimus, (said Archaretos) these are not thy garnished
garments, thy cloth of tinsell and gold, thy braceletts and chains, and thy
new fashioned novelties.

Well (quoth Philotimus) though I cannot go with the fashion, yet do I follow
the fashion: for in years of yore, before pride was in prime, when the purse
was rich and the apparel poor, this was the guise. Here they gave each other
the Bazelos manus, whose dolorous departure (Gentlemen) pardon me though I
describe it not, because I want an heart to attempt it, and words to utter it.
Yet I will not forget to recounte you certain verses, which Philotimus writ
immediately before his voyage, and Archaretos afterward found in the chamber
where they communed, and these they were.

Might mournful wailing end my days,
or pinching careful woe surcease:
Then hope might have his wished death,
or life enjoy his wonted ease.
But wealth is wast, and kin unkind,
all luckles haps deny my joy,
So direful grief must ever last,
and lingering life augment annoy.
In pleasant May-moone of mine age,
I mean the lusty gallant prime,
Where golden pleasure bears the sway,
and youthful sportes do pass the time:
Even then alas poor wretched wight,
my gladsome mirth was heavy moan,
My new sprung Rose did scarcely bud,
where straightway blasting all was gone.
Yet mauger frowning fortunes spite,
my swetest (l) is ever one,
Not near by birth but dear by love,
and sure more faithful never none:
His will is still as erst it was,
no froward chance can change his choice,
In lieu where of fame sound his praise,
with most triumphant joyful voice.
Philotimus, took his journey toward the borders of Graece, inquiring warily
as he went, what were the affairs of every Island, and what were the
conditions and enterteinment of the segniors of those territories, meaning, as
occasion should serve, to employ himself in some convenient service. I need
not recite to you the pensiuenes of this pilgrimage, when as he truly thought
that whatsoever was about him, was a circumference of danger, and he himself
a center of calamity. But this know, that he was afflicted with those
casualties which commonly are wont to befall to all unfortunate strangers, when
they travail in foreign nations without any protection: that is, to be spoiled
of his money, to be infected with diseases, and tossed from post to pillar,
like an esp^al or runnagate. When he was robbed of that little substance which
he had, destitute of friends and acquaintance, ashamed te beg, and detesting
to steal, he was urged to relieve his greedy hunger with the wild fruits of
the wilderness, and to take up his lodging in some secret cave or vault, or
amid some shrowding shrubs, or under some tree.

As Heliodorus Aethiopicus reports, that in Aegipt a little from the river of
Nylus, there inhabited certain heardmen, which expelled all the right owners
of the soil, and lived themselves with rauine and theuedome: so Philotimus was
now hit into a place, which a crewe of like companions had long haunted,
usurping those quarters sole to themselves. The gardeine and Roy of these
fellows, was one Toxilus, who with his lieges having one night raunged abroad
for their pray, at their returnement to cabin in a cave which siely Philotimus
had fore-possessed.

Toxilus entering the cave, and finding him lie groaning, beating his breast,
with sobs and throws, and dismayde almost amazde at this sight started aback,
and churlishly asked him what wight he was.

Philotimus answered: a wight scarce worthy naming, whose woes can none
express, and at Toxilus his importunity disclosed himself. The thief
thought this a fit occasion to increase their crewe with so meet a copes
mate, and hereupon unfolded the whole pack of his conspiratoures and their
intentes, with these persuasions to entice him.

The prince of Syracusa sacked the Temple of Proserpina at Locris, and spoiling
her treasure made a mockage at his theft. Thyamis a noble man's son defeated
of his priesthood, became a captain of theuish heardme^, such good fellows as
we: Paris was an arraunt thief both of women and of wealth: It was the law of
Arms among the Ethiopians, and whether it be there yet, or else where at this
day, I know not, that the soldiour might take all, or whatsoever it pleased
him, of that he found about his prisoner whom he caught: The Persian king did
never go abroad with open face, but with some lawne or silkin scarf, much
like this vale of mine: Aegeon spronge of Gods their race, does scour the
Seas, and souls the traffic of the trading merchauntes: Haste thou not
heard this precepte of Lycurgus, where the Lions skin will not serve, sow the
Foxes to it, that is to interpret it, where honest force will not avail, use
fraud and falsehood, and set conscience to sale. We are honest enough my
friend, as far as our wealth will serve, and are no worse then they that
borrowe money, but that we give no obligations when to pay it again, what
say thou man?

Philotimus looking wistly on him, with a deep sigh answered.

I cannot testify in words, how much I detest thy ways, nor verefy that for
good, which thou inuertest for guile: each queachye grove, each craggie cliffe
with sedge and lofty oysiers, and this same sprinting spring that's courbo
about with pebble stones, inueighs against your fact.

Hoorde in mind that story, and store well that horror, which Jupiter at his
procuration, and secret visitation of the earth, extended upon the ingluuious
rauenour Lycaon.

When Jove came down from heaven, and had entered the harbourles house of late
the Archadian king, such time as twilighte on the earth began to bring dim
darkness, he gave a sign that God was commen, whereat Lycaon made a sport, and
scoffingly said, he meant by open proof to see what wight of weight he was.

Besides he cut the throat of one that lay in hostage with him, which was an
Epyrote, whereof he part did roast, and part did slew, which when it came to
board, forthwith with dire reue^ging flame Jove overthrew the house upon the
ownees head: who seeing this, appauld with fear, slipped out of doors into the
wild and desert wooddes, where all alone endeavoring (but in vain) to make his
moan, he fell a howling, wherewithal for dery rage he ran out of his wits,
still setting blood abroch, and practicing his wonted lust of slaughter on
poor and lielie cattaile.

His garments turnde to shaggye hair, his arms to rugged paws, his skin is
hoarie gray, his shape turned to a wolves, his looks still grim with glaring
eyes, his cruel heart still shows it self in outward shape.

Thus was one house destroyed quite.

Nor he alone shall be condemned by rigorous doom, but for such like, did
Jove (as Naso says) summon all the Gods to his court of parliament, which
then he kept in princely palace amid the Heavens: A Palace gorgeous in
apparaunt sight, on stately pillars builded high of yellow burnisht gold,
beset with sparkling carcbuncles: ye roof was framde of yuory, ye silver
twisolde doo^es did cast a radiant light: And there a perfect plat of all the
world did Vulcan draw, of surges that embrace the earth with winding waves and
of the surefast centrie ground, and of ye wheeling heaven it self: there firye
foming Jove in purple robes and roial throne of Emerauldes fresh and grene did
sit, the Chrisolites and gems whereof did give a sheere and shining light.

See thou not yen milk white pathe that cross the welkin wendes? (we
commonly call it Galactaea) yen is the street that to the Court of whom I
speak, does lead. Even yonder thundering Jove remains, and yonder did he
call his Court, and yonder did he swear by Stix, leaning upon his three-tind
mace (when dreadfully he shook his bushie locks, wherewith he made both Sea
and land, and Heaven it self to quake) that all the ympes of such like
spiteful Carnes, as this Lycaon was, that francke their flesh on that they
filch, and gulpe up blood for bear, should smart of Lycaons whip, or worse
perhaps: For Lycaon you know, was coosin german to high Jove. O what a
wickedness it is to cram the maw with maw of man (as Cyclopes wont to do.)

I take you for no Christians, and therefore I use to Ethnicks the authority
of Ethnickes, which notwithstanding were not so irreligious as you, to make
honesty arbitrary, and in their choice whether they should use it or no. Libeus
was honored of the Sycilians, Ceres of the Rhods, Diana of the Ephesians,
Belus of y^ Palestines, Delphos of the Argiues, Juno of the Numydians, Venus of
the Thebanes, and Berecinthia of the Thebans: Which Gods were so devoutly
worshipped of their country nations both with daily oratories and rich
offeringes, that all men had this Plerophotia^ and full persuasion, that each
word from their God was deemed an oracle, and every offense to their God, a
corsiue to their conscience.

Those that deal with fortune, must entreat her, not force her, not get
wealth by stealth, for that will not prosper, but labor honestly for it, for so
it will thrive. The Augusts are said to begin in Caius, and the Caesar's to end
in Nero: which gives us to understand, that of virtue ensues all good things
behoofull, and by vice do decay all former prosperities.

Ah sirrah quoth Toxilus, now I remember the saying of the pleasant Philosopher
Mimns, Qui cum lasso samilico loquitur r^xa^ quarit, He that helps a beggar
out of the ditch shall be stung with his lyce. But I perceive a wrangling tongue
is the best language thou have. Yet Toxilus and his company aggrizd at these
words, neither able to reply against them, nor willing to apply them to their
amending, left him as they found him: what became of the^, I neither am very
certain, neither need you to doubt knowing their demeanor.

Philotimus thanked God, that he had delivered him from those temptations, and
prayed to his mercy, over to safeconduct him from such suggestio^s. But as
decayed Vear renues her vert grene leaves, and as the naked Serpent recouers
his scaly finnes, and every wasted thing does wear to former state: so
Philotimus began to make reiteration of his sorrows, never having respite but
for a greater spite ensuing, nor ceasing to sighe but for increasing his sobs.
When Io was transmute of Jove into an Hefars form (to bleare Jove's spouses
eyes, yt she might deem, no dame he had defloured, but only that a beast
was pasturing in the field (she rued this bestiall change of hers with
dankishe fear, and by and by assaying to complain, she lowed out, which did
her so affray, that often she started at her noise: unto her father Inachs banks
she did repair apace, where often the lithie Nymph had played her iocundary
reakes: now when she looked in the stream and saw her horned head, she was
aghast and from herself would all in have have fled, and when she thought to
lift her hands unto her head for help, she saw she had no hands at all: in
stead of costlye couch and dear bought down, she satte a nights upon the
ground, and on such grounds, whereas sometime was not so much as grass, and
oftentimes she was compelled to drink on muddie oasye pits, and for her food
on croppes of trees and bitter weeds to brouze: even such, and much alike was
the life of Philotimus. His sound reboundes into the wood, and thus he mournes.

Ye greedy gripes, forbear to tire on Titius growing-hearte: O Tantal, that
indeuorest to drink the shuning water, and Danaus daughters, that seek to
fill your tubs that have no brinkes, and Ixion, that do draw in that
incessa^t wheel, and Sisyphus with thy rolling restles stone, wail ye no
more, work ye no more, your taskes and sorrows every each one are fallen unto
my lot. O God, alas.

O Maiaes son, Cyllemus sweet, and nephewe unto Atlas, who with thy charming
rod and pipe, bringst things asleep, and fetchest souls from Hell, assuage
my woes, assist my brain with rest, and drive away those terrors wherewith my
mind is tortured. And as the drinkers of the River Salmacis, or of the lake of
Aethiop, do quite forgo their memory: or as Melampus Amithaons son,
delivered king Praetus his daughters by his charms and herbs, from being
mad: so thou vouchsafe this gracious boon, and yield no such recourse of
thoughtfull passed state, (unto my woes a nourishment) but let it now surcease
and end, and woes decay with famishment.

In Pallene there is a people, the which by diuinge thrice three times in
Triton lake, become all fethered, and take upon them the shape of birds.
Fair Phaetuse and Lampetie the daughters of the Sun and Clymen, bewraying salt
brine tears, and still be wayling brothers death, were ouergrowen with slender
bark, and turned to trees (of which said trees in guard of their goodwill and
moan, flow gummie tears that Amber men do call, which hardened with the
Sun, and falling from the boughs into the brook, do serueas things of
price to deck our Ladies wrests, and wear about their necks) so rather then
I spend my days in spitefusl dole, convert me good Mercury, to some Tree or
stone, that may do the service, or Aurelia some use.

Now brighte Hyperion was in mids of sky, and searde the field with fiery
rays, so that for very languishing heat Philotimus was constreynd to seek a
shade.

Not very far of, there was a valley thick with Pineapple and Cipresse trees,
that armed were with pricks, and in the furthest end thereof, there was a
pleasant boure vaulted with the leauy trees: by nature it was wal^ with flint
and pommy half about, and on the right side of the same a liuelye spring
with crystal stream full freshly flowed out, whereof the upper brimme was
grene with grass and matted herbs.

Here did Philotimus, that swet and swelted almost, rest himself to refreshe
his weakened limbs, and here he began afreshe to repeat his misery, which he
could never repel from his recording memory.

Into this valley had an old Shepherd (whose name was Laurus) forced with
heat, brought his flock, and he sitttinge under a pineapple tree, was
reading on an old motheaten book.

The shepherd hearing a lamentable sound, traced the voice till he had
started Philotimus, whom he found sitting under a Cipresse tree, leaning on his
left hand, sometimes beatinge his heels against the ground, sometimes
knocking his head against the Tree, sometime heauing his displaied hands to
heaven, calling for mercy and revenge, the one to pacify his mood, the other
a meede for his enemies cruelty. When his rage was assuaged, and he had fed
his fill upon this estasie, Laurus something more emboldened then before,
giving him a tap on his shoulder with his sheepehooke, saluted him after this
manner.

My Son, God speed thy study, and breed thy quiet, augment thy patience,
or lessen thy penance: and if thy grief may be told, and my rudenes
accepted, bewray it to me, I will betray thee to none: credit me a stranger
(good yongman) I will be as true to thee as the beggar to his dishe. What
haste thou trespassed against thy self, thus to tormente thee without cause or
reason? Declare (good Son) and doubt not: conference is conuenable to
subdewe direful melancholy, and difference of talk makes diversity in
thought. A slender poale can supporte a large vine, and my sleighte ability
may assiste thy debilitie. Open to me thy state, and hope to be bestad. A
shepherds scrippe is stuffed erewhile with better fare then bacon: a graish
weed does veil sometimes a gayer wit then velvet: a gray goose wear
becoms a wearied mind, but does not prove a goosish sot benumbed man: an
hoarie head does hoorde both sores and salues for every crased mind. Now of
fellowship say, and unfold thy dismal dristresses as we sit in this cooly
shade.

Philotimus seeing his friendly talk, countnaunced by a reverent aspect of
gravity, saluted him after this form.

Hail worthy shepherd what ere thou art, of greater worth then Laure I
think, if Laure himself did hear. But since you are importune to hear my
importable destinies, I will neither be captious to misconstrue your good
meaning, neither ungrateful to deny a kind demand, yt one an argument of a
peuish mind, the other a consequent of a perverse judgment: then my case
stands thus.

If pleasures be in painfulnes, if joys accord with carefulnes, if mirth may
be in misery, if banishment be liberty, then am I most pleasant, most
ioifull, most merry, most free: but ay lady mercy, I am quite the contrary.

I am a captive clapped in chains of care, lapt in the laws of lethall love,
and as the dog all only for the taste does gnawe the bone: so forth I draw
this irked life with fancies vain repaste. My corsiues comfort is but this,
that as a siedged forte with foreign force, for want of aid must yield at
last: so this my corpse thus courst with cares, for want of ease shall quickly
fade.

I have friends (or had friends) whom if good nature had taught to go upright,
when they learned to hault of wayward will, I had not been a president of
mischief, nor needed present counsel, I had been better advised, then now to
need advertisement, my winged desire had not been clogged with despair,
neither had I had this clue of care to work my warpe upon.

My fame had not failed, nor my fortune quayled, nor this bloom of my blame,
bred of the seed of their shame. My Courtiers steed had not been turned to a
Colliers cut, nor passed wealth to present want: I had not been expelled from
mine own country, nor here exposed to the wrecke of fortune.

Not to make a profound parable of a plain brobleme, nor to be nyce in
concealing that, which all the world does know, I will disclose some part of my
follies, which have been the close procurers of my fall.

I loved a Less (alas why did I so?) which made full many a swearing
promise, that I should be the platform, where she would plant her
gooodwill, and the only ground where she would graft her grace. But as I was
a sottish Ass to believe a faithles trull: so she made me an horned Ox to
harnish my love.

Why (quoth the shepherd, meaning to drive him out of his dumpes) it is a
point of a good gardener to plant in the highest ground, and therefore did
she choose thy head to graft her slips in.

Good shepherd (quoth Philotimus) be not too gamesome in so heavy a case: for
play is turned to earnest, where game makes loss, and these merry conceits
make but choleric melancholy. marmalet is no meat for mowers, nor pleasure a
pastime for distressed men: if thou list to hear my state, listen a while to
the tenure of my talk.

I was once a pleasant moate in my mistrisses eye, whiles I had a beam in mlne
own not to discern her dealinges: she the^ had a golden tongue (as Berosius
had for his eloquence) when my purse was so proud, that the lyning was silver:
I then see her lovely when my candle burnt bright, and now stink in her
nosthrils like loathly snuff, when my light is extinct. When my wealth was
first broched, I was sweet to her taste, but since it came to the dregs, she
shuns me like poison. When the honey dew of gold did drop upon her fingers,
and fortune flowed with full stream, then was I worthy to be master of her
barge, but ah now. Yet I wish her long prosperity, and my present death.

Truly (quoth the shepherd) and for thy sake (though I have as little
acquaintance with thee, as thou haste credit with her) I wish with all my
heart, she were with Charles the fourth Emperor of that name. Yet I request
not thy death before his time: for I hope thou shall eat of the goose that
shall tread on her grave. But I perceive thou art no good Grammarian, that
prefer est ye feminine gender to the masculine, and thy mistrisses love before
thine own safety. Me thinks her goodwill that will not be warmed at any
fire, should quickly aslake thy feruente affection, and since I could not
support her lack, I would learn of reason to suppress my love.

Shepherd, said Philotimus, in this she is qualifyed like Satyrus, who
embracing fire was not scortched, neither can my smoldering heat enkindle any
warmth in her.

Laurus replied.

Thou see (my son) she is a star that will not come within the compass of
thy Sphere, and therefore beat not thy brains about this bootles Astronomy.
The sweet tree Ebenus is good and pliable in his proper nature, but being cut
or hewn, turns to a stone. When her teeth does loose the knot yt her tongue
tied, thou art enlarged and at liberty, as thou were before this bond.
Naytheles, I would not have thee misconstrue my words, for it is not my purpose
to miscontent thy mind: and indeed I censure of thee, ye honor should rather
eternish thee for thy martial hardines, then that thou should do her homage
for her pranked haughtines, and I do rather persuade me, that thou deseruest a
better the^ she, then I can brook to hear thee commend such a retrograde
dissembler. These sighinges in her absence can small deal profit thee, whose
instance in her presence could not prevail. Therefore tender thy state and
forget her.

Philotimus looking upon him, neither backward nor forward, but like ye picture
of the sielie man Dulius, pitifully God knows, and very wistly, sighed out
these words.

O father shepherd, whiles thou endeuorest to staunch a vein in my liner,
thou let me blood in the very heart: thou cuttest the grass, whereof I
meant to make my hay, which though it now be a common for others to graze in,
yet I love it the better, because it might have been my frehold. She is ye
brau^ch, the root, and the tree, she is my head, my body, and my soul, the
first A. of my crosrow, and the last letter of my learning, without her I am
not, she is all in all, and all in every part. O Aurelia, dear Aurelia, What
(shepherd) do thou think my mind a roll of ware to receive the
impression of inhumaine disloialtie?

I know Bucephalus cannot be bridled without Alexhnders consent, nor the
Crocodile, tied to a Tree without Caesar's enforcement, nor Aurelia be co^yed by
any persuasions but her Cornelius his: Yet if I were able, I had rather give
thee a wedge of Gold to make a lock for thy lips, then thy tongue should be a
pickelocke to open the least part of her evil dealings, whose wished welfare is
sacred to me, and whose subtle practices shall be secret to thee.

If I had Gyges his faculty, to go unseen into my country, it were enough
for me but to view her.

I confess that by her means I am a scorn to the best, and a scum of the
worst, I expect no good by her, but suspect a propagation of my misfortunes:
yet now to forsake her after my long love, were to buy fish and give it to
the dogs, and to take thy barren counsel in these affairs, were as if a
calfe should suck a bull. O shepherd, much water passes besides the mill
that the milner sees not, and much has happened within the compass of thy
experience, whereof thou tookest little keep. I will commend the for a cunning
shepherd when I know thy skill, and will thank thee for thy courtesy, but not
take thee for a counsalour.

The good shepherd quietly answered. My good child, because I do see thee so
incapable of good counsel, in stead of a Rose to yield a sweet savor, I
was a thorn in thy nose to stir the up to sense, I spoke sharply, but meant
fatherly. Be yet of good cheer (my son) behind the door stands the wall,
and Time holds the glass of thy good fortune. But in the mean season, I do
so much the more lament thy casualties, for that thou and I have been birds of
one feather, paid tribute to one Caesar, and been fellow soldiers in the
same legar: so that he which has my misaduentures, and is enthralled with thy
present state, may vie the pair for sorrow, whatsoever the stake be.

Notwithstanding, though thou whose state was once extolled, art now
controuled of checkmate spite, and diuested from thy throne, despair not tho
as a miscreaunt, nor destruste thy possibilitye. Often have I seen as unlucky
a Burrowe harbor a Connye: Often have I known, as unskillful as great
humility, as I unadvisedly solicit my suite. So it is my good servant, that
my provident care to preserve my state, and thy sober discretion in all thy
dealings, induce me to thank thee for thy trusty policy, and to crave thee
for my phear and lawful husband. Yet I beseech thee impute not this to lust
(for such perturbations are placed in my preterpect tense, but refer it to the
virtue of thy good demeanor, which has a force attractiue, to draw all
hearts to it. What say thou man? If my breach of manners have staind my art
of wooing, then be thou a mannerly maid for me, and say nay and take it.

I answered her in these or the like words.

My good mistress, your meritorious charity has so long relieved me, and your
present courtesies offer me such kindness, that for ye one you may challeng me
to be your vassal, and with the other you have stricke me into a maze.
Wherefore I ask forgiveness on my knees, if I do not accomplish your reasonable
command, and whiles I live I will punish my untowardly mind, that is not
submissiue to your good meaning.

Yet this I will tell you, which perhaps you have heard: when the Moon which
is ye lowest planet, is in conjunction with Saturn which is the highest
planet, there can no good nativity issue from them: when Winter marries
Summer, write it up for a wonder, and when an old grift in a young plant
fructifies good fruit, ye year will pippins be preservative from ye plague:
The greenenes of my youth, and the gravity of your years, are discordes in
descante, and therefore can they never make good music. I am meeter for your
servant then your sovereign, and you fitter form y mistress then to be my
fellow. If I were pha^tasticall (good mistress) your clemency and good nature
could withdraw love from other obiectes, and allure it to your self: but I
have vowed singlenes and will be true votarie, for what cause, God and my
conscience best knows.

At this time we brake of, she telling me, that she doubted not but I would be
better advised, and I aunswering, that I wished I could satisfy her
expectation. Many colloquies had we about these matters after this, but her
earnest instaunce wrought but my resistau^ce, and my waiwardnes, her goodwill.
At length with much ado, and many entreatings, I got leave to be manumitted of
her service with her good liking.

Her reward at my departure was very bountiful, and though my ability were
too slender to make requital, yet was my grateful heart not unwilling to be
thankful..

Then in the progreffe of my travail, my meditation was, what course of life
to take. And since my lignage was obscure, and my parentage but base, I would
needs have enterprised some exploite, with the atchieuement of which, I might
have been to my posterity an original of true gentilitie. Amongst the rest,
the soldiers profession I most honored, and though I had been trained up in
learning, and never seen a lined camp, yet did I think that my reading with
a little experience, would afford me such knowledge as would suffice a
soldiour. Machaon and Podali^e the sons of Coronis, two excellent doctors in
physic, were Coronels of the Tricenses, Ithomenienses, and Occaliens, that
came to Troy with thrice ten sail. Could not I then for a need, marshall the
battaylons and phalanges of footmen, and raunge the soldiers with good
disposition? place the chariots in ye front, the choice footmen in the
rereward, and the weak ones in the midst? O brave, when bloody trumpe to
battle soundes, and lusty neighing horse bestirres him on the ground.

But when I looked back to see my self and the feebleness of my sielye
carcass, alas poor man (quoth I) thou art more like to fight with a Crane,
as Homer in the third of his Iliades says that the Pygmyes do, then attain
by thy valor to any notable conquest: surcease from this devise I wish. Nay,
Diana in her trayninge chase delights, Minerua in her chattering arms does
march, Apollo in his siluer-sounding cords disportes, yet none of these are my
content. The fragrant fields, the rural lawnes, where Zephyrus inspires the
fruitful earth, and does attire each bushe with budde and bloomie branch,
where the purple Colum^ine, and the orient cowsloppe, the daffadillie and the
pretty lilly, the dazie and the violet, do may in array, shall be my palace and
my paradise.

After all my consultations had been accomptant to my reason, this was the
foot of my determination. I met with an old ancient shepherd, with whose
tranquillity of life (being seiunged from all human troubles) I was much
delighted. Him I endeavored to serve, and after his decease, the small flock
which he kept in his life, was mine by his bequest after his decease. The
residue of my life have I led ever since in this vocation, where at my
pleasure I could study good authors, and be contemplative when I list, and my
mansion house is yonder little cottage, which thou see stand amid the trees.
My name as thou rightly gessedst at the first, is Laurus. Now, if thou can
either brook my kind of life, or accept the needines of my cheer, I will
either make thee a companion in my calling as long as I live, or give thee
whiles thou listest, such entertainment as I can.

Philotimus his humor was frankly fed with this discourse of the shepherd.
Laurus (quoth he) I gratulate thy presence, and am glad to see thee, much have
I heard of thee which now I will not repeat, and I think my self happy that
I have met with thee But as for thy life, I rather admire it then mean to
imitate it. For a candle put under a bushel, is light in vain, and a tale^t
hid, is to small purpose. If thou can give me knowledge of any Court nere at
hand, or any nobleman that will vouchsafe me his service, I shall think my
self much beholden to thee. Truly quoth the shepherd, in good time: for not
many leagues from hence, does soiourne a famous and virtuous Gentleman, the
prince of this province: whose peaceable policy and divine government, I
cannot rightly match, but with that most renowned regiment of the worthy
Queen ELIZABETH, now Queen of England, whose royal excellency,

Ah Laurus (quoth Philotimus) there hold, least in talking of Elizabeth's
majesty, thou be overwhelmed with her glory.

Her virtues must be adored with sincere contemplation, but cannot be
recensed without abridging of her praises. If thou should magnify her
highness with the eloquence of Tully, and every of these hills, wherewith thou
art environed, should Echo forth ten thousand voices, thy words would be
wasted in ye prologue of her praises, and the Echoes die for joy to hear her
name expressed. There is no vacum of her fame in rerum natura, all the world
ringes of it.

Well then (quoth Laurus) although I am not imbued with an autorchye of
faculty, to praise her as I would: yet do I not want a true lieges loyalty,
to pray for her majesty with an interminate devotion. And since the prince of
whom I speak, is in the Positive degree of her Superlatiue, thou shall not
need to doubt of his wisdom in deciphering thy good qualities, nor of his
clemency to vouchsafe the service.

To morrow next there is sollem hunting in the park here adjoining, at which
sport the prince will be present: and to morrow the Moon is in conjunction with
Jupiter, at which time I have red, yt it is prosperous to solicit any suite to
a nobleman. There by mine advise thou shall exhibit thy complaint in some pretty
piteous premeditated oration.

O (quoth Philotimus) shall I an uncouth stranger, so abruptly present my
self to a mighty prince? so I should rather seem to checkmate modesty, then
challenge meede.

Tush dastard (replied the shepherd) auaunt despair: crave in hope, and have
in ha^, often have thou heard it, and now shall thou try it, that fortune most
usually favors the venterous.

That night Philotimus lodged with Laurus, and the morning following all yelad
in grene, semblable to his griefs which were ever fresh and grene, he paced
forward to the park, where after a delicate banquet, whereto the prince was
invited in a coolye pauished arbor, after the game, Philotimus in due time
prostituting himself before his feet, and making as though he had some
straung news to utter, thereby to move his attention, delivered this speech
ensuing

If I were as shamfast (renowned prince) as modesty persuades my young grene
years, or if your honor did strike such an horror to my fainting heart, as
is wont to be common in humble suites, and partly thought commendable in such
abiected creatures as my sielie self, where now I feel the scant of skill to
bewray my wailfull case, and thereunto to move your merciful remorse, it would
also force a want of will, amyd your weighty affairs to use this careless
babbling, (whereof God knows you can but make full course account) to take wary
heed, and not to enterprise by rusticke speech, so foolish hardye bold
attempt, to awake my wits and lull my tongue asleep.

But alas (my Lord) sharp misery learnes bold policy, better solicit a
king, then always live a beggar. The cowardlye champion hembd in with listes
does often conquer, he, on whom poverty has so incroched, that scarce he can
move him out of his standing, but pinching need does catch him by the back,
must of necessity strain courtesy with modesty.

Yet I see my ambition above my condition, and a Pharisees desire pass a
Publicanes desert, and can it prevail with haulting heel to strive to hoppe
against the hill? Can the sluggish snayle with creeping pace ever reach the
Castles tower? Will the lusty Ship with top and top gallant, all fleeting away
with flanta galanta, veil bonnet to the boat so far underneath her, so tossed
through her weakness with every tempest? O happy I if this may be: and it
pleases sweet Hope to send forth an Echo and tell me It may be. The
mounting kite does sometimes seize on homely pray, Phoebus for all his
heavenly throne vouch safes to lend his comfortable light, as well to the
valleys as to the mountains. Then to my matter. And because my colors shall
not fade or soil, I will painte out my self with the oil of Truth.

I am a Gentleman borne in Italy, descended from the lignage of a noble house:
in my infancy and primetide of my youth, I was addicted to good letters, and
trained up in Florence in the study of the sciences: and after that by my
parents decease I was invested in their inheritance, I followed the Court,
and did attend upon the Dukes grace of Venice.

And Hinc illae lachrimae, from thence came these miseries. For there, not
being urged with any impositions of the Duke, but inclined to prodigallitie of
mine own wastfull nature, I made dilapidations of all my parents revenues,
and quite consumed all my possessions: then being ashamed in my needy
beggerie, to stay any longer in my country, and partly afraied of my greedy
creditors, least they should extend the rigor of their extremity, I
abandoned my native soil, seeking good fortune where I could find her: and as
Cadmus directed this journey that way toward which his staff fell: so I made
my voyage thither, whither it pleased God and destiny to guide me. Now (most
puissant Prince) if my secret instincte of divination do not deceive me. I
hope under your favorable protection, here to house my self in a safe
harbor. Surmise not I most humbly beseech your majesty, that I come as a
sentinall within your dominion, neither suspect me of any treachery, that may
be prejudice to your personage. For if by this fair pretense I intend any
other thing then to do your highness most duetifull service, and partlye to
renew my decayed state by your royal bounty, then I wish and pray, that
presently in your presence, the Gods most miraculously work my confusion. Not
much I owe to many, and little more I owe to some, but most of all, and all
it self, shall I owe to your highness, if you vouchsafe me your most regal
service. I am not harnished with a complete faculty in all mysteries, to execute
any function with facility, but (be it spoken without offense to any of your
subjects) imploye me at your pleasure abroad or at home, and if my daily
diligence be inferior to any man's, (although my might be much like hers whose
wealth was but a mite) then let me loose my due reward, and dye the death of a
villainous traitor. Thus loath any longer to trouble your highness with my
bablatiue eloquence^, and to keep my self in suspense of your wished
answer, I surcease my prating, praying God to preserve you, and expecting the
resolution of your majesty's determination.

The noble Prince seemed to take delight in his speech, which God knows was
framed with small study, and taking him by the hand made him stand up,
speaking as follows.

We see (my friend) that in the shallowest water is hid

Per. I have also red which thou addest not, that if they see not within seven
days after, they are blind for ever: and thou know how long I have borne my
crosses: yet I profess to thee Pandolpho, that I was never better comforted
with a cullisse in my sickness, then my mind was cheared with this story of
Philotimus. And therefore I beseech thee, commend me hartelie to the sweet
self of good Melanthus, and tell him, that if I might enjoy his company
together with thine, I should be restored to half my former happiness.


Pand. I will (good Periander) and now that I know thy mind, we will not long
be absent from thee. In the mean time good night my sweet friend, and as thou
can comfort thy self, and I will pray for both our prosperities.


Per. Ten thousand good nights my good Pandolpho, and so many thanks for this
present courtesy, and so many wishes for thy next company.


FINIS.
AT LONDON.

Imprinted by Roger Ward, dwelling nere Holburne Conduit at the sign of the
Talbot, and are there to be sold. 1583.


