THE FAMELIE OF LOVE.
Acted by the Children of his Majesty's Reuells.

Lectori. Sydera iungamus, facito mihi Iuppiter adsit, Et tibi Mercurius noster
dabit omnia saxo.



At London Printed for John Helmes, and are to be sold in Saint Dunstans
Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1608.

To the Reader.
TOo soon and too late, this work is published: Too soon, in that it was in
the Press, before J had notice of it, by which means some faults may escape
in the Printing. Too late, for that it was not published when the general voice
of the people had sealed it for good, and the newness of it made it much more
desired, then at this time: For Plays in this City are like wenches new fallen
to the trade, only desired of your neatest gallants, whiles the' are fresh:
when they grow stale they must be vented by Termers and Cuntrie chapmen. I know
not how this labor will please, Sure J am it past the censure of the Stage with
a general applause, now (whether vox populi be vox dei or no) that I leave to
be tried by the accute judgment of the famous six wits of the City: Farewell.

Actorum Nomina.
Glister -- A Doctor of Physic. Purge -- A Jealous Pothecarie. Dryfat -- A
Merchant, a brother of the Family. Gerardine -- A Lover. Lypsalue -- Two
Gallants that only pursue City Lechery. Guggin -- Two Gallants that only
pursue City Lechery. Club -- A Prentice. Vial -- Servant to Glister. Smelt
and Periwincle. Pages to the Gallants.
Weomen.
Mystrisse Glister. Mistrisse Purge -- An Elder in the Family. Maria -- Niece
to Glister.
PROLOGVS.
IF for opinion has not blazd his fame,
Nor expectation filld the general round,
You deem his labors slight, you both confound
Your grauer judgment and his merits.
Impartial hearing fits judicious spirits*
Nor let the fruit of many an hour fall,
By enuies tooth, or base detractions gall.
Both which are tokens of such abject spirits,
Which wanting worth, themselves hate other merits:
Or else of such, which once made great by fame,
Repine at those which seek t'attaine the same.
From both we know all truer judgments free
To them our muse with blushing modesty
Patiently to her entreats their favor,
Which done, with judgment praise, or else dislike the labor.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
Actus Primus, scena prima.
Enter Doctor Glister, his wife, and Maria. Glister. Tricks and shows;
protestations with men are like tears with weomen, forgot ere the cheek be
dry: Gerardine is a gentleman, his Lands be in Statutes: A is not for thee nor
thou for him, a is a Gallant, and young thoughts be most unconstant.


Ma. Yet young vines yield most wine.


Mist. Glist. But old veins the best, believe not these great breecht
gallants, they love for profit, not for affection, if a brings thee to a fools
paradise, a will forsake thee.


Glist. Which fortune, God send my enemy: Love is a cold heat, a bitter
sweet, a pleasure full of pain, a huge loss, and no gain, why should thou
love him only?


Ma. Words cannot force what destiny has sealed,
Who can resist the influence of his stars,
Or give a reason why a loves, or hates
Since our affections are not ruld by will,
But will by our affections. It Is blasphemy
Against Loves most sacred deity, to axe
Why we do love, since it is his only power
That swayes all our affections, all things which be
Beasts, Birds, Men, Gods, pay him their fealty

Glister. Tut, Love is an idle fantasy, bred by desire, nursed by delight, An
humor that begins his dominion in Leo the Lion, the sign of the heart, and
ends in Aries the Ram, the sign of the head, His power is to stir the blood,
pricks up the flesh, fills all the body with a libidinous humor, and is
indeed the ouerture of all Ladies: which to prevent, J have banished Gerardine
(your dearly beloved) my house, and as for you, since I (...)


Lyp. In her smile deceitful.


Gug. Jn her hate reuengeable.


Lip. And in nothing but her death acceptable, Jle tell thee: there is no
creature more desirous of an honest name and worse keeps it, then a woman,
Do here, follow this song and if ever thou forsake thy Country for a
wagtayle, let me be whipped to death with ladies hearelaces.


Gera. Letts here that worthy song Gentill master Lipsalue.


Lips. Observe? Now if I list will I love no more
Nor longer wait upon a gill.
Since every place now yeeldes a wench
If one will not another will;
And if what I have heard be true
Then young and old, and all will do:
How do thou like this? man.

Gerar. No more no more,
This is the chamber which Confines my love,
This is the Abstract of the spacious world,
Within it holds a Iemm, so rich so rare
That Art or nature never yet could set
A valued prise to her in valued worth.

Lip. Vnvalued worth, ha ha ha! Why? she is but a woman,
And they are windy turning veins, love light as chafe which when
Our nourishing graynes are winnow'd from them,
Inconstantly they fly at the least wind of passion
A woman's eye, can turn it self with quick dexterity
And in each wanton glass can comprehend
Their sundry fancy suited to each fend
tut their loves are all compact of leuitie
even like themselves, Nil muliere lenius.

Gug. Tut man every one knows their worth, when they are at a rack rent; In
the term time, they bear as great a prise as wheat when transportations are.
--


Gera. Peace lets draw nere the window and listen if we may hear her.

Enter Maria at the window,
Ma. Debard of liberty! Oh that this flesh
could like swift moving thoughts transfer it self,
From place to place, unseen and vndisolued:
Then should no iron ribs, or Churlish flinte
divide my love and me, Deer Gerardin
despite of Chance or Gardians Tyranny,
Jde move within thy orb and thou in mine.

Lip. She Would move within thy orb, and thou in hers, blud she talk bawdy to her
self: Guggin stand close;


Ma. But in vain do I proclaim my grief,
when air and walls can yield me no relief.

Gug. The walls are the more stony ^arted then,


Lip. Peace good Gudgin gape not so loud.


Ma. Come thou my best companion, thou art sensible
and can my wrongs reitterate; Thou and I.
will make some mirth in spite of Tyranny:
The black brow'd night drawn in her pithie wayne
In starry spangled pride rides now ore heaune
Now is the time when stealing minutes tell
The stole delight ioyd by all faithful lovers
Now loving souls contriue both place and means,
for wished pastimes only I am pent
within the closure of this fatal wall
deprived of all my joys.

Ger. My dear Maria be Comforted in this?
the frame of heaven shall sooner sease to move,
bright Phoebus Steeds leave their diurnall race
and all that is forsake their natural being
Ere I forget thy love.

Ma. Who'es that protestes so fast?


Ger. Thy ever vowed servant Gerardine.


Ma. O By your vows it seems you would feign get up


Lip. I and ride to.


Ger. I would most loved Maria.


Ma. I knew it: he that to get up to a fair woman
will stick to vow and swear, may be accounted no man,
but tell me why have thou chose this hour to visit me?
which nor the day nor night can claim but both
or neither, why in this twylight camst thou?

Ger. T'auoyd suspicious eyes, I come dear love
To take my last farewell, fitting this hour
which nor bright day will clame nor pitchy night
An hour sit to part conjoined souls,
Since that my native soil will not afford
My wished and best content, I will forsake it
And prove more strange to it then it to me.
In times swift course all things shall find event
Be it good or ill, and destenies do grant
That most preposterous courses often gain,
What labor and direct proceedings miss.

Mar. VVo't thou forsake me then?


Ger. Let first blessed life forsake me, be constant
My absence may procure thy more enlarge
and then --

Ma. Desires conceit is quick, I apprehend thee
Be thou as loyal, as I constant prove,
And time shall knit our mutual knot of love,
VVear this my loves true pledge: I need not wish
I know thou wo't return, or will I say
Thou may conceal thy self being returned
till I may make escape and visit thee.
I prithee love attempt not to ascend
my Chamber window by a lathered rope?
the entrance is to narrow: except this post
Which may with ease, yet that is dangerous:
I pre thee do it not I here some call: Farewell
my constant love let after actions tell;
Exit Maria*
Ger. O perfection of women!
A plague of such perfection, How she woes, by negatiues shows

Gug. Thee? what to do? under color of disswation


Ger. She Is truly virtuous.


Lip. Tut man outward appearance is no authentic instance of the inward
desires, women have sharp faulcons eyes, and can soar aloft, but keep them
like Faulcons from flesh and they soon stoop to a gaudy lure.


Gera. Why then Hugonot women are admirable Angels.


Gugg. But Angels make them admirable devils.


Gera. My loves chaste smile to all the world does speak her spotles innocence.


Lipsalue. Women's smiles are more of custom then of curtesy, women are
creatures, their hearts and they are full of holes, apt to receive but not
retain affection; Thou will to morrow thou saift be gone, if thou will know
the worst of a Cuntries marry before thou go, for if thou can endure a
cursed wife, never care what company thou come in.


Gerar. Come merry gallants, will you associate me to my Cousin Purges the
Potticaries, and take part of my parting feasts to night.


Gug. O his wife is of the family of Love, I Will thither, perhaps I may prove of
the Fraternity in time, we will thither that's flat.


Exeunt omnes. Act. 1. Sena. 3.
Enter Mistrisse Purge Sola. What Club, Club, is Club within there.

Enter Club. Club. Mistrisse.


Mist. Purge. J pray what said Master Doctor Glister, will a come.


Club. A sent word a would, for a was but to carry a diet to one of his
pacients; what call you her, she that paints a day times, and looks fair and
fresh, on the outside, but in the night time is filthier then the inside of
Bocardo, and is indeed far more unsavory that know her forsooth.


Mist. Pur. Went a to her.


Club. A had a receipt for the Grincomes in his hand, and a said a would take
that in his way.


Mist. Pur. It Is well, and what guest besides him and his wife will be here at
supper.


Club. The first in my Account is Master Gerarine your cousin: Master Doctor
Glister and his wife: Master Drifat the Merchant, Master Lipsalue the Courtier,
Master Guggin the gallant, and their pages. These J take will be your full
number.


Mi. Pur. Then belike my room shall be stuffed with Courtiers and gallants to
night: of all men I love not these gallants, they will prate much but do little,
they are people most uncertain: They use great words, but little sense: great
Beards, but little wit: Great breeches but no money.


Club. That was the last thing they swore away.


Mi. Pur. Belike they cannot fetch it again with swearing, for if they could,
there is not a page of theirs, but wod be as rich as a monarch.


Club. There Is nothing mistrisse that is sworn out of date, that returns;
their first oath in times past was by the Mass: And that they have sworn
quite away: Then came they to their Faith, as by my Faith it is so: That in a
short time was sworn away too; For no man believes now more then a sees. Then
they swore by their honesties, and that Mistrisse you know is sworn quite
away: After their honestyes was gone, then came they to their Gentilitie, and
swore, as they were Gentlemen: and their Gentilitie they swore away so fast,
that they had almost sworn away all the Ancient Gentry out of the Land,
which indeed are scarce mist: for that Yeomen and Farmars Sons, with the
help of a few welchmen, have undertook to supply their places. That at the
last they came to Silver; and their Oath was, by the Cross of this silver, and
swore so fast upon that, that now they have scarce left them a Cross for to
Swear by.


Mist. Purge. And what do they swear by now their money is gone.


Club. Why by () and God refuse them.


Mist. Pur. And can they not as well say men refuse them, as God refuse them.


Club. No mistrisse, for men, especially Citizens and rich men, have refused
them their bonds and protestations already.


Enter Master Purge. Mistrisse Pur. It Is well, see how supper goes forward, and
that my shoes be very well blackt, against J go to the Familye.

Exit Club. Now sweet Chick, where have thou been, in troth law I am not well,
J had thought to have spent the morning at the Family, but now I am resolved to
take pills, and therefore I prey thee desire Doctor Glister that a wud minister
to me, in the morning.


Mast. Pur. Thy will is known, and this for answer say,
It Is fit that wisemen should their wives obey.
And now sweet duck know, I have been for my cousin Gerardines Will and have
it, a has given thee a legacy, but the total is Marias.

Enter Master Glister, Master Dryfatt, and Mistrisse Glister. Master Doctor,
your wife and master Dryfat are most welcome, now were my cousin Gerardine and
Master Lipsalue here, our number were complete.


Do. Glist. Is this frantic Will done, will master Gerardine to sea, let me
tell you I am no whit sorry, let such as will be headstrong bite on the bridle.


Ma. Purge. It Is here master Doctor, all his worth is Marias and locked in a
trunk, which by to morrow Sun, shall be delivered to your custody.


Dry. Me thinks it were a reasonable match to bestow your Niece on master
Gerardine: A is a most hopeful gentleman, and his revenue such, that having
your Neeces portion to clear it of all incombraunces, it will maintain them
both in a very worthy degree.


Doctor Glist. Tut, you are master Dryfatt the Merchant, your skill is greater
in Connyskins and Wollpacks, then in Gentlemen, his Lands be in Statutes, you
Merchants were wont to be Merchant staplers, but now Gentlemen have gotten
up the trade, for there is not one gentleman amongst twenty but his land be
ingagd in twenty Statutes staple.


Enter Lipsalue, Gerardine and Guggin. Lipsalue. Let every man his humor have,
I do at none repine,
J never regard whose wenche J kiss, nor who does the like by mine:
The indifferent minds I hold still best, what ever does befall,
For she that will do with me and thee, will be a wenche for all; and how goes
the squares.

Ma. Pur. Your stay gentleman does wrong to a great many of good stomachs, your
suppers expect you.


Guggin. And we our suppers.


Doct. And from what good exercise come you three.


Gera. From a play, where we saw most excellent Sampson excel the whole world
in gate carrying.


Dry* Was it performed by the youths.


Lypsal. By youths: why I tell thee we saw Sampson, and J hope it is not for
youths to play Sampson: Believe it we saw Sampson bear the Town gates on his
neck, from the lower to the upper stage, with that life and admirable accord,
that it shall never be equalled (unless the whole new livery of Porters set
their shoulders)


Mist. Pur. Fie fie, it is pity young Gentlemen can bestow their time no better,
This playing is not lawful, for I cannot find that either plays or players
were allowed in the prime Church of Ephesus by the Elders.


Dry. Aha, I think she ticklde you there.


Ma. Purge. Cosen Gerardine, shall the Will be read before supper?


Gera. Before supper I beseech you.


Lyp. J, I, before supper, for when these women's bellies be full their bones
will be soon at rest.


Dry. Well Master Doctor Pity the state of a poor gentleman it is in you to
stay his journey, and make him and your self happy in his choice.


Glist. Hold you content shall this Will be read?


Ma. Purge. It shall, read you good Master Lipsalue.


Lyp. Command silence then.


Gug. Silence.


Lyp. In the name of God Amen. Know all men by these presence, that I Gerardine
being strong of body, and perfect in sense.


Dry. That's false, there is no lover in his perfect sense.


Gug. Peace Dryfat.


Lypsal. Do give and grant to Maria Glister: Daughter of John Glister, and
Niece to Docter Glister Physician, all my leases, lands, Chattels, goods and
moueables whatsoever: This is stark naught, you cannot give away your
moueables, for Mistress Doctor and Mistress Purge, claim both shares in your
moueables by reason of their legacies.


Dry. That's true, for their legacies must go out of your moueables.


Lyp. J put it in all my moueables, these following Legacies being paid.


Gerar. Do so good Master Lypsalue.


Lyp. It Is done.


Mist. Purge. I pray read only the Legacies, for Supper stays.


Lyp. Well, the Legacies, first I give to my Cousin Mistrisse Purge A fair
large standing, what is this, O Cup; A fair large standing cup, with a close
stool.


Dry. It Is not so, it is not so.


Lyp. I cry you mercy, a close cover it is, To mistress Doctor I give a fair
Bodkin of gold, with two orient Pearls attending the same: All which are in my
Trunk to be delivered to the keeping of Maria, In witness, etc. Is this your
Will?


Gerar. It Is.


Lip. To it with your hand and seal.


Mist. Purge. How is it Chicke, I must have the standing Cup, and mistress
Glister the bodkin.


Mast. Purge* Right sweet Duck.


Gerar. I pray gentlemen put to your hands.


Dry. Come, your fists Gentlemen your fists.


Gerar. Mistrisse Glister, I have found you always more flexible to understand
the estate of a poor gentleman, then your husband was willing, therefore I
have thought it a point of charity to reveal the wrongs you sustained by your
husbands loosenes. Let me tell you in private, that the Doctor cuckolds Purgo
oftener then he visits one of his pacients: what a spares from you, a spends
lauishly on her: These Pothicaries are a kind of panders, look to it, if a
keep Maria long close, it is for some lascivious end of his own.


Mi. Gli. She is his Niece.


Ger. Tut, these Doctors have tricks, your nicenes is such, that you can
endure no polluted shows in your house, take heed least a make you a Bawd
before your time, look to it.


Lipsalue. Come, our hands are testimonies to thy follyes, shall's now to
supper, we will have a health go round to thy voyage.


Good. I and to all that forswear marriage, and can be content with other men's
wives.


Ger. Of which consort you two are grounds, one touches
the Base, and the other tickles the minikin.
But to our cheer, come gentles let us away,
The Roastmeat's in consumption by our stay.

Exeunt. Finis Act. Primi.
ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Actus Secundus, scena prima.
Enter Master Purge. THe gray eyed morning Braues me to my face, and calls me
sluggard, it is time for Tradesmen to be in their shoppes, for he that tends well
his shop, and has an alluring wife, with a graceful what de lack, shall be
sure to have good doings, and good doings is that, that crowns so many
Citizens, with the horns of abundance. My wife (by ordinary course) should
this morning have been at the Family, but now her soft Pillow has given her
counsel to keep her bed, Master Doctor should (indeed) minister to her: to
whose pills she is so much accustomed, that now her body looks for them as
duly, as the Moon shakes off the old, and borrowes new horns. J smile to my
self to hear our Knights and gallants say, how they gull us Citizens, when
indeed we gull them, or rather, they gull themselves: Here they come (in
Term time,) hyer Chambers, and perhaps kiss our wives: Well: what loose I by
that: Gods blessing on's heart I say still, that makes much of my wife, for
they were very hard favored, that none could find in's heart to love but our
selves: Drugs would be dog cheap but for my private well practizd doctor, and
such customers. Tut, jealousy is a hell, and they that will thrive, must utter
their wares as they can, and wink at small faults.

Enter Doctor Glister. Glist. The tedious night is past, and the iocond morn
looks more lively and fresh, then an oulde gentlewomans glazd face in a new
perriwigge; By this time my humorous lover is at Grauesend, and J go with more
joy to fetch his truncke, than ever the valiant Troianes did to draw in the
Grecian Jade, his goods shall into the walls of my Troy, and be offered to a
face more lively, then ever was that thrice ravished Helen, yet with such
Caution, that no danger shall happen to me.


Lypsalue and Gudgin at several doors, with their Pages, Shrimpe and
Periwinde. Good. Master Lipsalue, welcome within ken, we two are so nearly
linkt, that if thou be absent but one two hours, thy acquaintance grows
almost moldy in my memory.


Lip. And then fly blown in mine how do thou do.


Shrim. Fellow page, I think our acquaintance runs low to, but if it run not
of the lees, lets set it a tylt, and give 'hem some dregs to their moldy fly
blown complements.


Peri. No rather lets pierce the Rundlets of our running heads and give 'hem a
neat cup of wagshippe, to put down their Courtship.


Shr. Courtship, Cartship: for the tongues of Complementers run on wheels:
but mark 'hem they have not done yet.


Good. And in faith how yst: me thinks thou have been a long vagrant.


Lip. The Rogation has been long indeed: therefore we may salute as
ceremoniously as Lawyers when they meet after a long vacation, who to renew
the discontinud state Tale, they strech it out with such length, that whilst
they greet before, their Clyents kiss them behind.


Shr. If his nose were put in the remainder of that state Tale, he would say
twere an unsavory one.


Peri. J wonder why many men gird so at the Law.


Shr. I Will tell thee, because they themselves have neither Law nor conscience.


Good. But what news now? how stands the state of things at Brussels.


Lip. Faith weak and limber, weak and lymber: nothing but pride and double
dealing, virtue is vices lacky; beggars suck like horse leaches at the heart of
bounty, and loves theme so tyerd and spurgald, that he can be no longer ridden
with honesty.


Good. Well fare the City yet: there virtue rides a cockhorsse cherisht and
kept warm in good sables, and Fox furre, and with the breath of his nostrills,
drives pride and covetousness before him, like's own shadow: beggars have
whipping cheer, bounty obliges men to it, gives money for Scrips and Scrolls,
and liberality sealed with strong Arms and Herauldry, to out live mortality:
love there will see the last man borne, never give over while there is an Arrow
in the Quiver.


Lip. Now we talk of love, I do know not far hence so good a subject for that
humor, that if she would wear but the standing collor, and her things in
fashion, our Ladies in the Court were but brown sugarcandy, as gross as
grocery to her.


Good. She is not so sweet as a potticaries shop is she?


Lip. A plague on you, ha you so good a sent? for my life he is my Rival.


Gudgin. Her Name begins with mistrisse Purge dus it not?


Lip. True, the only commet of the City.


Good. I, if she would let her Ruffes stream out a little wider; but J am sure
she is ominous to me, she makes civil wars and insurrections in the state of
my stomach: J had thought to have bound my self from love, but her purging
comfets makes me loose body'd still.


Lip. What has she ministerd to thee then?


Good. Faith some Lectuary or so.


Lipsalue. J, I fear she takes too much of that Lectuary to stoop to love, it
keeps her body soluble from sin, she is not troubled with carnal crudities,
nor the binding of the flesh.


Good. Thou have sounded her then belike.


Lypsalue. Not I: I am too shallow to sound her, she is out of my Element, if I
show passion, and discourse of love to her, she tells me I am wide from the
right scope, she says she has an other Object, and aims at a better Love then
mine.


Good. O that's her husband.


Lip. No, no, she speaks pure devotion, she is impenitrable, no gold, or
Oratory, no virtue in herbs, nor no physic will make her love.


Gudgin. More is the pity I say, that fair weomen should prove Saints,
before Age had made them crooked: It Is my luck to be croft still, but I must
not give over the chase.


Lip. Come hither boy while I think on it.


Lipsalue and Shrimpe confer. Good. Faith friend Lipsalue I perceive you would
feign play with my love, a pure creature it is, for whom I have sought every
Angle of my brain: but either she scorns Courtiers (as most of them do,
because, they are given to boast of their doings) or else she is exceeding
straight lac't: therefore to prevent this smell smock, I Will to my friend Doctor
Glister, (a man exquisite in the Art magic) who has toulde me of many rare
experimentes auaylable in this case: Farewell friend Lypsalue.


Exit Good. and Periwind. Lip. Adieu honest Gregorio, frequent my lodging, J
have a Violl de Gambo and good Tobacco: Thou will do this feate boy?


Shr. Else knock my head and my pate together,


Exit Shrimpe. Lip. Away then bid him bring his measure with him: Gerardine is
trauel'd, and I must needs be cast into his mould: my flesh grows proud; and
Marias a sweet wench, etc. But yet I must not let fall my suite with mistrisse
Purge, least (Cede vacanti) my friend Gudgin join issue: I Will rather to my
learned Doctor for a spell, for J have a fire in my liver, burns like Hell.

Exit.
Enter Mistrisse Glister and Maria. Mist. Glist. J pray lets have no polluted
feet nor Rumatick chaps enter the house, I shall have my flower look more
gresie shortly, then one of your Inn of Court dyning Tables: and now to you
good Niece I bend my speech, let me tell you plainly, you are a fool to be
loue-sicke for any man, longer then he is in your company, are you so ignorant
in the rules of Courtship, to think any one man to bear all the prick and
praise? I tell thee, be he never so proper, there is an other to second him.


Ma* Let rules of Courtship be authentic still,
To such as do pursue variety,
But unto those whose modest thoughts do tend.
To honored Nuptials, and a regular life
As far from show of niceness, as from that
Of impure thoughts, all other objects seem
Respectlesse, of no proportion ballanst with esteem
Of what their souls affect.

Mist. Glist. No marvel sure you should regard these men with such reverend
opinion, there is few good faces, and fewer graces in any of them, if one among a
multitude have a good pair of legs, he never leaves ^iding the ring, till he
has quite marred the proportion: nay some (as I have heard) wanting lyniaments
to their liking, and Calfe to support themselves, are feign to use Art, and
supply themselves with quilted Calu^s, which oftentimes in Reuelling fall about
their Ancles, and for their behavior, wit and discourse (except some few that
are traveled) it is as imperfectious and silly, as your Scholars new come
from the University, by this light I think we loose part of our happiness
when we make these weathercocks our equals.


Ma. Disgrace not that for which our sect was made,
Society in nuptial beds above these joys
Which lovers taste, when their conjoined lips
Suck forth each others souls, the earth the Air,
Yea Gods themselves know none: Elisiums sweet
J all that bliss which Poets pens describe
Are only known, when soft and amorous foulds,
Entwine the Corpse of two united lovers,
Where what they wish, they have yet still desire,
And sweets are known without society.

Enter Wall. Nun. Here Is Club forsooth and his fellow prentise have brought
master Gerardines Trunk.


Mist. Glist. Let them come in if their feet be clean.

Ex. So then your best beloved is gone, fair weather after him; all thy
passions go with him, recomfort thy self wench in a better choice, his love
to thee would have bin of no longer continuance then the vntrussing of his
hose, then why sholdst thou pine for such a one.


Maria. She Is foolish sure, with what imperfect phrase,
And shallow wit she answers me.

Enter Club and another with the Trunk. Mist. Gli. Honest Club welcome, is
this master Gerardines Trunk? he is gone then?


Club. I indeed mistress Glister, he is departed this transitory City, but his
whole substance is here enclosed, which (by command) we here deliver to your
custody, to the use of mistrisse Maria according to the tenure of the premises.


Mi. Gli. Place it here my honest Club, well done: and how does thy mistrisse*
was she at the Family to day, -- spit not good Club, J can not abide it.


Club. Not to day forsooth, she has ouercharged her self and her memory, she
means to use a moderation, and take no more then she can make use of.


Mi. Gli. And I pre thee Club what kind of creatures are these Familists, thou
art conversant with them.


Club. What are they? With reverence be it spoken, they are the most
accomplished Creatures under heaven, in them is all perfection.


Mi. Gli. As how good Club?


Club. Omitting their outward graces, I Will show you only one insta^ce which
includes all other: they love their neighbors better then themselves.


Mi. Gli. Not then themselves Club.


Club. Yes better then themselves, for they love them beter then their
husbands, and husband and wife are all one; therefore better then themselves.


Mi. Glist. This is logic. But tell me does she not endeavor to bring my
Doctor of her side and Fraternity.


Club. Let him resolve that himself for here he comes.


Enter Doctor Glister. Do. Gli. O: have thou brought the Trunk honest Club, I
commend thy honest care, here is for thy pains.


Club. J thank you master Doctor, you are free and liberal still, you will
command me nothing back?

Exit.
Doct. Glist. Nothing but commendations, farewell: your sweet heart Gerardine is
by this time cold of his hope to enjoy thee: he'es gone, and a more equal and
able husband shall my care ere long provide thee: what clyents have bin here in
my absence wife?


Mi. Glist. Faith Mouse none that I know, more then an old woman that had lost
her Cat, and came to you for a Spell in the recovery.


Doctor Glist. I think egregious ignorance will go near to save this age,
their blindness takes me for a coniurer: yesterday a Justice of peace salutes
me, with profer of a brace of Angels to help him to his footcloth, some 3.
days before stolen, and was feign to use his man's cloak in stead on it.


Enter Vial. Nun. Heers a gentleman craves speech with you sir.


Exeunt Mistress Glister and Maria. Do. Gli. Go in sweet wife, and give my Niece
good counsel: His name.


Nun. He will not tell it me.


Do. Glist. His countenance.


Nun. I can see nothing but his eyes; the rest of him is so rapt in cloak,
that it suffers no view.

Enter Lipsalue.
Do. Glist. Admit him, what should he be for a man: what Master Lipsalue is it
you? why thus obscured, what discontent ouershadowes you.


Lip. A discontent indeed Master Doctor, which to shake off, J must have you
extend your Art to the utmost bounds: you Physitia^s are as good as false doors
behind hangings to Ladies necessary uses: you know the very hour in which they
have neither will to deny, nor wit to mistrust: faith now by the way, when are
women most apt.


Do. Gli. Shall I vnbutton my self unto you; after the receipt of a purgation*
for then are their pores most open: but what creature of a Courtier is it, has
drawn your head into the woodcocks noose.


Lyp. A Courtier? nay by this flesh, J am clean fallen out with them, they have
nothing proportionable.


Do. Glist. O I perceive then it is some City Star that atracts your aspect.


Lip. He knows by his Art -- in plain terms a certain Pothicaries wife.


Do. Glist. Upon my life master Purge, I smell you sir.


Lyp. You may smell a man after a purgation indeed: Sir, it is she: Now for that
same has bruted you to be a man expert in negromancy, I would endeavor my
self to you for ever, would you vouchsafe to let one of your Spirits bring
Mistrisse Purge into some convenient place, where I might enjoy her: I have
heard of the like, can you perform this.


Do. Gli. With much facility I assure you: but you must understand, that the
apparition of a spirit is dreadful, and with all covetous, and with no small
sum of gold hired to such feats.


Nun. Sir heers another gentleman muffeld too, that desires present conference
with you.


Doct. Glist. Walk you into that room, I will bethink my self for your
good, and instantly resolve you; let the gentleman come in: Lipsalue in love
with my vessel of ease? come to me to help him to a morsel most affected by
mine own pallat? No more but so, I have shapt it, the conceit tickles me.

Enter Gudgin. Sir, as a stranger J welcome you, what master Gudgin have J
caught you: J thought it was a gallant that walked muffled, Come, let me
behoulde you at full, here are no Sergeants man.


Good. Master Doctor, this my obscure coming requires an action more obscure:
and in brief this it is; Sir, you are held a man far seen in natures secrets, I
know you can effect many things almost impossible; know then I love mistrisse
Purge, and opportunity favors me not, nor indeed is she so tractable as I
expected, if either by medicine, or your Art magikall, you can work her to my
will, J have a poor Gallants reward sir.


Doct, Glist. That's just nothing. But how sir would you have me to procure you
access to mistrisse Purge, you never knew a physician a bawd.


Good. Why by coniuration (I tell you) wherein you are said to be as well
practiced, as in Physic; here is the best part of my present store to effect it.


Do. Glist. Not a penny for my self, but my Spirits indeed they must be fed;
walk you by here, while I think upon a spell. What mystery should this be,
Lipsalue and Gudgin both in love with mistrisse Purge, and come to me to help
'hem by Art magic? It Is some gullery sure; yet if my invention hold, i will fit
them: Enter one. Whose within there, fetch me in all have two good whips, I
think you may have them not far hence; It shall be so, now tell me master
Gudgin does no man know of your love to mistrisse Purge:


Good. Not a man by my Gentry.


Do. Glist. Then sir know i will effect it; but understand withal, the apparition
will be most horrid, if it appear in his proper form, and will so amaze and
dull your senses, that your appetite will be lost and weak, though mistrisse
Purge should attend it naked Now sir, could you name a friend with whom you
are most conversant, in his likeness should the spirit appear.


Good. Of all men living, my conversation is most frequent with Lipsalue the
Courtier.


Doct. Gli. It Is enough: i will to my Spirit -- are these whips come there?


Enter one with whips. Man. Ready here sir.


Doct. Glist. So lie thou there; my noble gallants i will so firke you: Sir my
Spirit agrees in Lipsalues shape; to morrow twixt the hours of four and five,
shall mistrisse Purge be rapt with a whirlwind into Lypsalues chamber, that's
the fittest place: for by the break of day Lipsalue shall be mounted, and
forsake the City for three days, so my Spirit resolves me* Now sir, by my Art,
at that very hour shall his chamber door fly open, into which boldly enter in
this sort accoutered: put me on a pure clean shirt, leave off your doublet,
(for Spirits endure nothing polluted) take me this whip in your hand, and being
entered you shall see the Spirit in Lipsalues shape, in the self same form
that you appear; speak these words here ready written, take three bold steps
forward, then whippe him soundly, who straight vanishes and leaves mistress
Purge to your will.


Good. I but shall your Spirit come armed with a whippe too?


Do. Glist. He shall, but have no power to strike.


Good. Is this infallible, have you seen the proof?


Do. Glist. Probatum upon my word, I have seen the experience, if it fail,
say I am a fool, and no Magician.


Good. Master Doctor I would you had some suite at Court, by the faith of a
Courtier, J would beg it for you: Fare you well Sir, I shall report of you, as
I find your charm.


Exit. Doct. Glist. And no otherwise sir; let me understand how you thrive: ha,
ha, ha, now to my friend Lipsalue, I must possess him with the same
circumstance, wherein J am assured to get perpetual laughter in their follies,
and my revenge.

Exit.
Enter Maria over the Trunk. Ma. O which way shall J turn, or shift, or go,
To loose one thought of care, no soothing hope
Gives entermission, or beguiles one hour
Of tedious Time, which never will have end,
Whilst love pursues, in vain my absent friend,
Thou continent of wealth, whose want of stoare
For that it could not peiz thvnequall Scale
Of Avarice give matter to my moan,
O dross the leauell of insatiate Eyes
The Devils Engine, and the souls corrupter,
Thou plaist the Attorney against the lawful force
Of true affection, do enterpose a Bar,
twixt Hearts conioyn'd: Cursed be thy seed of strife,
Whose progress choakes the natural course of life.

Gerardine rising out of the Trunk, she seems fearful, and flies. Ma. O
help, help, help.


Ger. Stay sweet Maria, I bring thee ample joy
To check that sudden fear, let thy sweet heart
That constant seat of thy affection,
Repay that blood exhausted from thy veins;
Fear not sweet wench? I am no apparition,
But the firm substance of thy truest friend,
Know thou me now?

Ma. Gerardine my love?
What unheard of accident presents
Thy unexpected self, and gives my heart
Matter of joy, mixed with astonishment.
I thought thou had bin cabyn'd in thy ship.
Not Trunkt within my cruel gardyans house.

Ger. That cruelty gives fuel to desire,
For love suppressed fares like a raging fire
which burns all obstacles that stop his course,
And mounts aloft; the Ocean in his source
May easier hide himself, and be confynd,
Then Love can be obscurd; For in the mind,
She holds her seat, and through that heavenly essence,
Is near, when far remote; her virtuall presence,
Fills (like the Air) all places, gives delight,
Hope in despair and heart, against fell despite.
That worst of men thy cruel gardyan may
Keep down a while, but cannot dissipate
what heaven has joined, for fate and providence,
Gave me this Stratagem, to let him know,
That Love will creep, where it is restraynd to go.

Ma. I apprehend the rest: O rare conceit,
I see thy travel happily was faynd
To win access, which with small ease thou have gaynd:
This Trunk, which he so greedily supposes,
Contaynes thy substance (as it does indeed)
Upon thy fair pretense, in liew of love
Bequeathed to me, if death should stop the course,
This Trunk (J say) he hugs; sink thou or swim,
So he may feed his wolf, that root of Sin;
His Avarice but heaven (that mocks man's might
Gives this close means t'incist upon our right.

Ger. Ingenious Spirit, true Oracle of love,
Thou have prevented me, this was my plot,
Whose end and scope I long to imitate,
With accents free, and vncontrolld with fear,
Does opportunity stand fair?

Ma. Not now,
Danger stands centinell.

Ger. Then I Will retire,
We must be cautilous.

Ma. So so, and Time
Shall not often turn his howr glass ere i will find,
Peace and occasion fitting to thy mind.

Exeunt, Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTVS TERTIVS.
Actus Tertius scena prima.
Enter Gerardine and Maria. Ger. THe coast is clear, and Argus wakefull eyes
Securely sleep: time turns to us his front;
Come sweet Maria of the auspicious hours
Lets take advantage.

Ma. With all my heart, J do embrace the motion with thy self:
Welcome sweet friend to liberty of Air,
Which now me thinks does promp our breaths to move
Sweet accents of delight, the joys of love:
How do thou brook thy little ease, thy Trunk?

Ger. That Trunk confines this Chest, this Chest contaynes
The unbounded speculacion of our love
Incomprehensible: Grief, joy, hope, and fears
(Thaffections of my mind) are like the spheres,
Which in their iarring motions do agree,
Through the influence of loves sweet harmony.

Ma. Are not inferior bodies here on earth,
Produced and governed by those heavenly ones?

Ger. They are.


Ma. They iar (you say) yet in that strife maintain
Perpetual league: why should their influence
In rational souls be checked by erring sense?
Or why should mutual love (confirmd by heaven)
B'infringd by men, me thinks it is most uneven.

Ger. Thou argu'st well Maria: and this withal
That Bruites, nor Animalls do prove a thrall
To such seruility: souls that are wards
To gold opinion, or the undue regards
Of broking men, wolves that in sheep-skin bands,
Pray on the hearts to join the unwilling hands,
Ruin fair Stocks, when generous houses die,
Or propagate their name with Bastardy.

Ma. Sterility and barennes ensue,
Such forced love: nor shall erroneous men
Pervert my settled thoughts, or turn mine eye
From thy fair object, which I will pursue,
Rich in thy love, proud of this interuiew.

Ger. I Will suck these accents, let our breaths engender
A generation of such pleasing sounds,
To enterchange delights: O my bloud's on fire,
Sweet let me give more scope to true desire.

Ma. What would thou more then our minds firm contract?


Ger. Tut words are wind* thought vnreduct to Art,
Is but an Embrion in the truest sense.

Ma. I am beleagued I had need of sense,
You make me blush: play fair yet above board:

Ger. Here me exemplify loves Latin word
Together with thy self
As thus: hearts joined Amore: take A from thence,
Then more is the perfect moral sense,
Plural in manners, which in thee do shine
Saintlike, immortal, spotles and divine.
Take m away, ore in beauties name,
Craves an eternal Trophee to thy fame,
Lastly take o, in re stands all my rest,
which I in Chaucer style do term a jest.

Ma. You break all modest bounds, away, away?


Ger. So when men come behind, do women say.


Ma. Come come, I say


Ger. I that's the word indeed,
Men that come bold before, are like to speed.
Enter Lipsalue and Shrimp his Page. But who comes here? monstrum horrendum, my
nostrills have the rank sent of knavery, Maria lets remove our selves to the
window, and observe this piece of man's flesh.


Exeunt. Lip. Now mistress Maria ward your self, if my strong hope fail not, I
shall be with you to bring.


Shr. To bring what sir? some more o'your kind.


Lip. Faith boy that's mine aim.


Shr. Jle be sworn sir, you have a good loose, you let fly at chem a pace.


Lip. I have shot fair and far off, but now I hope to hit the mark indeed.


Shrim. God save it.


Lip. But where is the Sign?


Shr. Why there.


Lip. That's a special thing to be observed.


Shr. I have heard talk of the Gemini, me thinks that should be a Star
favorable to your proceeding.


Lip. The Gemini, O I apprehend thee: that is because J am so like Gerardine, ha
is it not so boy?


Shr. As if you were spit out ons mouth sir, you must needs be like him, for
you are both cut out of a piece: but Lord sir, how you hunt this chase of love,
are you not weary?


Lipsalue. Jndefatigable boy, indefatigable.


Shr. Fattigable (quoth you) you may call it leaneable well enough, for J am
sure it is able to make a man lean.


Lip. It Is my vocation boy, we must never be weary of well doing, love's as
proper to a Courtier, as preciseness to a Puritan.


Enter Gerardine and Maria above. Shr. Love (subbandy lust) a Punke in this
place subintelligitur.


Lypsalue. Boy I have spied my Saint.


Shr. Then down on your knees.


Lip. Fly of, least she take thee for my familiar: Save thee sweet Maria, Nay
wonder not (for thou thy self art wonder,) To see this unexpected gratulaion.


Maria. Whom do I see? O how my senses wander?
Am not I Hero: art not thou Leander?

Gerar. Thar't in the right sweet wench more of that vain;


Lip. Her passion ouercomes her, it is the kindest soul:
O excellent devise; it works, it works boy.

Shr. It dos in deed sir, like the suds of an Alefat, or a washing Bole.


Lip. Joy not too much, extremes are perilous.


Ma. O weather beaten love: Cisley go make a fire?
Go fetch my ladder of Ropes, Leander's come.

Lip. Mark how pretily in her rapture she harpes upon Gerardines travel, let
thextasie have end for I am Gerardine.


Gerar. The devil you are.


Ma. Ha? let me see, my love so soon returned.


Lyp. I never trauelld farther then thine eyes,
My bruted journey was a happy project,
To cast a mist before thy iealouse gardyan,
Who now suspectles, gives some hope t'attaine
My wished delight, before pursued in vain.

Ger. Ask if he straynd not hard for that same project.


Ma. Has not that project ouerrackt thy brain.
And spent more wit then thou have left behind.

Shrimp. By this light she flowts him.


Lip. No, wit is infinite I spent some brain;
Thy love did stretch my wit upon the Tenters

Ger. Then is it like to shrink in the wetting.


Mar. It cottens well, it cannot choose but bear
A pretty napp; I tender thy capacity,
A comfortable Caudle cherish it:
But whers my favor that I bid thee wear
As pledge of love.

Ger. Now do thou put him toot,
More Tenters for his wit, he is Nonplus quite

Lip. I wear it sweet Maria but on hy days,
Preserve it from the taynting of the air,
What should J say: it is in my the other hose.

Ma. How in your the other hose? he that J love
Shall wear my favor in those hose he has on.

Lip. Fiends and furies: block that I am.


Shrim. In your the other hose? she talked of a ladder of Ropes; if she would let
it down; for my life he would hang himself in it: Jn your the other hose? why
those hose are in Lauender, besides, they have never a Codpeece: but indeed
there needs no Iuy where the wine is good. In your the other hose?


Ma. I said you were too prodigal of wit.


Lyp. Expostulate no more, grant me access,
Or else i will travel to the wilderness.

Maria. Your only way, go travel till you tyer,
Be rid, and let a gull discharge the hyer.

Shr. Master, the Doctor the Doctor.


Lip. Where? which way.


Shrim. This way, that way, some way I heard him coming.


Lip. O boy J am abusd, gulld, disgraced, my credit's cracked.


Shr. You know that's nothing for a new Courtier.


Lip. O I shall run beside my self.


Shr. No sir, that's my office, i will run by your side.


Lip. My brain is out of temper, what shall J do?


Shr. ^^ke her council sir, get a cullis to your capacity, a restoratiue to
your reason, and a warming pan to your wit: he comes he comes.


Lip. Follow close boy, let him not see us.


Exeunt. Enter Doctor Glister. Doct. Glist. What more flatterers about my
carrion? more battery to my walls? shall I never be rid of these Petronell
Flashes? As for my friend Gerardine, the wind of my rage has blown him to
discover countries, and let the sea purge his love away and him together, I
care not: young wenches now are all of the hoigh: we that are gardyans must
respect more besides Titles, gold lace, person, or parts, we must have
Lordships and manors, elsewhere as well as in the man: wealth commands all,
and wealth i will have, or else my mynion shall lead Apes in hell. J must after
this gallant too, i will know his randiuous, and what company he keeps.

Exit.
Ma: Now must we be abrupt; retire sweet friend
To thy small ease; what more remains to do,
We Will consumate at our next enteruiew.

Ger. So shall J bear my prisonment with pleasure,
Look thou but big or cruel, foe will yield,
And give to Hymen the honor of the field.
Exeunt.
Enter Mistrisse Purge, and Club before her with a Link. Mist. Purge. Fie fie
Club, go a the other side the way, thou collowst me and my ruff, thou will make
me an unclean member in the congregation,


Club. Jf you be unclean mistress, you may pure your self, you have my masters
ware at your commandment, but what am I then, that does all the drudgerye in
your House.


Mi. Pur. Thart born to it, why boy I can show thy Indentures thou give no
other milk: we know how to use all i'theyr kind.


Club. Y are my better in Bark and Rhyne, but in pith and substance I may
compare with you: you are above (...) flesh mistrisse, and there is your boast, but
in my the other part, we are all one before God.


Enter Dryfat. Mi. Pur. All one with me! do thou swear too? why then up and
ride.


Dry. VVhither away mistrisse Purge?


Mi. Pur, To the Family master Dryfat to our exercise.


Dry. What by night?


Mi. Pur. O Lord, I sir, with the candles out too, we fructify best in the
dark, the glance of the Eye is a great matter, it leads us to other objects
besides the right.


Dry. Indeed I think we perform those functions best, when we are not thrall
to the fetters of the body.


Mi. Pur. The fetters of the body, what call you them?


Dry. The Organes of the body, as some term them.


Mi. Pur. Organes: fie, fie, they have a most abominable squeking sound in mine
ears, they edify not a whit I detest hem: I hope my body has no Organes.


Dry. To speak more familiarly Mistress Purge, they are the senses: the sight,
hearing, smelling, taste, and feeling.


Mist. Pur. I mary: ( Mary said J Lord what a words that in my mouth) you
speak now Master Dryfat: but yet let me tell you where you err too: this
feeling I will prove to be neither Organe nor fetter, it is a thing (a sense
did you call it?


Dry. I, a sense.


Mist. Pur. Why then a sense let it be (I say it is that we cannot be without:
for (as I take it) it is a part belonging to understanding; understanding (you
know) lifts up the mind from earth; if the mind be lift up, you know the body
goes with it: also it descends into the conscience, and there tickles us with
our works and doings: so that we make singular use of feeling.


Dry. And not of the rest?


Mi. Pur. Not at that time; therefore we hold it not amiss to put out the
candles, for the soul sees best in the dark.


Dry. You come to me now Mistress Purge.


M. Pu. Nay J will come to you else Master Dryfat: those senses (as you term
them) are of much efficacy in carnal mixtures, that is, when we crowde and
thrust a man and a woman together.


Enter Purge and over hears them. Pur. What so close at it: I thought this was
one end of your exercise. Byrlady I think there is small profit in this, I Will
winck no more for I am now tickled with a conceit that it is a scuruy thing to
be a Cuckold.


Dry. I commend this zeal in you Mistress Purge, J desire much to be of your
society.


M. Pu. Do you indeed, blessing on your heart: are you upright in your
dealings?


Dry. Yes, J do love to stand to any thing I do, though J lose by it, in truth
J deal but too truly for this world: You shall hear how far I am entered
in the right way already: First I live in Charity and give small Alms to such
as be not of the right Sect. J take under twenty in the hunderd, nor no
forfeiture of Bonds unless the law tell my conscience I may do it, I set no
pot on a sundaies, but feed on cold meat dressed a Satterdayes, I keep no holy
days, nor fasts, but eat most flesh o'frydayes of all days in the week: J do
use to say inspired graces able to starve a wicked man with length, I have
Aminadabs and Abrams to my god sons, and I chide them when they ask me
blessing: and I do hate the red letter, more then J follow the written verity.


Purge. Here Is Clergy.


Mi. Pu. These are the Rudiments indeed Master Dryfat.


Dry. Nay I can tell you I am or will be of the right stamp.


Pur. A pox o'your Stamp.


Mi. Pu. Then learn the word for your admittaunce, and you will be much made
on by the Congregation.


Dry. I the word good Mistress Purge.


Mi. Pu. A Brother in the Family.


Dry. Enough J have my lesson.


Pu. So have I mine, A Brother in the family, I must be a familist to day. I Will
follow this gear while it is on foot yfayth.


Mi. Pu. Then shore up your eyes, and lead the way to the goodliest people
that ever turned up the white o'th eye, give me my book Club, put out thy
Link, and come behind us.


They knock. Answer within. Who Is there?


Dry. Two brothers and a Sister in the Family -- Let in.


Purge knocks. -- Within Who Is there?


Purge. A Familiar brother.


Within. Heers no room for you nor your familiarity.


Pur. How? no room for me nor my familiarity? why what is the difference between
a familiar brother, and a brother in the Family? O I know: J made eclipses of
in, in this place where it should have bin expressed, so that the want of in, put
me clean out; or let me see: may it not be some mystery drawn from
Arithmetic? For my life these Familists love no substraction, take nothing
away, but put in and ad as much as you will, and after addition follows
multiplication of a most Pharasithipocriticall crew. Well for my part I like
not this family, nor indeed some kind of private lecturing that weomen use:
look toot, you that have such gadders to your wives: self willd they are as
children, and in faith capable of not much more then they peevish by custom,
naturally fools. J remember a pretty wodden sentence in a preamble to an
exercise, where the Reader prayed: that men of his Coat might grow up like
Cedars to make good waynscot in the house of sincerity, would not this waynscot
phrase be writ in Brass, to publish him that spoke it for an Animal: why,
such wodden pellets out of earthen Trunks, do strike these females into
admiration, hits 'hem home, sometimes (perhaps) in at one ear, and out at
the other, and then they depart in opinion, wiser then their neighbors, fraught
with matter, able to take down and mortify their husbands. Well i will home now,
and bring the true word next time: I shall expect my wife anon red hot with
zeal, and big with melting tears; and this night do I expect, (as her manner
is) she will weep me a whole Chamberpot full, Loquor Lapides? do J cast pills
abroad? it is no matter what I say, J talk like a Pothicary (as I am) I have
only purgd my self of a little choler and passion, and am now armd with a
patient resolucion, but how? to put my Horns in my Pocket? no:

What wise men bear is not for me to scorn,
It Is a hornorable thing to wear the horn.

Exit. Enter Lipsalue with his whip. Lip. Fortune, devils turd i'thy teeth,
i will turn no more o'thy wheel, Art is above thy might: what though my project
with Mistrisse Maria fayld, more ways to the wood then one, there is variety in
love. It is beleeud I am out of town, my door is open, the hour is at hand,
all things squard by the Doctors rule, and now I look for the Spirit to bring
me warm comfort, to cloth my nakedness, and that is Mistress Purge, the
cordial of a Familist, and come quickly good Spirit, or else my teeth will
chatter for thee.


Enter Gudgin with his whips. Good. O the naked pastymes of love, the scourge of
dullness, the purifier of uncleanness, and the hot house of humanity: I have
taken physic of master Purge, any time this twelve months to purge my humor
vpon's wife, and J have ever found her so fugitive, from exercise to exercise,
and from family to Family, that I could never yet open the close stool of my
mind to her: so that I may well say with Ovid: Hei mihi quod nullus amor est
medicabilis herbis: now am J driven to prove the violent virtue coniuration, if
it hit, and that I yearke my familist out of the Spirit, i will hang up my
Scourge-sticke for a Trophee, and emparadize my thoughts, though the Doctor go
to the devil, it is no matter: ha let me see; Lipsalues door open! and himself
out of town? excellent Doctor, soothsaying Doctor, oraculous Doctor.


Enter Doctor Glister above. Doct. I have taken up this standing to see my
Gallants play at Barriers with Scourge-sticks for the honor of my Punke: and
in good time I see my brave Spirits shining in bright Armor nakedly burning in
the Hell fire of Lechery, and ready for the hot encounter: sound Trumpets, the
Combatants are mounted.


Good. The apparition: Mistress Purge peers through him, I see her.


Lip. The spirit appears: but he might have come sooner: I am num'd with
cold, a shiuering ague has taken away my Courage.


Do. They are afraid one of another, look how they tremble, the flesh and the
devil strengthen 'hem: ha, ha, ha.


Good. Has a no cloven feet, what a laxatiue fever shakes me.


Lip. Will a not carry me with him to Hell? well I must venture: Clogmathos


Good. My Cue: Clogmathathos.


Lip. My Cue Garrazin.


Good. Garragas.


Lip. Garrazinos.


Good. Ton tetuphon.


Lip. Tes tetuphes.


Ambo. With a Whirley Twinos -- they lash one another.


Ambo. Hold, hold, hold, gogs nownes, Gogs blude, a pox, a plague, the Devil
take you, truce, truce, J smart, J smart.


Doctor. Ha, ha, ha. O for one of the hoopes of my Cornelius Tub: I must needs
be gone, I shall burst my self with laughing else:

Magic has no such Rule, men can not find,
Lust ever better handled in his kind.
Exit Doctor.
Good. What art thou? with the name of Jove I conjure thee?


Lip. With any name saving the whip, i will no more of that coniuration a plague
on it.


Gudg. Speak art not a Spirit, in the likeness of my friend Lipsalue, that
should transform thy self to mistress Purge.


Lip. How? a Spirit? I hope Spirits have no flesh and blood, and I am sure thou
have drawn blood out of my flesh with the spirit of thy whip.

Then shall we prove to be honest Gulls, and the Doctor an errant knave.


Lip. A plague upon him for a Glister* he has given our loves a suppositar with
a Recombentibus -- I Will tell thee sir.


Good. Tell not me, let me prevent thee, the wind shall not take the breath of
our gross abuse, we feel the gullery: Therefore let us swear by our naked
truths, and by the hilts of these our blades, our flesh-tamers, to be revenged
upon that Paraperopandenticall Doctor, that pocky Doctor.


Lip. Agreed, we will Cuckold him, that he shall not be able to put his head in
at's doors, and make his precise puritanicall, and peculiar Punke his
Pothicaries drug there, a known Cockatrice to the world.


Good. Jf report catch this knavery, we have lost our reputations for ever,
Wherefore lets be secret;
Ill tax we weomen of Credulity,
When men are gulld with such gross foppery.

Lip. Come let us in, and cover both our shames?
This Coniuration to the world's a nouelty,
Gallants turned Spirits and whipped for Lechery.
Exeunt.
Act. 3. Scen. 4.
Enter Maria and Gerardine out of the Trunk. Maria. Gerardine come forth Maria
calls?
Those Ribs shall not infoulde thy buxom Limbs
One minute longer the cincture of mine arms
Shall more securely keep thy soul from harms.

Ger. What heavenly breath of Phitonessaes power
(That raysd the dead corpse of her friend to life)
Preuayles no less on me, for even this vrne
(The figure of my sadder Requiem)
Gives up my bones, my love, my life, and all
To her, that gives me freedom in my thrall.

Ma. Be brief sweet friend, salute and part in one,
For niggard time now threats with imminent danger
Our late ioyd scope: Thy earnest then of love
Ere Sol have compast half the signs I fear
Will show a blushing fault, but it was thy plot, thine aim,
T'inforce consent in him that bars thy claim.

Ger. Love salues that fault, let time our guilt reveal,
I Will near deny my Deed, my hand, and Seal.
The Elements shall loose their ancient force;
Water and earth suppress the fire and Air,
Nature in all use, a preposterous course,
Each kind forget his likeness to repair,
Before i will falsify my faith to thee.

Ma. The humorous bodies elementall kind,
Shall sooner lose the innated heat of love,
The Soul in natures bounds shall be confind,
Heavens course shall retragrade, and leave to move
Ere I surcease to cherish mutual fire,
With thoughts refind in flames of true desire.

Ger. These words are odours in the sacred shrine
Of Loves best deity: the marriage God
Longs to perform these ceremonious rites,
Which terminate our hopes; till mine grow full
I Will use that intercourse amongst my friends,
That erst I did: then in the hight of joy,
I Will come to challenge interest in my boy.
Till then farewell.

Ma. You Will come upon your Cue


Ger. Doubt not of that;


Ma. Then twenty times adieu.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus Tertij.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
Actus Quartus, scena prima.
Enter Lypsalue and Guggin, Shrimp and Periwincle. Good. COme Boys, our clothes
boys, and what is the most current news Periwincle.


Peri. Faith sir, Fortune has favored us with no news, but what the Pedlar
brought from Norfolk.


Lyp. Is there nothing stirring at Court Shrimpe?


Shrim. Faith there is sir, but nothing new.


Lip. Good wag faith, thou smellst somewhat of a Courtier, though thy Mother was
a Citizens wife, Off with that filthy great Band, nay quick, on with your robe
of sanctity; nay suddenly man.


Gug. And why must we shift our selves into this demure habit, if impossible
to be of the Family, and keep our own fashion.


Lip. Tut man the name of a gallant is more hateful to them, then the sight of
a Corner Cap, had thou heard the protestations the wife of a bellowsmender
made but yesternight, against Gallants, thou had for ever abiured Crimson
breeches. She swore that all Gallants, were persons inferior to
bellowsmenders, for the trade of Bellowsmaking was very aeriall and high, And
what were men and women but bellows, for they take wind in at one place, and
do euaporate at another; euaporate was her very phrase.


Guggin. Me thinks her phrase flew with somewhat too strong a vapor.


Lip. Nay she proves farther, that all men receive their being chiefly from
bellows, without which the fire burns not, without fire the pot seeths not,
the pot not seething, powdered Beef is not to be eaten, of which she then
auerr'd our nation was a great deuourer, and without which they could neither
fight for their Country abroad, nor get children at home: For said she, powdered
beef is a great ioyner of nerves together.


Gug. What answer made thou?


Lip. Mary, that I thought a Bawd was a greater ioyner of nerves together,
then powdered beef, with that she protested, that a Bawd was an instrument of
the Devil, and as she had proved that bellowsmakers were of Gods trade, fo
Bawdes were of the devils trade: For (and thereupon she blew her Nose) the
devil and Bawdes did both live by the sins of the people.


Enter Club and Mistrisse Purge. Gug. No more, mistress Purge is at hand.


Lyp. Vanish boys, away, make have, before Jove she will be with us ere we can be
provided for her.


Mi. Pur. Advance your Lynke Club? At what time were thou bound Club? At
Guttyde: Hollantyde, or Candletide?


Club. I was bound indeed about Mydsommer.


Mist. Pur. And when has thy prentiship end, At Mychaeltyde next?


Club. So I take it.


Mi. Pu. They say Club you fall very heavy on such you love not, you never
learnt that of me.


Club. Indeed mistress I must confess, my falling is rusticke gross, and
butcherlike, marry yours is a pretty foolish light Court take falling: Yet
believe me my master smelles somewhat too gross of the Purgation, he wants
tutering.


Mi. Pu. And why I pray?


Club. My master being set last night in his shop, comes master Doctor
Glister (as his manner is) squerting in suddenlye, and after some conference,
tells my master that by his own knowledge you were young with Child, to
which my master replied, why master Doctor, will yoe put me to more Charges
yet?


Mi. Pur. Thou art a fool, In that my husband spoke as wifelie as if the
master of his company had spoke* he knows Doctors have receites for women,
which makes them most apt to conceive, and he promising a had ministered the
same lately to me, thereupon spoke it, Lead on with your link?


Lipsa. Art ready?


Gug. Ready.


Lips. Then speak pitifully, look scuruily, and dissemble cunningly, and we
shall quickly prove two of the fraternity Benediction and Sanctity; love and
Charity: fall on Mistress Purge, Sister of the family.


Mi. Pur. And what I pray be you two?


Sa. Two newly converted from the rags of Christianity; to become good members
in the house of the family.


Mi. Pur. Who I pray converted you?


Ma. Dryfat the merchant.


Mist. Pur. And from what sins has he converted you? From two very notorious
Crimes, The first was from eating fish on frydaies, and the second from
speaking reverently of the Clergy: but a resolved us, your talent in edifying
young men went far beyond his.


Enter Master Purge. Ma. Pur. A tallent I have therein, I must confess, nor
am I very nice at fit times to show it; for your better instructions therefore,
you must never hereafter frequent Tauernes nor Taphouses, no Maskes nor
Mummeries, no pastimes nor Playhouses.


Good. Must we have no recreation?


Mi. Pur. Yes, on the days which profane lips call Hollidayes, you may take
your Spaniell and spend some hours at the Duckingpond.


Lip. What are we bound unto, during the time we remain in the Family.


Mi. Pu. During the light of the Candle, you are to be very attentive, which
being extinguished, how to behave your selves, I will deliver in private
whisper.


Ma. Pur. It Is now come to a whisper, what young Familists be these? in faith I Will
make one, i will trip you wife, I sent your footing wife.

For Gallus writes, Paraselsus can tell,
Pothicaries have brains, and Noses eke to smell,

Lip. We shall with much diligence observe it.


Ma. Pur. J fear I shall have small cause to thank that diligence, but do
your worst, He that has red fine hear-balls in one year, can find a trick
which shall prevent this gear, they are going, follow Purge, close, close and
softly, like a Horsekeeper in a Ladies matted Chamber at midnight.


Exeunt Gudgin, Lipsalue, and Mistrisse Purge. Within. Who knockes?


Mi. Pur. Brethren and a Sister in the Family.


Within. Enter in peace.


Ma. Purge. Brethren and a sister, that's the word, How beastly was I mistaken
last day, J should have said a Brother in the Family -- And I said a Familiar
brother, for which J and my family were thrust out of doors: but as Titus Silus
of Holborn bridge most learnedly was wont to say, quoth --


He Knockes. Within. Whose there?


Ma. Pu. A brother in the family.


Within. Enter, and welcome.


Act. 4. Scena. 2.
Enter Gerardine. Thou sacred Dyety, love:
Thou power predominate, more to be admyr'd,
Then able to be expressed, whose Orb includes
All terrene joys which are, all States which be,
Pay to thy sacred Throne, as tribute fee
Their thoughts and lives like Jove's so must thy acts
Endure no question, why, thy hidden facts,
The Gods themselves obey, Heaven Synod holds,
No Gods, but what thy awful power controwls,
The Delphian Archer proud with Pythons spoil
At Cupids hand was forced to take the foil:
Not Mars his warlike Adamantine Targe,
Could free his warlike breast at Cupids charge;
And Jove whose frown all mortal lives bereaues
This marble throne and Iuory Scepter leaves:
And in the likeness of a Bull was seen,
As forced by him to bear the Tyrian Queen:
Through Neptunes watery kingdom, if these submit
My Metamorphos is not held unfit:
Enter Drifat. And see in most wished occasion Drifat the Merchant presents
himself: Sir, in the best of hours met, my thoughts had marked you out for a
man most apt, to do them the fairest of offices.

Dri. What? art thou a welsh Carrier, or a Northern Landlord, thart so saucy.


Gera. Is It possible sir, my disguise should so much fool your knowledge? how,
a Northern Landlord? can you think J get my living by a bell and a Clackdish?


Dri. By a bell and a Clackdish, how is that?


Ger. Why by begging sir, know you me now?


Dri. Ma. Gerardine, disguisd and a shore, nay then J smell a Rat.


Ger. Master Dryfat, shall I repose some trust in you, will you lay by a while
your Cities precise humor, will you not deceive me?


Dry. Jf I deceive your trust, the general plague seize me, that is, may I die
a Cuckold.


Ger. And I say thou shall die a true Citizen, if thou conceal it: And thus in
brief, It stands with thy knowledge how seriously I have (and do still affect
Maria: Now sir, I have so wrought it, that if thou could procure me a fellow,
that could serve in stead of a Crier, I my self would play Placket the
Parritor, and summon Doctor Glister and Maria to appear at thy house, and as
he plays the Parritor, so would thou but assume the shape of a Proctor, I
should have the wench, thou the credit, and the whole City occasion of
discourse this nine days.


Dri. Hows this, hows this! I should procure a fellow to play the Parritor, and
I my self should play the Proctor: but upon what occasion should they be
summoned?


Ger. Upon an accusation, that Doctor Glister should get Maria his Niece with
child, and have Bastards in the Cuntery which I have a trick to make probable.


Dri. And now I recall it to memory, I heard somewhat to that effect last night,
in master Beardbush the Barbers shop, but how will this sort, who shall accuse
him?


Ger. Refer that to me, I say, be that my care, all shall end in merriment, and
no disgrace touch either of their reputations.


Dri. Then take both word and hand, it is done, Club (mistrisse Purges prentice)
shall be the Sumner.


Ger. O my most precious Dryfat, may none of thy daughters prove vessels with
foul bungholes, or none of thy Sons hogsheads, but all true and honorable
Drifats like thy self.


Dri. Well Master Gerardine, I hope to see you a Familist before I die.


Ger. That's most likely, for J hold most of their principles already: I never
rail nor calumniate any man, but in love and charity; I never cosen any man
for any ill will I bear him, but in love and charity to my self: I never make
my neighbor a Cuckold for any hate or malice I bear him, but in love and
charity to his wife.


Dri. And may those principles fructify in your weak members: I Will be gone, and
with most quick dexterity provide you a Crier: To morrow at my house (said you)
they should appear.


Ger. Be that the time, most honored Dryfat, but be this known to none, most
loved sir, save Club, or to some other whom your judgment shall select, as a
fit person for our project.


Dri. Thus enough time out of sight.

Exit.
Ger. Maria, thou art mine: earths affecton and natures glory, woman of what an
excellency, if her thoughts and acts were squard and leueld with the first
celsitude of her creation:

T'inioy a creature, whose disheueld locks,
Like gems against the repercussiue Sun,
Gives light and splendour* whose starlike eyes
Attract more gazar loves to see them move
Then the Tartarians God, when first Egeons Hill
Amounts in triumph, a skin more pure and soft,
Then is the silke-worme bed, to the more white
Then newfalne Snow, or shining Iuorie,
Is happiness sought by the Gods themselves,
Celestial Venus borne without a mother,
Be thou probitious, thee and I implore
Not vulgar Venus, Heavens scorn and Mars his whore.
Exit.
Enter Mistrisse Glister and Maria. Ma. Good Aunt quiet your self, ground not
upon dreams, you know they are ever contrary.


Mi Gli. Mynion, mynion, coin no execuses; I grant dreams are deceitful,
but a true judgment grounded upon knowledge never fails: what? have not I
obseru*d the rising and falling of the blood, the coming and going of the
countenance, your qualmes, your vnlacings, your longings, most evident tokens,
besides a more certain sign then all these too, you know it, I need not speak
it; nay I am as skillful in that point as my husband: I can tell you Aristotle
speaks English enough to tell me these secrets: Body of me, so narrowly looked
too, and yet fly out? well, I see maids will ha'te, in spite of Laws or
locks that restrain 'hem, they will open, do men what they can.


Ma. I see my fault appears, simplicity
Has no evasion: it is bootlesse to deny,
Where guilty blood, cited by touch of shame,
Runs through my veins, and leaves my conscience stain,
Even in my face for bear I do beseech you,
To publish my defame, what I have done,
You shall not answer, I must bear mine own.

Mi. Gli. Bear your own? I mary there it goes, what must you bear?


Ma. My sins forsooth.


Mi. Gli. Your sins forsooth: confess to me, and go not about the bush, you
have bin doing that's flat, you have caught a clap, that's round, and answer me
roundly to the point, or else i will square. Come whose act is it? I can not devise
unless it be my husbands, for none else had access to thee; J am sure time
has turned his bald side to thee, and I do but wonder how thou tookst
opportunity: speak, tell me.


Ma. Now good Aunt press me not, let time reveal
What you suspect, for never shall my tongue
Confess an Act that tends unto my wrong.

Enter Gerardine like a Porter. Mi. Gli. Will you not boult, I must have it out
on you, and will.


Ger. By your leave mistrisse.


Mi. Gli. Passion of my heart, what art thou?


Ger No Ghost forsooth, though I appear in white.


Mi. Gli. No, but a saucy knave J perceive by your manners.


Ger. None of that Livery neither: I am of the bearing trade forsooth, you may
see by my Smock -- frock I would say: I am (if it please you) of the spick and
span new set up Company of Porters, Here Is my Breast plate, and besides our own
Arms we have the arms of the City to help us in our burdens, Ecce signum:
here is the Cross, and the sword of Justice in good Pewter, J can tell you
which goes as current with us as better metal.


Mi. Gli. What Is your name sir?


Ger. Nicholas Nebulo there is but a strawes breadth between that and the Arms,
it is in the back side of the Cross here, and well known in the City for an
ancient name, and an honest an't like your worship.


Mar. You are none of the 12 are you?


Ger. No forsooth but one of the 24.


Mi. Gli. Orders of knaves, I thought so, sir you are a Rascal to come thus
bluntly into my house with your durty Startups, get you without doors like a
filthy fellow as you are, a place more fit for you.


Ger. O good words mistress; I may be warden of my company for ought you know
and for my bluntness we have a clause in our Charter to warrant that for as we
bear, so likewise we may be borne with, and have free egresse and regresse
where our business lies.


Mi. Gli. And what is your business here?


Ger. I have a letter an't please you to master Doctor.


Mi. Gli. From whence?


Ger. That I cannot show your Worship, but I had it of Curtal the Carrier
whose lawful deputy I am.


Mi. Gli. Leave your scraping sir: fie how rank the knave smells of grease
and Tapsdroppings.


Ger. Coughes and spitts.


Mi. Gli. What are you Rheumatick too with a vengeance?


Ger. Yes indeed mistress, though I be but a poor man, I have a spice of the
gentleman in me, Master Doctor could smell it quickly, by cause he is a
gentleman himself; I must to the diet and that is Tobacco at the Alehouse, J
use n'other physic for it.


Mi. Gli. Did ever such a peasant defile my floare, or breathe so near me:
yfayth sir you would be bumd for your Roguery if you were well served.


Ger. I am bum'd well enough already Mistress, look here else; surreuerence
in your worship, master Doctors lips are not made of better stuff.


Mi. Gli. What an impudent Rogue is this: sir be gone I say, I would be rid
o'you?


Ger. Be rid of me? I shall gallop then: you mistake me forsooth I am a footpost,
I do not use to ride.


Mi. Gl. I think the Rascal be humorus or drunk: well I will read the letter and
send him packing, or else he will spew or do worse before me: fie on him, I
think he will infect me with some filthy disease.


Ger. Or else I loose mine aim.


Mi. Gli. What Is here Your poor nurse Thomasine Sweedlesse for my life now
shall I find out my husbands knavery, I have so long suspected.


Ger. She begins to nibble, twill take in faith -- mistress
I see some coffeehouse in your looks,
Care ill befittes so delicate a spirit.
Be frolic wench for he that is so near thee
has been much nearer?

Mar. That Accent sounds sweet music, it is my love.
That tongue breaths life into my liueles spirits
Gerardine! o rapture, why thus disguised!

Ger. No more, be mute; thus must I vary forms
To bring our Cares to end her Iealousy,
Ensues this Dryft, which if it take true scope,
Loves joy comes next be fearelesse in that hope:

Mi. Gli. It Is so: Ratsbane: I hate, it rack's on it torments me here it is, --
Woe worth the time that ever I gave suck to a Child that came in at the window
god knows how villainous Leacher; Yet if you did but see, how like the little
red headed knave is to his Father damnable Doctor: A Bastard in the Country,
and an other toward here J am out of doubt, this is his wo^ke. You are an
Arrant Strumpet, Incest, fornication, abomination in my own house;
intolerable; O for long nails to scratch out his Eyes.


Ger, Or the breeches to fight with him.


Mi. Gli. Out of my sight queen, thou shall to Bridewell -- O, I shall be mad
with rage.


Ger. Then you shall go to Bedlam.


Mi. Gli. Hence you Slave.


Ger. I must have a penny, you must pay me for my pains.


Mi. Gli. The Devil pay thee.


Ger. O that's the Doctor, but he wants his horns.


Mi. Gli. But i will furnish him ere long if I live.


Ger. It works as I would wish, farewell Maria,
This storm once past, fair weather ever after.
Exeunt.
Mi. Gli. Was ever woman so moved? but you shall be talked withal, and for
mine oulde fornicator, he shall have it as hot as coals in faith: heers stuff
indeed! Come mynkes come, there is Law for you both, have I found your knavery:
if I wink at this, let me be stone blind, or stoned to death, bear this and
bear all.

Exeunt.
Enter Lypsalue and Gudgin. Lip. Our hopes are crossed, sure there is some providence
Which countermaunds libidinous appetites,
For what we most intend, is countercheckt
By strange and unexpected accidents:
For by disguise procuring full access,
Nay ready to have feared thexpected prize
The candle out, steps twixt my hopes and me
Some pleasant Groine, possessed and full inioyd
That sweet, for which our vigila^t eyes have watched
And in one moment frustrates all our hopes.

Gudgin. Upon my life we are bewitched, the greasy Rascal, that first seized
Mistrisse Purge (by the last reflection of the light) appeared to my sight not
much unlike her husband.


Lipsalue. The Courts gall, the Cities plague, and Europaes Sea form be his
perpetual Crest, what ere a was. To loose Mistrisse Purge for lack of
dexterity, is a disgrace insalueable. The like opportunity will never present it
self.


Gudg. It Was an egregious grief, I must confess to see a knave slip betwixt us
both, and take occasion by the foretop, but since these proiects have had so
star cross events, lets lay some plot how to revenge our late disgrace on the
Doctor, by making him Cuckold.


Enter Purge. Lipsalue. Agreed, but what melancholy sir with a crostick arms
now comes from the Family?


Gug. Purge the potecarie, J prithee lets step aside and hear the issue of
this discontent.


Purge. O the misery of married men's estate!


Lip. A begins very pitifully.


Pur. O women what are many of you?


Lipsalue. Why disease to batchelers, and plagues to married men.


Pur. O marriage, the rage of all our miseries, my wife is a desembling
strumpet.


Gudgin. So is many a man's besides yours, and what of that?


Purge. I would have a law that all such which pray little should instantly be
married, for then would they pray continually if it were but to be rid of their
wives.


Lip. This is a charitable request and surely would pass the lower House.


Purge. Surely if affliction can bring a man to heaven I cannot see how any
married man can be damned, J have made my self a plain Cuckold.

A pile on ye, want you? had you not been so manable, here are some would
have saved you that labor.


Purge. What shall I do in this extremity, had I but witness of the fact, I
would make her answer it before authority, This is my wedding Ringe; It Is hit
I know it by the posy This I took from her finger in the dark, and she was
therewith very well pleased, were not this tro, a sufficient testimony? She
knows not that it was my self got so near her, J will take council; well,
little know Batchelers the miseries they undergo, when they prostrate themselves
to women.


Lip. O most true Master Purge, little knows a man what Elements a is to pass,
when a puts his head under a woman's girdle: your passion Master Purge is over
heard, and (plain tale to tell) we were eye witnesses of your wives treachery,
and if need be will be ready to depose as much.


Purge. What master Lipsalue and master Guggin are you disguised testimonies,
nay then Revenge look big?

Elphe and Phayrie
Help to revenge the wronged Poticary?

Good. Why now a speaks like himself, get me a Parritor for her strait?


Lip. Conceal the Ring, my little Purge, let not thy wife know thou have it,
until she comes to her trial.


Enter Drifat and Gerardine. Pur. Your aduices are very pithy, therefore in
private let me disclose my intent.


Good. Off boys, Shrimpe what do thou think of thy Master, is a not a rare
gull?


Per. J think a will swallow, and pocket more disgraces then large consenst
Lawyer Fees in a Michaelmasse Term. Thy master my honest Periwincle comes not
much short of a fool to, but that a is a Courtier.


Shrim. Draw somewhat near, and ouer-heare their conference?


Ger. This shape of the Crier, must Club to morrow assume: Are you fitted for
Popin the Proctor?


Dri. Excellent! and have spent some study in the mystical cases of Venery: J
can describe how often a man may lie with another man's wife, before a come to
the white sheet.


Ger. How long is that?


Dry. Why till a be taken tardy.

How long all women kind may by the statute profess and swear they are maids.


Ger. And how long is that?


Dryfa. Why till their bellies be so big that it cannot be no longer
concealed, but come forward toward Glisters.


Lip. It must be so: let the sumner tickle her, you shall bring in these
allegations and let us alone to swear them; who is this Master Dryfat?
Oportunely met sir, and whyther so fast? The news, the news?


Dry. Faith Gentlemen, I think to relate for news what I here of Doctor
Glister would come stale to your hearings.


Lip. O the getting of his niece with child, tut that's apparently known to all
the company, but in the name of Jupiter what art thou? or from whence camst
thou?


Ger. Why sir? I come from compassing the corners of the Land.


Gug. Of what trade in the name of Pluto?


Ger. Of the devils trade, for J live as he does, by the sins of the people,
Jn brief sir, I am Placket the Paritor.


Lip. As the devil would, we have (my noble Partor) instant, employment for
thee; A gray groat is to be purchased without sneaking my little Su^ner, where is
thy Quorum nomina my honest Placket?


Gerard. Sir, according to the old Ballad; my quorum nomina ready have I, with
my pen and inkehorne hanging by: her name sir, her name?


Gug. Jst no more but so?


Purg. I have most right to her name, her name master Placket is my wife,
Mistress Purge Sir: To what place do thou belong?


Ger. To the Commissioners, which sit to morrow at master Dryfats upon the
crimes of Doctor Glister and others.


Lipsalue. Sits there a commission Dryfat? Now for the love of lechery, lets
have mistress Purge summoned, thither?


Ger. She makes my Quorum nomina reasonable full my grant Sir and she shall
appear there upon a crime of concupiscence, Js not that your meaning?


Pu. Yes my honest Paritor, heers thy Fee.


Enter Club and Mistress Purge. Gug. And see how happily it succeeds, mistress
Purge is new come from the Family, let us step aside whilst Placket the
paratour, gives her a Summons?


Lipsalue. Content ^ Too her Placket But see for the briberie of twelve pence
you strike her not out of your Quorum nomina.


Ger. Fear not sir.


Mi. Pur. Forward apace Club.


Ger. Your name I take to be mistress Purge fair gentlewoman.


M. Pu. I am mistress Purge, Purges wife the poticarie: what of that?


Dry. Now you shall see him tickle her with a Quorum nomina


Ger. I cite you by virtue of my Quorum nomina to make your personal
appearance by eight of the clock in the morrow morning, before certain
commissioners at master Dryfats house to answer to an accusation of a crime of
concupisence?


M. Pur. To answer a crime of concupiscence, what is that I pray?


Gera. Why it is to answer a veneriall Crime, for having carnal copulation with
others besides your husband.


Mi. Pu. What are you I pray?


Gera. By name Placket, By trade a parator?


Mis. Pu. And must I answer say you, to a veneriall Crime? I tell thee placket
the paritor, I am able to answer thee, or any man else in any veneriall crime
they will put me to: And so tell your Commissioners:


Gera. If you fail your appearance, the penalty must fall heavy.


Mi. Pu. If it fall never so heavy, I am able to bear it and so set forward
Club.


Exeunt Club and Mistress Purge. Lips. Excellent in faith after your wife Purge:
Read Placket thy quorum nomina my noble groat monger.


Ger. Silence, the first that marches in this fair rank is, Thum the
feltmaker, for getting his maid with child and sending his prentice to
Bridewell for the fact, whyp the Bedel, for letting a punck escape for a
nights lodging, and bribe of ten groates, Batt the belman, for lying with a
wench in a Taylers stall at midnight when a should be performing his office.


Good. And Tipple the Tapster for deflouring a virgin in his seller. Doctor
Glister, his wife, Maria: mistress Purge These be the complete number.


Lipsa. Now dissolve and each to his occasion, till to morrow morning.


ACTVS QVINTVS.
Actus quintus Seena Prima.
Doctor Glister and Mistres Glister. Mi. Gl. THis was your color to keep her
close, but what Cloak have you for hers and your own shame? What your own
niece, your brothers daughter besides your bastard in the country?


Doct. Wife range not too far I would advise you? Come home in time? vex me
not beyond sufferance: The two edged sword of thy tongue, has drawn blood of my?
patience, I say thou art all this while in an error.


Mi. Gli. No, thou have been all this while in an Vrinall, thou have gone out
of thy compass in women's waters, You Are a coniurer (forsooth) and can rouse
your Spirits into Circles, a you old Fornicator that ever I saw that read beard
of thine; now could I rail against thy complexion. I think in my conscience
the Trases and Caparison of Venus coach, are made o'red hayres which may be a
true Emblem, that no flaxen stuff, or tan'd white-leather draws love like
'hem; J think thou manurd'st thy Chin with the droppings of Eggs and Muskadine,
before it brisled: a shame take thee and thy Loadstone: but it is no matter,
Master Placket the Parritor has cyted you, and you shall answer it.


Doct. O the raging jealousy of a woman! do you hear wife I will show my
self a man of sense, and answer you with silence, or like a man of wisdom,
speak in brief: I say you are a scowld, and beware the Cucking stool?


Mist. Glist. I say you are a nynnyhammer, and beware the Cuckoe; for as sure
as J have ware, i will traffic with the next Merchant venturer, and in good time
here comes gallants of the right trade.


Enter Lipsalue and Gudgin. Lip. All alone mistrisse Glister? meditating who
shall be your next child's Father.


Good. Indeed me thinks that should be one end of her thought an't be but to
cry quittance with her husband, or whose abuse the Town rings.


Doct. Flax and fire, flax and fire, here are fellows come in the nick, to
light their matches at my tynder.


Lipsalue. He tells you true mistrisse Glister, the Doctor has made you
ordinary in our Ordinaries, Satyrs whet their tooths, and steep rods in piss,
Epigrams lie in Poetries pickle and we shall have ryme out of all reason
against you.


Gudgin. Ere long he will take up his station at a Stationers, where we shall
see him do pennaunce in a Sheet at least.


Mi. Gli. O I am netled, my patience is so prouoak't, that I must doffe my
modesty: what shall I do? if ye be honest gentlemen, counsel me in my
revenge, teach me what to do, make my Case your own.


Lip. Why you are in the common road of revenge, take which hand you will,
you cannot go out o'your way; it is as soon taken, as Time by his forepart.


Good. Faith since he has struck with the sword, strike you with the Scabbard:
in plain terms Cuckold him: you may as easily do it, as lie down o'your bed.


Doct. This gear cottens in faith.


Mi* Gli* I apprehend you gentlemen: Lord how much better are two heads then
one, to make one large head?


Lip. You say true mistrisse Glister, there is help requird in grafting* and how
happily we come to tender our service: let our pretense be to take physic of
the Doctor: and that he may with as much ease minister to us, as we to you,
we will take a lodging in his house.


Good. How say you to this, is the color good? do like you?


Mist. Glist. Passing well: the color is so good, that you shall wear my
favor out of the same piece.


Lip. Excellent, excellent, now shall we be reuengd for the whipping; mistrisse
Glister let me be your first man?


Good Nay soft sir: I plied her as soon as you.


Doct. I should have an oar in her boat too by right? spoke by.


Lip. How ill aduisd were you to marry one with a red beard?


Mi. Gli. O master Lipsalue, I am not the first that has salne under that
ensign: there is no complexion more atractiue in this time for weomen, then gold
and red beards: such men are all liver.


Good. J, but small heart, and less honesty.


Lip. Yes, they are honest too (in some kind) for they will beg before they will
steal.


Good. That's true, for, for one that holds up his hand at the Sessions, you
shall have ten come into the baudy Court.


Doct. Was ever Beard so backbitten: this were enough to make red beards turn
medley: and dash 'hem clean out of countenance: but I hope like mine they
fear no colors: and you were ten Courtiers i will front you: I must give you
physic with a pox: well, if I pepper ye not, call me Doctor Doddipoll: Master
Lipsalue and master Gudgin you are heartily welcome, I am very glad to see you
well.


Lip. O master Doctor, your salutation is very suspicious?


Doct. Why master Lipsalue?


Lip. It can scarce be hearty, for physicians are rather glad to see men ill,
then well.


Doct. Not so sir, you must distinguish of men: though this J know, virtue is
not the end of all science, which commonly keeps the professor poor, some
study questuary and gainful Arts, and every one would thrive in's calling, but
in faith gentlemen, what wind drives you hither?


Good. The wind Collect master Doctor, or some such disease


Doct. But not the Stone Collect?


Lip. O no sir, we have no obstructions in those parts, we are loose enough
there.


Doct. If you were troubled with that, my wife can tell you of an excellent
remedy.


Good. We need it not, we need it not: but indeed master Doctor, for some
private infirmities (which our waters shall make known to you) we desire to
take some physic of you for a few days, and to that end we would take a
lodging in your house during the time?


Lip. Shall we entreat your favor?


Doct. No entreaty gentlemen, you shall command me to search the very
profundity of my skill for you. Have them in wife, and show them their lodging?
I will think upon an other receipt, and follow you immediately.


Good. And in faith we shall requite your pains to the full.


Exeunt Lipsalue, Gudgin, Mistrisse Glister. Doct. To the fool you mean: I
know you ha the horn of plenty for me, which you would derive unto me, from
the liberality of your bawdies, not your minds; here are Lords, that having
learnd the O.P.Q. of Courtship, travel up and down among Citizens wives to
show their learning, and bringing up: as if the City were not already a good
proficient in the Court Hornebooke: yes I warrant they have heads as capable as
other men; I and some of them can wisely say with the philosopher, that in
knowing all they know nothing. Well, because I am of the Livery, and pay Scot
and Lot amongst you, do but observe how i will fetch over my gallants for your
sakes; they say I am of the right hair, and indeed they may stand to it, and
hold the position good; saving with my wife: soft, are they not at pro and
contra already? I know they are hot spurs, and I must have an eye to the
maine. They have bin whipped already for lechery, and yet the pride of the flesh
pricks 'hem; well I must in, I have given them such a Pill shall take 'hem
down, for lust must have his fill.


Exit. Enter Maria above. Ma Now natures pensill, and the hand of time,
Gives life and lym, to generations Act;
My shame and guilt in wordles notes appear
The argument of scorn, O now J stand
The Theme and coment to each liberal tongue,
Whilst hope breeds comfort, and fear threats my wrong.
O Gerardine how often thy lively figure
(Deadly impressed in my yielding temper)
Assures me thou art mine: how fancy paynts
Thy true proportion in my troubled sleep,
Because sole subject of my daily thoughts;
O if thy vows prove fayn'd, and thou unjust,
I say and swear, in men there is no trust.

Enter Gerardine. Ger. Thus have J past the Round and Court of Guard,
Without the word: either conceit is strong,
Or else the Body where true lou's confined,
Walks as a Spirit, and does force his way
Through greatest dangers frightfull to those eyes,
That wayt to entercept him: Maria?
How like to Cynthia in her silver Orb
She seems to me, attended by loves Lamp
Whose mutual Jnfluence, and souls sympathy
Does show, heavens model in mortality*

Ma. Gerardine?
Aurora now the blushing Sons aproache,
D'art not more comfort to this Universe
Then thou to me: most acceptably come,
The Art of number cannot count the hours
Thou have bin absent.

Ger. Infinity of Love
Holds no proportion with Arithmetic.
Think not Maria but my heart retaynes
A deep impression of such thoughts as these:
I have bin forging of a myrthfull Plot,
To celebrate our wished Conjunction;
Which now digested, come to summon thee
To be an Actresse in the Comedy.

Ma. How, where, when, speak? mine ears are quick to hear,
I stand on thorns already to be there.

Ger. At Dryfats house the Merchant, there is our Scene,
Whose sequel (if I fail not in intent,)
Shall answer our desires, and each content: But when saw thou Lipsalue and
Gudgin our two gallants?


Ma. They are here in the house: so handled by mine uncle, that they are the
pittifullest patients that ever you beheld.


Ger. No matter, he serves them in their kind, they were infamous in the Court
and now are grown as notorious in the City: they may happily prove particles in
our sport, and fit subjects for laughter: Time calls me hence, adieu, prepare
to meet.


Ma. I shall outstrip the nimblest in my feet.


Exeunt. Act. 5. Scaena vltima.
Enter Dryfat and Club. Dry. Come Club come, there is a merry Fray toward, we
shall see the death of melancholy, wherein thou and I must call a grand Jury of
jests together, and pass upon them with the Club Law.


Club. Now as I am O, the Crier, and yet but a young Club, J have not yet
practizd that Law, you have a whole dryfat on it, I pray you instruct me?


Dri. Why it is a Law inacted (by the common counsel of Statute Caps) to qualify
the rage of the Time, to follow, to call back, and sometimes to encounter
gentlemen when they run in arrerages, I tell thee there is no auerment against our
Book Cases: It Is the Law called make peace, it makes them even, when they are
at ods, it shows 'hem a flat case, as plain as a pack staff, that is, knocks
'hem down without circumstance


Club. I marry I like that law well, it is studied with the turning of a hand:
there is no quiddits, nor pedlers French in it, there needs no book for the
exposition o'th terms; it is as easily learned as the felling of wood, and
getting of Children, all is but laying on load the down right blow.


Dry. I and by the way of exhortation it prints this moral Sentence on their
Costards, in Capital Letters Agree? for the Law is costly.


Club. Good good; but all this while there is no Doctor thought on, we must have
one to arbitrate;


Dry. Why (master Gerardine) man, has his name for the purpose, he shall be
called Doctor Stickler, Lupus est in Fabula, here he comes.


Enter Gerardine. Ger. How now lads does our Conceit cotton, ha you summond
your wits from wool gathering? Are you frought with matter for this merryment?


Dry. Full full, we are in labor man, and we shall die without midwiferie.


Club. We are ravished with delight like the wench that was got with child
against her stomach -- O but if we could wrest this smock law (now in hand) to
our Club law, it were excellent.


Dry. Easily, easily, all shall be called the Club law.


Ger. As how?


Dry. Why thus: Club is the Crier, I am Poppin the Proctor and you Stickler
the Doctor, he calls them to appear, I must be of their counsel, and you must
atone them put 'hem together we may know their cases, and be in their Elements
(mark you me) but they cannot be in ours, Tut, none knows our secrets, we can
speak fustian above their understanding, and make Asses ears attentive, I Will
play Ambodexter tell 'hem it is a plain Case and put 'hem down with the club
law; so that (as Club said well ee'now) our knavery is as near allied, as
felling of wood and getting of children.


Gera. Excellent excellent, by this they are at hand; lets bear these things
like our selves; I Will withdraw and put on my habiliments and then enter for the
Doctor.

Exit.
Enter Doctor Glister and Purge. Dry. Do so, they come, they come? welcome
Master Doctor Glister and master Purge, there is a commission to be sat upon
this day, to open a passage for imprisoned truth, concerning Acts yet in
tenebris.


Do. Gl. True; I am brought hither by the malice of my wife


Pur. And I have a just Appeal against my wife.


D. Gli. Master Exigent (so I think you are called) I understand you have the
Law at your fingers ends.


Dri. I can box Cases, and scould and scratch it out amongst them


Do. Glist. Indeed fame reports you to be a good Trumpeter of causes, I must
retain you sir to sound mine?


Dryfat. My Sagbut shall do it most pathetically; tell me in brief the nature
of your Case?


Doc. Faith sir, a scandalous Letter deuisd to wrong my reputation, about a
Bastard in the Country which should be mine.


Dri. About a Bastard in the Country which should be yours? hum; it is very like
you then, it should seem.


Doct. O no sir, understand me, only fathered upon me.


Dri. Only fathered upon you, cum nemini obtrudi potest; I understand you and
like you well to, you do not flatter your self in your own Case, no: it is not
good, well what more:


Do. And about my Niece got with child, in my own house.


Dri. Byrlady burdens of some weight, which you make light of -- you deny?


Doct. What else sir, I have reason.


Dry. I know it well, I take you for no beast: believe me (master Doctor)
denial and reason are two maine grounds, stand upon them and you cannot err.
Your case master Purge?


Purg First take your fee master Exigent, that you may have the more feeling,
and urge it home when you come toot, mine is a discovery of my wives Iniquity
at the Family of love.


Dri. Otherwise called the house of Venery, where they hunger and thurst for it.


Pur. True sir, you have heard of the hole in the wall, where they assemble
together in the day time, like so many Bees under a hyue.


Dry. Come home Crura Thimo plena, and lodge among hornets, is it not so?


Pur. J cannot tell sir, but for my part, I am much noted as I go


Dry. No doubt of that sir, your wife can furnish you with notes out of her
Cotations.


Club. I and give him a two tag'd point to tie 'hem together.


Dry. But how came you to detect her?


Pu. Why thus sir: getting the word, I dogd her to the Family where closing
with her I whispered so pleasing a tale in her ear, that J got from her her
wedding Ring, and here it is.


Dri. Well, out of that ring we will wring matter that shall carry meat ith
mouth. But what witness or proof can you produce to make good your wives
iniquity, and your own Cuccoldry


Pur. Master Lipsalue, and Master Gudgin, who were her companions at that same
time.


Dry. Very good a, re they cited in the quorum nomina?


Club. they will be here sir.


D. Gli. If they be they will beray all.


Dry. So much the better twill savor well for Master Purge.


Pu. You understand my case now? D. Gl. And mine too sir?


Dri, I do J do, they are as different as a Doctor and a Dunce, a man and a
beast, heers the Compe^dium; yours master Doctor stands upon the negative, and
yours master Purge upon the affirmative Pauca sapienti, J have it, J have it.


Pur. Mine is very current sir, J can show you good gilt.


Dry. I marry, there spoke an Angel, guilt's current indeed, let me feel't let
me feelt.


Pur. I mean my wives guilt.


Doct. Master Poppin, you shall have Innocence to speak for me?


Dry. Tut, Innocence is a fool, I care not for's company, I can speak enough
without him.


Doct. Then J hope you will be as good to us, as the fiue-finger at Maw.


Dry. No rather as Hercules, to lip labor 'hem with the Club Law, tut let me
alone.


Enter Mistrisse Glister, Mistrisse Purge, and Maria. Mi. Glist. O are you here
sir, I have brought you a full barn to glut your greedy appetite if you have
any maw, feed here till you choke again: Now shall J see the whole Carkas of
your knavery ripped up, if thou have any grace, now will thy red beard turn
white upon it.


Mi. Pur. O how have I been tossed from post to pillar,
Jn this libidinous world: the yoke I bear
Is so vneu'n, as if an Innocent Lamb
And a mad hare-braind Ox should draw together:
But I must have patience there is no remedy.

Dri. There Is some difference between these two tempers.


Doct. J would give a hundred pounds my wife had so gentle a spirit.


Pur. My wife must needs be gentle, for she can bear double.


Enter Gerardine. Dri. Here comes master Doctor, now rig up your vessels,
every one to his Tackling.


Ger. Good day to all at once, and peace amongst you: fie how I sweat, J think
Vulcan nere toyld so at his Anuill, as J have done, and all to make maids
water to slake Cupids fire, and to turn his shafts from the fetherbed to the
bed post, from the heart to the heel: Come master Poppin shall we to this gear?


Dri. Reverend Doctor we have staid your coming: Crier cry silence?

He cries. Master Doctor: I have heard in general terms, the Tales of master
Doctor Glister, and master Purge, which have in mutual manner iumped into the
Quagmyre of my mind, out of which quagmyre (by your enforcement, and mine own
duty) I pluck them up by the ears, and thus in naked appearance I present them.


Ger. Ad rem, ad rem master Poppin: leave your alegories, your metaphors, and
Circumlocutions, and to the point?


Dry. Then briefly thus: I have compared their tales, how short they will come
of their wives I know not: and first for mistrisse Purge, Crier call mistrisse
Purge?


Club. Rebecca Purge, wife to Peter Purge Pothicary, apeare upon thy purgation,
upon pain of excommunication.


Mi. Pu. Here I am: O times impiety!
Hither I come from out the harmless fold,
To have my good name eaten up by wolves:
See how they grin? well, the weak must to the wall,
I must bear wrong, but shame shall them befall.

Ger. Who is her accuser?


Dry. Her own husband upon the late discovery of a Crewe of narrow Ruste
strait lac't, yet loose body'd Dames, with a Route of Omnium gatherums,
assembled by the title of the family of love; which master Doctor if they be
not punished and suppressed by our Club Law, each man's copy hold, will become
free hold, specialties will turn to generalities and so from unity to parity,
from parity to plurality, and from plurality to universality, their wives, the
only ornaments of their houses and of all their wares, goods and Chattell, the
chief moueables will be made common.


Pur. Most Voluble and eloquent proctor.


Ger. Byrladie these Enormities must and shall be redrest, otherwise I see
their Charter will be infringd, and their ancient Staff of government the
Club (from whence we derive our law of Castigation) this club I say (they
seeming nothlng less then men by their forepart) will be turned upon their own
heads. Speak Rebecca Purge art thou one of this family? have thou ever known
the body of any man there, or elsewhere Concupiscentically?


Mi. P. No M. Doctor, those are but devises of the wicked to trap the Innocent,
but I thank my spirit I have fear before my eyes, which my husband sees not,
because something hangs in's light.


Pur. That Is my horns: she flowts me to my face, and I will not endure it: I
shall carry her mark to my grave: master Doctor she has given me that, that
Esculapius (were he now exta^t) could not heal, nor Edax rerum take away?


Ge. Produce your witness M. Purge, and blow not your own horn?


Purge. Master Lipsalue and master Gudgin, let them be called.


Cl. Laurence Lipsalue and Gregory Gudgen late of hic and vbique in the County
of nusquam Gentlemen, come into the Court, and give your evidence, upon pain
of that which shall ensue.


Enter Lipsalue and Gudgin. Doctor. Here they come, in pain I warrant them:
how works your physic Gallantes? do you go well to the ground? now Cuckold
the Doctor? wife who is your first man now, now strike with the scabbard: ha,
ha, ha.


Good. A villainous Doctor.


Lip. Mountybank you are a rascal, and we will cast about to be revenged.


Dri. Cast about this way, and beray what you can concerning Mistrisse Purge,
who stands here upon her purgation, either to prove mundified or
contaminated, according to the tenor piece of your principal Evidence, first
give 'hem the Book?


Club. Come, lay your hands upon the Book: you shall speak and auerre no
more, nor wade no farther into the Cream pots of this woman's crime, then the
naked truth, and the cart-rope of your conscience shall conduct you, so help
you the contents: kiss the book.


Lips. Alas, we are not in case to answer largely, but if you will have our
evidence in brief, I think I kissed her at the Family some three times; once at
coming, once at going, and once in the midst, otherwise never knew her
dishonestlie.


Pur. I, mark that middle kiss master Doctor?


Good. And for my part I have bin more mortified by her, then ever I was prouokt.


Ger. How say you to this master Purge, your witness is weak, and
surreuerence on, without sounder proof, they may depart to the close stool
whence they came, and you to your Pothicaries shop.


Pur. No master Doctor, I have an other boult to shoot, that shall strike her
dead, she shall not have a word to say.


Dry. Answer me to this Mistrisse Purge, where is your wedding Ring?


Mi. Pur. My wedding Ring? why what should J do with unnecessary things about
me, when the poor begs at my gate ready to starve; is it not better (as I
learned last Lecture) to send my substance before me, where I may find it, then
to leave it behind me, where I must forgo it? yes verily; wherefore (to put
you out of doubt) I have given that Ring to charitable uses?


Dry. Nay now she falters: my Clyent can show that Ring, got from her at the
Family, when these two Courtling had at the same time beleaguerd her Fort.


Ger. This alters the Case clean, what starting hole ha you now mistrisse
Purge?


Mi. Purge. Eene the Sanctuary of a safe conscience: now truly, truly,
(how ever he came by that Ring) by my Sisterhood I gave it to the relief of
the distressed Geneua.


Purge. How! to the relief of the distressed Geneua? Justice master Doctor: I
may now decline victus victa victum, one word more shall overthrow her: I my
self was a Familist that day, who more Jealous then zealous in devotion,
thrust in amongst the rest (as I had most right) on purpose to sound her, to
find out the knauerie: short tale to make, I got her Ring, and here it is?
let her deny it if she can; and what more I discovered, non est nunc narrandi
locus.


Mi. Pur. Husband, I see you are hudwynck't in the right use of feeling and
knowledge, as if J knew you not then, as well as the Child knows his own
father, look in the posye of my Ringe: does it not tell you that we two are
one flesh? and has not fellow feeling taught us to know one another as well by
night as by day? husband husband, will you do as the blind Jade, break your
neck down a hill because you see it not? ha you no light of nature in that
flesh of yours? Now (as true as I live master Doctor I had a secret operation,
and J knew him then to be my husband eene by very instinct.


Purge. Impudence do not blush? art not ashamed to lie so abominable.


Mi. Pur. No husband, rather be you ashamed of your own weakness, for, for my
part J neither fear nor shame what man can do unto me.


Ger. Master Purge J see you have spent your pith; therefore best make a full
point at the ring, and attend our pleasure, master Exigent proceed to the rest?


Dri. Crier, call Doctor Glister?


Club. Doctor Glister, alias suppositar doctor of physic, appear upon thy
purgation, upon the belly pain that may ensue therein.


Doct. Here master Doctor.


Ger. Who is his accuser?


Dry. His clamorous wife, who seems to enforce a separation about a Bastard in
the Country, which should be his, only fathered upon him.


Ger. What proof of that?


Mist. Gli. Proof unanswerable master Doctor, the Nurses Letter: let it be
red, but first observe his countenance? it may be his blushing will bewray his
guilt.


Ger. Now by this light, I thought it had indeed, but I see it is but the
reflection of his beard, Read the Letter Master Exigent?


Club. After my hearty commendations remembered unto your worshipful doctorship,
trusting in god that you are as well as I was at the making hereof thanks be to
him therefore, The cause of my writing unto you at this time is, to let you
understand that your little son is turned a ragged colt, a very stripling,
for being now stripped of all his clothing, his backside wants a tayle-peece
commendes it self to your fatherly Consideration. Woe worth the time that ever
I gave suck to a child that came in at the window, god knows how. Yet if you
did but see how like the peart little read headed knave is, to his Father: and
how like a Cock sparrow he mouses and touses my little Besse already, you would
take him for your own, and pay me my hier, I write not of the want of one
thing for I want all things, wherefore take some speedy order or else as naked
as he came from the mother will I send him to the father. From Pis. the xxii of
--

Your poor nurse Thomasiue Tweed es.


Doctor: Master doctor: Truth needs not the foil of Rhetoric, I will only
in Monosillaba answer for my self, (as sometimes a wise man did) such and
such things are laid to my charge, which J deny, you may think of me what
you please, but I am as innocent in this, as the child newborn.


Ger. Why there is partly a confession: the child we know is innocent and not
newborn neither: for it should seem by the letter he is able to call his
dad, knave.


Doct. You take me wrong master Proctor?


Dry. Under correction thus much can I say for my clients Justification; Indeed
he has trauel'd well in the beating of pulses, and has been much conversant
in women's Iordanes, but he had ever a care to raise his patient, being before
cast down: his charitable disposition has been such to poor folk, that he
never took above four pence for the casting of a water, which good custom
was so well known among all his patients, that if sixpence were at any time
offered him they might be bold to ask and have two pence again. He has been
so skillful and painful withal, in the cure of the green sickness, that of my
knowledge) he has risen at all hours in the night to pleasure maids that
have had it. And for that foul mouthed disease termed by a fine phrase -- a
pox on it what dee cal't? o! the Grincomes, at that he has played his doctors
prize, and writes Nil vltra to all Bountiba^ckes. So that the wise woman in
Pissing alley, nor she in Do-little lane are more famous for good deeds the^
he. Then master Doctor, out of these presumptions, besides his flat denial
(a more infallible ground) you may gather his innocence, and let him have his
purgation.


Gerardine. No Master Exigent it is not so to be foysted off.


Mi. Gl. Nay master Doctor what say you to his own Niece that looks big upon
him, an arrow that sticks for the vpshot against al comers, which by his
restraint of her, from master Gerardine an honest Gentleman that loved her, and
upon that Color from the sight and enter-course of other men, must by all
presumptions be his own Act.


Gerar. O monstrous! this is a foul Blot in your Tables indeed.


Doct. Wife thou have no shame nor womanhood in thee, thy conscience knows
me.


Mi. Gli. True of thy flesh who knows not that? thy bearde speaks for thee:
I, J, thou lie by me like a Stone, but abroad the art like a stone horse you
old Timelifter.


Dri. Cease your clamor, and attend my speech; most Worshipful, reverend and
judicial Doctor, for the quickening of your memory I will give you a Breuiat of
all that has been spoken: Master Doctor Glister has a cradlefull and a
belly full (you see) thrust upon him, and master Purge a head fool. Your wife
is an angry honilesse waspe, whose sting I hope you need not fear? and yours
carries honny in her mouth, but her sting makes your forehead swell: your wife
makes you deaf with the shrill treble of her tongue, and yours makes you horn
mad with the tenor of her Tail. In fine, master Doctors refuge is his
conscience, and Master Purge runs at his wives Ring.


Ger. Summa totalis, a good Audit, ha you made master Exigent: now attend my
Arbitterment: For you Gallants though you have incurd the danger of the Law,
by using counterfeit keys, and putting your hands into the wrong pocket; yet
because I see you punished and purgd already, my advise is, that you learn the
A.B.C. of better manners, go back and tell how you have been used in the
City, and being thus scoured keep your selves clean, and the bed
undefiled. For you Master Purge, because I see your Evidence insufficient, and
indeed too weak to foil your wives uprightness, and seeing Iealousy and
unkindness, has only made her a stranger in your land of Ham; my counsel is
that you readuance your Standard, give her new press money?


Purge. You may enjoin me sir but --


Ger. But not at me man, I will inioyne you, and conioyne you, and briefly
thus, you have your Ring that has made this combustion and vproare, that keep
still, wear it, and here by my edict be it proclaimed, to all that are
jealous, to wear their wives Ring still on their fingers, as best for their
security, and the only charm against Cuckoldry.


Purge. Then wife at master Doctors enioyntment (so thou will promise me to
come no more at the Family) I receive thee into the lists of my favor.


Mistr. Purge. Truly Husband my love must be free still to Gods creatures,
yea nevertheless preserving you still as the head of my body, I will do as
the Spirit shall enable me.


Ger. Go too: thou have a good wife, and there an end: upon you master Doctor
(being solicited by so apparent proof) J can do no less then pronounce a
severe sentence: and yet in faith the reverence of your calling and profession
does somewhat check my austeritie, what if master Gerardine (by my persuasion
would yet be induced to take your Niece and father the child, would you launch
with a thousand pound, besides her fathers portion?


Doct. Master Doctor I would, were it but to redeem her lost good name.


Ger. Then foreknowing what would happen, I thought good in master Gerardines
name, to have this bond ready, which if you seal to, he shall take her with
all faults.


Doct. That will I instantly -- So, this is done, which together with my Niece
do I deliver by these presents to the use of master Gerardine.


Ger. He thanks you heartily, and lets you know (they discover themselves
That Indian mines and Tagus glistering oar
To this bequest were unto me but poor.

Doct. Gli. What! Gerardine, Dryfat and Club?


Dry. The very same: your are welcome to our Club Law?


Club. The very same: your are welcome to our Club Law?


Ger. Cease admiration here! what doubt remaynes
I Will satisfy at full, now join with me,
For approbation of our Famylie.

EPILOGVS.
Gentles whose favor have or' spread this place,
And shed the real influence of grace
On harmless mirth* we thank you, for our hope
Atracts such vigor and vnmeasur'd scope
From the reflecting splendour of your eyes,
That grace presumd, fear in oblivion dies.
Your judgment as it is the Touch and Tryer
Of good from bad, so from your hearts comes fire,
That gives both ardor to the wit refined,
And sweetness the Incense of each willing mind:
O may that fire nere dye, nor let your sauors
Depart from us: give countnance to their labors
Proposed a Sacrifice, which may no less
Their strong desires, then our true zeales express.
FINIS.

