A confutacion of that Popish and Antichristian doctrine, which mainteineth
ye ministracyon and receiving of the sacrament under one kind, made Dialogewise
between the Priest and the Prentyse by Gracyous Menewe.

Math. 26. Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood which is of the new
testamente, that is shed for you, for the remission of sins.

To all faithful readers / that love Christ and his doctrine sincerely,
Gracyous Menew wysheth grace, peace of conscience and gostly strength from god
the father through our Lord and sauyoure Jesus Christ.
SOme there be, most Chrystian and faithful brethren, which now at this
present, that true relygion goes to wrack, do not one lie think but also
are fullye persuaded in themselves, that it is no offense at al to Communicate
with the Papystes, that so shamefullye mutilate or mangle the sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ, that they cut of, and take away ye one half from
the lay people, contrary to the institucion and ordinance of the heavenly
wisdom of god, our savior Jesus Christ. But if they would weygh the saying
of S. Paul in the.5. Chapter to the Ephesians, where he writes on this wise:
have no felowshyppe with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. ^. Tim. 5.
and again: be not partakers of other men's sins: they would be otherwise
minded, and be driven clean away from that foolyshe perswasyon of theyrs. For
if the cutting of, manglyng or taking away of half the sacrament from the
people of god, is no unfruitful work of darkness and such a sin, as none
other in a manner is to be compared with it: I cannot tell what we should call
works of darkness or what we should name sin. This is most sure, well-beloved,
that whatsoever man does imagyne and inuente, The manglyng of ye sacrament is
an inuencyon of me^ and therefore a work of darkness.
besides and without gods word or against the institucion of him, that is the
only true light that lights all men that come in to the world: It must be
mere darkness. But this mangling of the sacrament is an inuencion of wicked
men, which leauyng or rather despicynge the word of god and ordinance of his
son Jesus Christ our Lord, follow the mad phantasyes of their own brains:
therefore it must needs follow, that it is a work of darkness* not only
unfruitful, but also most noyesome and hurtefull, ye and of all other most
pernytyous. For beesydes that by it gods wrath is kyndled, and his vengeance
provoked: they go about most earnestly, by this deuilishe inuentyon of
theyrs, to nourysh, maintain, defend and uphold their blasphemous doctrine
of transubstantiacion in the sacrament, The mark that the papists shot at in
this manglynge of the sacrament.
perswadyng the simple and ignorant people, that after the words of
consecracyon (as they call it) be once spoken, there remains neither bread
nor wine, but the very true and natural body of our savior Jesus Christ,
flesh, blood and bones, as he was borne of the virgin, hanging on the cross,
did lie in the grave and afterward being raised again from the dead ascended
up into heaven, and therefore say they, it cannot be, but that under the form
of bread, they receive both flesh and blood, except we would have a body
without blood. This doctrine, I say, go they about to establyshe, by this
their manglynge of the sacrament what pretense or color soever they have
besides. Therefore have no felowshyppe with their unfruitful, noisome and
hurtful works of darkness: be no more partakers of their si^ne lest ye be
also partakers with the^ of the ponyshmentes and plagues that god threateneth
unto them, that preferryng their unwise and foolyshe knowledge, before his
heavenly wisdom, do arrogantly presume and take upon them to immutate,
change and alter any of his ordynaunces and laws. And that this matter of the
sacrament might the better be understood, The co^te^ts of this book.
and the intolerable blasphemy of the manglyng thereof sooner espied and
perceived: I have here compyled a small treatise, wherein all the arguments
and reasons, that the Popes catholics can bring for the mayntenaunce of their
abomynacyon, are, I trust, so substancially confuted, that their shall not
have one word to say: wherein also ye shall learn how far they are
deceived, that think it no offense to receive with them that so blasphemouslye
break the lords institucion and ordinance, what clokes soever they can bring
for to cloak their synnefull doings with all. Only I desyer this one thing of
you, that ye will take this my rude doing in good part, and pray with me that
god of his fatherly goodness and mercy vouche safe to look upon our afflyctions,
and forgettyng our offenses and the offenses of our forefathers deliver us from
this most miserable thraldom and captiuitye of conscience that we be in:
that we may with a free and vpryght heart honor, love and serve him in holiness
and ryghteousnes all the days of our life. Which thing without all
peradventure, if with true repentaunt hearts and faithful prayers we call
upon him, he will grant unto us, through the merytes of his son Jesus
Christ our Lord and savior, to who^, with the father and the holy ghost, be
all praise, glory and honor world without end. Amen.

A confutacion of all such arguments and reasons, as the popes catholics do
bring for to prove the mutilate and corrupted receauyng of the sacrament under
one kind contrary to the Lords institucyon and ordeynaunce, made Dialogue
wise between the Priest and the Prentyse, compyled by Gracious Menew.
The Pryeste. WHy, young man, will ye not receive ye blessed sacrament? Answer
me dyrectly, that I may make report to mine ordinary.


Prentyse. Saynct Paul says plainly, that whosoever eats of this bread and
drynketh of 1. Cor. 1^*
this cup unworthily, does eat and drink his own damnacion. Ambro. in 1.
Cor. 11. What is to receive unworthily.
And the holy father Ambrose, writing upon that place or text of the Apostel,
says plainly, that they do receive unworthily, that do minister or receive
the sacrament otherwise, then Christ has instituted and ordained: but as ye
minister it, it is done otherwise, then the lord has appointed and ordained:
therefore it cannot be but an unworthy receauinge, and so consequently an
eating and drynkyng of their own damnacyon that be partakers of it. The fautes
that are in the ministration of the sacrament, which is used now a days.



Priest. I would feign know, what fautes ye find in this kind of
mynystracyon, that is now a dais used in the church.


Prentyse. First and formest the order of the holy ghost is broken, which will
have nothing to be done in the congregacyon without edyfyinge. And what
edyfyinge shall the people have there, where all things be done in a strange
tongue, which scarcely the Pryest himself does understand: Secondly the
holy ghost wills, that whenever we eat of that bread, and drink of ye
cup, we should show forth the Lords death till he come: meaning thereby,
that whenever the Communyon is ministered, ye death of Christ and the
benefytes thereof should be preached and set forth unto the Congregacyon,
whereby they should be moved to hate and abhor sin, and to give most
earnest thanks unto god, for their deliverance from it, through the death,
passion and blood shedding of his son Jesus Christ. But none of all these
things ar done. Wherefore ye must confess, though there were none other thing
amysse, yt all that ye do is most ungodly. And who having a good conscience
would be glad to agree to such an ungodliness? No man having good conscience
ought to agree or se^e to agree to the ungodliness of ye papystes.
No man, I trow, yt loves his souls health.


Priest. is this all, that ye can say, concerning this matter? Is this all the
fault, that ye can find? Ye are a wise man for south. Ye shall be made one of
the counsel. Ye shall appoynte how and after what fashyon all things shall be
done and used in ye ministracion of this holy sacrament.


Prentyse. Now master perso^e, in things, that belong to this holy and blessed
sacrament, Cipria. ad Pompeiu^
we need not to go to man for to have instruction in the matter: for as the
holy martyr S. Ciprian says: if ye truth wauereth, or is doubted of, in any
point, we ought to fly to ye original of the lord, and to the Evangelical
and Apostolical tradition. And therefore Saint Paul, being about to set forth
to the church and congregacyon of Corinthus the right use of this sacrament,
goes to the very institution it self, 1. Cor. 11.
saying: that thing, which I have received of ye lord, I have delivered unto
you. And this did he speak.xxvi. years after the ascension of the lord,
having travailed through many countries of the world, and having seen many
churches, that the Apostles had planted in that space, both in Asia and in many
other regions besides.


Priest. But I prai you now, what is the institution of Christ.


Pre^tyse. The institution of Christ is set forth at large in the xxvi chap of
matthew, Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
in the xiiii. chapter of Mark, in the xxii. of Luke, and in the xi chap. of
the first to the Corinthia^s, where we have these words: The LORD Jesus in the
same night, that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and said. Take ye and eat. This is my body, which is broken for
you. This do ye in the rememberaunce of me. After the same manner also he took
the cup, when supper was do^, saying: This cup is the new testamente in my
blood. This do, as often as ye drink it, in rememberaunce of me. This fault
then do I find besides all other fautes, yt I have rehearced alredye, that ye
rob ye congregation of half the sacrament, taking away from them, and that
most treaterously, the mistycall cup.

The Papystes do rob the co^gregacio^ of half the sacrament.
Wherefore I must needs condemn in this point your proceadynges, as most
ungodly and detestable. And verily I ca^ not judge this to be the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, but rather an apishe counterfeytynge of the
same, The Papists ungodly communion, is an apyshe counterfeityng of Christ's
sacrament.
seeing that ye do, besides the idolatrye and other innumerable blasphemies,
that are committed about it, take away the chefest part of it, that is to say,
the cup, which is a most lively rememberaunce and plain certyficat of the
free remission and forgeuenes of our sins, that we have in the blood of our
savior Jesus Christ. Therefore who, having one crome of godlynes in his heart,
would not detest and abhor your doings? Who, beholding your presumptuous
boldness, would not tremble and quake for fear of the vengeance of god, that
he threatens unto all them, that add any thing unto his word or minyshe any
thing from it? Sacrilegeously, yt is to say with robbing of gods glory
Or that do sacrilegeously take upon them to alter and change his institucions
and ordinances?


Priest. What pain is it to hear unlearned and rude people talk? Ye do not
perceive nor understand why nor wherefore this is done: and that is the cause
that ye do so shamefully err.


Prentyse. I would feign hear of you some probable reason, for the satisfying
of my conscience.


Priest. Ye shall understand young man, that when the church was yet rude, The
first objection of the papists which they make to maintain their ungodly
manglyng of ye sacrament.
it did use both kids but afterward when it did perceive that the one kind
might suffice the lay people, that the error of some might be stopped,
which peradventure would have thought that the body of Christ in the sacrament
is given being separated from the blood, and the blood being severed from
the body: it has ordained, that ye Prists only should in their masses use
both kinds, and that the one only should be ministered to the lay people, Do
ye not hear now why and wherefore it has been done?


Prentise. Ye say, master person, An answer to ye first. obiectony.
that the church did at the beginning, when it was yet rude, use both kinds.

Would god we were as well learned in things, that belong to true chrystyan
religion, as they were in the primityue church, when they followed only the
lyghtso^e word of god for their guide. The church, say ye, did afterward
perceive that the one kind was sufficient for the laite. What cold, I pray
you, your Pope catholics see and perceive, that ye Apostles and fathers of ye
primitive church, which were all endued with so abundant a spirit, had not
perceived and seen? What is our knowledge in comparison of their knowledge, but
mere darkness, and bli^d supersticion? ye say furthermore that it has been
don to cause us to put away the error of them, which peradventure would
believe or think that the body of Christ is given separatly from the blood,
asthough the body should sit in heaven at the right hand of the father without
blood. These be your monsterous inuencions: for no heretics, We ought not
for taking away of heresies mangle the sacraments of god.
sense the coming of Christ, did ever imagine this kind of error and
blasphemye. But grant, that there has been such an heresye: could it be put
away none otherwise, but by mutilatyng, mangling and deprauati^ge the
sacrament, and taking half of it away? There may arise many pernycyous
opynions touching that other part, which is leafte: would ye therefore take
it away clean? how much rather ought we to take heed, that we do in no
wise swerve from the institucyon of Christ, nor preach otherwise then Christ
and his apostles have preached? The chief principle in divinity.
This ought to be the chief principle in divinity, whereunto all things must
be resolved. The Lord has spoken: this is the word of god, that remains for
ever.

If we should be called from it to men's constitucions and ordei^naunces,
which are always mutable, we should have no stablenes in religion, but
should be driven from that which is most certain and sure, to that which is
most uncertain and unsure, man's autorite being made equal with gods
autorite.

It is written in the Epistle to the Galathyans: if we, or an au^gel from
heaven, should preach otherwise than ye have heard, Gala. 1.
let him be accursed. If Paul will have neither angels nor apostles to be
harkened unto, if they teach any thing or appoynte anythyng contrary to the
gospel: shall we give ears to a sort of beasts, ye dare presume to peruerte
and altere Christ's holy institucion in his sacraments? The second obiectyon.
The answer to it. Why the counsel kept at Co^sta^ce was not obeyed of ye
universal church



Priest. Was not this confyrmed in the counsel of Constance? And ye know, that
we ought to be obedyente to general Counsels.


Prentyse. The Greek church did never obey this counsel nor all the East
part of the world, and not without a good cause: for there they made decrees
directly against gods word. Besides that, it is not unknown, that many
times counsels have erred, as it is plain of the counsel kept at Ariminum, at
Calcedone, and at Ephesus the second time, and of the counsel kept in Aphrike
under Ciprian, and of many other. Yea, did not in Christ's time ye counsel of
the Pryestes, and the church of that time, err most shamefully, Why counsels
did not alwais set forth ye truth.
when they did refuse Christ's doctrine, condemnynge both him and his Apostles?
Besides that, counsels did not alwais set forth the truth: because yt there
the greater part did overcome the less, and the worse the better.


Priest. Has not our church the holy ghost? The.3. objection.
How can it err then?


Prentyse. Hear ye are not a litell deceived: The answer to it.
for they, that have the holy ghost, do not always work according unto the
same. As a carpentar, in that he is a carpentar, he commits no fault in
maki^g up his building, but because he is given to other things, or is
otherwhyles drunken: therefore does he many times amysse.


Pryeste. But the church has a promise of the holy ghost, The.4. ob.
and that it shall never be forsaken.


Prentise. That do I grant, The ans.
and truly this promise is fulfilled: for there be always many in ye church
that are of a good judgment: as in the most corrupted times in the church of
Iurye there were Symeon, Zachary, Elizabeth, John the Baptist, the virgin Mary
and Joseph, Nathanael and many other, that were partakers of that promysse.

Yet it follows not by the virtue of this promysse, that the counsels do
never err.


Priest. But how shall we know, whether they err or not?


Prentis. All things must be tried with the touchsto^e of the scripture and
word of god: for if an au^gel from heaven should set forth unto us any other
doctri^e than is comprehended in the book of god, we ought in no wise to
receive it, but to count it accursed: much less then, if men take upon them
to make decrees contrary to the express word and commandment of god,
ought they to be harkened unto. Yea except they can with a good and an upright
conscience say with the blessed apostle S. 1. Cor. 1^.
Paul: that we have received of the lord, the same have we delivered unto you,
following only and solely the lords institucion in the matter of the
sacraments, it is to be judged of all Christians, yt they are not of god, but
of the adversary Satan the devil.


Priest. It is not unknown unto you, if at least ye have red the scriptures
thoroughly, that the commandments of god are divided into.2. kinds. Some of
them are fyrme and stable for ever, The 5. objection.
so that they can or may never be changed or altered: and these are called
Moral precepts. The other perteyne to externe and outward things, as to
cerimonyes and sacraments, and these be not so necessary, but that they may,
for the necessite of the place and time, be changed and altered. Therefore the
church, in taking away the one part of the sacrament from the lay people,
has not done amysse, seeing the time does so require.


Prentyse. Where as ye say that the precepts and commandments, The answer to
it.
that appertain to externe and outewarde things, as to ceremonies and
sacraments, are not so firm, stable and strong, but that they may, upon a
just occasyo^, be changed and altered: S. Ciprian in his Epistell contra
Aquarios, Ciprianus li. 2. episto. epi. 3. co^tra Aquarios.
is directly against you calling there the co^maundeme^ts and precepts of
this sacrament grandia, yt is to say: great and not lightly to be esteemed and
taken. Christ also says, that he shall be ye lest in the kingdom of heaven,
Math. 5
that breaks the lest of his commandments. And in the forth of
Deuteronomy, Deute. 4.
the lord himself speaks these words: now harken, O Israel, unto the
ordinances (whereby doubtless he understands ceremonies) and laws, which I
teach you for to do them: ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command
you: nether do aughte there from. Which only precept and commandment
ought to beat down our presumptuousnesse, that we will not only have our
inuencyons to be had in high estimacion and regarded of all men, but also to be
preferred before gods word. In the xv. Nume. 15.
Chapter of the numbers it is written, that the children of Israel were
commanded to have rybondes of yelowe sylke upon the vttermoste gardes of their
garments, that they, lokynge upon them, might remember all the commandments
of the Lord, and not seek after their own heart, or after their own eyes,
after the which they went a whoryng. And in the Epistell to the Romans, Paul
does greatly reprove or rebuke the heathen, Roma. 1.
because they were waxen foolyshe in their own imagynacyons, and would not
worship god, as they learned to know him, by his creatures. Wherefore, says
he, they were given over in to filthy concupiscence. And it is no doubt, but
that this manglyng of the Lords supper does appertain to that kind of
transgression or fault.

Notwythstandyng I grant, that there is a certain difference in the
precepts and commandments of god. For some there be, that we are always
bound and subject unto, as are the moral commandments, or those that the
law and the prophets do depend upon, which are: to love god with al our
heart, with all our strength, with all our soul, and our neighbor as our
self. Other there be, that we are not always bound to follow, except it
be, when the time and place and other circumstaunces appointed in the word of
god do require. For the Hebrews might not offer sacryfices every where, and
at al times, but upon certain days: and in ye place, that god had ordained
and appointed.

On the Sabbath day they could not always abstain from outward works, but
were feign other whiles to fight, as we read in the books of the Machabees.
Again circumcision could not be ministered before the eight day. Gene. 17.
In like manner, if any man were desirous to be baptized, and could not obtain
it: his good will sh^old be accepted for the deed it self. In these things
therefore, when we must do the commandment of god, it is not lawful to
innouat, change or alter any thing of god. And although we be not bound
always to do the thing, which is commanded: yet when we do it, we must
beware, that we swerve not from the Lords institucyon.

Nadab and Abihu went about to change and alter some thing in the
ordinances and ceremonies, Leui.10. Nadab. Abiu. 2. Sam. 6. Oza. Ozias. par.
26.
that were commanded of god: and they were consumed with fire.

Oza was punished with death for his temerite and rashenesse. And king Ozias,
because he would have against gods commandment offered incense, was smytten
with leprosy. Why does not the example of their sacrificinge Pryestes move
them, which are so affrayed to say their masses without either stole or
phanell, or to omytte any crossing, or such like small tryfles, which
nevertheless are nothing else but mere inuencions of men, and abominable
vanites? Why do we not rather take heed, that we omit none of those things
that God has commanded, and his son Jesus Christ instituted? The very
heathen their selves were greatly affraied, that the Pryest should in their
holy ceremonies, either stacker or fail in one word: and if any such thing
had happened, they counted it to be an exceadyng great fault, and in a manner
irremissible. And ye think it to be nothing, to break the Lords institucion,


Priest. The.6. objection.
Has not the church of Christ much greater liberte, than the Synagoge had?
Therefore we may much better change and alter things in the ceremonies, tha^
the ancient fathers might. For we are not as bond servants under the law,
but as free men under grace. Which thing appears to be most true by this,
that the church at this present does not dip them over the ears, yt are
baptized, as this word baptizei does signify, Baptizein.
but over sprinkleth them only or washes them. And yet it is not to be
doubted, but that they, which be so over sprynkled or washed, are truly
baptized. Ciprian.
For Ciprian being asked counsel, whether they that were baptized, when they
were drawing to their death, ought to be taken for true baptized Chrystians.
For they lying in their beds, and being oppressed with sickness, cold
nether be dipped over the ears, nor washed, but only over spri^kled:
wherefore they might seem not to have been baptized: this man of god did
answer, that they had received their full baptism. The. 7. ob
More over, have not the words of baptizme ben other whiles changed? For we
read in the Acts of the Apostles that baptizme was ministered in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whereas notwithstanding the Lord in the gospel
commanded his disciples to baptize in the name of the father, of ye son and
of the holy ghost. Finally, what say ye of the order, The. 8. ob.
yt Christ has prescribed? Is it observed and kept? Did not Christ command
to teach first, and than to baptize? But now we do baptize first the
infantes, and afterward teach the^, when they be of age. And shall we sai now
that the church does amiss in all these things? God forbid.


Prentise. Ans. to the ^. ob.
As touching your first argument, master person, wherein ye say, that we have
more liberty, than the Israelites had: and that therefore it is lawefull for
us, to change and alter things in ceremonies, which liberte the children of
Israel had not: I answer to yt, the Chrystyan lybertye does not consiste in
this, that we may change and alter the institucion of Christ: Wherein
consists the Christian liberte.
but it lies and consists in this, that Christ has brought and reduced
many laboreus, payneful, and dark ceremonies, into few, that are easy and
plain.

Besides that, we are by the power of the spirit made willing and ready to
obey: for we are not compelled by the law, but do most willingly, whatsoever
gods word does command us in his true religion. Therefore they can not
conclude that, that they would, but rather are driven to the contrary: for if
we be so delivered from the yoke and heavy burden of ye law, that we have only
few, easy, and plain ceremonies, it were a thing intolerable and much blame
worthy, if we would not fulfill and perform the^ without any grudging or
murmuring, or if we would alter any thing in them, seeing they be so few, so
easy, and so plain.


Pryest. Yet ye have not answered to that, which I brought against you
touching the change and alteracion that is in baptism


Pre^tise. I knowledge and confess, Ans. to the 7. obiec.
that ye auncyente fathers, when they could by the age or health of the
persons, dipped them over ears and head in the water: What is signified by the
dypping in, into ye water.
which dipping was prefigurated and shadowed by the goinge of the children of
Israel through the read sea: and yet it is neither necessary, nor has any
express commandment in ye word of god.

When it is used, it has a goodly significacion. For when we are dipped in,
thereby it is signified yt we dye with Christ: and by the coming out of the
water we are admonyshed, that we rise with him. unto everlasting life. Howebeit
(as we have said) this signification is not necessary, What is ye property and
nature of baptism.
I mean, so necessary but that it may be omitted: for the true property and
nature of baptism is, our clensing from our sins.

Wherefore S. Paul in the Epistle to the Ephesians writes, that Christ has
cleansed his congregation and church with the lauer of water through the
word. Ephe. 5.
This purginge or cleansing from sin, is most properly signified and
represe^ted by baptism, whether we be dipped in, or over sprinkeled, or by any
mean at all washed in the water.

Nor this word, baptize in, does not only signify to be dipped in, but also
to be washed by any manner of mean: moreover it is not al one, to change the
manner of washing, and to take all the whole away.

For in them, that are over spri^kled or washed, the element of baptism, that
is to soye, the water, is kept and used, and has his signification. We do not
contend supersticiously, how we must drink of the cup, whether we must
drink litel or much: so that both parts of the sacrament do remain hole it
is enough.

In times passed they used quils to drink out of the mistical cup Eusebius.
In times passed, they used to drink of the mistical cup with quilles, which
thing the bishop of Ro^e does yet use at this present time: some were wont to
dip their bread into the mistical wine as it is written in the Ecclesiastycall
historye of Eusebius. But I would wyshe al things to be do, that are most
consonaunte and agreeable to the institucio^ of Christ.


Pryeste. But what say ye of the word, which the Apostles have changed in
baptysme, vsyng not that prescribed form, that was appointed then by Christ
in the gospel? ans. to the 8. obiec.



Prentyse. Some there be that grant, that the words were altered and
changed, but that the form and manner, that the Apostels did use, was all one
with yt* that Christ had prescribed them in his gospel. For (say they) in the
name of Jesus Christ, In ye name of Jesus Christ the names of ye 3. divine
persons ar comprehended.

Ireneus contra Vale^tinianos. li. 4.


ar the names of the three divine persons comprehended, that is to say, of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.

And Ireneus in his. 4. book co^tra vale^tinianos does plainly testify and
witness the same, saying: in the name of Christ the three persons are
understood: for this word, Christ, does signify anointed, wherein is
showed both he that annoynteth, he that is anointed, and the unction it self:
he that is anointed is the son, he that annoynteth is the father, and the
vnctio^ is the holy ghost. Whereby it appears that in this alteracion nothing
at al is taken away. The.9. ob.



Pryest. So may we right well say, that in this alteracion, which is so sore
impugned and spoken against in this sacrament, nothing is taken away: in the
one part or kind the whole is contained.

For ye know right well, that the body of Christ, which is given unto the lay
people under ye form of bread, is not without blood, so yt as in or under ye
name of Christ, all three persons, that is to say, ye father, the son and
the holy ghost ar understood, so under ye form of bread is both the body and
blood contained.

What have ye now to say against this?


Prentyse. I have to say this. As for the answer that I have brought out of
Ireneus, I do not greatly lean upon it. For in ye place of the Acts of the
Apostles to baptize in the name of Christ is to baptize by his commandment,
What is to baptize in ye name of Christ.
and according to his will and institution.

Whereby we may rather conclude and gather, that the Apostles did observe the
form and manner, yt Christ had prescribed. Else they had not baptized in the
name of Christ, if they had done otherwise than Christ had commanded the^,
Farthermore it is not to be thought. that the Apostles, which did with such a
diligence and zeal set forth the true religion, did cast of the form and
manner of baptizinge yt Christ had ordained and prescribed unto them. Thomas de
Aquino.

Why after the scholemen the Apostls baptized in the name of Christ




Besides all this, when ye schoolmen (as we read in Thomas de Aquino) do
consent and agree, that the form and manner of baptising has been in some
thing changed and altered by the Apostles: they write that it was done for a
time, and that by the dispensinge of the holy ghost, and that therefore we
ought not to make of it a perpetual law.

For why? It was done to this end, say they, that the name of Christ might be
the more spread abroad.

But this ye do not observe, when ye take away the mistical cup of the
communion from the people. For, as ye do it without any dispensing of the holy
ghost, so will ye have your ungodly and blasphemouse decree to contynewe for
ever.

Again the Apostles did not condemn as heretykes those, that would use the
prescribed form and manner of baptising. But ye do not only condemn all the
lay people, as heretics, that receive under both kinds, but ye do also
most cruelly burn them.

And who would not, besides all this, deteste and abhor this doctrine, which
affirms, that it lies in man's power to inuert, turn and change either the
matter or words of the sacrament, as ye have done most shamfully, not only
taking away the cup from the people, but also the words, that are spoken upon
it, which are most wholesome, and do more plainly declare and set forth the
mystery of our salvation, then the words that are spoken upon the bread? For
of or upon ye bread it is only said. Luke. 22.
This is my body, which is delivered for you: but of or upon the cup, it is
said: this cup is the new testamente in my blood, which is shed for you and
for many unto remission of your sins. Weyghe now, what Godly and
comfortable doctryns are here contained in these last words, which do
appertain unto the cup.


Priest. Ye have not yet proved, but that under the form of bread there is both
flesh and blood contained onles ye will have a bodi without blod Wherefore ye do
most shamefully belie us, saying that we rob the people.

For, they receive as much under the one kind, as they should receive under
both.


Prentise. This is soon said, but not so soon proved master person: for ye
must understand, Ans. to the 9. obiec.
that the communion of the body and blood of Christ in the sacrament is not ye
work of nature: whatsoever is there delivered unto us, as it is offered unto us
by or in the words of Christ's promises, so is it received by faith. And in
this externe or outward things, God does most chiefly and most principally
require our obedience. The signs and outward affictio^ of the ceremonies are
things tra^sitory, but the word of God remains for ever: and therefore the
sacraments must be ministered according to the rule of it. Again: we receive
so much there, as God has appointed to give unto us, of whose will we can not
be certified but only by his word.

But Christ has ordained ii parts of this sacrament, saying of the one: This
is my body, and of ye other: this is my blood, meaning thereby, that in the
bread being worthily received, and according to Christ's institucion, we are
made partakers of his body, and in the wine, partakers of his blood: and has
left unto us express words, for or touching these things: therefore we must
rather trust to him, than to man's sophistications or subtle arguments.

I confess and grant that the body of Christ, Christ's bodi in heaven is not
without blood.
which is in heaven, is not without blood. I doubt not but that they are both
joined, together in him: I mean, this is my belefe, that in Christ's natural
body, there is both his flesh and blood joined together. But how shall ye
prove that they are both jointly joined together in the sacrament.

The faith of the communica^tes does in the one part amplexe, embrace, and
take hold upon the body of Christ, as it was hanged and nailed on the cross,
wherewith we are spiritually fed. And the same faith does in the other part
apprehende and take hold upon his blood, that was shed for our salvation,
and thereof we do spiritually drink.

The minds of the faithful does most chefeli run upon these misteryes of
Christ's death, when they do communicate. Therefore we must not now reason how
christ body is in heaven. We follow gods word, and see or perceive, that it is
not necessary, that those things which are naturally joined together, should be
jointly received together:

The humayn and divine nature are in the person of Christ jointly joined
together, and can in no wise be separated one from an other: yet ye will not
say, that whersoeuer the Godhead is there is ye manhood also: for yt were to
make ye body of Christ infynyte and unmeasurable, which is contrary to the
nature of an humayne body.

The son of God, in that he is God, is found to be every where and fills
al things, which can not be truly said of his body. More over al spiritual
gifts are jointly joined together in the holigoste, and yet it follows not
that whosoever has the gift of prophesying, has also ye gift of to^gs: or
whosoever has ye gift of to^ges, has also the gift of prophesying. Seuerite and
mercy are most ioyntlye joined together in God, and yet when any man receaueth
everlasting life, he feleth the mercy of God, and not his extreme rigor. The
same might I say of many other things, which though they be in themselves most
jointly joined together, yet are they given separatly.


Pryeste. Here is in deed divinity upon dyuinite. The.10. ob


But ye have yet said nothing to that, which I objected unto you touching the
order of baptysme, which, as ye know, the church does not observe: for
children are first baptized and afterward taught, whereas Christ commanded
first to teach and afterward to baptize. Ans. to the 10. ob.



Prentise. I meruayll greatly, master person, that ye will aleage this, as
though ye would be on the Anabaptists part, that so ye might the better be
against us, and troble us the more.

Why will ye not understand that this saying of Christ ought generally to be
understood and taken of the Gentiles or heathen, and not particularly? It is
most true, that in the first settinge forth of Christendom, that is to say,
of the Christen religion and gospel, we must begin at the doctrine. For when
a city, contreye or realm, must be won to Christ, before we come to
baptism, preaching must be used.

Which when it is once received and beeleued, not only they, that be of age,
are baptized, but also they offer their litell ones to be baptized.

That therefore, that was generally commanded of Christ, ye will bring it to a
particular baptisynge of children. The Greek word is Matheteusantes, which
signifies to make disciples, and to aggregat or gather unto Christ, which
thing, in them that are of age, is do^ both by doctrine and baptism, in the
young children by baptism only, because they are not yet able to receive the
doctrine. Which way seems to have been used in circumcision.

Abraham. Genesis 17.
As touching Abraham, yt was of a full age, the doctrine went before, and
afterward the sacrament followed. But it was not so in his son Isaac. Isaac.
And this also is a plain truth, that in the church the doctrine goes
before the sacraments, as al men may well perceue and see.

Moreover, as it has been said before, they gather not well, when they go
about to gather the order of things, of or by the order of ye words. For in
Mark we have of John the baptist, Mark.1.
that he was in the deserte baptisyng and preaching the baptism of
repentance, whereas no man doubts but yt he did preach first, and
afterward baptyse.


Priest. Do we, The.11. ob.
I pray you, even when the communion is ministered as ye will have it, do we, I
say, keep and observe that, which Christ did in his last supper? We receive
the sacrament fasting, whereas Christ did it after supper and ministered the
sacrament of his body and blood unto his discipls when they had supped. The.12.
ob


Secondlye the communion is ministered in the morning, The.13. ob
whereas Christ did it in the eueninge: nor we do not wash each others fete,
whereas Christ did both wash his disciples fete, and also commanded, that we
should wash each others fete.

I trow I shall so lay the scriptures to you, that ye shall have at length,
both your belly and mouth full. Ans. to the ^^. obie.



Prentise. As touching the first it is to be considered, that Christ did eat
first the paschall lamb: for his mind and will was after ye abolyshyng of the
old sacraments to institute and ordain the new. And as for the time of the
Lords supper, Ans. to the 12. obiec.
I confess and grant, that the church may use it self in that point, as it
shall think best, or as it shall think most expedyent for the glory of god,
and for the edifying of them, that do communicate. For there is no express
commandment of it, no more tha^ we have of coming to it fasting, or having
eaten somewhat before. The commau^dements, that appertain to this sacrament,
The commau^dme^ts that appertain to ye communion
are these: take and eat.

Take and drink all of this: do this in the rememberaunce of me: let every man
examine himself, and other like. There is no mencyon made of the time, nor of
the place nor of the apparel, nor of other such like circumstaunces. Ciprian.
Causes whi the communion is ministered in ye morning.
S. Ciprian rehearses the causes, why ye Lords supper or communion is
ministered in the morning: the first is, because the people may better come
together at that hour, tha^ at any other time of the day besides: for in the
day time much business chances, whereby men are plucked away from the divine
service. The second is, because men ar at that time sobre, and have their
minds more apt to receive and bear away Godly lessons and wholesome
doctrine.

The third is, because the morning is a good monument or reme^beraunce of the
Lords resurrection or rising again, which thing is much available to the
institucion of this sacrament.

Moreover, it is to be noted, yt the aunciente fathers, when they observed and
kept any general fasting, because they took then no meat till night, were
wont to have the Communion in the eueninge: for when they fasted, they gave
themselves all the day long to prayers, to hearing of sermons, to singinge of
Godly Hymmes, and to other like Godly exercises.

About the euenyng the communion or lords supper was ministered they receued
the sacrament, and so eueri man went home to take his repaste.

Howbeit in Saint Augustins time they were wont in many churches, upon
maundye thirsday to receive the communion at night that so they might the
better express Christ's institution and doing: but I find that this custo^e
was abolyshe and put down by the sixte counsel, The sixte Counsel. of
Co^stantnople kept in Trullo.
that was kept at Constantinople in Trullo, the Canons of which counsel are
set forth in greek, wherein mentyon is made, of the custom that was the^ used
in the churches of Africa. But to be short, so that ye whole sacrament be
ministered, and the institutyon of Christ kept, we ought not greatly to care for
the time, or other like circumstaunces, sythens we have no express
commandment of them. CHRIST, when he was baptized, was.xxx. years old.

And were it not mere foolishness, if we would suffer me^ to baptize none,
except they were.xxx. years old?


Priest. O Lord god, what a thing is this? What a world would it be, if such
young boys be suffered still to read the scriptures? Well, what say ye to ye
washing of the fete, which is altogether omitted and left?


Pre^tise. I say, that we ought to consider in it two significations. Ans. to
the 13. ob.
The one is touching remission of sins, and the clensing or purging away of
ye fylthynesse of the mind, which is given us by Christ. And of that does
our savior speak unto Peter, saying: John. 13.
If I wash thee not, you shall have no part with me. And again: he, that is
washed, has no need but to wash his feet. And of this washing does S.
Bernard speak very much. Bernarde.


Besides that, this washing was a token or sign of Christen love and of the
submission of the mind, which we ought to use, though we be never so hyghly
promoted in this world. And therefore Christ, speaking of it, says: ye call
me master and Lord, and ye say well, for I am so. If I then being your Lord and
master have washed your fete, ye ought also to wash one an others fete. By the
which commandment he would signify unto us, that we ought for no manner of
worldly dignity, to wythdrawe our selves from that service and duty, that we
owe to our neighbor or Christen brother, yea in things that seem most vile,
which thing Christ did for our example perform and fulfill. Where washyng
of fete was used and why it was used.


The washing of the fete, was a thing much used among the Jews. For in such
hot contryes, as Jury is, when men did trauayll on foot, their bodies were
much wearyed with heat: therefore the washing of their fete, when they were
weari and full of dust, was no small refreshing unto them, specially seeing that
in those contreyes men were not so well shod as they are with us.

Else how could Christ have had his fete washed by the synnefull woman and
wiped with her hears, Luke. 10.
except he had had his fete bare, or so shod that his shoes might easily be
pulled of? And yt ye washing of the fete in the scripturs does signify any
base service, that may be done to our neighbor, 1. Kin. 15.
Abigael does testify and witness for when David would have married her, she
answered: thy hande-mayde is ready to wash my lords feet, and the feet of my
Lords servants.

As though she should said: I think not my self worthy of so high honor, I
am rather most ready to do any kind of service, seems it never so base, to
mi lords servants.

And S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothee, 1. Timo. 5.
when he speaks of ye widow, that should be chosen of the church, he
wills that she should be such an one, as is full of good works, and has
washed the Saints fete. Where doubtless S. Math. 6.
Paul, by the washyng of ye fete, does understand al manner of charitable
service, How Christ's sayi^g must be understood when he says when ye fast
annoynte your heads.
that ought to be do^ to the men of God. Also Christ says in his holy gospel:
when thou do fast annoint thy head. Whereof it does not follow, yt we ought to
anoint our heads, whensoever we fast, but because yt in Siria or Arabia ye
happy they used much to anoint the^selfs when they would be merry and except
when they were in so^e heaviness, christ meneth, yt in private fasti^gs we should
not by omitting ye accustomable trimming of our bodies hunte after vain
glory, or vain praise of the world. But now, seeinge there is no such use
of anointing among us, we are not bound in our fasting, to anoynte our selves.

Which same self thing must be understood of the washing of the fete,
which ye do so stoutly obiecte unto us.

Washing of the fete cannot be called a sacrament.
Again: it cannot be called a sacrament, although it signifies and
represents in or by the elemente many Godly things (as I have showed
already) and has a commandment annexed unto it. For there be no express or
particular words given, that should be added to ye element, that thereof might
be made a sacrament, or whereby a promise of some particular gift or grace to
be obtained is signified and betokened.

Finally neither Christ, nor his Apostles did command, that the communica^tes
should wash each others fete.

And Augustyne, Augu. ad Ianuariu^. Epi. cxix.
in a certain Epistel ad Ianuariu^, does plainly write, that certain
churches did remove and put away this ceremony, least it should be taken for
part of the sacrament, or for baptysme: and that some again did keep still the
same.


Pryest. Why, The. 14. ob.
will ye have the Apostles and the lay people to be of like dignite? Were not
the Apostles made priests by our savior Christ? Therefore the church has by
good right made an other law for the communion of the lay people.


Prentise. We know nothing of this kind of priesthode, The answer to it.
there is not one jot or syllable in the scriptures, that the Apostles were
made priests The scriptures of ye new testament use no such names. Mark this
If they were pryestes, they were so either after the order of Melchisedech and
the^ must they have been priests for ever, or after the order of Aaron, and
then must they have offered bloody sacrifices, as lambs, calves, bullockes and
hefkers, or else after the order of Baal, All Christians in the new testament
be called priests.
as they be all, that robbing the Chrystyan congregation of that most worthy
name, given in the scriptures to all christians, do challenge it to them selves
alone.

But let them by the priests understand the ministers of ye church.


Priest. When pryestes say no Mass they receive but under one kind.
So they do, I warraunte you.


Prentyse. Now then tell me master person, why do ye minister the sacrament
under one kind only unto your priests, when they, saying not mass their
selves, chance to come to the communyo^, since that Christ did minister under
both kinds to the Apostles, geuyng them no less than he took for himself?
Again, if Christ did only give the sacrament to pryestes, as they call them,
why dare ye then give part to the lay and commen people, sithe Christ did not
communicate with them? Besides this there were no women at the communion with
Christ, except ye will have the^ to be priests also.

Why do ye then give the sacrament unto them, sithe that CHRIST did give it
only to men? But ye, that reason so substanciallye of the sacrament or
communyon of Christ, kept with his Apostles, what shall ye answer to the
Apostle Paul? who, writing to the universal church of Corinthus,
commands both kinds to be given, not to the ministers only, but to the
whole people? The. 15. objection.



Pryest. Ye can not deny, but that there is mencyon made of the communion of
the lay people in the decrees, canons and ecclesiastical historyes.


Prentyse. I grant that: but ye are greatly deceived, An answer to it.
if by the Communion of the lay people ye do understand the receiving under
one kind: for there both kinds were given. On lie it was called the communyon
of the lay people, because that so^e of the clergy, being through their own
fault fallen from their ministry and office, did no more communicate among the
clergy or ministers, but among the lay and common people.


Priest. The more, I trow, I reason with you, the worse I shall find you. Did
not Christ, I pray you, minister the sacrament under one kind to his
disciples, The. 16. ob
when he went to Emaus? Luke. 24.
For there as it is said they knew him by the breakyng of bread.

Therefore ye do not well, that of one only action of Christ go about to
establyshe a doctrine and make a commandment. The.17. ob
Besides that, all the whole church is on our side: which holy mother the church
being moved with many causes, did ordain that the sacrament should be
ministered unto the lay people under one kind.

The first cause, which moved our mother the holy church, The.18. ob
to minister the sacrament under one ki^d is, lest if the cup should be
generally ministered, any sh^ould be shed or spilled.

The second is this: (...).19. ob
if (...) should be reserved for the (...) the bread is, it would wax sour,
and not be able to be drunken. Thirdly there be many, The. 20. ob
that can not away with drinking of wine, therefore seeing that they can take
but one part, if both were so necessary, as ye say, they would think, that
they had not communicated truly, nor received the whole sacrament.

The.21. ob.
Last of all, the ministers must have some what more privilege, than the
commen sort of the people.

I trust young man, ye have marked these things well.


Prentyse. Truly master person, I have marked them well, and I trust, ye shall
say no less, by that time ye have heard mine answer.

As for the first argument, that ye have brought, Ans. to the 16. obiec.
saying that Christ has some times ministered under one kind, because we read
in Luk that his disciples knew him by ye breakyng of bread, that verelye is to
weak, yea and very foolyshe also.

For ye shall never be able to show that the breaking of bread does in that
place signify the holy communion, sith that the same manner of speaking is in
ye holy scriptures applied very often times to the commandments. And it is
no meruail, that those disciples knew him by breakyng of bread, or by taking of
commen meat. For sith yt Christ (as we may Godly believe of him) had
certain peculyare thanks geuinge and prayers, he might easily be known. But
grant that Christ did then at that time give one part of the Sacrament
only: shall it be lawful for us to do it therefore? He did not by ye same
one only doing abrogate or abolyshe the general commandment, that he gave
at his supper, and afterward was confyrmed by the writings of the
Euangelystes and of Paul.

Genesis 22.
God did once command Abraham to sacrifice his son: yet he did not by that
abolyshe this general commaundenlente of his: thou shall not kyl. Exo. 20.


He did also command once the Israelites to carye away the goods of the
Egipcians, Ex. 3.11.12.
howbeit he will have nevertheless this his commandment to stand still:
Thou shall not steal. Sinecdoche is a figure, whereby, when part of a thing is
named, ye whole is understood, and so^etymes the whole being named, part
only is understood
Moreover by the breaking of the bread, the whole supper may be understood
by a figure, which is called Synecdoche.

And whereas ye blame us, because (as ye report of us) we do of one only
action or doing of Christ make a general doctrine and commandment: ye are
blame worthi your selves, for this deed or fact of Christ, was not vulgar or
common, but has an express commau^demente joined and annexed to it: which
was afterward confyrmed and established by Paul. And do we not, besides all
this, work most surely, when we seek to the head spring and former institucio^?


Pryest. Well the church is on our side, which thing ye can not deny, and
Credendum est magis soli marie veraci, quam Jude oru^ turbai^ fallaci. That is
to say: the holy church alone is more to be beeleued, then a sort of false
heretykes, although they were thousands together.


Prentise. Well, to the purpose master person, I can not think, Ans. to the
17. obiec.
but whereas ye say that the catholic church is on your side and death with
you, that is plain falls. For all the Greek church, and the whole east part of
the world, with all the whole auncientie, is against you in this point: for this
shameful and most blasphemous mutylation or cutting of the one part of the
sacrament, is a bird of yesterdayes hatchyng.

Thomas de Aquino, now being one of the latter schoolmen, 3. part. que 80.
arti. 12
says plainly that it began to be used about his time, in certain churches.

truly master person, me think, this is a mad way, that ye do use. When we
flee to the scriptures, by and by ye say that they are obscure and dark, and
so appeall to the fathers, who, ye say, do all stand on your side, ye run
to the antiquity of time, whereby ye go about to mock away all the
testimonies and autorytes of the scriptures. But how steadfast ye be, it shall
easily be seen in this disputacion, where the scripture is plain, all the
fathers stand with us, and all the whole antiquite consents with the
scriptures. Why the Pope catholyks do so sore resist ye truth


Therefore this your study and love, that ye, have to resist or speak against
us, comes only of this that ye are sworn and addicted to the Popes laws,
whereby it comes to pass, yt ye set not a straw neither by the truth, nor
by the scriptures, nor by the fathers, nor yet by antiquite.


Pryeste. If there were none other thing, yet the causes, whereby the church
was moved to make this Godly ordeynau^ce, ought to suffice us.


Pre^tise, The first cause, so far as I do remember, is least the cup
should be shed, Ans. to the 18. obiec.
if it should be ministered uniuersally to all men.

Here do I muse and greatly meruel at Ireneus, Basilius, Ambrose, Nazia^zene
and Augustyne, which being such wise and prudent fathers, did not see these
perils in the sacrament: or if they did se them, they did not so much esteem
them, that they would therefore violate the sacraments, which nevertheless,
they ministered very often.

For these blasphemous private masses were not yet then used. Private masses are
here called when no communion is used.
They did always communicate in the mysteries with the other, ye people
coming to the communion much more often than they do now a days.

They did not pass so much, if part of the mistical cup did perchance fall
on the ground. In Ciprianus time a maid did spue out of the mystical wine.
This was the greatest care, that the holy fathers took, that they might
minister the sacrament to worthy persons.

But ye labor not to put away from it dogs and swyne, by whom much greater
iniurye is done to the blood of Christ, than if some drops of it should be
spilled on the ground: therefore I would counsayll the ministers, if at lest I
were worthy to give counsel, to take good head, that none be spilled, and if
any chances to be spilled, let them be sorry therefore, and yet it ought not
to be exaggerated, as though it were a thing irremissible.

Saint Augustine writes, Augusti. Questi. 1. cap interrogo uos.
that as we must take heed that no part of the sacrament fall down on the
ground* so must both the minister and also the hearers beware, that no word
be spoken in vain, or escape without profit. And yet notwythstandyng although
many times the word is negligentlye heard and vnfrutefully received, sermons
must not be kept away from the people.


Priest. But how could the mystical wine be kept from sowryng, if it were
reserved for the sick?


Pre^tise. Ans. to the 19. obiec.
I answer, that your own supersticion only does breed ye same peril.

Who compels you to keep or reserve the sacrament? Who has given you that
commandment?


Priest. We must give it to the sick.


Prentyse. I grant it, but may not the consecracion be do^e before the sick?


Pryest. But the sick persons can not always tarry so long. There be many
ceremo^ies ye know.


Prentyse. And this does also come of your superstition and not of Christ's
commandment. That which Christ commanded, may easily be done in a short
time, and with very few words. Gregory in his Epistles testifies and
witnesses, that the Apostles did only use the lords prayer at the
consecracyon: but ye affirm and hold opinion, that the sacrament can not be
made but only in your Mass. Therefore these impedimentes and lettes, that ye
allege, are to be imputed to your own foolysh superstition, and not to the
institucion of the lord.


Pryest. What shall we do with them, that either of nature do abhor wine, or
else by reason of their sickness, can not away with it?


Prentyse. When there is such necessite, Ans. to the 20, obiec.
that the law can take no place, to such kind of men one part only of
the sacrament may be given.

But nevertheless it can not be gathered thereof, that touching the other
that can away with wine the sacrament ought to be mutilated or half cut of, by
the law and decree of men.

For it is god that seems to have brought or cast that man into this
necessite, whereby it follows, that he does not wittingly and willingly violate
the sacrament. So^e there be that make this answer: if any do so abhor
wine, that they can by no means away with it: such drink may be given unto
them, as they can well away with all, so that the sacrament be kept whole, and
the words of the Lord fully rehearced.


Priest. But Christ has not so instituted and ordained: therefore they, that
should do sa, should break the Lords institucion.


Prentise. This answer they will make, that Christ did use that kind of
drink, that men could away withal, and that did agree with them that
received it, and that therefore they swerve not from the institucion of Christ,
when they minister to all men that kind of drink, that they can brook. For
in so doing they seem rather to submit themselves to the inbecillite and
weakness of their brethren, than to violate the sacrament. To this may I
add, that if a man ca^ not receive the sacrament, as christ has instituted,
he should altogether refrain from it.

For if he does desire it and believe, he shall lose no fruit or profit
thereof, but it shall be imputed unto him as though he had received it. As if a
man should earnestly desire to be baptized, and cold not obtai^e it, it would be
imputed unto him, as if he had been baptized in very deed.

But we may not, because of such rare and seldom chances, cut away half the
sacrament.


Pryeste. I perceive that ye seek nothing else but mere confusion, and that ye
will have no honor to be given to the ministers.


Prentyse. Ans. to the 21. obiec.
The dignite of the ministers consists not in this, that they should
receive.2. parts of ye sacrament, and the lay people but one; or that they
should receive a greater cake, than the common sort of the people, that do
communicate with them.

1. Timo. 3. Titus. 1.
Paul in his first Epystel to Timothe, and in his Epistle to Titus, does
sufficiently describe the godly qualites of the ministers wherein consists
their dignitye. And again writing to Timothe he says, 1. Tim. 5.
that the elders are worthy of double honor, when they rule well, and labor
in the word of god.


Pryeste. I am almost weary to talk with you, ye are so obstinate. I perceive
that ye will in no wise yield to your betters, but are full of words and of
unlearned contention.


Prentyse. I do from my very heart detest and abhor vain words, and
ungodly contencion: but that I should in this matter yield to you, I see not
yet, why I should do it.

For besides all other reasons, arguments, and autorites of the Scriptures,
that have bee^ alleged hitherto, this I do read in the.3. to the Galathians,
that though it be but a man's testament, if it be allowed, Gala. 3.
no man despyseth it, or adds any thing thereto: how much less ought men
to be so temera^ious and rash, as for to add any thing to ye testament of
Christ? Me^ being frail and mortal, do only in their testamentes bequeathe
earthly things: but Christ, which is God almightye, bequeatheth to his church
his heavenly sacraments, which apperteine unto everlasting life.

Therefore it is an intolerable presumption that man, being but a worm of the
earth, should alter any thing in his testamente. Beesydes this all the universal
church, through the whole world, did never in the right administracion of the
sacrament swerve from the institution of Christ, The counsel of Constaunce is
most unfaithful. John husse Hieronymus de Praga.
til ye most disloial and unfaithful consell, yt was kept at Co^staunce
about.120. years ago: in which devilish counsel, these.2. notable and godly
learned men John Husse, and Hieronymus de Praga, were most treacherously burnt,
for speaking against this most horrible profanation of the sacrament. What
should I here speak of the ancient fathers? who did always from their very
heart abhor to swerve any thing in this sacrament from the institution and
ordeynaunce of Christ. We have a Canon of Gelasyus, which is written de
consecratio^e, distinctio^e.2. capi^. Comperimus: there some are rebuked,
Galasius de consecr. distinct.2. cap. co^perimus.
because yt they, receauinge a portion of the Lords body, did altogether
abstain from the cup of the Lords blood.

Which thing he calls supersticious, commaundynge them either to take the
whole sacrament, or to abstain from the whole. For (says he) it is a plain
sacrilege or robbing of Gods glory, yt they should be severed or separated.


Pryeste. That Canon is to be understood of the Priests, The. 22. ob.
when they say mass. For they are bound to receive both kinds.


Prentyse. This cannot be gathered of the words of this holy bishop. Ans. to
it
For there plain mention is made of ye communicantes, and of them that should
be put from the sacraments which things can be applied but only to those,
to whom the sacrament is ministered. Moreover it is not written in the Canon,
that any injury is done to the sacrifice, but to the sacrament. For says he,
no division of that one only misterye can be done without great sacrilege
or intolerable robberye of the glory of god.

Since then ye minister the sacrament to the lay people under one kind, making
a shameful division of this sacrament, ye can not excuse your selves, but
that ye commit plain and manifest sacrilege. Chrysostom in the.18. Homilye
upon the second Epistell to the Corinthians writes, Chri. ho. 1^ in.2. Epi.
ad Corin.
that there be certain things, wherein the priest differs nothing from the
lay man.

As in receauinge of the dreadefull misteryes, It is not with us as in the old
law, where one part of the sacrifice was given to the Pryeste, and an other
to him that did offer: but to us all, says he, one only and the same body
of Christ is given, and one only and the same cup.

Ciprian in his.2. book and.3. Epistell proves, that we ought in no wise to
swerve in this sacrament from the institucion of Christ: where among all other
things he reherceth these.3. principal points: first, Cipri. 2. li. epist. 3.
epi.
how in this matter Christ only ought to be harkened unto.

Again: how we ought not to care what other have done before us, but what
Christ, who was before all, has done himself or wills us to do: last of al
how they that do otherwise, tha^ christ did, do in vain worship God, with
the doctrynes and precepts of men.


Priest. O good God, what a thing is it, to read any author after this sort,
not weyghynge ye circumstaunces of the places? Cyprian does not speak of this
thing that we have now in hand, The.23. ob. Aquarri may be called in english
waterlynges. Ans. to it.
but there he disputes against certain sects, yt be called Aquarii, which
used water in the Lords cup instede of wine.

This fault does he there speak against, and not against ye taking away of the
one part of this sacrament from the lay people.


Pre^tis. But I say, that ye offend more (...) against the instytucion of
Christ in the sacrament, than these waterlynges did: for although they used
water for wine, yet did they not utterly put away the one part of the
sacrament. They did still keep the very words, that appertei^e to ye cup, only
they did change the elemente.

But ye do most treaterouslye take away from the lay people, both the whole
cup, and also the words, that appertain unto it. Secondely I grant that
Cipryans disputacion, wherein he confuteth the waterlings, is particular, but
the arguments and reasons, that he does use, are universal, yt is to say:
how in the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, we ought in no wise to
swerve from Christ's institucion. Whereupon I conclude that it is in no wise
lawful, to take away the mystical cup from the communion.


Priest. The.24. ob
Ciprian writes these things only of them, that did offer: therefore this place
appertains nothing to the communion.


Prentise. I wonder yt your wit is so gross that ye can not see, Answer.
how the sacrifices of the ancient fathers in Ciprians time did in nothing
dyfferre from the communion: there were no private masses used among them, for
they did afterward crepe in, to the great hinderaunce of the true religion.


Priest. Then be like there was some kind of mass in Ciprians time. Therefore
they that say, that it is a bird of late years, do most shamefully belie us.


Prentyse. I will not now reason of that matter with you.

For there is a book, which, I trust, shall shortly come abroad in print,
wherein al things, concerning your cursed mass, ar so plai^ly discussed and
set forth, that your Pope catholics, which now at this time are so brag,
shall not have one word to speak.


Pryest. Well, are ye at this point, that ye will not receive at all, now at
this blessed time?


Prentyse. I have told you my mind, master person, what I intend to do.


Priest. So shall ye bring your self into trouble, and not preuayll.


Prentyse. If it be the pleasure of God to bring me into any trouble for his
son Jesus Christ's sake, or for his truethes sake, I am assured that he will
not suffer me to be tempted above mi strength, but will in the midst of my
temptation make away, that I may be able to bear it: that is to say: this
do I believe, that God will, of his infinite goodness, measure his cross
according to my strength. God measures his cross according to our strength
Look what I am able to bear, that will his fatherly and most merciful
goodness lay upon my sholders, if it be expedient for his glory, for the
edifying of his church and for the salvation of my soul: and if it be his
Godly pleasure, to increase his cross upon me, he will also increase my
strength. In the mean ceason I know this to be most sure, that it is not the
way to eschew trouble, to flee from God or to swerve from his truth: but
rather it is the way and mean to bring my self into a much greater trouble,
both in this world here, and also in the world to come.

And specially for this matter of the sacrament, that now we have in handlyng:
I doubt not, but that God will of his ryghteous judgment plage this wicked
world with great and horrible plagues. For if the Corinthians, that kept
Christ's holy institucion whole, 1. Cor. 11.
were nevertheless, be cause they misused themselves in the receiving of the
sacrament, so sore punyshed with syckenesse, new diseases and pestilences:
what ought they to look for, at the ryghteous judgment of God, that so
blasphemously prophanate his sacraments, taking away most sacrilegeouslye not
only the one half of the matter that the sacraments are made of, but also the
very words of the institution? Truly all the plagues, that do daily chance
unto us, the prophanacion of ye sacrament is the chief cause of our plages.
as tumulte, sedicion, rebellions, insurrections, famyne and extreme hunger,
derth and scarceness of al manner of things, with innumerable kinds of new
diseases, that daily spryng up among us, ought to be imputed to none other
thing, but to this profane mutilatyon or manglyng of the sacrament.


Priest. And did not al these plags happen unto us, when ye had the sacrament
ministered under both kinds? What tumultes and insurrectyons have we had in
that short time, that all things were, as ye would have them? What dearth and
scarceness of victualles have we had ever since? The chief argument that ye
pope catholics use now a days to diffame the gospel and word of god.
Whereunto shall we impute these things? Did not besides all this all the
chief autors of your religion come to an ill end? reckon Anne Boleyne,
Cro^ewel, the duke of Somerset, ye duke of Northumberland, and the duke of
Suffolk, that I should in the mean ceason pass them over, that have been
burnt as most shameful heretykes.

Therefore young man, look better to your self, weigh and consider these
things better in your mind, and return by times, least ye repent your self
at length of this your sticneckednesse.


Prentyse. I grant, Answer.
that we have had tumultes and insurrectyons in that short time, that true
relygyon was up: but who were the authors of them? Were they not a sort of
rebellyous Papystes, that caused the insurrectyon in ye weast part of
England, for to have put down true relygyon, and Gods word?

As for them of Northfolke, it is not unknown what was ye cause of their
rising.

And no doubt it is but that there were many children of Belliall among them,
that prycked them forewardes: as the devil is always busye to sow sedicion
and to move men's hearts to rebellion, but most specially, when he sees, that
the world falls away from him, by the preaching of ye word of god.

Then does he bestirre himself, seeking all means possible to bring the gospel
into a suspicion or gelousye, and to make men to beeleue that it is a sedicious
doctrine: that so by that mean he may enjoy his possession still.

As long as the world sits in darkness and in the shadow of death,
runnyng headlong, for lack of the light of gods word, into perdycyon: the
devil is quiet enoughe, ye shall hear but of few tumultes.

For why? he is then in peasable possession of the world: what needs he to
make any thing ado: And as for the derth and scarcenes of victualles, yt we
have had ever since, whereunto shall we impute ye same, but to a sort of
Cormarands, which under the cloak of Gods word hyded their treaterouse
covetousness? For, thanks be unto God, there has been always great plenty
in this realm, ever since ye true reformacion of the church, of all manner of
things, that are necessary for the sustenaunce of man: so that both victuals
and other necessary things might have been good cheap, if it had not been for
these caterpillars, which would rather suffer their corn to be eaten with
vermin, and their cattle to dye of the rote, The cause of ye scarcenes and
derth that is now a days and to whom it ought to be imputed.
or send both corn and cattle over into strange contreyes, than let their
poor neighbors to have any thing at their hands, for a reasonable price.
This has made this derth, and nothing else. Howbeit I do not deny but that it
is a plage of god, that thus in the midst of plenty, we suffer such penury
and scarceness: but whereunto shall we impute it, but to our rebellyous
hearts, and diuelish^e stubburnesse, that would in no wise receive Gods word,
when it was so plenteously offered unto us, but kycked against it, having
lieffer to feed still of the coddes and husks with the swyne, than to eat
deintye meats in our fathers house? Had ye not masses said in your priui
chambers, ye rank papysts, kept ye not Idolatry in every dark corner? But woe
be to you: for
What abomynable Idolatrye, not wythstandyng the shynyng light of the gospel,
was still committed by such, as ye ar, in many dark corners of this realm? And
whereas ye say, that all the chief authors of our relygyon be come to an ill
end, recknyng a great many of honorable persons, which, being favorers of the
truth, have gone to wrake here in this world: what makes that for your
purpose? Might I not with the same reason diffame the gospel of Christ, yea and
all the scriptures of God also? To what end, I pray you, came all the
Prophets of God? What the end of Christ and of his Apostles has been here in
this world.
Some of the^ were stoned to death, some sawen in two with a woode^ saw, some
had tente nails driven through both their temples. And John the Baptyst, the
foreru^ner of Christ, was he not beheaded? Christ himself, who is the end
of all Prophets, was put to a most shameful death, being hanged on a
cross betwyxt two thieves.

None of all his holy Apostles did escape the cruel tyranny of this world,
that in the mean season I should speak nothing of so many thousand
Martyrs, whose blood was most cruellye shed.

Shall we therefore say, that the gospel, and the scriptures of god, are
untrue? God forbid.


Priest. Truly young man, I am sorye for you. I am affrayde that I shall be
feign to put you up to my Lord: then are ye undone.


Prentyse. Do as ye shall think best. Fare ye well master person: God open
your heart.

Be ashamed of your doings ye Papystes.



