A Proclamation agreed upon by the Justices of Peace of this County of
Bedford, at a general Sessions holden at Bedford, the nineteenth day of
April, in the xxvii. year of the Queens most gracious Reign, For the
restraint of Wandering Roges and Vacabounds.
WHereas at a general quarter Sessions holden at Bedford the xix. day of
April, in the xxvii. year of the Queens Majesty's reign that now is, for
the avoiding of Idleness, and for the reformation of idle evil disposed
Roges, Vacabonds and other lewd persons within the County of Bedford, the
number whereof now of late have greatly abounded, and daily more and more do
increase, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, breach of the Queens
Majesty's Laws, trouble of her loving Subjects, and great hinderance to the
impotent poor, whose relief thereby is taken away, which thing chiefly
grows for want of a convenient place and means to set the said Roges and
Vacabonds on work, and to correct them for their disorders: whereby they may
not only be forced to labor for their own living: but also be kept from
their wicked and ungodly course and trade of their wandering licencious and
abominable life.

It was agreed and fully concluded by the right Honorable Henry. Earl of
Kent, Henry, Lord Cheney of Tuddington, Thomas Snag, Sericant at the law,
Jews Diue Csquire, and other the Queens Majesty's Justices of Peace of this
County of Bedford, then assembled, that according to the intent and meaning of
the statutes made in the xiiii. and xviii. years of the Queens Majesty's
reign a house of Correction and Stocks of Wares to set the Idle on work, and
officers and workmen, both to instruct them in work, and to rule and guide
them in good order, should with all convenient speed be provided within this
County, for which purpose there is appointed three Justices of Peace of this
shire, to take upon them the chardge and care to provide a convenient house
for that purpose, and put the same in order, and to provide stocks of Wares
and other things necessary for the correction, instructing, ruling, ordering,
and setting on work of al such persons as should be committed into the same
house by any of her Majesty's Justices of Peace in this County. And to that
end it was then also agreed, that a taxation should be made within this
County, according to the statute in that case provided. Whereupon assesments
be made and taxed by the said Justices of Peace through all the Hundreds and
parts of this shire, upon persons most meet to contribute thereunto, for a
convenient sum of money to be levied for the said house, and other the good
purposes aforesaid. The said Justices of Peace have thought it good, meet and
convenient, as well for the furtherance of this good purpose aforesaid, as for
the better satisfying of them which be contributors to the same, to give notice
and knowledge to all the inhabitaunts of this County, that the said house is
at Bedford seen and vewed by three of the said Justices of Peace, to be in all
respects apt and fit for the purpose aforesaid, which house is appointed to be
(by Gods favor) upon the next coming, fully prepared and made ready to
receive, correct, order, rule, and set on work al such vagrant Roges,
Vagabonds, and other disordred persons, as shall be sent thither by any Justice
of Peace of this County, and that the Constable. Tythingman, Hedburroughs, or
other Officer, bringing by the warrant of any Justice of Peace of this County,
any such Vagabound, Roge, or other disordred person, shall receive at the said
house of correction of the Keeper of the said house, a Penny for every mile
between the place where the Justices warrant is made, and the said house of
Correction, as shall be expressed in the said Warrant, toward his charges and
pains in bringing of the same Roge. And the said Justices do also give notice
and knowledge hereby, to all such persons, as being assessed to contribute to
this good work, and do refuse or delay to pay forthwith to the high
Constables or other persons appointed to receive the sums upon them taxed,
that then the said Justices will forthwith proceed against such refusers,
according to the severity of the laws for such penalties and forfaitures, as
by their defaults in that behalf shall be lost and forfaited, that is to say,
for the double value of the sums upon them severally taxed, to be levied
upon their Lands by distress or of their goods by sail thereof. And lastly,
they also do notify and make it known unto all the inhabitants of this
County, that that every Town, Village and Hamlet, through all parts of this
County there shall be a strong Watch and Ward kept from Sun setting, until
next day at night, and withal a general and diligent search made the said
day at night, and the next day following it shall be made and continued. In which
Search, Watch and ward, so many Roges, vagabonds, beggars, and other
suspicious and unknown persons as shall be found, shall be apprehended and
brought before the next Justice of Peace, and upon examination, to be by him
committed to her Majesty's Gaile, or to the said house of correction at his
discretion, as the case shall require. And for the better preserving of this
Country after that time, clearly from Roges and Vagabonds, the said Justices
have likewise thought good to admonish all Constables, petty Constables,
Tythingmen, and other Officers and inhabitaunts within this County, to whom it
appertains not only diligently and duly to continue and keep every night
their Watches from the said next coming, until the feast of Saint Michael
next following, in every Town, Village and Hamlet, according to the statute of
Winchester, upon the pain therein limited. But also that there do no Roge,
Vagabond nor Beggar after the said pass by Day or by night throught any Town,
Village or Hamlet, vnarrested or vnbrought before a Justice of Peace, upon the
pains limited in the statute in that behalf lately provided, that is to say,
vi. s. viii. d. for every default, the same to be levied by distress upon
their Lands, or by sale of their goods of every Constable, Tithingman or
Officer offending in that behalf. And likewise no person being an Inhabitaunt
within this County, after the said next, do relieve any Roge, Vagabond, or
wandering beggar unlicensed, upon the pain of xx. s. for every default, to be
levied upon his Lands or goods, according to the statute in manner and form
aforesaid, which pains and forfaitures certainly shall be levied upon the goods
of every offender in that behalf, without mittigation. And for the avoiding
of all excuses touching the reprehension of Roges, vagabonds and beggars, the
said Justices do further give knowledge to al such poor persons, as have
licenses to collect the charitable alms of others in any Hundreds or parts of
this County, yet vnexpired and standing in force (except such as have lycenses
to beg for their houses burnt with Fire) and such as have lycenses under the
great Seal of England, that they forthwith severally repair to the Justices
of the Limmits wherein they do severally dwell, who will make other convenient
provision for their relief, without wandering abroad any more.

God save the Queen.

