A MOST PLAIN and profitable Exposition of the Book of Ester, delivered in
26. Sermons.

By Peter Merlin, one of the Ministers of the Church of Garnezey:

And now translated into English, for the help of those who wanting the
knowledge of the tongues, are yet desirous of the understanding of the
Scriptures and true Godliness.

With a Table of the principal points of doctrine contained therein.

Psalm 34. 19. Great are the troubles of the righteou, but the Lord delivers
him out of them all.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed 1599.

THE TRANSLATOR to the Reader, wishes grace and mercy from God the Father, in
Christ Jesus.
IT is to be lamented (dear Christian brother) even with bloody tears, that
the policies and subtilties of satan used in the time of darkness and
superstition, and not better discerned, or at the least not avoided in this
clear light of the Gospel. The Apostle S. Paul says that 2. Cor. 2. 11.
^e was not, (and by his example we should not: ^e) ignorant of his enterprises,
and subtle ^ractises: For this ignorance in not knowing, and negligence in not
avoiding, are the causes why many run headlong into his nets, and ^re taken
captives to do his will. Amongst 2. Tim. 2. 26.
which nets and snares of his, wherewith he draws souls into perdition, he
has not any more gainful unto himself, more hurtful unto man, then the
writing, publishing and reading of idle, fruitless, filthy and wicked books.
This is perceived most plainly in Papistrie, wherein it is lawful to publish
or read any book but those that are good, and which in any sort might tend to
the opening of ignorance R. Aschame Praeface to his schoolemaister.
and reformation of wickedness. Which thing a learned man of our age
complains to have happened at the time of the alteration of religion, in the
woeful reign of Queen Mary, when the Bible and all books of religion were
banished and Mort Arthure, with the like received into the Princes and Nobles
chambers. Satan is the same which ever he has been, an 1. Pet. 5. 8. Reu. 1^.
9. 10.
ancient Adversary, and old Serpent; and therefore ever works to the same
end, that is to our destruction* every day more cunningly then other: and even
by the same means which even now I spoke of: For who so list to take a view,
may easily see, there have more of those hobgoblin books, having neither show
of reason* nor likelihood of any truth; and more unsavory and unfruitful
matters ben^ partly raked up out of oblivion, and partly by setting on the
gloss of finer conceits as it were new coined* within these few years, the^
since the abolishing of Papistrie in many yer^^ before. What the Devil
purposes it is apparent* to nuzle ignorance* and cherish wickedness: what we
should do herein we cannot be ignorant, even every one in his place and
calling, to set himself to the bew^^ying and beating down of Satan's
practices. Wherein for mine own part, as in my place I cease not* according to
the measure of the grace of GOD committed unto me* by my voice to effect it: so
have I adventured both by the translation* of this book, and by this short and
rude admonition in writing* to deal with others farther of, that whither the
Authors voice nor mine could reach, our pens might* and where he either in
French or Latin could not be understood* mine Englishing of him might* instruct.

As for those who by the penning of those books defile their own wits, and by
the publishing of them, both abuse other men's time* and defame that Noble and
worthy Art of Printing* I desire them even by the mercies Romans 12. 1.
of GOD, (if they make any account of that dreadful account* which in the last
judgment they shall render of every idle word, and Mat. 12. 36.
therefore much more of idle and worse writing:) that they look into this
policy of Satan and detest it, knowing that his promise of the knowledge of
good and evil, performs Genesis 3.
but evil unto those that believe him: and that they acknowledge God to be the
Author of those gifts and ornaments of wit and learning which they possess,
and therefore use them unto his glory. The Printers, who for the greediness
of a little gain, lose the greatest 1. Tim. 6. 6.
gain, which is godliness, and the gain that grows by that, even ^ternall
life, if in time they repent not: I exhort to consider how excellent members
they be or should be of a Christian Commonwealth, how excellent and even
miraculous Art they profess: and how profitable they might be unto the Church
of God, which now by printing these ougly pamphlets, they injury and (as much
as in them lies) pull down. The grave and reverend Fathers unto whom the
oversight of books to pass the Print is committed, in most humble and earnest
manner I beseech, that yet in time they stop this mischief, which they know
better the^ I can tell them, how much it tends to the dishonor of God, whose
glory they are appointed to set forth, and to the disgrace of the Church
whereof they are ouer-seers.

And you (o dear Christians whosoever) that shall by Gods providence read
this simple admonition, if you have at any time been tainted with an itching
desire of reading such fables and toys, yet now at the last come to amendment
out of the snares of the devil. 2. Tim. 2. 26 Psalm. 95.
Whiles it is yet to day harden not your hearts, but hear the voice of God
sounding in his word, and soundly set forth and explained by godly learned men.
Hearken not unto Satan's promises for he will deceive thee, as the woman of
Samaria did her neighbor, who hid her child when she had promised to dress him
2. Kin. 6. 29.
tomorrow: the very Heathen can tell thee, Sera nimis vita est crastina, viue
hodie:

Tomorrowes life is all too late,
Live thou to day, that love thy state.
If we may not in Salomons judgment, bid our neighbor come tomorrow, much
less Prou* 3. 2^. Reu. 3. 20.
may thou bid God come again tomorrow, when he stands at thy door and
knocks. Use then the opportunity which God has given thee by the publishing
of good books, and mispend not thy time any longer in reading damnable and
wicked Treatises. Thou have (the Lords name be ever blessed therefore) the
holy Bible, the most necessary, the most profitable book, even the book of
life, and that dispearsed in infinite numbers easy to be gotten. Thou have also
even in thy mother tongue, Expositios, Readings, Comments, Sermons, Catechismes
innumerable, which all tend to the opening of that book, and to make the
understanding thereof easy unto thee. For the furthering whereof, seeing I had
nothing of mine own worthy the vieu in this learned age, I have taken some
time which I might best spare from mine ordinary function of preaching of the
word* and have employed it in this translation. Whereby if I may do any good
even unto the rudest and simplest, for whose cause I undertook it, I have my
desire: the learned have the Fountains out of which they may draw in
abundance, this is undertaken to help the unlearned, and unskillful in the
tongues.

Touching the Author of this book, and the occasion why he undertook it, I
am shortly to admonish thee. He was a French man, and sometimes Preacher unto
the King of France that now is, then King of Navarre; and therefore he bends
himself principally to touch the state of that Country: and being by those
broils which then were raised by the League against the professors of the
Gospel, driven to forsake his Country, he came into the Isle of Gernezey,
within her most excellent Majesty's dominions, where he was accepted for one of
the Ministers of that Church, and there he delivered first in French unto his
Auditorie, and afterward committed to writing in latin these Sermons, which
here now (good Reader) thou have now in English. The occasion why he took this
book in hand, was upon the death of the Duke of Guise, who as an Haman had set
himself against the Church of God, and was by the same Assuerus* whose power
and authority he had before abused (he means the French King, Henry the
third) suddenly slain at an assembly of the states at Bloys, when he thought
himself most sure of obtaining his purpose against all the godly; and was most
secure of his own state. The observing of this, serves to open the Authors
meaning in diverse places* which otherwise might seem somewhat dark* and
therefore thus briefly I set it down to thee.

The profit that shall come by the reading of this Treatise, and the principal
points contained therein, I had rather every man should find by proof in
reading the book, the^ spend time in blazing it before hand. And therefore I
commit it to thine own care and diligence, praying God to open thine heart to
understand, and bless thy diligence, to profit hereby both in knowledge and
practice, even for Christ Jesus sake, to whose grace I commend thee.

Farewell.
Gods Ship, Gods Church, with many a tempest tossed,
With waves of woe, and furious billows beaten,
Often seems to man to be even fully lost,
Quight swallowed up, and of those surges eaten:
When straight at hand Gods succor does appear,
Who stays the storms, and does all troubles clear*
The worldlings proud, fierce foemen to this bark,
Do swim in wealth, and flote in honors hie:
So that they seem deuoyd of any carke,
And bear their topsailes flanting in the sky:
When suddenly Gods vengeance does appear,
Which makes them buy their passed pleasure dear*
By those same storms God tries his chosen pheere,
His Church, his spouse, how constant she will stand;
Corrects his children whom he holds most dear,
Lest that they perish with that wicked band.
Whom, when they have those perils stoutly past,
He does conduct to happy haven at last.
By those fair calmes which wicked men enjoy,
Without excuse Gods bounty does them make:
And as the Ox is fatted on with joy,
Is brought at last unto the doleful stake:
The worldlings so does time in pleasure spend,
But goes to pain, when Death his life does end.
These changes rife are each where to be seen,
upon this stage whereon we play our parts:
Examples strange in every age has been,
If men had grace to lay them to their hearts.
But specially this story sweet and true,
Will lay these things apparent to thy vieu.
Then read with heed what in this book is pend,
And these examples to thy self apply:
Both text and Comment drive unto this end,
And as it were with joint consent do cry:
First follow Virtue in thine actions all,
Then flee from vice, for fear of endless fall.
Errata.
Page 6. l. 11, for Monarch, read Monarchy. Page 7. l. 8. for remain,
remained, l. 16 for* dets, nets, l. 20. of the which put our the. Pa. 18 l. 2.
for waste, wasting, Pa* 19. marg. for Dan. 1. 32. Dan. 2. 32* Pa. 21. l. 1. for
his, this Pa. 26. l. 1. for Siiuer, silver, l. 21. read, received with
thansgiuing. l. vl^ for these, the, P. 31. l. 2, for Bsides, Besides* P. 33. l.
1, read who even when Bab. Marg. for Eccle. 10. 9 read 10. 16 P. 47, l. 2*
read, make a small, l. 11. a periode put for a co^lon, l. 13. for and are, P.
64. in the title, for the second Se^ the fourth Ser.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON the Book of Ester.
The first Sermon containing the argument of the Book, and the exposition of
the two first verses: that is, of the time when these things were done, and of
the greatness of the dominion of Assuerus.

CHAP. I. In the days of Assuerus (this is that Assuerus, that reigned from
India even unto Aethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces.)

2. In those days when the King Assuerus sat on his throne, which was in the
Palace of Susa.


HIstories which contain the declaration of things true and profitable for the
life of man, have always been greatly esteemed of all men, who were not
altogether Barbarous, as well for the great pleasure, as for the exceeding
profitte which is received by them: and because besides it is a most
commendable matter for us to know, and a shameful* matter to be ignorant of,
those u^ble and v^liant acts, which have been achieved by those that lived in
former ages before us. So then, Cicero the chief Father of the Roman
eloqence, did not without cause say, that Histories are the witnesses of times,
the light of truth, the life of memory, the schoole-m^stresse of life, and the
messenger of antiquity. For without Histories* what certainty can we have of
things past? what truth of things spoken and done in former ages? how void
should our memory be of the knowledge of so many notable things, which
happened before our days? and then what skill or use could there be of things
altogether unknown? We should as children pass over our life, ignorant of all
reverend antiquity. Now then, if every History faithfully committed to
writing, deserves this praise, and glories worthily in these titles, how
much more may we truly say, that the sacred Histories only, are free from
all suspicion, which were endited by the Spirit of God, written by the
Prophets, and carefully preserved in the Church: which set before our eyes
the true original of all things, teach the beginning and order of times, lay
down the truth of all things past, stir up in us, and refresh the memory of
works, both humane and divine, and propose unto us sound examples, by which we
may frame our whole life to the true knowledge and sincere worship of God? Add
hereunto, that the state of the Church is represented unto us by the same
Histories, and that the enemies of the same* her fights and sufferings, Gods
manifold succors, and at the last, the full deliverances thereof are in them
plainly set down to her view. Amongst all the rest, this History of Ester,
which by Gods favor we take in hand, does propose unto us, even as in a glass,
the wonderful providence of God, in preserving, cherishing, and defending his
Church: then again, the treacheries and cruel minds of her most deadly
enemies: and last of all, the carfulness and duty of the godly, as well at
all other times, as then principally, when dangers hang over their heads, and
threaten unto them all extremity. The name of the author is unknown, neither
does it much avail us to know who wrote it (as in such like Histories of the
Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, and Job,) so that we know that it is sacred and
divine, and has been so taken and received always in the Church of God: since
the holy ghost has engraven it in the hearts of the faithful by sufficient
testimonies. This History therefore bearing for title the name of Ester,
(because Ester was as a principal instrument, which God did use for the
deliverance of his Church, when it was like utterly to have bin destroyed in
her time, throughout all the provinces of Assuerus) is adorned with this note
of divine majesty and undoubted truth, and laid up in writing amongst the
holy monuments, for the instruction and consolation of the Church, throughout
all ages. For as the Apostle Paul says: Whatsoever things are written before
time, are written for our learning, Romans 15. 4.
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. For
so notable and extraordinary deliverances of the Church of God, at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, were not gathered together and committed to
writing, without the ordinance and direction of Gods divine providence: but
that diligently beholding how great a care the Lord has always had of his
people, and with how unwearied endeavor he has brought unto them present
help in greatest distress: we may learn to place our hope in him alone, and
to rest our selves only on him, whose goodness and truth endures for ever.

The time when these things happened, was in the reign of Assuerus: but who
this Assuerus was, or at what time he reigned, it is not agreed upon by all
writers: yet notwithstanding by comparing of other places of holy Scripture, in
which mention is made of Assuerus, as Esra 4. 6. it appears that this
Assuerus is he, whom the profane Hystorians call Darius, the son of
Hystaspis, which after the death of Cambyses the son of Cyrus, had obtained the
Kingdom. Wherefore, whereas this History sets down a rehearsal from the
third year of the reign of Assuerus, and the conspiracy of Haman falls out
the twelfth year: those things which are here recited, seem to have happened
in the two and thirtieth year after that the people by the decree of Cyrus,
^ad leave to return out of the captivity into they rowne Country. For Cyrus
and Cambyses reigned nine year: the two Magi surprised Babylon a year, about
the end whereof Assuerus obtained the Kingdom. So that there were but only
ten years past from the establishment of the Monarch of the Persians and
Medes, when Assuerus got the Kingdom, in whose twelfth year this conspiracy
happened. But then it must needs be that Mardochaeus must be very old,
because as we shall hear in the second Chapter, he was carried into
Captivity with Iechoniah, from which time unto this, there passed more then
four score years. But the Lord as often as the necessity of his Church has
so required, has preserved certain men strong and sound for that purpose.
And let these things suffice to have been spoken of the time. For their
opinion has not sufficient ground, which place these things under the time of
the Captivity* because that during the time of that fast Monarchy of the
Babylonians, none of the Persians had so large an Empire ^s this Assuerus,
r^igning from India* unto Aethiop^^.

The drift of this History, is to make manifest, how the poor Church of
those who remain dispearsed in diverse ^egions, into which they were led away
^aptiues, (when as a most certain and pre^ent destruction hanged over their
heads) was by the peculiar care and savor of God, delivered* from the
slaughter, and ^s it were, plucked out of the jaws of their enemies: the death
which they ^^re^tned, and the det^ and traps which ^hey pr^pared for others,
being tur^ed over upon the adversaries own* ^eades. So that this History
consists ^f two parts, of the which the first con^^ineth the mischie^s
prepared against* the ^ewes, in the five first Chapters* the ^ther contains
the happy issue and ^iraculous deliverance from them, in ^^e rest of the
Book. As concerning ^e former part* in the* first two Chap^ers is recited the
rejecting of Vashti, and ^he exalting of Ester succeeding in her place. In the
third Chapter is recorded how greatly Haman is had in favor and authoritre
with Assuerus and his courtiers, and with how great and deadly hatred he
prosecuted Mardochaeus and all the rest of the Jews. The fourth contains the
prayers and supplications of the Jews unto God, when they saw so certain a
destruction to be ready to light on them. The fifth shows the preparation to
the deliverance, the wrath and fury of Ha^man notwithstanding increasing still
against Mardochaeus: and this is the first part of the book. In the other part
wherein the deliverance is contained, in the sixth Chapter, is declared the
honor which Mardochaeus receives from the King by the ministry of Haman: and
heereuppon the beginning of the evils that followed, and an extreme despair
of bringing his purpose to pass, is foretold him by his wife. In the seventh
it is noted, how he was hanged on the gallows which he had prepared. In the
two next Chapters is recited the slaughter of the enemies killed by the Jews,
as well in Susa, as in allother provinces, to the number of three score and
fifteen thousand men: amongst whom were the ten sons of Haman (...), and
after hanged upon gallows. Herehence arises great joy and gladness ^o the
Jews, and that day is appointed ^earely to celebrate so great a benefit
^eceiued at Gods hand. The last Chapter (...) teaches, that Mardochaeus being
^n great favor and authority with the King, and succeeding in Hamans place,
^mployeth al his force to the good of the church. And thus this History
contains ^he space of fifteen years, though some ^ount more, some less.

The use and profit of this History is great. For first out of it we learn,
what ^or the most part, is the state and conditi^n of the Church in this world:
to wit, to ^e dispearsed here and there under the ^ower and dominion of
infidel Kings: to ^e basely accounted of, and hated of am^itious Courtiers: to
be subject to many ^launders, and to be appointed even unto death: so that it
shall be free for every ^ne without controlment, to exercise ty^annie against
it. Contrariwise, that the children of this world, (whiles others (...), are
despised, and subject to the cross) follow their pleasures, abound in riches
and honor, and they who are stirred up with greater rage of unruly minds,
go about to compass the death and destruction of the poor faithful ones by
which wicked counsels Kings easily suffer themselves to be persuaded, and so
deceived. But all these things happen not without Gods decree and providence,
to those whom by these means he will have exercised and proved, that they
may acknowledge the greatness of their sins, be removed from the love of
this world, be brought to true repen^ance, be made like unto their head,
yield testimony and witness to the truth, and be lifted up into the hope
of the Kingdom of heaven. The causes then of the afflictions with which for
the most part we see the Church of GOD to wrestle, are on the one side the
will of God, both that the spots and blemishes wherewith as yet she is dimmed,
may be washed away, and also that the virtue wherewith GOD has endued her,
may shine the more bright. On the other side, the most venomous hatred of the
world against the truth and pure Religion, and also the credulity of ^^ose,
who sit at the stearne of the ^^eatest Empires, together with their (...)
great carelessness, to search out the (...) or false Religion, or to judge of
(...) uprightly. Especially we are to ob^^rue the treacherous and exceeding
rage (...) Satan, moving and driving men at (...) beck, and going about by
all means ^^ssible, to extinguish the light of the ^^auenly doctrine.

Next we are to note what are the ^^ercises of the faithful, when afflic^^^ns
grow upon them, to wit, tears, (...), prayer, whence they hope for ^elpe:
with what constancy and bold^^sse they ought to be endued, that are ^^noured
with the greatest gifts in the church: who ought, following the ^^ample of
Mardochaeus and Ester, o^^rcomming all difficulties, to employ ^^eyr whole
labor for the Church, ^^ensoeuer any danger is like to fall (...) it. For
let this be the only end of ^^ose gifts whatsoever, which men have received
from God, and of the authority and favor, whereby they be of power (...),
even the glory of God, and the good of the Church, leaving the event of tho^^
things which by reason of our duty, (...) the fear of God are taken in hand,
(...) his good will and pleasure. Now where as God is at hand, the helper of
his, in (...) fit time, and by so many means: (...) learn first, that it
was not without (...) said, that The ^ye of the Lord is upon (...) Psalm. 33 18.
Psalm. 121.
that fear him, and hope in his mercy: (...) that He that keeps Israel does
not slumbe^^ and therefore that we may safely (...) unto him, and look for
his help. Nex^ that the Lord is admirable in the defenc^ of his, and revenge
of his enemies: that (...) may know, that it is he alone that sauet^ (...) 43*
^^*
and none other: that prayer and supplicat^ons are not powered out before him,
(...) trust reposed in his goodness in vaine^ and that al may be compelled to
acknowledge in his works, his hand and power^ Therefore often times by
himself, without any means of man, rouengeth he (...) himself on his
enemies. So in old tim^ Pharao runs headlong into the sea with his horses
and chariots: so the host of Sennacherib Exodus 14. 1* King. 19.
was slain and discomfited* Sometimes indeed he uses humane means* but th^se
so strange and unlooked for* that all men are driven to wonder at it: as Judge.
3. 2^* 22. and 4. 21. and 7. 22.
(...) Eglon was slain by Ehud: Siser^ by (...): the host of the Madianites,
ouer^^^wne with a great slaughter, by three (...) men following Gedeon, who
(...) not, but only blew their (...): and as this Haman of whom we are (...),
hanged upon the same gallows (...) himself had set up, even by his (...),
of whom before he had (...) so great honors. Hereby it is (...), that the
hearts of Kings are in the Prou. 21. 1.
(...) of the Lord, which he turns at his (...): so that in a moment he so
(...) the hand of him who had signed and (...) the death of the poor and
inno^^^t faithful, that he turns the same to (...) punishment of them, whom
before he (...) furnished with authority and power, (...) the overthrowing of
the true (...)* Here also this is apparent, that when (...) goes about to
deliver his Church (...) the oppression of tyrants, he first (...) takes away
with shame and (...), the chief and head, and after (...) up his revenging
hand against the (...) of the members of the conspiracy. (...) Pharao perished
not alone in the sea, but together with his host. So Eglo^ slain, and then
the restare punished, Sisara is put to flight with his army.

Haman is hanged, after that his (...) and a great multitude of the (...) of
Gods people, are utterly. destroy those being chosen to execute this (...)
geance, and strengthened thereunto, by (...) authority of the lawful
Magistra^e, (...) were before appointed to the (...) Neither are the examples
few of (...) uers such exployts, occurring (...) where in holy Writ, as in the
(...) of the Judges, Samuel, and the King in which we often see the people of
(...) defending themselves with lawful arm to have destroyed their enemies
(...) great slaughters, and not to have span often times neither women or
children^ great is the wrath of God, in reuengin the injuries offered to
himself, in the person of his Church, whom he loue^ as his most dearest
spouse. So many time when the enemies of the people of (...) are most joyful
and tryumphant, as (...) ming unto themselves to have fully (...) the event of
their practices; the^ is the joy and triumph turned into mourning (...) sorrow.
Contrariwise, the groans of the (...), and her tears, are changed into (...)
voice of a song and m^^th, as the (...) sings. Sorrow may lodge with her for
psalm. 30. 5.
(...), but joy comes in the morning: and (...) wrath of God endures but a
moment, but (...) favor is life everlasting. Let the (...) therefore consecrate
unto the Lord (...) joy and gladuesse, and let them in it (...) up a
perpetual monument and (...) of his benefits, as here we shall see (...) be
done by these seely captives, who (...) so great a safety from the Lord* (...)
thus much suffices to have spoken (...) the fruits of this History.

Let us now then set in hand with the (...) it self, and first here offers
(...) unto us, the greatness of the (...) of Assuerus, which is described unto
(...) by two circumstances the first, that he (...) from India to Aethiopra:
the (...), that twenty seven provinces (...) him, and that he had his
imperial seat (...) the royal City Susa, among the (...). So that the
greatest part of the (...) world, was subject unto him, even (...) goodliest,
richest and most fruitful (...): seeing he had under his domini^^ all Asia, and
no small part of Africa, in the which Egypt and Aethiopia are situate. So
Babylon, Assyria, Syria, and Iudaea, were at his command, and he governed al
these kingdoms in great peace, being free from the fear of all enemies,
either abroad or at home, which is easily gathered by that feast, of which a
little after we shall entreat. So the Church then was under his Empire: for
they that were returned again into Iudaea by Cyrus permission, acknowledged
him for their King, did yield him fealty, and paid him tribute. But be it
far from us, that we^ should judge by this dignity and largeness of so
peaceable and flourishing an Empire, that Assuerus and the Persians were more
favored and cared for by God, then all other Kings and people. For God did more
esteem those poor and miserable captives dispearsed here and there, and
subject to that great monarch, then either the King himself, or the rest of
his subjects, seeing they were the Lords (...) Ekod. 19. 6. 1. Pet, 2. 5. 9
ritance, a chosen people, a holy nation, a kingly priesthood. We may not
therefore judge of Gods love or hatred, by the glory, dignity, or largeness
of great Empires, but by the form of the covenant which he (...) made with
his: and by the (...) of that free adoption, into the which (...) the most part
are received the base (...) contemptible before men, when the (...) and hautie
are rejected, because they (...) have disdained it. In the mean (...) God will
have his to be subject (...) unto Infidel Kings, that we may (...)
sufficient experience That the Lords John. 18: 36.
(...) is not of this world, neither that (...) church is to be sought for in
the (...) of the Empires of this world. (...) notwithstanding, I deny not,
but that (...) gives Kingdoms and (...) to his, even that it may be made
(...), that Kings are appointed by God, (...) that he places in the Throne
whom (...) him: Although the glory of (...) and Empires in the Church, (...)
not continued long. David indeed (...) a mighty King: but how great I pray,
comparison of the Monarchies of (...) and Babylon? Constantine obtained (...)
Empire, both of the East and West, (...) after him some godly Emperors, as
(...) the Theodosii, but the glory of so (...) an Empire quickly fell: the
barbarous Nations that came out of the North, spoiling and waste it, and
seasing on the chief and greatest part of it: the Turk also and Saracens, and
other favorers of Ma^^homets sect, at this day possessing the greatest part of
the world. And this not without great cause; least the faithful should
suppose, that this outward glory and greatness of Dominion, were a note of
the Church: but rather that they should follow the light of the Gospel: for
there indeed is the Church, where Christ Jesus is acknowledged for the one lie
author of salvation. Now GOD gave so great an Empire unto Assuerus for none
other end, but to preserve policy, and the estate of those Nations: to
establish laws, to repress confusions wherewith among themselves those fiero
people would have been troubled, and to bridle Tyraunts, whose pride and
arrogancy quickly would be, kindled if they were not restrained by a
greater power. For great Empires, though in there most corrupt men have the
government yet they bind together (as it were) with firm band many people,
though otherwise much different in manners and condition, and draw them back by
good laws and orders to a more civil kind of life. God by this means making a
way to his word, as often as it seems good unto him, to frame men unto the
obedience of his will. Let us not therefore think that there is here mention
made of the largeness of Assuerus Empire, to the commendation of his prowess
and wisdom, as though he by his power and counsel had gotten to himself so
great a Dominion: (...) to lay before our eyes the providence Dan. f. 32.
of our God, who at his pleasure appoynteth and establishes kingdoms: and
trans^ateth them from one nation to another, as it was foretold by Daniel, and
delivered in (...) dream to Nabuchadnezar, in the vision of that great Image,
whose head was of gold, the arms and breast of silver. So we have seen it
come to pass, that that great Monarchy of the Babylonians, which was figured
by the golden head, was taken away by the Monarchy of the Persians and Medes,
begun by Cyrus, increased by Cambyses, and confirmed by Assuerus, who did not
descend from Cyrus, but was chosen (...). (...)
King by the neighing of his horse, as Hystories report.

He is said here to sit on his throane: whereby his Kingdom is noted to be
peaceable and quiet, so that he had no need to go from place to place to
repress his enemies, or to appease seditions amongst his subjects. So God
oftentimes gives rest unto mighty Emperors, that their Subjects may fear
their power: which if they shall attribute to their own wisdom, and
industry, they truly commit sacrilege, and GOD oftentimes reuengeth their
pride. Of which divine vengeance let Nabuchadnezar be an example, who when
he gloryed with himself in these words, It not this that great Babylon
which my hands have built? was on the sudden dispoyled of his Kingdom for a
while, and thrown out from the society of men, to eategrasse with the beasts
of the field.

This Assuerus, chose for the chief City of his Kingdom Susa, and so
translated the seat of the Empire, from Babylon, where before it was, into
Persia, Dan. 4. 27.
whereby the Persians might be acknowledged for the first and principal
erectors of this Monarchy. So great then was the power of his Monarch, under
whose shadow, there was given a seat, and some rest to the Church, but not
without great troubles, as in regard of them who were returned, into Iudaea,
the Book of Ezra does witness: and this book will teach concerning those
who remained as yet despersed in Chaldaea, Persia, Media, and other Provinces.
And such shall see the state of the Church, until the son of God come, to
gather and receive ^er into the triumph of eternal glory, and to carry her
with himself, far above all the heavens. To whom alone be all honor and
glory for evermore,

Amen.
THE SECOND SERMON.
Of Assuerus feasts, from the third verse to the tenth.

CHAP. II. 3 In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his
Princes and his ser^^nts, to the Princes of the hoasts of pers^^, and Media,
and to the Captains and governors of the Provinces in his presence.

4 Showing his riches, the glory of his Kingdom, and the honor, and Majesty
of his greatness: many days, even an hundred and four score days.

5 (And when these days were almost expired, the King made a feast to all the
people which were found in the royal City of Susa, from the greatest to the
least seven days: in the Court of the Garden of the King*s Palace.)

^ Having hangings of white, green, and blewe, fastened with Coardes of fine
Linen, and Purple, unto Rings of Silver, and Marble pillars: the beds were of
Gold, and Silver, upon a pauement of Porphyrie and Marble, and Alabaster, and
stones of blew color.

^ And giving them drink in vessels of Gold, and in vessels differing one
from an other: and royal Wine in abundaunce, according to the power of a King.

^ And the drinking was by an order, none might compel: for so the King had
appointed, to every officer of his house, that they should do according to
every manspleasure.

^ The Queen Vashti made afeast also for the women, in the royal house of
King Assuerus.


MOst magnificent and most sumptuous feasts are here described unto us,
whether we respect the person that makes them, or the number and quality of
the guests, or the space of the time wherein they are kept, or lastly the whole
furniture, wherein there is nothing but magnificent, and sumptuous, and
kinglike. The end of declaring of this, is, not yt we should be kept idle in the
beholding of the magnificence of this King, and of his exceeding cost, but that
we may be taught the occasion, for which Vashti the Queen being divorced,
Ester a base and abject Captive maiden was lifted up into her place, God
thereby preparing for himself an instrument, which he would use for the
delivery of his Church, before it was in danger. There is here mention made of
three feasts. The first was made to all the Princes, Captains, and governors
of the provinces, many days, even an hundred and four score: the other, at
which were present as many as dwelt in Susa, seven days. The third was made by
the Queen Vashti, for the women. Here we first are to consider the furniture
and provision, then the end of this charge and magnificence, and lastly we are
(...) observe and note some what upon every one of these feasts.

The provision is described from the end of the fifth verse, unto the ninth. And
first the place in which the King made this feast to the Princes and Nobles of
the whole kingdom, and to all the people that dwelt at Susa, in the Court of
the Garden of the Kings Palace. That court must needs be great and large,
that should receive so great a multitude of men at a feast. By which also it
may be vnder^toode, at what season of the year these things happened, even
about the beginning of the Spring, seeing they ban^uetted abroad out of the
house, in the ^hirde year of the reign of Assuerus. The Pauement of this
Court was won^erfull fair, and rich, framed by art of Porphyrie, and Marble,
and Alabaster, and stones of blewe color. Neither were (...) hanginges less
stately and precious, ^hether you respect the matter, or the ^^uerse colors,
white, green, blewe, (...) purple. For seeing that the Coardes were of fine
Linen (this Linen was more precious then any Silk) fastened to rings of
Siiuer, and pillars of marble: it is likely that the arras and tapistrie were
entermingled with gold, and exquisite sorts of embroydered works. The beds on
which the guests (according to the custom of those times) did sit, were of
gold and silver. There was great store of all sorts of choice and excellent
wines, and great variety of cups and vessels of gold: by which it may easily
be gathered, what excess there was in other things, as well in most delicate
meats, and variety of courses, as also in the whole furniture wherewith the
guests were served. All which in their own nature are not to be blamed, for
they are the good gifts of GOD, and by him created good, the use whereof is
good, as Paul teaches in 1. Tim. 4. 4.
these words: Every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused,
of it be with thanksgiving. But excess, intemperauncie, pride, ambition, and
unthankfulness, do corrupt the use of good things, which yet the faithful
man will use with a good conscience, and give God thanks for his exceeding
great liberality and bountifulness, and will lift up these eyes of his
mind from these earthly riches and delights, to the (...) of those which are
eternal (...) spiritual, and will thus gather with (...): If the gifts be so
great which (...) the Lord gives to the unfaithful, (...) great shall the
abundance be of (...) things and delights, which God (...) laid up in heaven
for his elect? (...) as the prophet terms them, Psalm 36. 8. and 31. 19.
(...) of pleasure: and says: How (...) is the goodness of God, which he
has, (...) up for them that fear him? So shall (...) come to pass, that
neither the eyes (...) other senses of the faithful* shall be (...) with the
outward use of those (...) which they touch and taste, when (...) shall know
that there are laid up* (...) him far better and more excellent (...), to
the enjoying whereof we (...) invited. I confess indeed, that (...) this
abundance of earthly delights, (...) and temperance are greatly (...); for
very hardly can (...) be kept: wherefore let the (...) being called to a
feast, be so much (...) more wary in these things, by how (...) the way is
the more slipperie and (...) to the fall*

Furthermore, the Law which here the King expressly prescribes unto his, is
greatly to be praised, to wit, That none should be compelled to drink over
largely, but that every one should drink according to his thirst and
appetite. For he would not that his house should be made a school of
intemperancie, and by reason of over much drink and wine, be filled with
confusion, wantonness, vomites, and such other like effects of drunkenness.
And here let this heathen King be a judge of many, who boast themselves to be
Christians, whose only care and exercise is this, to compel themselves and
others to drink, and whole nights and days to continue in eating, as the
manner is almost every where in Germany, and in too many places in France and
England. And it appears by this edict of the King, that even then this wicked
custom had gotten place among the Persians, whose sobriety and moderation in
meat and drink, was in former ages so much commended: so slippie and bending
is the way to intemperancie and evil manners. And thus far of the place and
preparation of the feast.

The end for which the King bestows this great cost, is described in the
fourth (...). That he might show the riches and (...) of his kingdom, and the
honor and ^aiestie of his greatness. By which words ^^peareth the pride and
vanity of so great Monarch, abusing the gifts of God (...) his own ambition:
for which not^^thstanding he did not give him thanks, (...) having received
them from him. For (...) great a vanity I pray you is it, to show (...) riches
gotten by other men's labor (...) industry, which also he could not (...) but
from his subjects? Yet will I not (...) that Kings and other rich men do
(...), if at any time they do make any (...) feasts, but I say there ought to
(...) another end then the proud osten^^ion of their riches, to wit, that by
(...) honest liberality they witness (...) charity, that they nourish
concord (...) society between many; that by (...) kinds of benefits they
purchase (...) friendship and good will of many, (...) when necessity shall
require, they (...) use to honest and lawful purposes: (...), that by their
liberality they ^ay stir up others to sing praises unto ^od, the giver of so
many and so great good things, whereby our feasts may be cousecrated to him
with prayer and thanksgiving. But what a miserable and lamentable thing is it,
that a most mighty King could not otherwise make (...) magnificence and
greatness to be known, then by excessive charge in feasting? For, how many
other things and there whereby he might declare it a great deal better, and
with much more profit to ensue both to himself and to his subjects, that is,
if in every place he see that all things be governed in lawful order, if the
laws retain their due authority if right be administered to every one if (...)
people be eased of tributes, taxes, and subsidies, if soldiers be contained
within military discipline, if rewards be given with kingly liberality to
those that deserve them?

And here we are especially to (...) to remembrance that which the Lord
warns us, that those who will make^^ feast which should be allowed by God,
should call unto it not the rich, but the Luc. 14. 13.
poor, in which thing there is liberality indeed. But in this part we must
also take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, boasting and affectation of
vain glory before men. Bsides, this is also here to be noted, that Kings for
the most part do bestow that money which they have gathered with great labor
from their subjects, upon vain and unprofitable expenses. so that they seem
to labor more on the dispersing and loosing, then was labor bestowed in the
gathering of them together. And thus far of the end of the ^easts made by
Assuerus. There were many other perhaps, who have done the (...), but this
sufficed the holy Scriptures to note him as a cheese man: and so (...) these
things thus be spoken, as well of the furniture of those feasts, as of their
(...).

Let us come now to the special consideration of the particulars. First, the
feast was celebrated an hundred and four (...) days, that is, full half a
year together, For all the Princes and servants of the King, that is, the
rulers of the king^ome, that he might have in his view the power of Persia and
Media, that is, the princes and governors of the provinces. Which things
declare great peace in the whole Empire of Assuerus: for he would not have
called unto him the governors of the provinces to feasting and banqueting, if
there had been war in any part of his dominion, or any light suspicion of
rebellion. They are not called then to counsel concerning the weighty
affairs of the Commonwealth, but to banqueting and mirth. And thereby it may
seem likely, that they wanted not in that great quiet, all manner of sports
that might serve their delight, as music, gaming, tilt, and other shows, as
at this day noble men are wonderfully delighted with iesters, enterludes,
wilde-fires, daunces, and such like toys. Behold here then, a kingdom full
of mirth and pastime, and as it were drowned in delights and pleasures: behold
with what joys the Lord does fill even with sacietie the children of this
world, whiles the Church is oppressed with captivity and miseries: behold the
ende^ of victories obtained by great pollicie^ and labor of mighty Kings and
Counselors, and with much slaughter of they (...) people, even pleasures and
delights. Although they were not come to so great (...) madness as Balsazar,
the last Monarch^ (...) Babilonians, even when Babylon was (...), gave himself
to feasting and (...): or as many princes in this (...) age, whom you shall
see even when (...) estate of their Kingdoms shake and (...) a fall, are yet
little moved, but (...) drowned in pleasures, take their fill (...). This was
also an evil (...) for his subjects, when they should see (...) King with all
his Princes and (...), give themselves to banqueting, (...) and delights. For
what became (...) mean while of the Provinces, (...) so long of their
governors, (...) were to administer justice unto them? (...) the wise man
says not in vain, VV. (...), O land, whose Princes rise early to play. Eccles.
10, 9.
(...) in vain does Esaias threaten the like (...) Princes of his (...) which
rose up ears (...) follow drunkenness. So (...) inueigheth Esaias. 5. 11. Amos 6,
4.
(...) against the (...) of the Jews, (...) they made with great riot in beds
(...). Unless the courts of Princes go (...) in example of sobriety and (...)
the whole kingdom will easily let (...) the reins unto surfeiting, (...),
and lasciviousness: For the whole (...) labors to conform itself unto the
pattern of the King. Besides these governors being returned into their
provinces, after so long time of absence employed in riot, study to imitate
the example of their king, and being bold upon the favors which they have
received of their Prince, are more ready to deal unjustly and oppress the
people. Who here also may not worthily marvel that noble men are so soon
wearied with consulting of the estate and common profit of ye subjects, but
never satisfied with banqueting and following their delights? For you shall
see many who not only feast certain days, but spend the whole time of their
life in such excess. And are not many private men also wont to do the like,
who have none other care whiles they live, then to fill their paunch, and
provide for their belly? even as they are said in this life to rejoice
themselves, and to be praised by their flatterers when they make much of
themselves. To them appertains the example of the wicked rich man, as though
Psalm. 49. 18. Luc. 15.
they did live to eat and drink, whereas we must eat and drink to live, and
to be able to employ our selves in our vocation. Especially Kings and their
officers, who ought to be examples unto their subjects of all virtues. But what
can be aright in so great wantonness and riot? But so they live for the most
part by the just judgment of God the revenger, because the people make
themselves unworthy of good kings and wise counselors. The other feast unto
which all ye people that were in Susa were invited, lasted only seven days:
yet was it long enough: for it is a great matter for a whole city to give
themselves to eating and drinking and to pastimes, seven days together. So
when great men begin once to give themselves unto riot, they are drowned in it
more and more, desiring to gratify all others in the like. This bidding of the
whole people, does testify not only the kings liberality and bounty, but
his humanity and kindness, a virtue most beseeming kings. And surely this
gentleness and courtesy is so much the more to be commended in so great a
Monarch: because the greater part of Princes at this day, who yet are far
from the power of this King, do make no more account of their subjects then of
base bondmen: so that they will scarsly suffer themselves to be seen by them,
unless it be to be honored. yet might he better have bestowed his
liberality. For the bounty bestowed upon the belly, scarce lasts any
longer then whiles it is full: and that which is so prodigally spent without
choice upon all, binds no man: and is rather to be accounted waste and
prodigality, then liberality or beneficence. Yet is it not unfitting the
office of a King, or unseemly for them sometime to exercise liberality
toward their subjects, not neglecting any: for they are Kings as well of the
small as of the great: and ^n the baser sort especially are they to power out
the effects of their munificence and humanity, even as we see the Sun no
less to send out his rays upon the vile and abject, then upon the high and
hautie. So the holy Kings of Judah in times past were liberal and bountiful
toward the people, which were wont to keep holyday and rejoice seven days
together during the feast of Tabernacles: but their joy was consecrated unto
God, with a solemn remembrance of his benefits. When God then gives rest and
ability, it is lawful to banquet many days together, so that all
lasciuiousnes be banished, and God worshipped and acknowledged as the author
of that joy and rest. So that if this King had regard of Justice, and did
govern all things orderly and uprightly, this liberality was commendable. But
if the people were oppressed with tributes and exactions, or otherwise hardly
dealt withal, this was but a means to comfort a while their misery, and to
have them after more ready and obedient. Many Kings now a days think it
sufficient to seed their people with fair words, which they are wont to
publish in writing, that they may persuade the poor subjects, that they night
and day study for their profit: whereas notwithstanding this is for the most
part their only care, by what means to wring money from them, suck out their
wealth, and have them obedient to every command. So that those people are
happy, which either are subject to good kings, or without Kings enjoy their
own liberty. And those Kings and Governors are also wise and happy, who
have learned to govern* their people with justice and clemency, after the
example of David, who excellently teaches, that it is not enough for a King to
win his subjects* with feasts, but that justice and mercy are required in
him principally, for their government. Of which roial virtues see more in the
three score and twelft Psalm. And thus far of the Kings feasts.

Let us now come in like sort to the feast which the Queen Vashti made for the
women: in the kings house also, but not in the Court, as did Assuerus, because
it becomes women rather to keep themselves within doors, then to go to
banqueting abroad. Great was the authority of this queen Vashti, for that
she was the daughter of Cyrus, the first Monarch of the Persians, and sister of
Cambyses, who in Scripture is called Artaxerxes, and was the second emperor,
and then wife of this Assuerus, who was the third king of the Persian
Monarchy. She therefore observed the like order in entertaining the women, as
her husband did toward the men. Therefore as the king entertained his Princes
which he had called out of all his Empire with costly feasts, so the queen
banquetted together with the Ladies which were come with their husbands out of
diverse provinces. And as he feasted the men that dwelt in Susan, seven days,
so did the queen the women, that the joy might be great on both parts. For
otherwise it had been but half a pleasure, if the men had feasted with the
King, no regard at all being had of the women. And further, it seems void
of all equity, that the men giving themselves to their pleasures and feasting,
should leave all the trouble and care upon their wives, to provide for their
household affairs. As the men therefore were diligent in devising diverse
pastimes (as they are termed) to pass away, or that I may speak more truly,
to loose their time: the women no doubt were not behind in inuenting of
sportes and toys for their delights, seeing women are no less given to
pleasure then men. But you will say why did they banquet apart from their
husbands, seeing now a days you shall not see any pleasant feasts, unless
the women be bidde^ together with the men, nay for the most part the banquettes
are made for their sakes, as the manners of our age are most corrupt, and more
bent to greater licentiousness? I say, that the custom of those times was
more honest and modest, that in public feasts the women should not banquet
with the men, that by this means the occasion of many allurements unto
wantonness might be cut off. For I pray, what chastity can remain untouched
in drunkenness and intemperancie, in filthy and wanton looks and speeches,
and oftentimes scarce honest touchings? And would to God at this day this law
were in force amongst those nations which delight so much to banquet with
women, and to spend the time in dancing with them. For how dishonest a
custom has prevailed amongst some, to carry other men's wives and maidens to
the Tauernes? For how is it possible, that in the schools of all impudency,
such as the Tauerns are, honesty and chastity can be preserved, especially
in that license which every man takes unto himself among the ports: when as
even in the most holy places, many behold both women and maids, with
unchaste eyes? Is not this the full measure of all mischief, that those who
are well heat with wine, should get them to dance, where nothing is heard but
wanton Music, nothing seen but motions full of intisement: where finally
there is full liberty to do and say what you list? Far away let all this
shamelessness be, and let us learn at the least of the wretched heathen, some
laws and examples of modesty: seeing especially we see the matter come to
that impudency, that the horse feels no longer the bitte, and there is now
no more place left for admonitions or reproves drawn out of the pure word of
God.

Some things therefore are praise worthy in these feasts of Assuerus, to wit,
his liberality toward his Nobles, his courtesy and gentleness toward all
the people that dwelt at Susa; the law also set down by him, that no man
should be compelled to drink without thirst; and lastly, that honest modest
separation of the men from the women in banqueting. But there are again not a
few things faulty in the same, to wit, that vain ostentation of his glory
and riches, the great loss of time in feasting and banqueting, that over
great wasting and spending of his goods, the too much carelessness of
necessary affairs, which could not but fall out to be many, and of no small
weight, within so large an Empire, in the space of six months: and
especially the contempt of the true God, who is neither acknowledged nor
worshipped by these feasters: and finally that profane mirth and gladness
without any note of holiness, which ought principally to shine among the
faithful: so that it was not much to be maruailed at, that the issue was so
mournful, as God granting, we shall see. Wherefore if we desire to have our
joy and mirth continue long, and have it joined with Gods blessing, let us
begin with calling upon his name, and let us end with the same: yea, let us
direct the whole course of our life to his glory. For therefore are we borne,
that when we have served him in this world, and yielded unto him the glory
that is due, we may at the last be made partakers of everlasting joys with
him in heaven,

Amen.
THE THIRD SERMON.
Of the mournful end of these feasts, from verse 10. unto 16.

10. Upon the seventh day,, when the king was merry with wine, he commanded
Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven
Eunuchs that served before the King Assuerus.

11 To bring Queen Vashti into the Kings presence, with the Crown royal,
that he might show the people and the Princes her beauty, because she was
fair to look upon.

12 But when the Queen Vashti refused to come at the Kings word which was
brought unto her by those Eunuchs, the King was very angry, and his wrath
kindled in him.

13 Therefore the King said to the wise men, that knew the times (for so the
Kings business was wont to be propounded to all that knew the law and
judgment.)

14 And to those that were next unto him: Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish,
Meroe, Marsena, and Memuchan, the seven Princes of Persia and Media, which saw
the Kings face, and sat the first in the Kingdom.

15. What shall we do to the Queen Vashti, according to the law, because
she did not obey the commnudement of the King Assuerus, sent by the Eunuchs?


HItherto we have seen the Court of Assuerus, and the whole city of Susa full
of joy, the King feasting with his Princes, and all the people of Susa, the
Queen Vashti likewise banketting with the women. Now let us hear the holy
Ghost reciting how all this joy ended in great sorrow, and that for light
cause: to wit, on the one side, by reason of the Kings intemperancie,
commanding the Queen to be brought into the kings presence, to boast of her
beauty in the sight of the people: on the other side, by reason of the Queens
disdainfulnesse refusing to come unto the King, whereby the Kings wrath is
kindled, and the banquets disturbed: the King consulting with his Nobles, and
demanding their opinion what they thought was to be done to the Queen
Vashti for his stubburnnesse. Like for the most part (...) the end of profane
and immoderate (...). So often times the joys of mortal (...) end in sorrow,
God accursing all in^emperancie, and riot, and turning the ^assions and desires
of great men, whose ^oyes no man dares to trouble, to be the ^ause that they
themselves trouble them^elues. Wherefore God forbid that we should envy at
their prosperity and de^ights, but rather rejoice with spiritual (...),
being content with our own estate. For it is better being content with a
little, to feel the favor and blessing of God, ^hen in the midst of carnal
delights and ^leasures, to fear his wrath. For diverse times it so falls out,
that when men most desire to take their delight, they receive the message of
death. As it was said to that rich man which stirred up his soul to live Luc.
12. 19. 20.
at ease, Eat, drink, and take his pastime. O fool, this night will they
fetch away thy soul from thee: then whose shall these things be which thou
have provided? And this in general is to be noted.

Let us now weight every thing severally. Upon the seventh day, which was the
last of that feast which was made for ye people, it is said, that The Kings
heart was m^rie with wine, that is, that he exceeded measure in drinking, and
that there was in him an immodest mirth unworthy ye person of a king, his mind
being thereby ben^ to speak and do things scarce seemly, which is wont to
happen to those who are ouer-ful of drink. So that he transgressed that law
which himself had made. For why had he forbidden that no man should compel
another to drink, but because he might take away excess and intemperancie? So
many times Kings set down good laws, which shortly after they break and take
away, persuading themselves that it is unseemly for the Majesty of a king to
be subject to the laws which he has made. Which thing also is often beaten
into their minds by flatterers: but in vain do they publish good laws,
unless by their own example they procure them authority. And in lesser
commonweals, good laws made either against drunkenness or any other
excess, are vain and void, unless the magistrates also be subject unto
them. For with what face can he punish those tliat be drunk, when he himself
is guilty of the same offense. Neither are they here to be hearkened unto, who
that they may make small fault of intemperancie in drink, say, that it is a
far other matter to be merry with wine, then to be drunk. For where the
bounds of mediocritie are passed, and men wax hot with wine, it is a fault,
so that although the use of reason be not quite taken away with wine, nor all
the senses astonished, as it comes to pass in those wretches whom we may see
staggering in the streets. Yet the effects of this half drunkenness, are
far more dangerous, then those which and wont to accompany that other great
excess, whereby those who are drunk be quite benumbed, and as it were in a
trance: for he that is merry with the wine, if he be bent to anger, quickly
picketh a quarrel: if he be prone to lust, breaks out soon into unchaste and
filthy words and actions: if he be a pratler, vncouers every secret: if
he be a tale carrier or backbiter, spares no man's good name, neither
abstaineth even from contemning GOD, and treading under foot all honesty, as
the wise man notably teaches in these words: wine is a mocker, and strong
drink is raging. What need we then set fair colors Prou. 20. 1*
on vices? away with such patrons of most wicked causes. For against such men,
Isaie pronounces a curse, because they call evil good, and darkness light.
Neither does he Isa. 5. 20.
only inueigh against those which fill their tables with vomit, which is the
property of filthy dogs and beasts, but against them that continue sitting
till the wine do inflame them: for then is the mind ready bent to Verse. 11.
dare to do any thing.

So Assuerus when his mind was merry with the wine, commaunderh those seven
Courtiers that served him, to bring his wife in to the ba^quet, to show to the
people her beauty. Which before when his mind was quiet, he did not, neither
would have done, unless the force of the wine had taken away the use of his
reason, because it was repugnant to honesty, and the custom of that country:
and besides, it must needs be a most vain thing, and unseeming the majesty of
so great a Prince, to show the beauty of his wife to all, and that among the
cups. For this could not be, but with great shame to the Queen, and not
without allurements, and scant honest affections in the minds of those who
were no more temperate then the King. Moreover, it was a matter of very evil
example to his subjects, to abuse the beauty of their wines, after the excess
of banqueting. And if he needs would have her beauty seen; had it not been
a great deal more convenient to have called her to banquet with them at the
beginning of the feast? By this it is made out ^o^t unto all men, how vain and
void of reason many times the judgments of great men are, (...) whom
notwithstanding all men are wont to marvel, by reason of the opinion they
have of their wisdom and that he wife man to purpose wa^^eth in the Proverbs,
that it is not for (...) to drink wine, Pro. 31, 4-5.
(...) they forget the decree and p^ruert iudge^ent: as also for the same cause
the Lord ^^rbiddeth his Priests which shall come Leu. 10. 9.
(...) unto his tabernacle, (...) wine or (...) drink.

Hereby also it appears ye beauty (...) women make so great account, turns
^any times to he the cause of mourning, (...), of death unto them. But this
seems (...) to be maruailed at that so many wife ^ounsellors sitting with the
King, none of (...) dares to dissuade him from his pur^se, being so (...) and
dishonest, both for the king and the queen, who though she had come when she
was called, might not without just cause have conceived indignation, that she
was brought forth as a g^^ing stock unto her subjects in the midst of their
pots* as we read that the wife of C^nda^le^ long of Lydia did, who when she
perceived that she had bin shown naked by her husband to one of his familiar
friends, lying hidden in a secret place, she never was quiet until she had
revenged that injury done unto her, her husband being slain by the hand of the
same his friend. Finally as this king does all things to the show, so he has
his ministers most obedient to follow his lusts* his Princes most ready for
such ieasts, and his people prepared for this show.

But the queen Vashti by not obeying deceyues all their expectation, which
fact of hers, those who measure al men's deliberations and actions by the
success, do condemn of pride stubburnnes, rashness and folly* from which vines
perhaps she was not altogether free, For seeing she was ye daughter of Cyrus,
and sister of Cambyses and Assuerus, but the son of Hystaspis, it might be
that in contempt of her husband she refused to come at his call. Yet
nevertheless, (...) might defend her self by no slender ^^asons, to wit,
that this commandment of (...) kings was repugnant to the laws of (...)
Persians, contrary to common hone^e, and full of very evil example: neither
(...) it be but by this means the banquet of (...) ladies should be disturbed.
And this is (...) especially to be commended, that she (...) not make show of
her beauty, for (...) at this day women are so careful* that (...) desire
this only and think that it (...) not well with them, unless they can (...)
all men's eyes toward the^. Notwith^^^nding, she might have taken a middle
(...): which is in stead of so sudden a (...) so to have excused her self,
that yet might have showed forth her obedi^e, and have gotten some of
themessen^s, to approve her excuse unto the king* (...) unless the King would
accept, it been better, to have obeyed him in a (...) in it own nature not
evil, then by (...), to have provoked the Kings (...) against her: and so to
run into (...) suspision of contempt and stubb^mnes, (...) in so noble an
assembly, in whose (...) the King was willing to show his power and
magnificence, from which by this her rebellion she seemed much to d^^tract.
Here hence let women learn not to provoke their husbands, in those thing
which may be done without offense (...) God: neither to make account of they^
stock or beauty, or riches in their disgrace neither frowardly to deny those
things (...) denying whereof the peace and quiet (...) their house might be
disturbed. For (...) though peradventure they cannot be (...) without some
inconvenience, yet is it be^ter, if of their own nature they be (...) evil,
by obeying to nourish peace, (...) by resisting to break it.

This repulse the King took in (...) evil part, and brake forth into
exceedi^^ great wrath, because by this means (...) thought himself to be
despised, and ligh^ly regarded by his wife, and that it would be a reproach
unto him, especially in (...) view of all the Princes of his kingdom^ This so
great heat of wrath, is a fruit drunkenness, by which most especia^ bankers
are disturbed, and joy is turn into sorrow: the king taking such indig^tion at
the matter, and so immeasurab^^ boiling with anger, by who^ the^ rest (...)
(...) cheared and made merry: For as Solomon Pro. 16, 20.
(...), The Kings wrath is the Messenger of (...), or of some great calamity
unto him, ^^ainst who^ it is stirred: and therefore it be^ueth kings, to be so
much ye more (...) in their anger: when as yet notwithsta^^^^g, me^ wax so much
the more vehemently (...), by how much greater is their power: (...) their eye
rather upon their power, (...) upon their duty: whereby it comes to (...) yt
they will not suffer themselves to be moved from their affections, whether they
good or evil. But they should have regard right, and not to their power or
affecti^^s. For therefore do they reign with great power, that they may
establish (...), preserve good laws, defend the (...), punish the offenders,
yield vn^eason, and compel others to obey it* that there is nothing that is
more (...) for Kings, then to give that place ^assions, where reason ought to
bear ^sway. For their Subjects take from (...) the pattern of good and honest
life. (...) clemency and mildness are the (...) ornaments of Kings and anger
(...) woorst counselor that may be: for (...) it is it self unjust, and the
mother of all iniquity: and gives any form unto a matter, but that which is
the right: as when we behold any thing through a colored Glass. Therefore
Saint James says, That the wrath of man does not fulfill the Iam. 1. 20.
Ephesians. 4. 27
righteousness of God: and Saint Paul warns, That he that refraineth not
his anger, gives place to the Devil. Now the wrath of Princes is so much the
more dangerous, by how much they are of greater might, and there are none
which dare reprehende them, or oppose themselves against them, no more then
against a Lion, or any other wild beast. For which cause they should be like
unto the laws whereof they are the executours, and give their judgment of
every cause without passion. So should Assuerus have thought, that the queen
Vashti, wanted not sufficient excuse, whereby she might approve her doing
unto him, if he would not have let loose the reins to his anger. Such a
moderation is required in all Judges, and in all them who have any kind of
power over others. For unless the mind be quiet and calm, and settled in the
fear of reason, it can not but err from the truth, and trouble both it self
and others.

In this rage the King asks the opinion of his Councillors, what they think
may be done to Vashti, by the law. It is praise worthy, to ask the advice
of wise men, and for an angry man to be willing to hear their opinion: but
it is to be feared, least he kindle his Councillors with his ouer-great
heat, because oftentimes we see it happen, how every one does frame his
affections to the kings humor, and gives him counsel according to his
passion. The king therefore asks those seven Counselors whose names here are
recited, who sat ye chiefest in the Kingdom of Persia, and Media, and saw
always the Kings face: that is, were always present with him to give him
advice in all hard and doubtful cases, according to the manner and custom of
the Country, by which it seems that the Kings were subject to this
counsel. And surely that was an excellent order: even as in all Empires which
are not tyrannical, there are appointed unto Kings a certain number of
Councillors, without whose advice they do not any great matter.

But in process of time many kings give themselves such liberty, that they
abuse the name of their counselors, to get the greater authority to their
own wilful decrees. For* so it comes to pass, that great power cannot long
abide any peer. Those seven who here are named, are adorned with excellent
titles, Of wise men, which knew the times, and were skillful in justice and
judgment. And truly these gifts are very requisite in Kings counselors. For
by their wisdom and discreet counsel, profitable laws and statutes are
made, as well in peace as in war: by them the whole kingdom is governed: they
dispose of all matters, both public and private. They create Magistrates and
public officers: they unfold difficulties arising: they prevent confusions,
or appease them when they are sprung up: finally, they repair all losses,
and preserve the estate of the Commonwealth. In all which there is required
great wisdom, long experience, and exquisite knowledge of the laws. True
wisdom contains the knowledge of things both divine and humane, and of
their causes also. Now because these men had not attained the knowledge of the
true God, they were furnished only with worldly wisdom, which yet is also
the gift of God, and a light which is bestowed by him upon some for the
gonernment of great Empires, whereby they may be profitable to mankind, who
otherwise would become the instruments of great confusion in the same. Next,
the knowledge of the times is attributed unto them, which contains the skill
in Histories, out of which may be drawn the examples of memorable acts in all
ages: to which must be adjoined experience, a surer instructor a great deal
then Histories, which affoordeth sound counsel, according to the variety
and necessity of occurrents. The knowledge also of Laws is required: for out
of them is to be gathered the deciding and defining of doubts proposed. Now
that which is spoken of judgments, is referred to ye knowledge of equity,
whereby in many things the rigor of law is moderated, and every ^ction with
great wisdom is weighed by the circumstances, that judgment may be given in
every case with equity and moderation. Wherefore there is none other to be
looked for, but the overthrow of those states, whose government is managed by
rash counselors, and without knowledge, by young heads and without experience
(of which let those young Counselors of Rehoboam, be a memorable example unto
1. King. 12. 10.
us) by those that are unskillful in the laws, and not careful of equity,
but only witty in subtle inventions, whereby they frame themselves to the
will of their Prince. Furthermore, these virtues are not sufficient neither,
unless they be grounded on a good and upright conscience, which in every
matter shall love the truth and right. For otherwise wisdom is turned into
subtilty, experience into deceit, the knowledge of the law into crafty cauils,
and equity into a maliciou^ interpretation of the statutes. So that great
authority, and dignity, and knowledge of the Law in a wicked man, is as a
sword in the hand of a mad man. The laws are holy and pure, therefore they
require a pure and holy mind. Judgments are of God, and in his fear ought
they to be administered: as Iehosaphat warned his Judges who^ he had appointed
over the people: That 2. Chro. 1^. 6.
they should remember, that they executed not the judgments of man, but of the
lord. Wherefore, in the choice of counselors and judges, there is not greater
care to be had of their industry and knowledge, (which yet are required in
them) then of their honesty and good conscience. Neither do wise and skilful
counselors any whit profit a king, unless they be also just, and severe
executors of the laws. And finally, the wisdom of a good and discreet prince,
is not more known in any thing the^ in the choice of good counselors, and in
the approving of right and lawful counsels. For to no purpose are good
cou^cellors, unless their counsels be obeyed.

Behold here then at the last, the end of laughter to be anger: behold in
steed of a banqueting house, a judgment hall: behold a feast turned into a
consultation of a matter most intricate and of great moment: seeing on the one
side is proposed the question of the Queens person, her whole estate and
dignity: on the other side, how the kings mind, though he were full of wine and
wrath, may be satisfied, and how his magnifice^ce and majesty may be preserved
whole and sound, which he himself could not sufficiently defend. So many times
kings and princes stir up troubles and confusion, which afterward their
counselors must remedy. But we will defer this consultatio^ of theirs unto the
next Sermon, and in ye mean while let us be wary by others men's examples: let
us retain temperance and sobriety in our feasts: let us avoid all vanity and
unseemly ostentation: let us bridle our wrath and the rage of our minds: let
us seek counsel of wise men, but without passion, seeking rather right and
equity, then revenge: let every one according to his vocation, study to
attain true wisdom, and the knowledge of rights, laws, and judgment, and
especially those, who ought to govern others with good counsel, that in all
our meetings a lawful order may be observed, and the ends of them may be
happy, being joined with the glory of God, to whom only be alhonor,
strength, and power, for ever more,

Amen.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
The sentence of those seven wise men of the question proposed, what by law was
to be done to the Queen Vashti, from the sixteenth verse to the end of the
Chapter.

16 Then said Memuchan before the King, and the Princes, the Qeene Vashti has
not only done evil against the King, but against all the Princes, and against
all the people that are in all the provinces of King Assuerus.

17 For when the Act of the Queen shall come abroad unto all women, it shall
come to pass, that they shall despise their husbands in their own eyes,
saying, The King Assuerus commanded the Queen Vashti to be brought into his
presence: but she come not.

18 Also thus shall the Princesses of Persia and Medea this day say unto all the
Kings Princes, when they hear of the act of the Queen: thus shall there be
among us much despitefulnesse and wrath.

19 If it seem good unto the King, let aroyall decree proceed from him: and
let it be written among the Statutes of Persia and Media, that it be not
transgressed: that the Queen Vashti come un more into the presence of King
Assuerus, and let the King give her royal estate unto her companion that shall
be better then she.

20 So when the decree of the King shall be heard, which he shall publish
throghout all his Kingdom, (though it be great) all the women shall give
their husbands honor both great and small.

21 And when this saying pleased the King and the Princes: the King did
according to the sentence of Memuchan.

22 For he sent letters into all the provinces of the King, into every
province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their
language: That every man should bear rule in his own house, which every
officer published in the language of his people.


RIghtly does the wise man say in the Prou. 11. 14
Proverbs, as Where no counsel is the people fall: so in the multitude of
good counselors there is health. Rightly also have the ancients said, That
counsel is (...) sacred holy thing. For where all things are diligently
weighed and decerned by deliberate counsel, there right determinatio^s are
made, which bring both profit unto al men, and remedy for all mischiefs. But
there (...) no good counsel without God. Ther^ore Wisdom cries out, I have
counsel Pro. 8. 14. 15.
and equity wisdom is mine, and a little after, By me Kings raigus, and
rulers decree justice. Therefore unless God sit president in ^he counsel of
the wife, they quickly ^urne away from that which is right wher^f this History
wilgiue us sufficient proof: (...) which ye king being as yet hot in wrath,
^ema^deth of his cou^cellors, what they think (...) to be done to the Queen
Vashti, because she ^b^yed not the kings commandment* and one ^f the
cou^cellors pronouncing ye sentence, ^he king without further inquiry, allows
(...), and the rest confirm it with their cons^^* that by and by ther^ should a
decree be made, ^hereby the Queen should be deprived of ^er dignity, and so be
divorced, least that women should afterward become disobedient, or stubburne
against their husbands, but every man should be ruler in his own house. The
end of this decree was good and commendable, but the manner of the proceeding
unlawful, and no proportion or equality observed between the fault and the
punishment: and therefore no regard had either of justice, or of public
commodity: which will better appear by the diligent consideration of every
particular. First therefore let us weigh the question propounded by the King,
and afterward examine the sentence of Memuchan one of the council.

Lo then this is the question proposed by the King to be deliberated of what
shall be done, according to the Law to the Queen Vashti: because she
fulfilled not the commandment of the King Assuerus, ^sent by the Eunuchs? A
plain proposition, and as it seems not unjust: for he requires to have her
judged by the law. But was a matter of so great moment to be referred to the
counsel when they had well drunk? or whiles the king was yet inflamed with
wine, and incensed with anger? For as yet his wrath was not assuaged, as
appears by the decree of the council, and those things which expressly are
spoken in the beginning of the next Chapter. Besides, is not a matter of so
great weight ouer-hasfily handeled, when he will have sentence given even in
their banquet? Moreover, what justice was it to give judgment against so noble
a personage, the cause being never heard? seeing there is none so vile or
abject, who can be condemned in the equity of any law, either diume or
humane, when neither he has pleaded his cause, neither is lawfully convict?
Last of all, even by the law of nations, every man is to be heard in his own
cause, before he be condemned. First therefore they should have enquired whether
the matter were worthy to be called into consultation: which if it should be
found so to be, then both the day should have been assigned, and a convenient
place appointed, and the party accused, called: if this had been done, that
joyful meeting of theirs had not been turned into so woeful a tragedy. He
desires indeed that ye queen Vashti should be judged according to the laws,
but the contempt of laws in this action, sufficiently shows that he makes
mention of the laws, only for fashions sake. So for the most part, Kings are
wont to talk of laws and statutes, as though they would submit themselves
unto them: but indeed they mean to have their will to stand for reason, and
their passion to possess the place of judgment. So every one that goes to
law, pretends law and equity, which the greater part of them have an
hundredth times broken, or at the least turned to their own commodity. So those
who sit in the place of government, will seem to speak nothing but law and
statutes, which notwithstanding for the most part they wrest and alter as they
list. Notwithstanding this saying of the Kings, if it be rightly understood,
prescribes a rule, whereby all controversies as well civil as Ecclesiastical,
may be compounded. For whereas we live so here upon this earth, by reason
of the infirmity of man, that it cannot be but that strife vvil sometime
arise, they must all be judged according to the law.

Wherefore it behooves, that in judgment the Judges have the laws alvvaies
before their eyes, and diligently enquire of the cause and every circumstaunce
thereof, as Job protests of himself, that he was wont to Examine diligently
the cause which he did not know. Therefore Job. 29, 16 1. Tim. 4. 13 and 5.
21 Deuteronomy. 17. 19
Paul wills Timothy to give attendance to the reading of the Scriptures,
which were able to make him wise, and gives him warning, That he incline not
to one part more then another in judgment. Therefore were the Kings of Judah
commanded to cause to be written, and to read the law of God all the days of
their lives, ^out of which they might learn judgment and iustce. For
wherehence do wrong judgments arise, but out of the ignorance of the law, or
of a malicious wandering from the same?

We learn besides out of this fact of Assuerus, that no man ought to be
judge in his own cause, but leave it to ^he judgment of others, how great
soever ^is own authority be. But indeed if Assuerus would have sentence
given according to the law of the question propounded, this knot must first be
dissolved, whether at this time the queen were rightly called by Assuerus, to
show her beauty ^o the guests, or no? Now every man ^ootheth and flattereth
himself, and mighty ^en will not have their actions enquired of by any, as
though they could not slide, err, or be deceived: in which opinion they are
also confirmed by the impudency of flatterers. Of which thing, let that
courtly flatterer be a witness, who said unto Alexander the great, that
Justice was the inseparable companion of Kings thrones, that they might not
err in their judgments. And so the flatterers of our time say, Kings can do
nothing unjustly: the Popes holiness cannot err: finally, if every one might
be judge in his own cause, would he not say the like? And thus far of the
question propounded by the King.

Let us now then hear the sentence of Memuchan, one of the council, who was
last recited, but speaks first: either because he was the youngest, or else
the King commanded him first to show his opinion. His sentence is contained
in five verses: and in the three first, he judges that the Queen has
offended as well against the Kings majesty, as also by her evil example, which
she has showed to all women, and in this part he is somewhat long: in the two
other verses which are the 19. and 20. he sets down the punishment fit for
such a fact, and proves his sentence by the profit which shall come thereby to
every man. Whose sentence the king allows of, and the rest of council
confirm, verse 21* and in the last verse, follows the suddein execution of
that sentence. Lo then, this is his judgment of the fact of O. Vashti, That
^he Queen Vashti has not only done evil against the King, but against all
the Princes, and against all the people that are in all the (...) of the King
Assuerus: but that she ^ath done evil against the King, he (...) by no reason,
which yet principally (...) should have done: only he takes for (...), and
as a maxim without all (...), that they do evil which are not ^bedient to
the Kings word, wherein he (...) grievously: for that which the king (...)
is not by and by the rule of (...): and then although the queen had (...) in
this point, yet not (...) of a perverse mind, but moved (...) by fear, or
bashfulnesse, or some (...) civil and honest cause. Moreover, he (...) not,
that it is reason the queen should (...) heard, and so in this action he
makes (...) kings fault his own. Yet notwithstan^^ng great is his liberality
in speech: which (...) beseems counselors which follow the right way, but is
most dangerous in them who do err from the same. A councellor therefore ought
to be most free in pronouncing sentence, but he must also be a wise discerner
of equity, least enclining to the mightier part, he oppress the weaker with
his judgment: which thing we here see to be done by this Memucha, who gives
severe sentence with rigor against the queen, though absent, framing it
according to the lust of this angry king, and inclining in that his sentence
which seems to be so freely uttered, rather unto the one part then unto the
other. It is then a virtue of a good councellor, freely and without respect of
persons, to declare his sentence, and to judge of every matter as it is, but
he must also be wise and wary, least he err in the fact, and make it more
heinous then it is indeed.

Furthermore, Memuchan confirms the other part of his sentence, to wit, that
the queen had don evil against al ye princes, and against all the people of the
whole Empire, with this reason, That the queens fact shall come abroad to al
women, whereof they will take occasion to despise their husbands, and so the
princesses of Persia and Media, who have seen^ and heard the fact of the
queen, shall so answer to all the Princes of the King, whereof shall arise
much despightfulnes and wrath despightfulnes and contempt of ye women toward
their husbands, and wrath of the men against their wives, not enduring such
contempt. He therefore weighs ye conseque^, what will follow of this fact, and
the evil example given to ye women by the queen. And without doubt he, yt will
judge right, must weigh diligently al circumstances, and namely what will be
the consequent of any evil act, especially if it be done by the^ who are in
high authority and estimation. For their evil deeds do more hurt by reason of
the example, the^ if they were otherwise considered by themselves. But we must
diligently take great care to distinguish an offense taken, from an offense
given, least yt we rash^y impute unto him who has committed a fault, whatsoever
perverse and malicious me^ will gather thereof. For there may be some especial
consideration of a man's fact, which others know not, and therefore should it be
an unadvised part to go about to follow it. Moreover, when men are to give
they^ judgment of those controversies which ^rise between such as are joined
with so ^eare bonds, as is matrimony, especially among Princes, all things are
not to be interpreted in the worser part. Neither must we (as the Proverb is)
cast oil into the fire to increase the flame, but all ways and means must be
sought of reconciliation and renewing of love: yet so, that the evil committed
be not thereby altogether covered. Last of all, we must prudently discern
between a light fault and an heinous offense. This denial of the Queen was
indeed a fault, but it was not any heinous offense* as i^ she had been
guilty of adultery or some other unchaste act, or had conspired against the
Kings majesty, or had practiced any rebellion or alteration of the Kings
state. Neither had those offenses been to be punished only with divorce, but
with greater punishments, even with death, I confess that a fault may be
either lesser or greater, according to the manners or customs of people or
regions. In other countries this refusal would not have been so hardly
taken, unless perhaps it had been joined with exceeding great contempt. But
among the Medes and Persians, over whom their kings challenge an absolute
power, this fault was the greater, though not therefore to be changed into so
heinous a crime, nor so far to be urged, that the inconvenience should so
hardly be scanned, which thereof might follow among others

By this speech also of Memuchan, we gather yt in Persia the husbands had
obtained great authority over their wives, and were willing to retain it: and
also that the women would gladly shake off this yoke of hard bondage: which
mischief Memuchan here seeks in time to prevent.

We learn also out of his words, that to pronounce right judgment of any
matter, it is requisite that all things be weighed what may follow upon any
thing, that the evils which may ensue be prevented, but yet by such convenient
remedies as shall not be more dangerous the^ the evils which be feared. By the
way also this is to be noted, that there is nothing that so easily stirs up
strife between the married, as when the wife despises and conte^neth her
husband. And these things touching the sentence of Memuchan concerning the fact
of the Queen Vashti.

There follows now what punishment is fit for such a fact to wit, Let it
please the king, that a royal decree proceed from him, and ^^^ it be written
among the statutes of Persia and Media, that it be not transgressed: That the
queen Vashti come no more into the kings presence, and let the King give her
kingdom unto her neighbor, which shall be better then she. This is a most
grievous punishment, whether it be considered in it self, or in the manner of
the publishing. For he will have her to be divorced with shame and reproach,
and her princely dignity to be taken from her, as being rebellious against her
king and husband, and another to be appointed in her place, whereby her grief
might be increased with greater indignation. As touching the manner, there must
a decree go forth from the king, which shall be published through all provinces,
and laid up in record among the statutes, and not to be called back
again. In which point Memuchan seems to provide for his own safety, for he
might chance to hear of it afterward, if the decree might be recalled. This
sentence seems just unto many, and such as the pride and stubburnnes of the
queen Vashti did well deserve. But to him that shall weigh the matter in
equal balance, it may well appear, that ye punishment was far greater then
the offense, and so more severe then right. For simple disobedience is not a
sufficient cause to dissolve the band of matrimony, especially it being
grounded on a seasonable show, if any list to be the queens patron in the
cause. Asa the King of Judah, did indeed depose his mother Maacha from
governing the people, but it was for her horrible idolatry. I confess that
the people of the East parts did never greatly esteem of marriage, having
joined unto themselves many wives at once: yea, even of those who were near of
blood unto them, and using also for very light occasions to divorce them
again. Neither ought this to seem strange, when even among the people of
GOD, these vices found place. But these things are not to be measured by
their abuse, but by the truth and the ancient law of nature. Besides, the
deposing of a personage of so great Majesty, especially joined with so great
reproach and perpetual note of infamy, is most commonly more bitter then
death it self. But far be it from me that I should go about to search out the
judgments of God, which seeing they are always holy and just, we must confess
that the Queen Vashti was for just cause thrown down by him* which thing the
blessed virgin does in her song confess, that God has put down the Lu^. 1.
52.
mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree. But those things
which God by his secret decree does bring to pass, and those which men decree,
do many degrees differ the one from the other, wherein men may easily pass
their bounds, and deal unjustly, though God always deal justly. This is
plain unto us in the example Genesis 37.
of Joseph, when God justly humbles and tries, when his brethren
traitorously, and with more then barbarous treachery do sell him. Wherefore the
punishment of Vashti, if they had observed the proportion between the fault and
the punishment, might have been gentler, neither needed they to have dealt
with her by extreme law, which often times is extreme injury. By this let
the mighty learn, not to trust in their dignity, which is so brittle: for
those falls are most dangerous, which are from high places. And any man may
easily conjecture how great the sorrow of this great Lady was, being ^ast
down so suddenly from so high degree of honor.

That custom of the Persians to make laws that should not be repealed, is
most commendable, so that care be taken, that few laws be made, and that
those be just, and diligently weighed with deliberate counsel before they be
confirmed and published. For it avails little or nothing to have good laws
made, unless they be kept in force, and diligently observed: and to set forth
statutes which in short time shall be repealed, is to lay them open to
contempt, and cause them to be despised: and it takes much away from the
authority of laws, when men see that they must either be taken away again,
or at the ^east somewhat changed in them. Yet notwithstanding, there be some
things which may and ought to be altered with the ^ime, seeing as men are
variable and changeble, so also are their laws and affairs: and some thing
may be fit and necessary for one time, which is not so convenient at an other.

It is further to be noted, that then commonweals are best governed, and
their ^state preserved, when punishments are ^rdained for those that offend,
and contra^^wise, those that deserve well of the commonwealth, are by the
authority of the laws sufficiently rewarded* which two if they be wanting,
all things will be full of troubles and confusion. And thus much hitherto of
the punishment to be inflicted upon the queen Vashti.

He confirms his sentence afterward with the profit that will follow: to wit,
that all women afterward yield the greater honor to their husbands. He
seems indeed to judge aright: but he sees not on the otherside, that many
husbands being by this means made more insolent, will abuse their authority,
and change it into tyranny: and that many women may easily be compelled unto
many things scarce honest, as often as their husbands shall require: and that by
this means many marriages by divorce shall be broken: so that this, wise
councellor seems but with one eye to have looked into this fact. But when as
he deals about a decree which should be irreuocable, he was to have had a
more diligent care of all things that might follow, least he set down a remedy
more dangerous then the disease. But thus we see it for the most part comes
to pass with those who only have regard of their own commodity, and so are
scarce indifferent judges of others. Laws ought to be equal, and not ^hiles
they provide for one, oppress an (...), as this counceller here does. Yet this
(...) gather out of his speech, that it is a law (...) down by God himself,
and as it were ^^itten with his finger in the hearts of all (...): used in all
nations, and confirmed by (...) laws, That women obey their hus^^nds. Ephe. 5.
22 25 1. Pet, 3, 1, 7.
But again on the otherside, Hus^^nds must love their wives, and bear with
(...) as with the weaker vessels: so that wives (...) be subject unto their
husbands, but (...) as slaves.

This sentence of Memuchan, the King (...) does allow, and the Counselors
(...) any gainsaying do confirm. (...) was this marvel in the King, who
(...) before given place in himself, unto (...) bad Councillors, Wine and
Wrath. (...) when the question was of the putting (...) of his wise, and that
with (...), should he not yet at the least have (...), what other men
vvoulde have (...) of him in this case? should not his ^ouncell have exhorted
him to weigh the ^atter earnestly, and every circumstance (...)? Mark
therefore I beseech you, how great the force of wrath is when it is once
kindled, though for a light matter* even for denying her presence to the kin^
when he called her: and how ready eui^ counsel is to help it forward, that
so suddenly the sacred band of matrimoni^ should be broken: and the love so
solemnlie professed, violated. Neither was it seemly that the rest of the
Council should be so ready to confirm so severe a sentenc^ with their
consent: but you shall find ver^ few which dare speak against a king, when he
allows any sentence. It therefore (...) nie times little avails Kings to
be attended with a great number of Counc^^lours, but only for greater pomp
(...) charge. Those therefore whose will stands for reason, are wont to use
but one (...) two as witnesses of then secrets. But (...) notwithstanding, that
remains vnmou^able which in the beginning we set down^ that safety
consists in the multitude (...) Councillors, so that it be understood (...)
good and wise Counselors, which hand^ and govern their affairs aright, and
(...) justice.

The sentence given, is more speedily (...) in execution, the Edicts and
Proclama^^ ^ons being sent by the king into all provinces, according to every
ones language: the conclusion whereof was, that every man should bear rule in
his own house. An upright edict verily, so that it be mo^erated, according as
we are taught by (...) spirit of God, and this lawful rule of (...) husband,
end not in tyranny and op^ression. We see then, that all things (...) done
here hastily, which is vnseeme^^ for them, who purpose to establish ^nmoueable
and firm laws, and are to ^etermine of the weighty affairs, which ^pertaine
to so great an Empire. And ^is notwithstanding we see to happen ^any times,
even to wise Counselors, ^od by his exceeding great wisdom, ^awing out of
their counsels, that which ^all be profitable for his Church: and as ^were,
bringing light out of darkness, (...) the sudden motions and rages of (...)
most mighty Monarchs and rulers (...) the world, to his own glory.

Lo then what was the end of the feasts Asuerus, abounding with excess and
^perfluitie. He gave the first place to (...), wherewith being moved, he
^pointed these feasts: the second, to delights and delicaties, giving himself
to wine, and a vain desire to show forth his wives beauty: who resusing so
to do: he thirdly is stirred up to wrath and indignation, and diuorceth his
wife, and proclaims his own shame through his whole kingdom: and thus he
exchangeth his delight and joy, for sorrowful care and sad pensiveness, having
lost his lawful companion at bed and boorde: but yet the greatest loss and
disgrace redowndeth to the Queen Vashti. Behold here, I say, the islue of
worldly delights and banquets ouerflowing with iyot and excess.

Let us therefore be content with an holy mirth, framed according unto god
word: Let us so use wealth and prosperity, that we faint not in aduerfitie:
bu^ using both estates holilie and uprightly we may refer them to his
glory, who does distribute them according as it seems best unto himself,
through Jesus Christ, to who^ be glory, honor, and power, for evermore.

Amen.
THE V. SERMON.
Upon what occasion Ester was brought into the Kings house for women, under the
keeping of Hegai, the keeper of the maidens. From the 1. verse of the 2.
Chapter, to the ninth.

CHAP. II. After these things, when the wrath of King Assuerus was appeased,
he remembered Vashsti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her.

^. Wherefore the Kings servants that ministered unto him, said: Let them
seek for the King, beautiful young Virgins.

^. And let the King appoint Officers throughout all the Provinces of his
kingdom, who shall gather all the beautiful young Virgins, unto Susa, the
Cittieroyall, into the house of the women, under the hand of Hegai, the Kings
Eunuch, the keeper of the women: who shall give them their things for
purification.

4. And the maid that shall please the King, let her reign in the steed of
Vashti. And this pleased the King, and he did so.

5. In the City royal of Susa, there was a Jew, whose name was Mordecai,
the son of Iair, the son of Shimei* the son of Kish, the Beniamite.

6. Which had been carried away from Jerusalem, with the captivity, that was
carried away with Ieconiah, king of Judah; whom Nebuchad-nezar King of Babylon
carried away.

7. And he nourished Hadassa: that is, Ester, his Uncles daughter, for that
she had neither Father nor Mother: and the maid was fair and beautiful to
look on, whom after the death of her father and mother, Mordecai took for his
own daughter.

8. It came to pass therefore, when by the publishing of the Kings
commandment and decree, there were many maids brought together to Susa, the
City royal, under the hand of Hegai: Ester was brought also unto the kings
house, under the hand of Hegai, the keeper of the women.

9. Whom the maid pleased well, and she found favor in his sight: therefore
he caused her things for purification to be given her speedily, and her
portions, and seven comely maids to be given her out of the kings house, and
he gave unto her and to her maids, the best place in the house of the women.


Of the most sumptuous and most riotous banquets of Assuerus, and of his fond
desires, there has been none other end (as we have heard) but sorrow and
sadness, of which the greatest part did light on the Queen Vashti, who was
divorced from her husband, and deprived of her royal dignity.

Now is declard what afterward followed, and how it came to pass, that the
King going about to allaie the want he found of Qu. Vashti, when by the counsel
of his Courtiers, he had gathered many virgins out of his whole Empire, that
out of them he might choose one, whom he might take to succeed Vashti: Ester
was preserred to the Crown. Afterward how Mardochaeus by revealing the
conspiracy of certain Courtiers, prepared himself a way to highest honors.
And this is the sum of this Chapter. There are at this present two things to
be weighed by us: First the counsel which was given to the King, to gather
together so many Virgins out of his whole Kingdom, out of which he might
choose one for his Qu. which being approved by the king, is straightwaies
executed: which things are contained in the four first verses. Next, who and
of what estate Ester was, who among the rest was brought into the kings house,
where the maidens were gathered together for the King, which is described from
the fifth to the ninth verse.

The reason of entrance into this counsel, is declared in the I. verse: to
wit, After these things, when the wrath of King Assuerus was appeased, he
remembered Vashti, and what she had dose, and what was decreed against her. The
Author makes not mention what time passed from the rejecting of Vashti, but it
is likely that it was some two years space: for she was divorced about the
latter end of the third year of the reign of Assuerus, and Ester succeeded
in her place, in the 7. year: so there are 4. years that passed between
those things, of which, if one be allowed to the gathering together of the
Virgins, the other in preparing them, according to that which is desctibed in
the 12. verse, there remine two years in which the wrath of king Assuerus
lasted. Now when his wrath was appeased, he remembered the fact of the Queen
Vashti, and the decree that was made against her. Although it be not expressly
said, that he did repent it, yet may it easily be gathered, because it is not
without cause said, That his wrath was appeased. For he might call to mind
her beauty, and her noble race descending from Cyrus, he might acknowledge
he had done her wrong, in that he rejected her for so light a fault. So then
the decree made against her, was in the heat of his rage, of which the king
begins now to repent. This for the most part comes to pass in those
things which are done in a rage: For when they are done without advise, they
leave naught behind them but repentance.

But what is now to be done? there remains no remedy, the law is made, yea
it cannot be recalled: and so both the custom of the Country, and his own
estimation, will not permit him to alter any thing in the decree. Wherefore
Princes and men of high estate, who are subject to anger, which is so much the
more dangerous, by how much the greater their power is, must learn from hence,
that they must bridle and restrain their fury, unless they will do many
things vntustly, whereby they shall incur great infamy, which yet
notwithstanding they cannot by any means remedy.

By this also we may mark, that every passion is assuaged and mitigated by
time: and reason, who was as it were, thrown down from her throne, receives
again her authority, but often times too late, when things are brought into
so bad a case, that there remains no remedy. Wherefore, those who contend
withperpetuall hatred, and deadly feende, do sufficiently testify, that
reason is banished out of their minds, and are more hard against the Lords
reproves, the^ any stone against the drops, wherewith by often fal^ing they are
pierced. Besides, it had not been hard to have found out a medicine for that
mischief, unless by evil counsel the way had been stopped, which is
^euident in this action. For the counsel that was given to Assuerus, did more
and more alienate his mind from Vashti. Now although God did turn this
counsel to the good of Ester, and the Church, that lets not, but that it
may be many ways faulty, as by the careful sifting of it, we shall easily
perceive.

The counsel that is given by the young men the Kings servants, is this: Let
there be sought for the King, beautiful young Virgins, and let the King
appoint Officers for this purpose, in all the Provinces of hiskingdome, which
shall gather all the young Virgins unto Susa, the City royal, into the
^house of women, under the hand of Hegai, who shall give them their ornamints,
and the Virgin that pleases the Kings eye, let her be Queen in steed of
Vashti. This counsel is given to the King, by young Counselors: neither are
the seven Princes the ordinary Counselors (of whom was spoken in this
former Chapter) here called unto counsel. The counsel of young me^ in weighty
affairs, is worthily suspected: for when as they have neither wisdom nor
experience, they do most times rather give that counsel which lust and passion
do suggest, then that which reason 1. Kins. 12. 16.
should affoorde: Of which thing, the young Counselors of Rehoboam do make
proof. These also do frame their sentence according to the lust of an
ambitious and riotous King, neither have they any regard of right or honesty.
For what need was there, I pray, to gather together so many Virgins out of all
the Provinces of the kingdom, when in the city of Susa only, there were
enough, and enough, to be found? To what end served so many Officers, which
should take the daughters out of their Parents arms, eue^ against their will?
was it justice so by force to take them, in despite of their Parents? But these
men will have all things to be ^awfull for Kings: Nay, they say, it is an
honor for those parents, whose daugh^ers they vouchsafe to take for the kings
Concubines, or rather Bondslaues. How^eit, let it be, that all men do consent
with willing minds unto the Princes ^^sts, it is notwithstanding a matter of
ve^^ bad example, out of which there cannot choose but grow great confusion in
(...) states. For, O good God! how great (...) the licentiousness, how great
the inso^^ncie of those who are set about such ^atters? How many things do
they, ^uite besides al honesty and seemlinesse, ^^at they may be thought to
be good ^^rocurers of the lusts and pleasures of ^^eir Lords? What then do
ye think ^as done in this case? perhaps more then thousand Virgins thus taken.
For kings (...) never more ready and willing Officers, then when they command
those ^^inges which make for their pleasures, or the setting forth of their
pride, though sometimes they be scarce honest: nay sometimes cruel. What
other ^^ing then may you think came to ^asse by this counsel, but the
opening of wide door to all dissoluteness, and intemperancie: and the
preparing of matter to make a man effeminate and wanton And in choosing of a
wife for a King forsooth, they only have regard (...) beauty, which many
times is void (...) virtue and chastity: Whereby it comes to pass, that
all those who only respect beauty, are most deceived o^ their expectation,
and receive at last (...) fit reward for their lusts.

The kings house whereinto they were brought, what other was it, but a
perp^tuall prison? and though we grant (...) were honorable or to be
esteemed yet was it a prison, and unto diverse (...) them a perpetual
widdowhood, (...) ^^dowed under the cloak of Matrimony, unless they pleased
the king whe^^ he had deflowred them. The preparation, of which in the 12.
verse, (...) other was it, but a bastarding of (...) native beauty? But kings
which (...) wives, not by their own, but by other men's eyes, have many times
those whom it pleases other and not them selves: and delight rather in those
(...) are painted and set out by Art, then (...) true and natural beauty. And
besides what need I pray, so many maidens ^o beecome most wretched for ones
^ake only, which should attain the ^oyall seat? And yet this sentence
^leased the king, and he commanded (...) should most speedily be put in
exe^ution: whom it had better beseemed ^o have carefully weighed this matter,
that therein, neither force nor injury, should be offered to any; and to have
^rouided, that neither he should marry (...) wife against her parents or her
own will, or which himself might not love and like of. But those counsels
chiefly please Princes, whereby there is an easier way made to their delights,
and their power increased. Therefore the King is glad, that by this means, all
prouin^ces should have experience, that he had power over the goods and persons
of ^his subjects, nothing regarding whether by right or wrong. He is fed
then with hope of enjoying those Virgins, who should most excel in
comeliness and beauty, throughout his whole Realms: he forefaineth unto
himself, all manner of delights and pleasures, little caring for public
honesty, or the affairs of the Commonwealth. For what earnest matter can he
think of, who tosseth in his mind none other thing the^ to attain a piece of
most exact beauty and favor, passing al others in comeliness? But of such
Governors the world is worthy, who only study for their own profit and
pleasure: because all men for the most part, are carried headlong with
immoderate pleasures, preferring tyranny, before just government. Furthermore,
it is little to be marueiled at, that a Prince ignorant of the true religion,
did yield so much to his pleasures in gathering together so many women: When
Solomon, 1. Kings* 11 3.
whose wisdom is reported to be so great, and his kingdom far less, did get
unto him a thousand Wives, whereof seven hundredth were Noble women, and three
hundredth Concubins, and that against the express commandment of God: which
turned to his overthrow. So then it often comes to pass, that many times
Princes have not the best counsel given them; many times they ask not
counsel of the wisest: because they are far more desirous of setting forth
their power and magnificence, then of wisdom: and more careful of their
pleasures, then of the common profit. But you will say, this counsel was for
the good and profit of the Church: I confess it, yet is it no whi^te the
less faulty. For God knows how to bring light out of darkness, though it
remain always darkness: and he draws good forth of evil, the evil
still continuing evil. This counsel then, though in it self evil, and the
multitude of wives, or rather fornications, which here are advised, being
also evil: yet God thence took an occasion to lift up Ester into so high a
place of dignity, doing those things well and wisely, which by men were done
rashly, and inconsiderately. So great is the goodness and wisdom of our God,
turning all things to the health and commodity of his. And thus far of the
counsel and edict, for the gathering of so many Virgins into the Kings house
of women.

We are now to see, who and of what estate Ester was, which by force of this
decree, was brought to the hand of Hegai, the Kings Eunuch, keeper of the
women, who were gathered together for the King. Mardochaeus, who by kindred,
was her Cosen germain, and had taken her for his daughter, who also
afterward did direct her with his counsel, for deliverance of the Church, is
described in two verses, both in respect of his Stock, and of his state.
Therefore he is said to be A man of Benjamin, descending from Kish, the
father of Saul, having Iairus for his father, Shimei, his Grandfather, and
Kish, his great Grandfather. But it is likely, that in this Cenealogie, all
the Ancestors of Mardorhaeus, until Kish, be not reckoned. For from the time
that Saul the son of Kish began to reign, unto the captivity, which
happened under Iechonia, there passed more then four hundredth years. It is
also to be noted, that when these things came to pass, Mardochaeus was
grown to great years, for from that captivity under Iechonia, unto the time
which here is described, there passed fourscore years: so that it must
needs be, that Mardocbans was carried with his father Ianus into captivity.
For God does many times for the good of his Church, give long life and old
years unto diverse, above the ordinary course of nature, as we read of Ioiada
the high Priest, that he reached to the age of an hundred and thirty years.
In the mean while, we see what for the most part is the condition of the
children of God in this world, that they be dispearsed into diverse parts of
the world, and carried captives into a strange country, neither kings, nor
mighty, nor learned men excepted. For there were carried into captivity with
Iechonia, ten thousand captives out of Judah and Benjamin, all being men of
might, and all the workmen, and cunning men of the kingdom, as appears 2.
King. 24. 14. And this is our comfort and consolation in flights and
banishments, that our God does relieve our exile, by giving places of abode
under Christian Princes, and gives us leave to exercise all holy liberty both
of body and conscience under their dominion. And such was Mardochaeus estate.

It is said afterward that the father of Ester was the uncle of Mardochaeus,
and he is named after in the 15. verse, Abihail, but she remained an Orphane
both by father and mother, being borne in the captivity, for otherwise she
must be of necessity fourscore year old. She being in this case,
Mardochaeus takes her as his daughter, and does the duty of a father toward
her: wherein he shows himself to be a good kinsman and faithful friend of
the dead, having so great care of their daughter left in such a case. Her
favor and beauty is commended, because it was the means which got the kings
grace, and made a way for her to the royal dignity. So beauty does help
those that fear God to obtain honor, but unto others it is oftentimes the
instrument of their destruction, as unto Queen Vashti.

Those therefore who are more fair then others, have not whereof to be proud:
but there is rather given unto them greater occasion of humility and modesty,
that they may employ the gifts given them by God, to his honor and glory.

In the mean while, mark what is the state sometime of those Virgins which
fear God, though borne of honest and noble Parents. Ester is a captive, a
stranger, without father or mother, and poor, whose only treasure and riches
is godliness, and her only father and defendor the Lord.

By which example we are taught, that Parents ought not to be so careful and
greedy for their children, that they do any thing in getting or keeping of
wealth for them, which shall be against their conscience: when as Godliness
content with it own is great riches, and there can no better enheritance be
left by Parents to their children then it.

Therefore they ought to bestow diligent care in bringing them up, and cast
off 1. Tim. 4. 1.
all other care, and ouergreat carke of the things that appertain to this
life, and not to carry with them when they die, that sorrow and carfulness
which many do, unless they have provided for their children according to
their mind.

For then are they well provided for, when they have God for their father,
whose blessings are on a thousand generations, toward them that fear him:
so that without doubt, he will raise up some faithful Mardochaeus, who shall
take care of the children of Gods faithful servants. Here also all men are
taught by the example of Mardochaeus, to have a peculiar care of Orphans, and
namely of their kindred and affinity; and especially of maidens, who for their
chastity are in greatest danger. Number. 29. 12.
And this carfulness Job protests of himself. Wherefore it is an
intolerable shame, that stony hearted and more then barbarous men, who abound
in riches and wealth, do notwithstanding so little love and regard even their
own kindred, that they suffer the^ many times to be brought unto extreme
beggerie and penury. Neither may they lawfully stick at their loss, and
pretend that for an excuse, when Mardochaeus though he were a banished man and
a captive, did not yet cast off the care of his cousin germane, but brought her
up with him in godliness and religion, the fruits whereof did at the last
show forth themselves to the good and profit of the whole Church. Thus have you
what Ester was.

There remains now to be set forth, how she was brought into the house of
women, where the virgins were gathered together for the King, under the hand of
Hegai, as in the fifth and sixth verses is declared. The author does not
express whether it were done with Mardochaeus consent and hers, or no: it is
most likely that there was not any ones consent looked for: and that they
should be in great peril whosoever should refuse: but seeing they had much
profited in godliness, it cannot be doubted but that they were driven into
great distress: and that they did wrestle with many fears: When on the one
side, Mardochaeus beholds all the good hope he had of his pupile in a moment
to perish: and on the other side, Ester fears the present danger of being
rejected after the King had once known her. For what reason should she have to
hope that she should be preferred before all the virgins in the whole
Empire, and be exalted into the dignity royal? Besides, how do you think
that she was vexed in mind and conscience, when she saw that she must be
joined to an Infidel and uncircumcised, though a King? and that by this means
she was separated and in a manner rent from the people of God? Yea, but some
will say, she should rather have suffered any shame, and offered her self
unto a thousand deaths, then consent unto this, to be the Concubine of an
Infidel. But what could she do? a greater force took her away: and
peradventure there was in this fact some special and extraordinary motion of
gods spirit, who is wont so to lead his through the thickest darkness of this
world. And if we should say, that in her and Mardochaeus there were some
sparks of infirmity, we should not speak of any strange and unusual matter
even in the saints of God: which yet notwithstanding we may not imitate. For
the infirmities of the saints are set down unto us in the holy scriptures,
that we should wonder at and learn to extol the goodness of god toward
them, who turns their infirmities to their good; not that we should follow
them* I would not therefore suffer my self to be persuaded by any reasons, much
less would I persuade any, or yield consent* that a christian maiden should be
joined to the great Turk, though it were in marriage. But whatsoever happened
in this case, I doubt not but Ester had many thoughts running in her mind,
when she saw she should be taken from the hand of Mardochaeus, by whom so
fatherly she had been brought up, and delivered to an Infidel: and but that
both of them with many groans and sighs did desire the help, counsel, and
protection of God. And so ought we to do in all our difficulties and
distresses, certainly persuading our selves, that God will lighten our
darkness, as we are taught Psalm. 18. and 112. When as we rely on him alone,
and dedicate our selves with an upright heart to set forth and celebrate his
glory: even as the Lord is said to direct the steps of his, and when they
fall, to lift them up, that they be not utterly trodden under foot. Let us
therefore wholly commit our selves unto him, for he has a care of us, whom
he leads into all blessedness in Christ Jesus his son, to whom be glory
for ever.

Amen.
THE SIXTH SERMON.
The preferment and exaltation of Ester to the royal dignity: from verse 9.
unto 18. of the second Chapter.

9. And the maid pleased him, and she found favor in his sight: therefore he
gave her speedily the things for her purification, and her portions, and seven
comely maids out of the Kings house, and he appointed unto her and her maids
the best place in the house of the women.

10. Ester had not showed her people and her kindred: for Mordecai had charged
her, that she should not tell it.

11. But Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to
know if Ester did well, and what should be done with her.

12. And when the course of every maid came to go in unto King Assuerus, after
she had been twelve months after the manner of women (for so were the days of
their purification accomplished, six months with oil of myrrh, and six
months with sweet odours, and in the purifying of women.)

13 Then when every maid came unto the King, whatsoever she required was
given her, to go with her out of the women's house unto the kings house.

14 In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second
house of the women, under the hand of Shaashgaz the Kings Eunuch which kept the
concubines: she came in to the King no more, unless she pleased the king, and
that she were called by name.

15 Now when the course of Ester the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai
(which had taken her as his own daughter) came, that she should go in to the
king, she desired nothing, but what Hegai the Kings Eunuch the keeper of the
women, said: And Ester found favor in the sight of all them that looked upon
her.

16 So Ester was taken unto king Assuerus, into his house royal in the tenth
month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.

17 And the king loved Ester above all the women, and she found grace and
favor in his sight, more then all the other virgins: So that he set the crown
of the kingdom, upon her head, and made her Queen in stead of Vashti.


AMongst the most wonderful works of God in the ordering and governing of men's
actions, those are most worthy attent consideration, when he throws down
the mighty, and exalts those of lowestate, as in their Himnes Anna the
mother of Samuel, and the Blessed 1. Sam. 2. 8. Luke. 1. 52.
virgin Marie do most sweetly record. Nay, the very Heathen did observe and
note them, and have delivered many of those alterations in their writings: not
attributing them indeed unto God, as they ought, but unto Fortune, which also
at this day we see to be done by the ignorant. But in the holy scriptures,
many such excellent and memorable examples are proposed unto us, and the means
diligently observed which God did use in bringing low the one, and lifting up
the other; whereby the order and course of Genesis 41. 40. Exodus 12. 10. Dan. 2.
48 and 6. 28.
his providence might the better be perceived. Which is most evident in the
History of Joseph, who was exalted to so great dignity in Egypt, that he
was next unto the king: and of Moses, who was brought up in Pharaohs Court, and
called the son of Pharaohs daughter: and of Daniell, who was so great in favor
and autho ritie in Babylon. Amongst who^ Ester, whose History we expound,
deserves not the last place, being lifted up to the crown royal, from a
low and base estate: in which History there is particularly expressed by the
holy Ghost, the means which God used in exalting her to so high an estate, for
the good of his Church.

The reiection of Vashti was as it were the beginning and entrance into it,
then the counsel given to the king togather together the fairest virgins out
of all his Empire, was a furtherance of it, though in it self it were neither
good nor honest; besides, her beauty and favor was added, whereby the kings
officers were moved to bring her into the house of the women under the hand of
Hegai: al which we have hitherto declared.

Now there are other means set down unto us, to wit, that she pleased Hegai,
and used wisdom and discretion in her behavior by the counsel and advice of
Mardochaeus: and that although she were compelled to use perfumes: and those
other prescribed paintings, yet she sought not any thing whereby she might
procure the kings favor, unto whom notwithstanding she was most acceptable,
as also unto all that saw her, insomuch that by an hidden yet heavenly motion,
the Kings love rested on her, and he set the royal crown upon her head. Thus
we see how God did lift up this base captive maiden, and that using but small
and contemptible means, whereby we might the better learn to acknowledge all
to come from his grace and mercy. But we shall know these things better, by
the diligent exposition of every particular.

First therefore, She is said to please Hegai, and to find favor in his
sight, neither came that to pass as though she were the most beautiful, most
noble, most industrious, or most skillful in courtlike matters, but it came of
God, who governs and has in his hand the hearts of men, and turns them
every way, according to his pleasure, that he may procure the love of all
toward them whom he will exalt, that is, toward those that fear him. So
that to purchase the good wills of men, we need no cunning, or wicked, or
unlawful means, as did Absalom, who did steal the hearts of the people: but
2. Sam. 15 6. 1. Sam. 2. 30.
we must fear and honor God, Who honoreth those of whom he is honored: we
must follow the way of integrity and humility, which is the true and only way
to get the good will ofal me^, unto which are altogether contrary, pride,
arrogancy, and insolency: Whosoever therefore desire to be beloved of
others, let them look into this example, that by it they may learn to be
careful of uprightness and holiness. The good will of Hegai is accompanied
with an especial care of his, in yielding unto her things fit for women and
her portions, that is, giving unto her whatsoever was requisite either for
apparel or diet; besides a train of seven maids out of the kings house, who
should attend her, and finally the best and most commodious place in the house
of women.

So the fear of God brings all commodities to the faithful, as the Prophet
at large in the 112. Psalm does particularly describe it. Neither is it
without cause that David bids him that is desirous Psalm. 34 12.
of long life, and to be furnished plentifully with all things which are truly
good, to fear God, and do injury to no man. Therefore also the son of God
exhorts Mat. 6. 33.
his to seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, promising
that all other things besides shall be cast upon them. Yet we say not that
godliness does always bring to those that follow it, such abundance of honors
and goods, but that it is enough if that we learn by it, to be content with
that measure which God does measure unto every one, which is more abundant unto
us, then all the superfluities of the wicked.

The wisdom and silence of Ester are afterward commended unto us, to wit,
that she showed neither her people, nor her kindred, as she was commanded to
do by Mardochaeus.

The cause of this forbidding is not expressed: but it is not hard to guess,
that it was done because of that contempt and reproach wherewith the Jews were
oppressed: as well because they were captives, as also because they followed a
diverse and contrary religion from all others. But this inhibition is to be
understood, to stretch so far forth, until she were demanded by those
who had lawful power and authority over her. For otherwise unless she did
declare it unto them when she should be examined, truly she had not only lied,
but also secretly denied her religion. It is indeed a high point of wisdom,
not rashly to bewray that which may breed us hatred, envy, and contempt: but
again to deny the truth, and to dissemble what religion we profess when we
are demanded, is a treachery, which redoundeth to the dishonor of God.
Therefore when the time required it, neither Ester nor Mardochaeus did hide
their religion or their people. Wherefore this place helps not those, who by
this example would shape a defense for Idolatry: for the sentence of the son
of God remains firm and unremoved: Whosoever Mark. 8. 38.
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words before men, I will also be ashamed of
him before god my father. But a man may demand it not without cause, how she
could co^ceale her people and her kindred? For whereas Mardochaeus from whom she
was taken, was ^nowne to be a Jew, and she did abstain from meats for bidden
in Gods law, it seems that she did sufficiently bewray her self. For if any
think that she did eat of unclean meats, or violate the Saboth, he may
also say, that she cast away all godliness: forasmuch as we see, that the
faithful would rather endure any torment, then taste swines flesh: whereof
there is a most notable example in the History of the Macabees. But I answer,
that neither the officers who gathered the maids together, nor Hegai, under
whose hand they were kept, enquired very carefully after these things, but were
only content that she was beautiful, which they chiefly sought after. I
add, that whereas Ester was in great favor with Hegai, she therefore obtained
greater liberty to live according to the law of God, and yet not be espied.
So is God wont to watch over his, that they run not into any hatred or
contempt, and yet notwithstanding preserve their conscience safe. And thus
far of Esters wisdom. That peculiar care which Mardochaeus had always of
her, is now after this declared: That every day he walked before the court of
the house of women, that he might learn of Esters prosperity, and what
became of her. For when as it was not lawful for him to enter into the women's
house, he diligently sought all occasion to talk with any, by whom he might
be certified concerning her. Neither was it without cause that he took so
great care for her: for he knew that the manners of young maidens easily
would be corrupted with courtly delights, and soon forget their former
education: as daily expeperience does teach, that there is scarce one ofan 100.
who may chance not to be infected with the vices of the Court, in which he
shall be brought up. For there be few Joseph's, few Moses, few Daniels, who
can be conversant in the Courts of Insidels and Idolaters without some spot or
fault, when as there reigns such abundance of all manner of corruptions, even
in the Courts of those who profess themselves to be Christians. Therefore not
without cause did Mardochaeus so fear least Ester should be forgetful of the
doctrine of the law, and of that good bringing up and instruction which she
had received from him. He was careful also for her health: and what should
become of her, fearing least if by chance her people, and the religion which
she did profess should be known, she should be rejected with contempt and
reproach, or evil entreated and dealt with. Here all Parents, Tutors and
Guardians, by the example of Mardochaeus are warned and put in mind of their
duty toward those pupils whom God has committed unto them, not only as long
as they be under their charge, but also after they be set at liberty: to wit,
that they always watch over them, and whether they be removed far off, or
be near unto them, to help forward as much as in them lies, their health
and profit.

Mardochaeus might seem in his own conceit, excellently to have discharged
his duty, and might say as many in our time are wont, what should I have any
further care of Ester, seeing she is so well provided for? I had care of her
as long as she was under my charge: I have done what I could for her, I think
I have well performed my duty: she is now in better case then I am, why
should I trouble my self any further?

But true love is not so quenched in the minds of good kinsmen, it rather
raises up new sparkles, whereby they may be stirred up to bear an especial
care toward them, to whom they are bound in kindred or alliance; and to give
the^ good counsel and advice.

But you shall see in these days, that the greater part of me^ rather study
this only, how they may be rid of the charge of their children or pupils, or
poor kindred, by what means soever it be; that being once freed, they may
ever after altogether cast away that care. And let this suffice to be spoken of
Mardochaeus care.

Here is now described in the three verses following, the manner of the
preparation, too too laboursome and sumptuous, and delicate, whereby the
maidens were anointed with oils and sweet perfumes, before they were brought
unto the king: Next, in what manner they went in unto the king: and thirdly,
how they had an other house appointed for them, after they had been one night
with the king.

These are the tokens of extreme riotousnesse, and extreme wantonness, in
this wanton and effeminate Infidel king: whereby we may learn, that those whom
the spirit of holiness and regeneration does not govern, are made the
bondslaues of all manner most unstayed lusts: thinking that all things are
lawful for them by reason of their dignity. This king then being a servant
unto lust, will not touch a m^ide, though fair and clean, unless she have
been first whole six months besmeered, and as it were soked with oil of
myrrh, and then other six months anointed, perfumed, and as it were
seasoned with all manner of sweet spices. So nothing that is natural can
content these vassals of most prodigious lusts, but only painting and art does
please them. Now how troublesome think you was this unto Ester, who had been
brought up in all godliness, frugahtie and modesty, to be basted and soked a
whole year in such wantonness and riot? Yea, but some will say, ought she to
endure it? Certes, seeing she was a modest and godly maiden, I doubt not but
she was ashamed of these delicacies and allurements. But what should she do?
whether she would or no, even with extreme grief she was compelled unto it.
The use indeed of oils and perfumes is not simply to be condemned, but excess
in the use of them, and a corrupt affection abusing the^ to an other end then
they ought. Nevertheless, in a matter wherein her conscience was not wounded,
and which she sought not by ambition, she might with a good conscience yield to
necessity, and frame her self unto the time: keeping notwithstanding in her
heart her former love of simplicity and purity, those most fit virtues for
faithful virgins. Wherefore these things do nothing help those women, who
infected with the poison of pride and ambition, never make an end of painting
and coloring themselves, that they may turn all men's eyes toward them, and
procure every ones favor. Behold yet further here how great the slavery is
which they live in, that live in the courts of wicked kings. Neither must we
labor greatly to excuse Ester, as though every way she were free from all vice.
For she might also be touched with some weakness, even as we see the most
holy to have wrestled with many infirmities: so that in Ester, the mercy and
goodness of the Lord does so much the more shine, in that he used these means
to procure favor for Ester with the king. These maidens thus besmeered and
besmoked, were lead to the King, every one in her course: and there was given
unto her whatsoever she would desire, either for company or apparel, when
she went in unto the king: so that there was no spare made of any thing, to
satisfy the infatiable lust of this impure and leacherous king: and it is very
likely, that every maid affecting that high place of royal dignity, did show
their skill in devising of ornaments and fashions, whereby she might allure
the king to like of her. When they had passed the night with the king, they
were brought into an other house of Concubines, under the hand of Shaashgaze,
in which they were holden in perpetual prison, unless the king being
delighted in any one of them, did by name call for her.

There is here described unto us such an horrible pollution and defiling of
matrimony, which we ought most earnestly to hate and abhor: And considering
how great the darkness was wherein those miserable blind wretches did walk,
or rather wander, we ought to make so much the greater account of that light
which we have received from God: and to use holy and honorable marriage in
most holy and pure manner. For if we shall do otherwise, we are ready to fall
into most certain and unavoidable danger, yea though we passed Solomon in
wisdom: and we draw down upon us the just fury of Gods wrath, as he did by
the multitude of women, and abuse of holy matrimony. And these things are to
be observed in these 3. verses, 12, 13, and 14, that we may not stay any longer
in searching out the filth of this king who knew not the true God: who yet
notwithstanding has at this day too many folowers (eue^ among those who
profess the knowledge of God) of this his unchaste and intemperate beastlines.
Now let us see how Ester behaved her self, when her turn came to go in unto ye
king: and how god got her so great favor with the king, that she was preferred
before all the other maide^s. It is said, That she demanded nothing, but was
co^te^t with those things which Hegai did prescribe: eue^ by this testifying
that she was drawn against her will, and with a discontented mind, unto this
impure and uncircumcised king: that she would not go about to purchase his
favor by any cunning, but that she gave over her self wholly to the
providence and guard of the Lord, that she might be preserved undefiled. And
this indeed she did obtain by Gods singular bounty and clemency, that she
was not cast out into the number of Concubines, but joined in lawful
matrimony to the king. For by how much the more she neglected all painting
and beauty gotten by art, by so much was she the more accepted and favored
of all that looked on her: so much can Gods favor, so much can modesty and
simplicity do, in procuring the good will of all men toward us. Those
therefore that fear god, do receive this reward at his hand, of their virtue
and integrity, a reward I say and not a gift, but yet of his mere grace and
liberality, who is debtor unto none.

The time when she was brought unto the king is expressly noted, both that the
credit of the History may be the greater, and the peculiar care which God
has over his Church, the more known and famous: for by this means he
provided aforehand for the necessities thereof, when it should be in danger,
before the peril drew near. For Hamans conspiracy happened in the beginning
of the twelfth year of Assuerus: and Ester is received into favor and the
royal estate, about the end of the seventh year, in the month Tebeth, which
for the greater part answers to our December. Behold then with what favor God
embraced his handmaide: to wit, that Assuerus being moved with a secret
instinct, loved Ester above all the women, and she found grace and favor in
his sight, more then all the other virgins. Neither was this by reason that
she was the most noble, the most witty, the most expert in courtly affairs:
for where, when, how should she learn them, seeing she was brought up with
her cousin Mardochaeus in all fear and humility? And besides, it is very
likely that many other were her equals, or did pass her in beauty: but the
secret favor of God can do more then all these things. By this we may see
how truly it was said by the wise man; The hearts of Kings are Pro. 21. 1
in the hands of God, and he turns the^ at his Pro. 21. 1.
pleasure: and that the favor and grace which we receive of great men, flows
from the especial grace of God, least any man should ascribe it unto himself,
as though he were of himself worthy of such love. And truly this is altogether
admirable, that so lustful a king could so suddenly settle his affection upon
a base unknown maid, so that he did prefer her before all the rest, and
joining her unto him in marriage, made her Queen. Let maidens then learn from
hence, which wish to have good husbands, and wives who desire to be beloved
of their husbands, with what ornaments they ought principally to desire to be
decked, to wit, with the favor of God, which they shall procure, if with
humility and modesty they serve him. Behold then Ester, of a miserable
captive made a Queen, the wife and spouse of the greatest Monarch in the world.
Profane men would say, that good Fortune laughed on her, but we do herein
acknowledge the singular providence of God, lifting up the base and abject, as
often as it seems good unto him. So was Joseph promoted in Egypt, not by
fortune or chance, but by the certain counsel of god, providing before hand for
his Church, that it might have a remedy prepared in Egypt, against that great
famine which the^ was in hand, and yt there it might be received and cherished
for a while: which Joseph himself does acknowledge, and tell his brethren: and
is expressly noted in ye 105. Psa. So Moses was brought up in Pharaos court,
that being furnished with all ye wisdom of the Egyptians, he might be of the
greater authority and grace, when the time of ^he deliverance of the people to
be wrought by him should come. The same divine providence did lift up Daniel
in Babylon, not only as an excellent Prophet, but also as a protector and
defendor of the Church. Thus does God lift up the base and abject, that they
may say with David, O* Lord my heart is not haughty, neither are mine eyes
lofty: on the contrary, Psa. 131. 1.
he keeps down the proud, and throws down the lofty countenance. And
this the Blessed virgin sings in her Luke 1. 48 52.
Himne, saying: God has regarded the base estate of his handmaid: not that any
ones humility or baseness does deserve to be exalted by God: but that God will
thereby show forth the treasures of his mercy. And if the proud for a time
sit in high estate, it is for their greater mischief, for that they shall
leave behind them an unhappy memory of their wickedness.

Neither are all the base and contemptible people lifted up by God, into some
high degree of dignity in this world: but it is enough and that abundantly for
the^, that they are by the grace of god made in Christ Jesus the sons of God,
kings and Priests: which dignity is greater and more precious then any
dominion, even over all the kingdoms of the world. Neither did the chief
honor of Ester consist (...) her dignity royal, or marriage with Assuerus,
but in her excellent faith and assurance of everlasting life. For if these
things had been wanting in her, surely the greatness and dignity of her
kingdom could not have kept her from eternal misery and malediction.
Furthermore, the examples of such dignity and extraordinary pre-eminence, are
most rare among the faithful, least any should think that the^^ felicity and
happiness were placed in such things: nevertheless, in those few examples
which are, god will have us to behold, as in a glass, his most wise
providence, to whom it is most easy to exalt whom pleases him, into most high
dignity: least any should here feign, as ignorant men are wont, any turning
and unconstant wheel of Fortune. But let us imprint this in our memory, that
the way whereby we attain to that glory, which is proper to the sons of God,
is humility, integrity, and modesty, which are the gifts of God, whereby we
may learn to know, that the beginning, middle and end of our salvation, does
flow from the only mere grace of God, through the merit of Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be all glory, praise and dominion for ever.

Amen.
THE SEVENTH Sermon.
The banquet made for Esters sake, to the solemnization of her marriage: her
dutifulness toward Mardochaeus; and the worthy fact of Mardochaeus in
disclosing of the conspiracy against the King. From verse 18. unto the end of
the second Chapter.

18. Afterward the king made a great feast unto al his Princes and his
servants, which was the feast of Ester, and gave freedom unto the Provinces,
and gave gifts according to the power of a king.

19. And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
Mordecai sat in the kings gate.

20. Ester had not yet showed her kindred, nor her people, as Mordecai had
charged her: for Ester did after the word of Mordecai, as when she was
nourished with him.

21. In those days when Mordecai sat in the kings gate, two of the kings
Eunuchs, Bigthan and Teresh, which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to
lay hand on the king Assuerus.

22. And the thing was known to Mordecai, and he told it unto Queen Ester,
and Ester certified the king thereof in Mordecaies name.

23. And when inquisition was made, it was found so: therefore they were both
hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book of the Chronicles before the
king.


IT comes to pass for the most part, that those who are exalted out of a
base and abject place, into any higher degree of honor, are either open unto
the biting of the envious, or waxing insolent, forget their duty: or are
subject to some sudden alteration. For I know not how almost al me^ envy at
ye dignity of those that suddenly arise. Besides, in so happy a success it
is very hard to keep measure, but that pride commonly does accompany such,
after which follows some unhappy calamity and overthrow. For a man shall
more hardly set sure footing upon the top of an hill, or in a steep
downfall, then in a low and plain place. So that those who on the sudden
are lifted up into any height of dignity without envy, and do therein behave
themselves modestly, not proudly, and stand firm against every tempest, do
find a peculiar favor at Gods hand: by whose help they are safe from the venime
of envy and malice: and from the insolency of a proud heart, and so at the
last from destruction and shameful change.

This favor we see here that Ester has obtained from GOD, whose so sudden
alteration of her estate into so high a dignity, was pleasant and acceptable
without envy, by that liberality which king Assuerus showed for her sake
toward his subjects. And because God in his secret providence, made that her
kindred and nation was not known, she also is not forgetful of her duty, but
obeys Mardochaeus, as before when she was brought up with him: and so God
makes a way for those honors which were after to be given to Mardochaeus,
whereby her dignitiie may be more and more confirmed. So God gives all things
Psalm. 127 2.
unto his as it were sleeping. Which doctrine is most profitable for us,
whereby we may learn to rest upon the Lord with all our heart, and not
trust to our own wisdom, but to acknowledge his providence in all our ways,
that so he may continually govern our steps, as the wise man speaks.
Prou. 3. 6.

Let us now then weigh this peculiar care of God over Ester. Assuerus for her
sake provides a great feast, as well to celebrate her marriage, as to confirm
unto her the royal dignity, and to show her forth unto his people, that she
might be known* to whom he therefore gran^th immunitie and rest from their
taxes (...) tributes, and gave gifts according to* (...) power of a king. This
feast is not to (...) reproved as the former, of which we (...) in the first
Chapter, for there is in ^is feast, both a good end, andan honest ^ccasion. For
this has been in all ages a ^ost commendable custom, in the ho^our of
marriage, to celebrate a feast a^ongst the kinsfolk, friends and neigh^ours:
in so much that those who were (...) and wealthy, did continue the feast (...)
days, as may easily be gathered out (...) the 29. of Genesis when Lea was given
to ^^acob to wife; and out of the 14. of Judge* (...) which there is mention of
the marri^ge of Samson. Now these feasts were so ^uch ye more carefully kept by
the^ of old (...) in honor of marriage, because mar^^ages* were not openly
blessed in the Church of God, as afterward among Christians it was accustomed
to be done. (...) then with what honor the king en^ertaineth Ester, that by a
solemn feast which he made to his Princes and ser^ants, he might proclaim
her Queen before them all, and would make it known that she was his spouse and
wife: of which feast also the end was quiet and happy. He had indeed many
women besides her, as the corrupt manners of that age did bear, but in a far
lower degree, for which cause also they were called concubines. But this fact
was especially praise worthy in this feast, because he gave great occasion
unto his subjects of public joy, in that he granted them release from their
burthen^ and payments. It is not declared, whether that immunitie was granted
for oney ear^ or more: but it is likely that it was granted at the least for a
year: wherefore the people being set free from this burden, (...) just cause
of gladness, and to rejoice (...) Ester was made Queen. Neither is it
expressed to whom those royal gifts (...) given, but it is to be supposed
that (...) were given to those that were bidden unto the feast, even as at this
day in some places it is a custom to give gifts to (...) that are invited to a
banquet.

By the example of this royal magnificence and liberality of Assuerus, let
king and great men learn, that their feasts an^ pastimes be not the cause of
weeping (...) tears unto their poor subjects, by (...) hard exacting of taxes
and other tributes: which yet notwithstanding at this day is (...) to be done
in the Courts of many ^reat Princes, so that they neither cele^rate feasts nor
marriage, nor come almost (...) any of their Cities, without great (...) and
oppression of the miserable people, whose very marrowe (as it were) (...) suck
out: so far off be they from ^eeing liberal and beneficial unto them, (...)
the joy may be common to all: but ^here is scraping every where, and violent
^atching to satisfy the sacred famine of a (...) Courtiers, which indeed can
never* (...) satisfied.

Moreover here is set down a pattern ^or all, unto which they must conform
their marriage feasts, whosoever a^ong Christians will celebrate them ^ith holy
mirth; that the beginning (...) so holy a band and league, be ^edicated unto
the author thereof, of whom only the blessing thereof does ^epend.

But here every man must measure himself according to his ability, least
those things be consumed in a few days, which ought to have sufficed for many
years.

Besides, men must abstain in such feasts, from all intemperancie in meat
and drink, from all filthy speech and profane wantonness, and we must take
care that the poor be made partakers of our joy: finally, we must labor
that all things be done holily in so holy an action: for whereas for the most
part, men let loose the reins to all intemperancie, it is the cause wherefore
we see so many unhappy ends of marriages, which God does not bless, because
he dwells but only with the holy.

The wisdom of Ester is afterward for down in co^cealing those things which
Mardochaeus had willed her, that is, of her kindred and people. In that the
virgins are said to be gathered together the second time, it has some
difficulty in it, and may bear diverse senses. But this seems to be the most
simple meaning, if we shall say that the king having so many Concubines, and
Ester being declared to be Queen, and that there were as yet many maidens in
the custody of Hegai which had not yet been brought in unto the king, did
gather those rest again together, that they might be restored every one unto
their friends and parents. For seeing he had chosen one out of the whole number
to be his Queen, it was right that the rest should be sent back again to
their home. It is not altogether also without difficulty, how it might come to
pass that Ester being so suddenly exalted into so high a dignity, could
conceal her people: for men are wont most especial* (...) to make inquiry
concerning such, and that very diligently. We must therefore suppose, that in
those days ye people were (...) so curious as they be now, especially
concerning a woman: and that they gave themselves only to mi^th and joy, not
regarding whence she was. But especially the favor of God is to be
considered, whereby Ester was preserved safe, that it might not be known of
what kindred she was, or what religion she did profess, vn^ill there were fit
time for it, the Lord so defending her against that contempt and ^nuie, which
if it hadbene known she ^ad been a Jew and a captive, she should ^aue run
into. Behold how the Lord ^oth direct the ways of his, how he ^efendeth and
makes plain their paths, (...) gives them at last the thing they wish for.
To what end then should Ester speak any thing of her kindred or nation, when
no man made demand concerning it, until fit opportunity and her duty
should require it? Here then her wisdom is greatly to be commended, but
especially therein is she to be praised, that although she were a Queen, yet
she is obedient to her cousin Mardochaeus, eue^ as before when she was brought
up with him and under his custody. This virtue is most rare, that those who
are exalted out of base and low degree, to any estate or dignity, do
acknowledge their poor kinsmen, or will vouchsafe the^ of any honor: which
pride and insolency is especially found in those Ianissaries which the Turk
brings up. For how can those who are lifted up into dignity, and so set free
from their Parents power, almost but wax haughty? when we se^ those who yet
are under their parents government, do account it a small matter to contemn
them, and behave themselue^ stubbornly against them? What fair excuses might
Ester have pretended to Mardochaeus, if she had refused to yield to hi^
precepts? to wit, that she was now vnde^ the power of her husband, who being
so mighty a Monarch, he ought to know that her former estate was greatly
altered, which now might not suffer her to be subject to a private man; and
other matters of like sort. But she, whatsoever honor and felicity she
attained unto, she attributed it unto the good education she had under him, and
to the good lessons and instructions she had received from him. For what
dignity, what honor can be compared to the incomparable treasure of true
piety and religion, which by the care of our Parents, and their diligent
education we attain unto? How great then shall the vice of ingratitude and
unthankfulness be, unless children always have it fixed in their memory? what
a madness finally is it, to esteem less of such a precious tresure, then of
worldly riches and transitory honors? The godliness which Ester had learned
under Mardochaeus, was it not far more profitable unto her then her royal
crown? She did then justly obey him who^ she did honor as her father. What
then shall become of those miserable wretches, who attaining to the least
honors, do arrogantly despise every man? Truly they are worthy to be hated of
all men: and as they set light by their old friends, and despile good counsel,
so deserve they to be deprined of them, and to be suffered to sink under the
burden of their honor. And these things are thus far spoken of the modesty
and wisdom of Ester, who would to God she had many followers, that would be
desirous of her virtues both publicly and privately.

It remains that we hear a singular duty performed by Mardochaeus to the
King, whereby he made himselse a way to great honor and authority with
Assuerus, though not so soon as he deserved: which was, that he declared
unto the king by Ester, the treason of two courtiers, who conspired the death
of king Assuerus, and so he delivered the king from death: and when as the
whole truth being examined, was found out, and they were executed by just
punishment, the matter was written before the king in the book of Chronicles.
In this History, first these two, Bigtan and Teresh, offer themselves to our
consideration, who in their wrath conspire the kings death.

What occasion they had of this wicked counsel is not expressed, and there*
fore we ought not to be over curious in searching of it: but this is to be
observed, that Courtiers as they are drawn with desires and passions, do many
times very quickly take any occasion of sedition and treasons. For they
oftentimes conspire against their Prince, either upon the denial of their
petition, or for indignation and hatred, and envy, which they conceive at
other men's honor, whom they cannot abide should be preferred before them, or
moved with ambition, and desire of alteration, as Absalom did against 2. Sam.
15
David. And what Prince is there, who may justly boast that he has no such
traitors in his Court? Princes also themselves oftentimes by their own
insolency, pride and cruelty, diverse times by their sloth and negligence, do
yield occasion to their Courtiers to rebel. Nevertheless, they are wicked
and ungodly men, who conspire wilfully the death of their Prince, and
especially those whom he has so trusted, that they are admitted to the
keeping and guard of their persons: as these were by Assuerus, whom he
preferred to the custody of his gate. For unto such men the way is easy to
execute their conspiracy: as it is reported, that diverse of the Nobles his
most familiars, did conspire the death of Alexander the great. But kings are
enforced to commit themselves and their life to such men: And look how much the
greater the trust is that is reposed in them, so much the more ugly is their
treason and detestable in the sight of all men. But unto such wickedness are
we grown in this age, that even the Physicians, from whom Princes look for
the means of their preservation, and commit their bodies to their direction,
have been found to have co^spired the death of those who have been the causes
of their wealth and honor. Wherefore those Princes are blessed, who put their
trust wholly in God, and not in man's aid: those are happy whom God does shield
and protect. Besides, in the person of Assuerus we see how greatly the life of
kings and great men is many times endangered, though their guard do seem to
defend them against all danger. But often does it happen, that they are more
in danger then meaner men, especially if they turn their just government into
tyranny. Wherefore the ancients have used it for a proverb, that few Tyrants
descend to Pluto by dry death, that is, die without blood. So Alexander the
great, was made away by poison: so Julius Caesar was murdered in the Senate:
so very many Roman Emperors were slain by their soldiers: so Bennadab was
choked: Isboth slain by two wicked men on his bed: Ioas the king of Judah by
two of his servants: Amasias was slain at Lachis: finally of twenty kings
which reigned in Israel, ten of them died by violent death: that he seems
not to have spoken vnwittily, who said, that a Tyrant was like to him who sat
at a table furnished with all dainty dishes, accompanied with all kind of
music, and a great many of waytingmen ready at all commands; but seeing a
naked sword hanging over his head by a small thread, and every minute ready to
fall upon him. Therefore many wise men amongst the^, have wished that they
might resign those great honors which they had attained, if safely they
might, to lead a quiet and sure life without danger; as it is written of
Augustus Caesar: Yea, very many have quite given over their Empires, as
Diocletian and Maximian, those capitals enemies and persecutors of Christiaris.
Antigonus King of Macedonia, when he was to set the Diadem on his head, said
very fitly and truly: O crown, if men knew how great cares thou bring with
thee, none would so much as stoop to take thee up, though thou layest in his
way. So that state of life which we account so happy, is oftentimes condemned
as most unhappy, even by those who are esteemed most happy, as being most open
to so many entrappings, partly of open enemies, partly of faithless friends,
from which indeed none could be safe, were it not that the eyes of the Lord do
watch for the safety of kings, though even unworthy of his favor and good
will. Which here we see done for this Assuerus, unto whom God raised up
Mardochaeus, by whom he is in time admonished of the conspiratours: that no
good turn bestowed on God, should be bestowed in vain. That benefit which
Assuerus did for Ester and the whole people of God, was very late and fresh in
memory: and god by and by does requite it, delivering him from the hands of
those who had conspired his death: that David does not without cause say, That
it is God which gives deliverance unto kings, and rescueth Psa. 144. 10.
them from the hurtful sword: as he himself had often by experience found. It
is also to he noted, that Assuerus was warned of the treason that was practiced
against him by the relation of a mean man, that kings may learn to contemn
none, though they be but of base and low degree. If any demand how Mardochaeus
could detect that conspiracy, it may be answered, that he was one of the
porters of the kings gate, which is apparent out of this and other places,
especially the fifth and sixth chapter, and therefore he might hear and see
somewhat whereby he might perceive the matter: and peradventure he might be
solicited by the traitors, to see of what good will he was in the case, and to
draw him to their partiallitie. Whatsoever it was, it pleased God to use this
instrument, as well to preserve the Kings life, as also to make known
Mardochaeus fidelity so much the better. We are here then to observe, that
nothing is done by fortune, but all things are governed by Gods providence, who
by this prepared in time another helper against the imminent danger of his
Church. Here let all natural subjects and inhabitants in any Realm, learn
what is their duty toward Princes, to wit, that there is not only honor and
obedience due unto them, but also a care and watchfulness, and defense of
their life and dignity. Moreover, that it is a thing praise-worthie to bewray
the guilty, though so oftentimes those who detect them incur great danger,
and the hatred of many, especially if upon examination the matter prove not
so. Therefore Mardochaeus dealt indeed faithfully and wisely, but not without
danger, being a stranger and a captine: but his oath and office did so
require.

He opens the matter by Ester, either because he thought for his baseness
that he was not worthy to speak unto the king, or because he thought the
matter would have the more authority if it proceeded from a person in favor:
besides, by this means the love of the king toward Ester his wife, might be
increased and confirmed, when he should see her so careful of his preservation.

The king also handles the matter wisely. For he makes inquisition, and does
not rashly upon a bare report cause them to be condemned. By which thing
Princes are warned not to admit unadvisedly every accusation: for if accusation
only should suffice, who should be innocent, who should be safe from the
tongues of slaunderers?

When the matter was found out, the offenders were punished and hanged on a
tree, that is, either fastened to a cross, as in those times they accustomed,
or hanged on a galous, as is used at this day. Further in the matter of
treason, especially where it concerns the life of the Prince, the will being
proved, is holden for the fact: as also in other offenses, as if any prepare
poison for another death, which yet was not drunk, but given to be drunken,
seeing that he sought his life, though he killed him not, he should die for
it.

Worthily then are these two punished by death, though they did but only
conspire the kings death: which matter by the kings commandment is written in
the Chronicles of the Persians.

Hereby it apppeareth, that after a laudable custom Kings were wont to have
their Chronicles and yearly Acts recorded in all ages, in which all memorable
matters through the whole kingdom should be enrolled, and so preserved for
posterity. And this is very commendable for those manifold commodities which
we receive by Histories, as in the beginning of the book was declared. But
the king remembers not to requite Mardochaeus, in which he cannot escape the
note of an unthankful mind. For as justice has place in the punishing of the
wicked for their offenses, so is it also a part of justice, to reward the good
according to their deserts. But these things came not thus to pass without
Gods providence, (which yet excuses not Assuerus fault) that in a more fit
time Mardochaeus might receive that honor which was prepared for him by God,
as in the sixth Chapter we shall see. Therefore let us not be weary of well
doing, though the envy of men increase and arise at it, for the reward though
it be deferred, yet shall it not be lost. And if men be unmindful of benefits
received, God, who is rich toward all that call upon him, and worship him in
pureness and sincerity of mind, will restore abundantly, that which
notwithstanding he owes not: and farther giving us the power of wel-willing
and wel-working, will crown his works in us with immortal glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all power
and dominion for ever.

Amen.
THE EIGHT Sermon.
Haman is extolled and worshipped by all the Courtiers, except Mardochaeus: where
at Haman waxing angry, deliberateth to make away the whole nation of the
Jews. In the sixth first verses of the third Chapter.

CHAP. III. 1. After these things did king Assuerus promote Haman the son of
Ammedatha the Agagite,and exalted him: so that he (...) his seat above the sour
of all the Princes that were about him.

2. And all the kings servants that entered in at the kings gate, bowed their
knees and reverenced Haman: but Mordecai bowed not the knee, neither did
reverence.

3. Wherefore the kings servants that entered in at the kings gate, said unto
Mordecai, why transgressest thou the K. co^mandemetic.

4. Therefore when they had spoken unto him daily, and he would not hear them,
they told Haman, that they might see whether Mordecaies words would stand, for
he had told them that he was a Jew.

5. And when Haman saw that Mordecaies bowed not the knee unto him, nor did
reverence unto him, then was Haman full of wrath.

6. Now he thought it too little to lay his hands on Mordecai only: and because
they had showed him the people of Mordecai, Haman sought to destroy all the
Jews, that were throughout all the kingdom of Assuerus, even the people of
Mordecai.


The wise man says, Pro. 29. 2. When the righteous are increased, the people
rejoice: but when the wicked bear rule, then the people sigh: unto which also
that which is Psa. 12. 9. is to be referred. The wicked walk too and fro, when
evil men are exalted to high dignity. The use of which sentences, this
History does plainly set before our eyes.

For when as Ester was exalted unto the dignity royal, as before we sa^e,
there was great joy brought unto all nations: but now when Haman is promoted, a
fierce and cruel man, there is prepared for all the godly, weeping and tears:
and at the last by his wicked counsels, threescore and ten thousand men were
brought to death, as in the progress of this History we shall see.

In this Chapter is declared, how Hama^s indignation was so great against
Mardochaeus, because he reverenced him not, as others did, that he procured
acommaundement from the king to destroy in one certain day appointed, all the
nation of the Jews which was subject to his Empire.

At this present we are to consider, how he was lift up by the king into so
high an estate of honor, verse 1. How he was reverenced uere^ced of al me^
except Mardochaeus: vet. 1. 2. 3 4. and how through indignation and impotencie
of mind, he took counsel how to destroy the Jews, together with
Mardochaeus, at one massacre: verse 5. and 6. so cruel is Ambition, so fierce
and savage is desire of revenge in those who affect divine honors.

See therefore first the Authors words, When these things were done, the king
Assuerus did magnify Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and exalted him,
so that he set his seat above the seat of all his Prinoes that were about
him. This stranger the kings favor did thus exalt, four years after the
celebration of Esters marriage: for Ester was brought in unto the King about
the end of ye 7. year of the reign of Assuerus, Chap. 2, verse 6. and it
appears by those things which are spoken after, that Hamans dignity and
favor happened about the end of the eleventh year, because as soon as he
petceiued that Mardochaeus would not honor him, he conspired the death of him
and all his nation, about the beginning of the 12. year of Assuerus reign,
verse 7. The cause is not expressed why he was thus promoted by the king,
neither ought we greatly to labor in searching it: for oftentimes kings for
very light causes do exalt men altogether unworthy, but despise men that
deserve honor, and that are endued with excellent virtues: because they
persuade themselves, that their will ought to stand for reason, and that
whatsoever they list, is lawful for them. Oftentimes for a little service even
in an dishonest matter, for counsel given to establish tyranny, and augment
tribute, for inuenting some new delight and pleasure, for some extreme
flattery; and such like, kings persuade themselves that they have sufficient
cause to promote the worst men to the highest honors, and to admit them into
the number of their chiefest friends, and to follow their advise and counsel
in their most weighty affairs. For what cause then so ever Haman was
promoted, it appears he was a man unworthy of it, being full of malice and
cruelty: and so it often comes to pass, that wicked men by their crafts and
cunning, are preferred by the inconsiderate favor of Princes, to honor, and
yet not without Gods providence, who only lifts up whom please him, and
throws down whom he list. Now God does this as well to exercise the godly, as
to punish the unthankfulness of the world, to beat down the pride of kings
who abuse their power, and to throw down the ungodly, with so much the
greater shame and ruin, by how much the higher they were exalted. That honor
which the king commands to be given to him, offends in excess: because
it was more then beseems man, though usual to be yielded to the kings of
Persia. But this is altogether a wonderful matter, how kings being so careful
and jealous over their honor, do yet not withstanding communicate it even unto
bad men, in whom there shines not the least sparkle of virtue. For it is most
worthy and commendable and profitable for the state, to prefer to the
government of the Commonwealth, men notable for their virtues and wisdom. So
Pharao made Joseph ruler of Egypt, whose wisdom was sufficiently known and
approved* so Daniel by his wisdom obtained great honor both with
Nabuchadnezzar; and with Darius. Notwithstanding many times Princes are too
prodigal in these things, supposing that they, imitate the magnificence of
God, in promoting to honor whom please them.

Besides, this Haman is said to be an Agagite, that is, of the offspring of the
kings of the Amalekites, who all were of Agag, surnamed Agags, as the kings of
Eegypt were all called Pharaoes of Pharaos; and the Emperors of Rome, Caesar's
of Julius Caesar.

He was then an aliant, and not a natural subject of the kings: it is also
unknown, whether he were a captive or no, and whether he came into the Court
by the kings especial favor, or by desert, or moved by his own ambition.
But by what occasion so ever he came into the Court, he descended of a nation
which god had cur^ed for their cruelty: and had forbidden ^he children of
Israel that they should not at any time have peace with them: but altogether
root them out from under the heavens, and destroy them with a perpe^uall
slaughter.

^o that although the Amalekites did des^end of Esau the brother of Jacob, and
so ^ere joined in kindred to the Isralites, yet did they always strive in
deadly and hereditarie hatreds, and were most mortal enemies, the one unto the
other.

Which on the Israelites part was done by the express commandment from God,
for that in humanity which the Amulekits Exodus 17. 8. 1. Sam. 17 3.
did show in the wilderness against their brethren: being the first that came
out to war against them after their coming out of Egypt: Behold then the
most capital and deadly enemy of the Jews is exalted above the^, into the
most highest state of honor. And such is the condition of the Church, that
most often she sees her most malicio^us and deadly foe^ daily to be extolled,
and to receive ne^ increases of honor, increasing with all their desire of her
utter overthrow.

Now follows that honor which the Courtiers do yield unto him by the kings
commandment, whereunto only Mardochaeus does most constantly resist. All the
kings servants therefore which passed in and out at the kings gate bowed
themselves, and did honor Haman, only Mardochaus bowed not himself down,
neither did him reverence. This is the custome^ of those which follow the
Court, that they all fall down before him whom the king magnifieth, little
enquiring whether the cause be good or no. 1 confess, some did it against
their wills and for fear, others that they might procure themselves favor,
which thing especially they hunted after: and none will willingly enter into
harred with great men, none dare control or condemn their actions and
devises. But truly it always has seemed an intolerable servitude, to men of
courage and any worth, to fall down before a mortal man: although the people
of the East, and namely the Persians, did exceed all measure therein: whose
custom when Alexander the great would follow, after that by war he had
gotten the Monarchy, he purchased thereby the hatred of the Grecians, and
chiefly of the Macedonians his own subjects. For indeed it appears by the
Histories, that this honor which was given to the kings of Perfia, was not
merely civil, but mixed with that honor which is due unto God. For otherwise
we read, that holy kings were honored by their subjects upon their knees,
with their faces toward the ground: but so that no part of divine worship
ship was mingled therewith. Seeing that here therefore the question was of an
honor, more then civil and due unto a man, Mardochaeus refuses to fall down
on his face, and indeed so much the rather, because this Haman was descended
from a Nation which God had cursed, and which he willed his people should hate
and abhor.

Now his constancy is so much the more to be commended, that look how much
the more he is urged at, and carped by the Courtiers, to obey the Kings
command, so much the firmer is he in his purpose, and is daunted by no
threatenings, neither being accused to Haman, either concealeth his Nation, or
dissembleth his religion, which was the only cause wherefore he would not cast
down himself before him, whom he knew by Gods decree (which could not be
called back) to be accursed. The greater then that the importunity was of
the Courtiers, who flattered Haman and sought his favor; the more grievous the
threatenings were; the more certain the danger that hanged over Mardochaeus
head; the more praise worthy was his virtue and constancy. But some will say,
that that is not to be accounted constancy, but contumacie, or at the least
ashnesse and impudency, to cast himself into so evident a danger, to provoke
the Kings wrath against him, and to stir up the rage of so mighty a man
against himself, yea and his whole Nation. For, will he say, could he not keep
himself close, and not come into Hamans sight? (...) answer, that he had
first a regard of Gods sentence against all the Amalekites, that he would not
honor him whom God had cursed: and besides, by reason ^f his office and oath,
he must of necessity (...) at the Kings gate. He might moreover ^ee moved by
some instinct and secret ^otion of the holy Ghost, to give testi^ony to the
truth, and make a way ready (...) that wonderful deliverance which afterward
was wrought.

So God brought forth those three Dan. 3.
^hildren to be witnesses of his glory, against that idolatry which
Nabuchadnez^ar would have established: that being (...) into the fiery
furnace, and by strange ^^iracle delivered from thence, the most wonderful
power of GOD should be made the more brighter, and more fearful to them who
durst (...) about to tread it under foot. This example of rare constancy is
necessary for us at this day, that we may be armed ^ith invincible constancy
against their flattering speeches, or threatening words, wh^ would have us to
acknowledge that Antichrist of Rome, and be subject unto him* For he is that
man of sin, that son of perdition, 2. These. 2. 3. 4.
who sits in the Temple of God, an^ proudly exalts himself against all
that i^ called God, and causing himself to be worshipped as God. What a
blockishnesse the^^ is it, what an infidelity to fall before hi^ feet? to
hold him for such an head, as (...) would be accounted in the Church? (...)
consent to all his blasphemies and I dolatries? Go on brethren, let us call to
min^ this constancy of Mardochaeus: wh^^ though he were alone, and were vrge^
by the Courtiers to do as they did, thog^ the kings commandment were laid
unto him, though he were ouerwhelme^ with threatenings, and at last accused as
(...) rebel, yet he remains without feare^^ and yields not unto them: but
he defends himself with this reason, that (...) is a Jew, and that his
religion would no^ permit him, to bow down himself vn^^ him whom God would
have to be de^^oyed.

So in that general Apostasy wherein (...) force of the edicts and
proclamations (...) Princes, many yield divine honor vn^^ Antichrist, and the
truth of the son (...) God is abiured, we must call to re^embrance that we
profess Christi^^tie, and that God the only true God (...) be worshipped by
us. For what a ^ame I pray shall it be unto us, if we (...) not the like
courage and strength of (...), in preserving the Lords right vn^^him, and
giving God his due worship ^^^honour, with so many nations who do ^^spise that
Idol; as was in one Mardo^eus in resisting the kings Edicts, ouer^^mming the
importunity of the Cour^^rs, and not yielding, no not a jot, to (...) fury of
so cruel an enemy* And this ^^iefly to be observed in the example of
Mardochaeus.

Besides, we see that those which most ^uilely obey the Edict of the King, not
^ring whether the matter be just and ho^^st, or no, do never make an end of
al^ing, yea and by force compelling of others into the same wickedness wit^
them. So none do at this time more sol^cite Christians unto Apostafie, and to
(...) away from the true religion, then thos^ who have bin first themselves
Aposta^^ and forsaken the truth. But mark I besee^ you, with what weapons they
are furn^shed to set upon them. They set down (...) Kings proclamation to
terrify them they propose their own example, (...) bend against them the
threats of the d^structio^ of their families, and those (...) they see to be
most constant they accuse^ Where it is to be observed (Exper^ence the
mistress of all matters teachin^ the same) that there never wants (...) of
accusers, which by their policies (...) those, who desire to keep themselu^^
clean and unspotted from all Idola^^ and unhonesty. But this mischief (...)
neth and rages every where, that things well done, are imputed as faults, and
(...) reproof, turns to the hurt of the good.

And as it was a plausible accus^^tion against Mardochaeus, that he one^^
durst break the Kings commandemen^ (which could not, they thought, but
proceed from great stubbornness and contumacie) so at this day are we
accused, as rebels and disturbers of the public state. But a good
conscience ought to be our comfort before GOD, who acknowledges and approves
those to be his, who despise Psalm. 15. 4.
the wicked, and honor his servants. And thus far touching the fact of
Mardochaeus and these Courtiers.

Let us now go forward and weigh the wrath and fury of Haman against
Mardochaeus and his Nation, when he perceives that he bowed not unto him as
others did. Being told of it then, he marketh Mardochaeus more diligently,
and observes his doing, although he had about him many wayters, who pryed
carefully into all actions, but so would he cut off all matter of excuse,
after himself had made trial of it.

And therefore his courage and man^ly mind shyneth so much the brigh^ter, that
when he saw all their eyes bent upon him, though others bowed themselves unto
Haman, yet he continued vn^daunted in his purpose.

He had therefore driven out of his mind all fear of envy, slander, infamy,
yea finally of death it self, when as the very presence of Hama^ could not a
whit move him from his determination. Such ought the magnanimity of the true
faithful servants of God be, that they be not feared or driven off from their
due and holy purpose, with any power of mortal man, be it never so great, or
with the presence or threats of any man, be he never so fierce.

And this constancy and readiness of mind, does show that Mardochaeus was
throghly resolved in his conscience, that he did no more but his duty. And
without all doubt, when the question is of the yielding up of life, a faithful
man ought to be certainly persuaded, that he neither does nor takes in hand
any thing, but by the immooueable authority of the word of God, to whom he
dedicateth his life, and commits the issue of all events unto him.

Now by how much the more firm that Mardochaeus constancy is, by so much the
more is the rage of Hamans wrath kindled. For the proud can bear nothing with
less patience, then to be despised by good men, especially if they be but few
in number, and of small ability and favor. His anger seems unto him to be
just and right, seeing that he is supported by the favor of the King, the
obedience of the Courtiers, and the most willing consent of all others: and
that only this wretch, a strange Jew, and a captive too, does resist him. So
proud and arrogant men, not weighing the equity of the matter, and little
regarding reason, do gather together whatsoever they may, eue^ out of the least
suspicions, that they may be the more vehemently provoked and enflamed to
revenge. Behold then how cruel a revenge he purposes in his mind, against
his adversary, for he accounts it a small matter to kill him, v^lesse also
together with him, he destroy his whole Nation at one massacre. For he might
well consider with himself, that the whole Nation were also his enemies, and
that there could be no better occasion given, then to set upon the matter
whiles the King so highly favored him. He might also call to memory so many
damages and calamities, which his ancestors had suffered by the Israelites, as
by Saul and David, 1. Sam. 15
and before by the Tribe of Simeon: al 2. Sam. 8.
which things moving him, it is very likely that he easily assented to so
bloody a slaughter. Whereby we have it sufficiently made manifest, that cruel
and ambitious men have no moderation, but ouerflowe as a flood or river, and
with violence drown and destroy whatsoever displeases them: that they cannot
satisfy their bloody hunger, unless together with the bodies of me^they
destroy their souls too; not content to have rooted out the people, unless
they also abolish religion and the service of god. That* Haman of our time,
*The D. of Guise.
when he was climbed up unto his height, by the favor of diverse Kings, and
promised himself the Crown, one only family being the stop of his plots and
designements, he desired notwithstanding, with that to overthrow religion, and
to beat to the ground all the reformed Churches.

Here also is to be observed, the goodness and patience of God, who though he
had many years before given sentence of the rooting out of the Amalekites, yet
deferred the first execution of it about 4. hundred years after he had
determined it; and from that time there passed five hundred years and more, to
this wherein he suffered Haman to be exalted to so high a degree of honor. But
wicked men are appeased with no benefits from the Lord; nay rather they are
confirmed more and more in their malice. For GOD had hitherto suffered Haman
with long patience, but he deuiseth how utterly to overthrow the church. But
by this means, the justice of Gods revenge appears the clearer, by how much
more the ungodly are hardened in their malice, until they have filled the
measure of their iniquities: and in the mean while the patience of the faithful
is tried, until God give unto them their right. Go too then brethren, let us
not be offended with the prosperous success of the wicked; but let us fear
God, not declining from his obedience: and whatsoever the enemies practice, let
us honor him, commending into his hand our life, whereof he takes a peculiar
charge, and will in his good time, pluck it out of the jaws of the enemies:
and will get unto himself exceeding glory, as welby the vengeance he will execute
upon the enemies, as also by the miraculous deliverance of his. To him therefore
only be glory and dominion for evermore.

Ame^.
THE NINTH Sermon.
What course Haman did follow for the execution of his determination, in the
7, 8, 9, 10, and 11. verses.

7. In the first month (which is the month Nifan) in the twelfth year of
King Assuerus: they cast Pur (that is a lot) before Haman, from day to day, and
from month to month, unto the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar.

8. Then Haman said unto King Assuerus, there is a people scattered and
dispersed in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, whose laws are diverse from the
laws of all people: and they do not observe the Kings laws: therefore it is not
the Kings profit to suffer them.

9. If it please the King, let it be written that they may be destroyed* and I
will pay ten thousand talents of silver, into the hands of them that have the
charge of this business, to bring it into the Kings treasury.

10. Then the king took his ring from his band, and gave it to Haman the son
of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews adversary.

11. And the king said unto Haman, Let the silver be thine, and do with this
people as it seems good in thine eyes.


AFter that wicked men have once conceived mischief, they always are in
travel of it, until they have brought it forth: so that they cease not,
until they have cruelly put in execution that which wickedly they did devise:
especially when the desire of revenge does prick them on. Which passion is one
of the most vehement, wherewith men are driven.

This is clearly to be seen in this wicked Haman, who when upon that furious
indignation which he had conceived because Mardochaeus would not honor him, he
had determined with himself not only to kill him, but together with him, to
destroy the whole nation of the Jews: he burns with desire speedily to
execute that his bloody purpose, and seeks carefully always to perfect it:
and first he runs unto lots; then to the Kings authority; whereby he easily
obtains what he will: that his determination might stand, to kill and destroy
the whole Nation of the Jews, which was dispersed into diverse places of
Assuerus dominion. So there is nothing so cruel, nothing so barbarous, nothing
so bloody, which the capital enemies of the Church cannot obtain at the
hands of Princes, utterly to overthrow and root it out. But the eye of the
Lord, which watches for the safety of his, causes that those wicked ones, do
often bring forth a birth, quite contrary to their deliberation, and that they
fall into the pit which they dug for others: and into the nets which
themselves did bend, and that the evil which they went about, falls upon
their own head.

This History ought to teach us the estate of the Church in this world, and
the disposition of her enemies, as also what means they are accustomed to use,
practicing for this purpose, witchcraft and sorceries; and feyning accusations,
whereby they blind the eyes of kings, that they may the more easily abuse their
name and authority, their power and forces, all which things, by the
exposition of every part, we shall the better understand. First then Haman
commands to cast alot before him, which in the Persia^ tongue is called Pur.
The time is noted for the greater light and credit of the History, to wit, the
first month of the 12. year of the reign of Assuerus, about four years
after that Ester was proclaimed Queen: The endwhich he proposes to himselfin
casting the lot, was, that it might be known what month and what day, would be
fittest for the execution of his cursed purpose; and it is said, that the lot
being cast from day to day, and from month to month, did fall upon the 12.
month, which here is called Adar, answering in parr to our February. For ye
months are here reconed after the manner of the Jews, which began their year
in March: the day also is afterward noted, Verse. 13. to wit, the 13. day of the
month. So that the lots do certify Hama^, both of the month and day, which
should be fittest for the executing of yt which he had co^sulted: in which
thing he was deceived, as he deserved, for before that day, shame fell upon
himself, and that destruction which he had prepared for others, Now Haman (as
we see) flees unto Lots, to ask counsel of his gods, and to enquire whether
that were acceptable unto them which he went about, and what opportunity they
would yield him for the performance thereof. For there is nothing so unjust
which idolaters do not persuade themselves to be acceptable to their gods, when
as it once likes themselves.

What kind of lotte he used no man knows, because the holy Scriptures do
not declare. And it is evidently known, that these miserable heathen being
blinded by Satan, who is the spirit of error, did use diverse kinds of lots
and diuinations: for some did conjecture and divine by the earth, some by the
water, some by the air, some by the fire, some by the concourse and aspects of
Planets and other Stars, some by diuelles, which the Scriptures call Pythons or
spirits of divination: some by those answers which the Images and statues of
their false gods do give: and the most of them by the entrails of their
sacrifices. Finally, there is nothing created which these miserable blind men
have not abused to their diuinatio^s. I leave out lots, which every one by
himself might devise, So the father of lies, after he had turned men away from
the word of God, and those answers which he gave by his true servants and
Prophets, which are the only rule according to which our life and all our
actions are to be framed, he did eue^ make them mad with so many sorceries
and diuinations, which he brought in, in steed of Gods word, and bewitched them
by all means, with diverse sorts of lies in steed of Gods truth: that if at any
time he spoke any thing that were true, and that things came to pass as he
foretold them, it was done by Gods judgment, giving to the unclean spirit the
efficacy of error, and granting him liberty, that those who had left the love
of the truth might 2. These. 2. 11, 12.
believe lies. So Satan by reason of that great knowledge and experience he
has of things past, might a great ways before, by the causes gather the
effects, and by certain co^iectures foretell of things to come: which is not to
divine, but by the causes to judge of the effects, which all men are wont to
do, who have attained to any perfect knowledge of any science.

Now seeing this pestiferous vanity has place at this day amongst men, and
namely, amongst those who profess themselves Christians, we are to be warned,
how great a fault, yea wicked and abominable before God, lot-casting is, or
any other kind of witchcraft or divination. Which is apparent by those things
which are written, Leuit. 19. 31. and 20. 6. and Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11. 12. in all
which places, they are adjudged to death, whosoever give their minds to any of
those diuinations. And 1. Sam. 28. Saul is said to have added this as an heap
to all his evils, that he had recourse to those that had familiar spirits; and
1. Chron. 10. 13. these are the words of the holy Ghost. So Saul died for his
transgression against the Lord, even against the word of the Lord, which he
kept not, and in that he sought and asked counsel of a witch which had a
familiar spirit, and asked not of the Lord. And hereunto belongs that of
Ochozia or Ahazia, the K. of Israel, who when he fell into a disease, and had
sent to ask concerning the event thereof, of the Oracle of Beelzebub the God
of the Accaronites, was therefore so sharply reproved by Elia the Prophet, who
told him of his death, 2. King. 1. Finally, the scripture, to show forth the
corruptions and extreme iniquity of Manasses the king of Judah, says: that
he also gave his mind to diuinations, 2. King. 21. Let no man therefore think
the sin of Diuiners, Sorcerers, Enchanters, Necromancers, and those who use
familiar spirits, to be a light sin: for they all leave God to follow the
devil: and the light that shines in the holy scriptures, to delight in lies;
and for Christ their Master, they follow Beliall: and in stead of ye light of
his spirit, they run after ye deceits of the spirit of darkness. It is further
to be observed, that there be many sorts of witchcrafts and diuinations which
proceed from the wicked spirit, which yet unskillful men account to be but
sports and pastimes, or else things lawful to be used: as, to knit a point to
hinder the effect of holy matrimony; to move a sieve; to know who has taken or
stolen any thing; to throw the key of the chief door of the house into the
fire, that the witch may come, who is suspected to have bewitched any: to run
to soothsaiers or diuiners, either to recover things lost, or to get help for
any disease, or to know whether a disease be deadly, or to hear foretelling of
good fortune by them: finally out of dreams or the meetings of any thing to
search out the truth of diverse eue^ts to come. For Satan cunningly mingling
himself in all these things does guide them: that he may turn away the minds
of men from the word of God, from his fear, from trust in his fatherly
goodness, and finally from care and heedfulnesse, to learn of the spirit of
God the way whereby we may be governed in all distress, calling upon him, and
attentively reading and hearing his word. For that malicious spirit leaves
nothing vnatte^pted, and searches all crafts, whereby when he has turned us
from the only voice and doctrine of our good shepherd Christ Jesus, he may
lead us after himself, to seek counsel, aid and help at his hand. But
those that turn away from Christ Jesus to these vain and idolatrous things,
must look for nothing else but ruin and confusion. For what other thing can
he bring unto man, who was a liar and a murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.
but only death and deceit? Now here by ye way we may note, the means which
they followed, who were the chief promoters of that slaughter and horrible
butchery of the poor faithful ones in France, even they used the art and
counsel of Witches, Soothsayers, and wicked spirits, as there are in the
Church of Rome, yea and in the Courts of Princes many, very devils incarnate,
who are addicted altogether to those deceits, and to all kind of magical
incantations and diuinations. Also I beseech ye, unto what thing does the
greatest part of the service of the Church of Rome lean, more then (as they
persuade themselves) to the apparing of the spirits and ghosts of the dead?
And what other thing is that but a kind of Necromancie? Therefore what marvel
is it, that a religion founded upon lies, is maintained by the same arts, and
gives place to the crafts and deceites of Satan to oppress the Church of
God? And this was the first way which Haman used for the executing of his
determination.

Now let us see by what skill he persuaded the king, that he might abuse his
name and authority to effect his cruel purposes. Haman said to the king
Assuerus, there is a people dispearsed among thy people in all the Provinces of
thy kingdom, yet separated from others, whose laws are diverse from the laws
of all people: and the kings laws they do not observe, and therefore it is not
profitable for the king to suffer them. He disdaineth to name the Jews, but
that he might make them odious to the king, he sets them forth by these
four notes. 1. That they are dispearsed through all the kings Provinces.

2. That they dwell apart from others.

3. That they have laws different from all other people. 4. That they obey not
the kings laws: that is shortly, that they are a people singular, esteeming no
laws but their own: and therefore setting light by the kings laws, they are
always ready to rebel, and so much the more to be feared, that being mingled
every where among the kings subjects in all his Provinces, they are a bad
example for the rest to stir up any sedition. The last poynot of this
accusation is most false, and other things also are brought to set a color to
deceive the king, and to make them suspected of rebellion. He obiecteth their
calamity as a reproach, that they were dispearsed into sundry Provinces, as
though this had been done of purpose, and certain advise by them, and not
rather by the violence of those by who^ they were lead into captivity, and so
dispearsed, according to those threatenings which many ages before, god had
threatened unto them, if they rebelled against him and his laws by Moses, and
other Prophets. Deuteronomy. 32. That which he tells that they are severed from the
laws of al people, respects their religion, whereby God had distinguished
them from all other people, and did prescribe unto them holy and divine laws,
that they might serve him according unto his will. For as touching the laws
civil and statutes politicque, they could use none other but the kings,
unless they were permitted by the king, to live according to their own
manners and customs. So that he reprooueth and accuses them of that whereof
they did most glory before God, and which they esteemed as their greatest
praise, that they were segregated by God, as his proper treasure and store:
that they might be his holy nation, a people set at liberty, and part of his
inheritance: and that he had given them from heaven most holy laws, which
should be their wisdom, as Moses says. For the laws of other people
concerning religion, were mere folly and abomination before God, for their
idolatry and impiety. But so use the blind and ignorant to object unto the
people of God as a fault, their holiness, their beauty, and finally the
heavenly doctrine which they have from God. Last of all he accuses them as
disobedient to the kings laws, which was most false, unless peradventure
maliciously he impute the private fact of Mardochaeus to the whole nation, and
that in a thing so just, to wit, that he gave not the honor due unto the
immortal God alone, to a mortal creature. By this accusation it appears,
that the Jews though they were captives, had nothing to do with the idolatry
of the Gentiles, but observed their sacred ceremonies, as circumcision, the
Sabboths, choice of meats, and of other clean things which were commanded by
the law of God.

And it seems that this was granted unto them, or at the least suffered by
the kings, who therein were more favorable unto their poor subjects, then the
idolatrous kings of our age, who cannot by any means abide those that profess
true godliness. For who knows not but that the enemies of the Church, do
use the same speeches with Haman, and are carried away by the same spirit? For
if the faithful endeavor to depend upon the voice alone of the son of God,
which is the Gospel, are they not by and by accused of singularity, sedition,
contempt, obstinacy, sauciness, and self conceit? Are they not accused as
contemners of laws, and the constitutions of all antiquity, of the Councels,
Fathers, and especially of the Sea of Rome, which they have lifted up above the
seat of Christ: and finally as rebels against kings and their laws and
statutes? But I pray you, wherefore? Forsooth because they refuse to worship
that Antichrist of Rome, and serve his Idols, and to prefer his
constitutions before the commandments of Christ Jesus as they do. So we see
the malice and wickedness of Haman and his bloody mind, as yet to remain in
the mouths and hearts of the capital enemies of the Church.

But yet notwithstanding, let us give exceeding great thanks to our good and
gracious God, who at the last made it manifest, that the king had none more
stubborn and disobedient and rebellious, then those who accused the Church of
rebellion. For how comes it to pass, that at this day the Leaguers rise so
rebelliously against the king, but that they are bewitched with the false
doctrine of the Pope? Do they not sufficiently show, that they have only
hitherto abused ye kings name, that they might wrongfully accuse us? Is it not
abundantly experienced that they cared not for the king edicts, but so far
forth as they abused them to oppress us? Nay, what Edicts have not these good
Catholics despised, but those which have been wrested from the king to
destroy religion?

Now that which they blame us for, that we will not be present in their
Ecclesiastical assemblies and Churches, and observe the same ceremonies and
rites with them, is it not rather contrariwise a most high praise unto us, that
we will not come into any fellowship with those superstitious and idolatrous
rites wherewith their Churches are stuffed*

And let thus much be spoken of Hamans accusation against the people of God.

Let us hear now his bloody conclusion: It is not profitable for the king to
suffer the^* If it seem good unto the king, let it be decreed that they may
be destroyed, and I will weigh ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of
those who shall be appointed to this business, that they may bring it into the
kings treasury. If the accusation had been true* the former part of it seemed
clear enough. For it is not expedient for States to tolerate a part of their
subjects, which should contemn and cast aside good laws. But yet that
follows not which Hama^ infers, that they shall be destroyed with a
general massacre. There are other ways more moderate, whereby those who obey
not good laws as they should, may be corrected and amended, which are to be
followed, rather then at once to destroy them all. In that he says, It is not
profitable for the king, he has respect unto that common speech, that but one
kind of religion only is to be suffered in one kingdom, that the diversity of
religion is the cause of sedition and war, that the people which live after
their own fashion, will easily rebel and revolt unto the enemies of the
kingdom.

Thus said that stubborn Pharao, when in Exo. 1, 10
the counsel of his states, they concluded, that the Israelites were to be
oppressed with hard bondage.

And again, the purpose and determination Dan. 3
of Nabuchadnezzar, in erecting that great golden Image, to establish one only
religion in his whole Empire. But the experience of al times has made it
manifest, as even at this day it also does, that true religion is not the cause
of stirs and troubles, but the malice of them that cannot abide it. Indeed
false religions do easily bear one an other, but all hate the true: for truth
and lying cannot stand together. For who knows not how many sects of Monks
the Church of Rome does nourish, what diversities of opinions, which yet defend
one an other, and that only upon an hatred of the truth, and in that consent
whereby they acknowledge one Head, who easily tollerateth all errors and
disordered orders, so that they yield him faith and obedience, but cannot in
any wise abide the truth, whereby his pride may be detected? yet is this a
most pleasing voice, and acceptable unto all, that there ought to be one King,
one Faith, one Law. And indeed it is a most excellent saying so that it be
well understood: but when error is placed in steed of faith, and abuse for law,
and a tyrant for a King, that union and unity which is so much desired, is
turned into a miserable destruction and scattering of true doctrine.
Furthermore, that sentence is so far of from being true, that it is hurtful
and damageable to kings, to suffer in their Kingdoms Gods people professing
pure doctrine, that on the contrary, it is most profitable, and their
preservation depends upon it. For God does preserve the world for his elects
sake, although wicked men persuade themselves, that the faithful are the cause
of all calamities and evil. Insomuch as that which Haman thought was not
profitable for King Assuerus, was the commodity and glory, yea and the
preservation and defense of his Kingdom. For did not Mardochaeus disclose that
co^spiracie which was made against the king, and by his wisdom preserved him
from it?

And therefore so much the more is the conclusion of Haman to be condemned,
that the whole Nation of the Jews was to be destroyed: and so much the more
his froward malice to be abhorred, that perceiving his request to bevniust, he
promises ten thousand tallents of silver, whereby the loss might be
supplied, which it seemed the King should sustain by the slaughter of the
Jews. So that he sufficiently saw his purpose was void of all humanity, and
damageable to the kings revenues, and therefore he promises to recompense that
loss with the sum of 10000 tallents of silver. And by this reason it appears
how thirsty he was of the blood of these wretched men, when he endeavors to
buy it, he cares not with what sum: and goes about to deceive the King in
faigning himself to be most careful of his profit, in as much as he sticks
not to bestow so great a sum, from which there shall arise a double profit to
the King, both by making away that stubborn and rebellious people, and by
increasing the Kings treasure by such an heap of silver: in such sort do the
wicked account nothing so dear or precious, which they will not willingly
bestow on the destruction of the Church. Some there are that think that Haman
did not offer this sum of his own, but of the spoils of the Jews: and that
he was not so prodigal, that he would buy their blood at so dear a price,
whom he esteemed no better then dogs; as for the most part, Idolaters are
wont to set light by the blood of the faithful: but by the comparing of this
place, with those things which are after spoken in the 13. verse, of taking the
spoil of the Jews, and with those things which are set down in the 7. verse
of the next Chapter, that Haman had promised to pay that sum of silver into
the Kings treasure, for the Jews, to destroy them, it appears sufficiently,
that he offered this sum of his own. For otherwise to what purpose should a
subject offer such a sum unto his King, of the spoil of subjects: Therefore
although the enemies of the Church be exceeding covetous, yet the desire of
revenge, and that deadly hatred wherewith they are driven, do compel them to
any prodigality, so that they may shead the blood of the faithful at their
pleasures. This is apparent in the Roman Clergy, whose insatiable
covetousness is known unto every man; yet they spare not any cost, to
solicit Kings, and set them on to the slaughter of the godly: buying their
blood with the greatest and most precious part of their Ecclesiastiall
revenues. And the people also being bewitched with the importune cries of false
teachers and Jesuits, do willingly spend part of their goods, so that religion
may utterly be abolished and destroyed: with such and so great hatred, which by
no means can be appeased, does the world fight against Gods people and his
truth: so Satan speweth out his rage and venom against the Church, by his
ministers: and so is the blood of the faithful sold for ready money. But God
forbid that we should grudge at this, when we know that Christ Jesus our Lord
was so betrayed, and sold for a certain sum of money. And this is Hamans
opinion for the destruction of the nation of the Jews. Let us then go forward
to the kings answer, in which his exceeding great inabilitie and unskillfulness
is seen: for without any co^tradiction, taking his Ring from his finger, he
gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, that would oppress the
Jews: and besides, he said to Hama^, that he gives him all that silver, and
besides that people also, to do with them as seems good in his eyes. The ring
is given him in sign of the authority and power which he received of the King,
to use as should seem good unto him. And this further appears, in that he
gives him the money offered, and permits him to use his pleasure with the
people. So we Genesis 41. 42.
see, that Pharao but in a lawful cause, when he would give absolute authority
unto Joseph in his Kingdom, to dispose all things as he pleased, gave unto him
his Ring. But what shall we most wonder at in this blockish king? whether that
he gave over his power to an other, and him a stranger, or that so rashly he
admits his accusation? or that so cruelly he condemnethso many innocents,
and gave their goods for a pray? or that without any man's advise not hearing
the accused, neither making any inquisition of the cause, he delivers over
so headdily so many thousand men, to so bloody a slaughter?

Kings ought to be a living law, a sanctuary for the afflicted, a help to
the oppressed, the Image of God on earth, and a defense and comfort of the
wretched and those in calamity.

What then will come to pass, when Kings give ear only to false accusers,
have unmerciful eyes, inhumane hearts, minds without reason, judgment
without equity or right? Are they not then rather the enemies of mankind, the
destruction of law, the subersion of justice, the supporters of the wicked,
the instruments of injustice, and the utter desolation of all good? Such an one
here Assuerut shows himself to be, not only void of all justice, reason and
equity: but also of all common sense and humanity. But so for the most part
it comes to pass in the affairs of the Church, so there be any that will
accuse, the ears of Princes are open to any accusation: if the question be of
the utter destruction of it, it shall be decreed: but in other things, in the
least trifles, even in the death of dogs, there will be some sticking at the
matter: but the people of God with the Princes of this world, are no more
esteemed then the ofscouring and refuse of the whole world. But why should we
marvel at this, when Barrabas was preferred before our Lord and Savior?

Against thieves there is observed a due course of law, neither are the guilty
condemned, their cause not being heard. Many times the seditious and
rebellious multitude are spared by reason of their great number: and because
that even very nature abhotred the slaughter of so many, yea though they have
deserved it: yea, and the most raging enemies after the heat of the battle,
are wont to spare those whom they have overcome, though they were injured by
them: but this vnmanlike king in the midst of peace, not being injured, no man
co^plaining but one private slaunderer, does deliver over a whole nation, to
the number of some two or three hundred thousand persons, to a bloody death and
butchery. How truly was it said, that the tongue of the slaunderer is worse
then Serpents, then the poison of Aspes, sharper then any twoedged sword, and
more deadly then the biting of any the most savage beast? And that kings void
of counsel and wisdom, are the plague and ruin of manking? It is also a
matter of great moment to the whole state, what manner of friends and
Counselors Princes have: for if they be wicked, there can none other thing
be looked for from them, but evil counsel, to the damage of the subjects.

Wherefore those people are indeed wise, who by their laws prescribe unto
their Princes, a certain number of wise men for their counsel: but ambition
and tyranny cannot long bear any good and stayed counsel.

Last of all, heere-hence we perceive, out of what fountain the most bloody
persecutions of the Church do spring, to wit, partly from the malice of
certain wicked counselors, who breathe out nothing but blood and fire, and
partly from the inabilitie or rather blockishnesse of Kings, who making no
inquiry of the the truth, deliver over Gods people to their bloody
butcherie. Such is the state and condition of the Church under unfaithful
kings, and namely those who give ear unto evil Counselors. So have our
miserable Churches in France, been oftentimes set open to the lust of most
bloody cutthroates, by reason of the rage of wicked Counselors, and the
ouer-light credulity of kings.

Hence therefore let us learn, not to trust in any earthly Prince, but in God
alone, who so often has delivered us from the fury of so many most cruel
enemies: who also alone both can and will save all those who fly unto him in
the name of his son our Lord Christ Jesus, to whom alone, be all glory and
dominion for evermore.

Amen.
THE TENTH Sermon.
How the day is appointed for the utter destruction of the Jews, and how the
proclamation was published throughout all the Provinces of the Empire of
Assuerus, from the 12. verse, unto the end of the Chapter.

12. Then were the kings Scribes called on the thirteenth day of the first
month, and there was written (according unto all that Haman commanded) unto the
kings officers, and unto the Captains that were over every Province, and to
the Rulers of every people, to every Province according to the writing thereof,
and to every people according to their language: in the name of the king
Assuerus was it written, and sealed with the kings ring.

13. And the letters was sent by Posts into all the kings Provinces, to root
out, to kill and to destroy all the Jews, both young and old, children and
women, in one day, upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, (which is the
month Adar) and to spoil them as a pray.

14. The contents of this writing was, that there should be given a
commandment in all Provinces, and published to all people: that they should
be ready against the same day.

15. And the Posts went forth with speed, with the kings commandment, and
the commandment was given in the Palace at Susa: and the king and Haman sat
drinking, but the City of Susa was in perptexitie.


THe distressed Church of God can never sufficiently consider how great the
malice of their enemies is, nor how great are the dangers which do compass
her about, whereof it comes, that neither is she wary enough for her self,
neither sufficiently careful to call for necessary aid and help at Gods
hand, for as the Apostle says: We are accounted Romans 8. 36 Ier. 18. 23 and
26. 11
as sheep appointed for the slaughter: or as Jeremy professes concerning
himself, We are as an Ox in the stall, of whose slaughter men advise.

Of which thing we have here a most memorable example: for whiles the poor
people of the Jews dispearsed through all Provinces of the Kingdom of
Assuerus, think to be in safety, and live secure under the custody of the
Laws and protection of publicque authority, behold their enemy Haman,
without delay speedily urges, that the Kings Edict of destroying the Jews,
be written according to his mind, and that all things may be performed without
stop for the utter destruction of them, in so much that their name may be
abolished from among men, and no mention ever after made of them. Therefore it
is here declared, how the kings Scribes wrote the Edict according to Hamans
pleasure and direction, in authentical form, verse 12. Then what were the
contents thereof, verse 13. and 14. and at last, how it was made known unto
all Provinces by Posts, and published at Susa, whiles the king and Haman sat
drinking, in the last verse. In which thing, as in a glass, we behold how
great diligence and celeritie every one uses in executing those bloody
Edicts, whereby utter destruction is prepared for the Church: The king he gives
over all his authority to Haman; the Scribes they write with speed the bloody
proclamation; the Posts they quickly carry it into all parts; all men are
ready against the day of slaughter; and Haman having al things perfected to
his wish, sits drinking with the king. This History is worthy to be
diligently weighed: for it contains a lively pattern of those things which
have happened in our age. First then the Kings Scribes are called, as soon as
the King has given his assent: least perhaps the matter being better
thought on, there might be left a place for repentance, and occasion to call
back again, that which ouer-rashly he had granted: and so either himself
thinking better upon it, or else warned by some other, should take some new
advise concerning so barbarous and bloody a grant. So the wicked are wont to
urge Kings, and to be instant upon them in a wicked purpose, that there may
be left them neither time nor place to deliberate of it.

And thus are the Scribes called, not to deliberate of the whole matter, but
only to write those things which Haman should command: to be sent to the Kings
Nobles, and to the Captains that were in every Province, and to the rulers of
every people, and to every people according to their tongue: that is in brief,
to all which in every Province had any authority. For the Nobles were his
Liefetenants general, the Captains were the gouenors under them, the rulers
were those which in every City, and in all meetings of the people were in
greatest estimation and credit. Hamans end and purpose was, that all sorts of
men should do their careful endeavor in accomplishing that bloody Edict,
which was so guarded with the Kings name, and sealed with the Kings Ring, which
was in steed of those great seals which our Kings at this day use. So for the
most part we see it to come to pass, that those who are placed in the
government of the Commonwealth, for the defense of good men, the protection of
laws, and preservation of public peace, do often times (kings being carried
away with evil counselors) bestow their labor in murdering and massacring
the most quiet and peaceable subjects, making no inquiry before whether it be
done by right or wrong, to whom it is enough to say: Thus it was the Kings
pleasure: neither are they mindful that they are called to that place not to
serve the Princes lust, who as other men, is mortal; but to serve the laws,
and render to every one that which is theirs. Wherefore that saying Traiane.
of an Emperor of Rome is greatly to be praised, who delivering unto the
General of his horsemen the sword into his hand, spoke unto him these words:
Use this for me, if I command that which is right: and against me, if I
command that which is unjust. But the tyrannous will, or rather lust of many
Princes, challe^geth the force of law, and to be the rule of equity, although
even in jest they deliberate of most unjust matters.

The Scribes again on the other part, yield themselves most obedient to Haman,
and object nothing against so bloody and violent an Edict: they would not
forsooth displease the King. Nothing also in so cruel a proclamation seems
unjust or unlawful to the Nobles and Captains, but they are ready to fulfill
it. So in our age, if Edicts were to be penned against religion, the Scribes
could never satisfy themselves in devising significant words, to make them
more heinous and cruel: the Governors without any exception, were ready with
all their might severely to observe them: and the people received them with
alioy and gladness. And as here al things were written in the kings name, and
sealed with the Kings seal: so in our age, the colleagued enemies of the
church and true religion, with great cries and open mouth, pretended still the
kings name and majesty, and have used his forces and the common treasure to
the oppressing thereof: running as it were to quench a fire that would bring
destruction to the whole Realm. Lo then how this Edict was written in
authentical form, according to Hamans will and lust.

Let us come now to those things that were contained therein, for of the manner
how it came and was dispearsed into the Provinces, we will speak after in the
15. verse. The Proclamation contains two principal points.

The former is, the killing of all Jews, without sparing or making difference,
and that all together upon one appointed day; and the spoiling of their goods
as a pray.

The other, that this decree be made known unto all Provinces, that all men
might be ready against the day prefixed to commit so bloody aslaughter. As
concerning the former: Haman is not contented with the common word of killing
the Jews, but that he might the better lay open his c^uell and bloodthirsty
mind, he says that they should be rooted out, slain, and destroyed: and that
there should not any place be left for manhood or piety, wherewith moved men
at least migh spare infants, he makes mention of every one severally as well
young as old; little children as women.

This butcherie is appointed upon one and the same day, that with greater
pleasure he might wallowe in abundance of blood, flowing from al places at one
time: and that the cut-throates in every place might the more be stirred up
unto that horrible slaughter: nay farther, that they may not spare any, the
goods of those that are slain, are set open for a pray to be spoiled, that
every one having this reward promised, might run unto that slaughter, with a
barbarous and unbridled fury.

If any man demand with what show of reason so detestable a fact could be
shadowed, the answer is easy, upon Hamans accusation they were condemned, as
contemners of the Kings laws, and religion.

Finally, the hatred of God and of true religion, was a sufficient incitement
unto them to commit so bestiall a massacre. Paraduenture it may seem strange
and incredible that so bloody a decree could be made, when the most enraged
enemies and most bloody, are wont in wars to spare women and children,
unless even in our own age we had seen far more cruel things then these:
not only to have been deliberated of, and decreed by those who brag that they
are Christians, but also to have been executed with so great and so barbarous
rage by them, that even a man's heart will quake only to remember it. For if
any man call to remembrance that arrest of Parliament made at Aix against the
inhabitants of Cabriers, and Merindoll, about some 44. years ago; and also
that most horrible butcherie begun at Paris the 24. of August, 1572. and
afterward spread into the other Cities of France, he must needs be driven to
confess, that these were so cruel that they passed all others, and this last
so barbarous that it turns away men's eyes from all others, unto that alone:
the cruelty was so fierce and unheard of before, that none can sufficiently
wonder at it, and be moved with horror, who have but only heard the report
thereof.

For what kind of cruelty was there not executed with more then devilish
rage against men of all ages, quality, and sex? what villainies omitted
against those that were slain? with what slanders were they not even
overwhelmed, that they might be accounted even detestable after their death?

But by whom (I beseech you consider) were those horrible and savage slaughters
committed? not by strangers, not by savage people and Canibals, but by their
fellow-Citizens, their neighbors, their alliance, by them who but the day
before did testify their friendship by their oaths. But at what time was this
lamentable slaughter executed? In the midst of a public peace, with most
solemn rites proclaimed and sworn unto, under the glorious pretense of
marriage and feasts royal, when all joy did seem to be hoped for. By what
means? Even by the most treacherous and traitorous practices, that ever the most
faithless did use. Under what pretense? of Christianity, zeal, religion.
Oinfernal and hellish zeal! o devilish religion which teaches to murder so
cruelly, so treacherously, those who only call on the name of Christ Jesus*

And yet notwithstanding, so barbarous, so impudent is the superstition of the
servants of Antichrist, that all the Preachers of the Church of Rome have
extolled with most high commendation even unto heaven so barbarous a butcherie,
as an holy and meritorious work: and after did never make an end of exho^ting
the people to new slaughters by their seditious outcries, neither ceased they
until they had again kindled a new fire of civil war.

And the greatest part of the people, being seasoned or tainted rather with so
pestilent doctrine, delighted in that savage butcherie: and were sorry they
could not commit greater cruelties, or that any of the faithful should escape
their bloody fingers.

For this purpose not many years past was that League made among the
conspiratours, who assembled themselves, and bound themselves by oath, to
oppress, spoil and destroy the rest of the Church, not only in France or
England, but in all places of the world, where the name of Christ Jesus is
purely called on, and his Gospel sincerelytaught.

And to this end indeed are all the desires, counselles, deceits, treacheries
and endeavors of the Roman Antichrist directed, that by this means he may
restore his decayed tyranny. And who even yet at this day, do move ye body of
the League without a head, so furiously, but those fire bra^ds which are sent
from the Pope, stirring up in the minds of all those who give ear unto them,
a deadly hatred against the Gospel, under the name of heresy, which they
falsely lay upon it: and a desire of destroying and rooting out, yea even
rasing the memory from amongst men of all those who do profess it?

Therefore Haman is not yet dead, but his cruel mind reuiueth in an infinite
number of men, who being bewitched with the blasphemous voices of Antichrist,
craftily colored, persuade themselves, that there is none other zeal, no
other godliness, but in sheading the blood of all those who consent not to their
imp^eties: yea also of those, though they be Papists, who allow not of the
cruelty and fury of the Leagurs; so that they have not spared even their King
and his officers.

And if the Lord himself had not cut in sunder all the cords of the ungodly,
and shut the mouths of the cruel Lions, so cunningly and so deceitfully had
they couched all their frauds and guiles, that there was not any hope left to
escape their traps. But, blessed be the Lord, who has not suffered that these
wicked and cruel beasts should devour as they hoped his people, whom they had
caught in their claws, and even rent them with their most fierce teeth.

They had eue^ already divided the spoils of the poor faithful ones, and
laid hold on their goods, but the Lord who has stricken their Head, is even
now ready to demand an account of so many slaughters committed by them, and to
revenge it. And thus far touching the first part of the Edict.

The other point is, that the contents of this writing, should be made known
to all People and Provinces, that they might all be prepared against that day,
that is, that the cut-throates in all coasts should be ready to set upon the
Jews and to kill them.

So that this execution should be done without any form of judgment.

For, I pray, what order or show of law was observed against these poor
innocents? All things then were to be done with open force and armed hand, as
most times there want not ministers of such cruelties, especially if the goods
of those that are executed, may remain as a pray for such cut-throates.

But what a confusion is that, and what disturbing of order, so to allure, and
accustom the people to slaughter? Is not this the means to open the way to
new seditions, to lay forth the laws to be trodden under foot by all men, to
teach men, to set light by the blood and life of men, and to flesh the wicked
and leaud persons in robbery and violence? But without care is the confusion of
al things brought in, without care are the laws both divine and ^^mane broken,
without care is the law of nations and nature trode^ under foot, so that ^^ey
may take revenge of their enemies, and true religion may be destroyed, with
(...) that favor it. Now if any should take ex^^tions, that this Edict being so
speedily (...) out, did give warning to the Jews, speedily to provide for
their safety by flight. I answer, there was also as speedily provided that
there should be no place for them to escape. For whither I pray, could those
miserable Captives flee with their families, being environed on every side
with so many enemies? For from the time that decrees are pulished against the
poor faithful, there is none dates show himself a friend unto them: all men
are enemies in adversity.

The Kings voice is as thunder, wherewith even the most stout are feared. Who
then will wonder that there was no means for the poor Jews being thus
condemned to escape: when as it is rather to be marvelled at, how their enemies
held themselves back, but that they had assailed them before the day prefixed,
tha^ they might the sooner enjoy the spoil as we see that holy-hunger of gold
drives men to commit any mischief? B^^ God did watch for the safegarde of the
poor Captives, from whom being iniu^^ously condemned, he did turn the eu^^
upon their enemies.

Here we are to hold for certain, the God does often suffer his Church to b^
plunged into so great dangers, as it seems in the judgment of man,
impossible to get out of them, that thereby the deliverance thereof, may be
the more known and famous in the whole world.

So Pharoes host hemmed in the Israelites Exodus 14.
on every side at the red Sea, to whom God gave a deliverance through the
midst of the Sea. So Rabsake be^eeged 2. King. 19. 35.
Jerusalem very straightly, without hope of help from any mortal man, that
his power who punished from heaven by the hand of an Angel, by whom in ^ne
night the host of this blasphemer was slain before Libna, might be so much
^he more renoumed among Gods people, and more feared among all other. So (...)
our days we have seen not a few of ^hese deliverances, though not by the
like ^iracle or so apparently. Hence we learn (...) hope for an issue out of so
many euilles ^herewith we are oppressed by those who ^aue conspired against us,
who now rage ^ore furiously then at any time before. And thus far of the
contents of the E^ict.

Furthermore, this Edict thus composed according to Hamans pleasure, is carried
by the swiftest posts into all Provinces, by the Kings commandment, and the
decree is first published in Susa, the chief City. The king urges this
matter, as though it concerned his Crown, or the defense of the State of the
whole Empire, as though the enemies were at the gates. So it comes to pass,
that the mischiese begun by the wicked against the Church, increases as it
goes: and the wicked will of ungodly men, always runs into the woorst, so
that they never give rest neither to themselves nor others, until they have
brought their ungracious purpose to an end.

This unwise King, is not ashamed to publish every where his injustice, and
more then barbarous cruelty, and to solicit his subjects to accomplish it: he
little regards the judgment of posterity against him, neither cares what
may followeamong his subjects, of so inhumane a fact: so much can the words of
those prevail, who daily persuade Kings to new slaughters.

Finally, the King and Haman are said to sit drinking when the inhabitants of
Susa were in perplexity; that is, they gave themselves to banqueting and
quaffing, after the proclayming of this bloody decree, when in the mean
while, those in whom there was any spark of humanity, were troubled at it,
and the poor Jews mourned with tears and lamentation. These things are added
to depaint unto us in few words, the nature and disposition of the enemies of
the Church, who are never more merry, neither at any time give themselves more
unto banquets and drinking, then when they see her destruction to be confirmed.
And this is a horrible sencelesnesse, wherewith Satan has blinded them in the
midst of their malice, that they should not feel it or be displeased with
themselves for it, which were a beginning of health and conversion. Especially
consider the perverse and wicked craft of Haman, who imployeth the King with
delights and banquets, least perhaps at leisure he might considerin his mind
that evil, whereunto he had been solicited by Haman, and repent of the doing
thereof.

This wicked man also drownes himself in delights, because he knew the decree
was irreuocable, and thinks that there was an end of the Jews, and there
remained no hope of help for them.

In like sort that Haman of ours did only talk of feasting, did only thirst
after men's blood, wherein he hoped that he and his should wade even unto the
girdles, after he had obtained that Edict of the States, confirmed by an oath,
and set down as a fundamental law of the Kingdom, for the killing of all
that professed the Christian religion.

So we see that to have been true in all ages, which our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ said to his Apostles, The world Io. 16. 20. 2.
shall laugh, but you shall weep: yea those who kill you, will think they do
God service. So our Lord Jesus Christ hanging on the Mat. 27. 39. Marc. 6. 27.
Cross, all his enemies rejoiced, and with mockes and scoffs derided him.
Whiles Herod with his Courtiers banquet them. selves, John Baptist is beheaded
in the prison. The Papists were never merrier then when they knew that the
decree was confirmed to root out, and to destroy all those that professed the
reformed religion.

But let us learn that it is an heinous sin and cruelty to rejoice at the
euilles of the Church: for which cause, God by his Prophet Ezekiel, does
denounce destruction Ezekiel. 20. unto Chap. 34.
and overthrow, not only to the nations who spoiled Judea and Jerusalem, but
unto all those who were glad at their desolation. For which cause also Obadiah
Obad. v. 12.
the Prophet, threatened horrible judgments to the Edomites. Nay let us know
moreover, that we offend greatly by inhumanitie, if when the people of God
suffer, we be not moved, but follow delights, and banquet as though al things
were well: For we are warned to weep with them that Romans 12. 15. Amos. 6. 6.
Heb. 13. 3.
weep; that we must sorrow for the affliction of Joseph: that we must suffer
with those that are in bonds, even as if we our selves were bound. Wherefore a
curse is denounced unto those among the Jews, who gave themselves to drinking
and wantonness, whiles the ten Tribes, which are meant by the name of
Joseph, in the place which before I alleged of the Prophet Amos, were led
away Captives and destroyed. Therefore the Levites, being captives in Babylon
Psalm. 137. 6. 2. Sa. 11. 11*
do testify, that they will not rejoice and be merry until they hear of the
restitution of Jerusalem. Also Vrias would not go down to his house to sleep,
because the Ark of God and the host remained in tents, and were in danger of
war. Wherefore the blockishnesse and senslesnesse of many is wonderful in these
days, who are not moved with common calamities, wherewith the Churches of
France and Flanders are oppressed: and it is greatly to be feared, least those
who thus delight themselves whiles others weep, being deaf to the complaints
of their brethren, shall have their own turn come at last: and have their cross
so much the more grievous, by how much the more they have bin hardened at others
calamities. Go too then, let us bear pitiful minds, and let us help one an
other with mutual benefits, and duties of charity, whereby in the day of
visitation, our stroke may be the lighter: or else we may be altogether
delivered from the evil days, and revenge of Gods wrath that continually
doing good, we may rejoice in his salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be glory for ever.

Amen.
THE ELEVENTH Sermon.
Mardochaeus first flees unto God, after to the intercession of Ester, to king
Assuerus: in the eight first verses of the fourth Chapter.

CHAP. IIII. 1. Now when Mordecai knew all that was done, Mordecai rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth and ashes: and went out into the midst of the
City, and cried with a great cry, and a bitter.

2. And he came even before the Kings gate, bnt he might not enter into the
Kings gate, being clothed with sackcloth.

3. And in every Province and place, whither the Kings charge and his
commission came, there was great sorrow among the Jews, and fasting and
weeping, and mourning, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

4. Then Esters maids and her Eunuchs came and told it her: therefore the
Queen was very heavy, and she sent raiment to cloth Mordecai, and to take
away his Sackcloth from him, but he received it not.

5. Then called Ester Hatach one of the kings Eunuchs, whom he had appointed
to serve her, and gave him a commandment unto Mordecai, to know what it was,
and why it was.

6. So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the City, who was
before the kings gate.

7. And Mordecai told him of all that had come unto him, and of the sum of
the silver that Haman had promised to pay unto the Kings treasures, because of
the Jews for to destroy them.

8. Also he gave him the copy of the writing and commission that was given at
Susa, to destroy them; that he might show it unto Ester, and declare it unto
her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the King, and make her
petition and supplication before him for her people.


WE have heard how great a peril and destruction was prepared for the Jews,
that were dispearsed through all the Provinces of the Persian Empire, as well
by the malice of Haman, as by the negligence and injustice of the King, yet not
without Gods determination and just decree, who so would exercise his, that his
power might shine in their weakness; his glory in their deliverance; and his
justice in revenge against his and their enemies: which things we shall be
taught in the four Chapters which follow in this holy History.

In this Chapter is showed to what remedies Mardochaeus had recourse, that he
might be delivered from these distresses: to wit, to God first, in fasting and
prayer: and then to the King by the intercession of Ester, unto which she
gives not her assent without some stay.

This doctrine is very necessary for us, that we may know both in our public
and private calamities whatsoever that grow unto us, by what means they may
be overcome: to wit, that after the example of Mardochaeus, and the rest of the
whole people of the Jews, we humbly flee unto the grace and mercy of God:
then, if any way be opened unto us, whereby our innocence may be made known,
and the hearts of the oppressors turned, by the means of those who are in
authority and favor, that we wisely follow it, placing nevertheless our
whole hope in the Lord. Now then let us see how Mardochaeus behaved himself in
both these means, not only having care and regard of himself, but also of
his whole Nation, that it might be delivered from that bloody butcherie.

First therefore it is set down, that Mardochaeus when he knew what was done,
rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth and ashes, and went
through the City, crying out with a great cry and a bitter. Whereunto let us
join, that which was done by the rest of the Jews, who heard the decree, That
there was great sorrow among them* fasting and weeping, and mourning, and many
lay in sackcloth and ashes, as in the third verse is said. Wherehence it
appears, that the Edict was not so secret among a few, but that at the least
it was so spread abroad, that the Jews were certified thereof, yea and had a
copy of it.

It seems very likely, that it was not yet openly proclaimed, seeing that
neither Ester, nor those who attended her, knew any thing thereof, as is easily
gathered out of the fourth and fifth verses. Besides it is gathered by that,
that seeing the decrees of the Persians were irreuocable, there could not but
great confusion arise throghout the whole Empire, by the decree granted to the
Jews to defend themselves: when others also had commandment to invade and
destroy them.

Whatsoever was done, Mardochaeus had intelligence of the whole matter, and
also the Jews in the Provinces, God by his secret providence stirring up his,
that perceiving so great a danger decreed against them, they might flee to his
grace and ay de as they did.

For by reason hereof, Mardochaeus ^ent his clothes, took sackcloth and
ashes, with a great cry and a bitter, cries through the City.

Neither is it to be doubted, but he had humbled himself before God, and had
directed his cries, that is, fervent prayers unto him. For otherwise what had
that cry of his been, but disordered outcryes and howlings, such as Infidels
and brute beasts themselves send forth naturally, when they are pressed with
any grief or sorrow. And I pray what fruit could there be of such a cry?

Likewise when as the Jews dispearsed through the Provinces, are said to have
cried out in fasting, weeping, and great mourning, it was before God, before
whom they showed forth such tokens of humility, craving his aid and help
with earnest prayers, and these like signs of repentance. For without prayer,
without faith and repentance, what could sackcloth, ashes, weeping, fasting,
have prevailed, but only to increase their contempt and misery?

Here therefore, first they are worthy commendation, that they take not
counsel of flesh and blood, neither run into despair, or seek unlawful
counselles, as to make an uproar, stir up sedition, fire the Cities, that at
least they might not die without revenge.

Let us not therefore suffer our selves to be driven, either by the cruelty or
fury of our enemies, or by the greatness of dangers threatened, to do any thing
against the laws, or against right and our duties, but let us patiently expect
from God the means of our lawful defense, as here the Jews, appointed to
the slaughter, yet looking for hope and help from God alone, are a pattern and
example unto us.

Moreover we are here in brief to observe what use and profit comes of that
tearing of the clothes, of wearing sackcloth and ashes, of weeping, and cries,
and lying on the ground: to wit, that all these ought to be the true effects
and testimonies of true and earnest repentance, and of true humiliation and
casting our selves down, as well before God, as before Angels and men.
Wherefore Joel, Joel. 2. 13.
chap. 2. warned that we should rather rent our hearts then our garments. And
Isaias Isai. 58. 4, 5, etc.
chap. 58. cried, that fasting without repentance is mere hypocrisy: and
likewise fasting with opinion of merit, and with desire of being seen in the
eyes of men, or with supposall of the service of God, Mat. 6. 16.
is nothing but hypocrisy and wickedness. Weeping also and tears without
repentance, are of no value before God, which is plain in the example of Esau.
Repentance Genesis 27. 38. Heb. 12. 17.
then is at all times a pleasant and acceptable sacrifice unto God: Prayers,
fasting, tears, sackcloth and ashes, are partly the effects of repantance;
partly helps and means, whereby we are moved to the casting down of our
souls, and true humility, that we return to a better kind of living.

And although the custom of renting of our clothes, of wearing sackcloth, of
sprinkling our heads with ashes, and lying on the ground, be grown out of
use in the Church, yet has she retained fasting, tears, and sighs, as the
most convenient furtherances for our weakness, and most beseeming the
gravity of public assemblies. Privately, it is lawful for every one to use
those means whereby he may be stirred up to true humility and repentance,
whether he put on sackcloth, or lie on the ground, putting his mouth in the
dust, (as Jeremy La^. 3. 29. 1. Tim. 4. 8.
speaks) so that he know that all this bodily exercise has little profit,
as Paul says, and that he place not the service of God in these exercises,
or faigne unto it an opinion of merit, as unskillful men are wont in the Church
of Rome. So that when these outward things are referred to their right end
and use, which is, that we may be the more cast down and humbled before God
by them, and raised up to true repentance, that our zeal may be increased, and
our prayers more fervent, then they help, and are pleasing and acceptable to
God, who, as he has created the body no less then the soul, does also
require to be served with both, and in both will have us to give testimony of
earnest repentance and amendment. But we must especially take care that the
contrition and humility of the heart, placing his hope and trust in the mercy
of God, do go before these outward things; after which the confession of our
sins must follow, and an acknowledging of Gods justice, with earnest prayer,
desire of pardon, and deprecation of the deserved punishments: and last of all,
an ardent petition of help and defense, to the glory of his name. The
sprinklings of such a sacrifice, are fastings, sighs and tears: and from that
(as from a fountain) do these outward things draw all the dignity that they
have: but faith, repentance, hope, are the gifts of God, of his mere grace,
which receive all their dignity from the only merit of Christ Jesus and his
obedience. Wherefore our whole repentance, with all the parts, fruits, and
testimonies thereof, are the gifts of God, whose whole merit comes from that
only sacrifice, which our Lord Jesus Christ offered once upon the Cross for
us, by which alone God is appeased, turns away his wrath from us, and
forgiueth us our sins. Therefore being reconciled unto God by so excellent a
price, our repentance which is the gift of his grace, is pleasing and
acceptable unto him, because that by our humility we magnify his glory: and
by acknowledging of our sins, we commend his justice: and in that we flee
unto him in the midst of our miseries yea and death, he is acknowledged to be
the author of life and salvation, a gracious, gentle, and merciful God. How
then can it be but such a repentance shall be acceptable unto God, when he
deferred the sentence of vengeance already given against Achab, for 1. Reg. 21
29.
for that he humbled himself before God, although his heart were not sincere
and upright? and oftentimes did he patiently bear with his people in the
wilderness, although their heart were not Psa. 78. 37.
pure and right with God. Thus have we how Mardochaeus and the rest of the
Jews did publicly testify their repentance, looking for help and
deliverance from God. If any man demand what their sins were, the answer is
easy, that besides the usual sins whereu^to men are given, this also was
added, that through fear and negligence they remained in those strange
countries, when the rest of their brethren, by the commandment and leave of
Cyrus, were returned to Jerusalem and the holy land. And it behooved them when
they were thus appointed to the slaughter, to feel how great a sin they had
committed, in not returning with the rest into their country. By this example
and such like in which we see that the faithful never found more safer
protection then Gods mercy; nor more strong weapons then prayers and tears;
our sluggishnes must be rowsed up, especially at this time, in which we see the
fury of the enemies more then ever to be kindled, and that they take greater
courage to oppress Gods truth, and destroy Gods pure service, to flee unto
him, and to be converted with our whole heart, that having mercy on us, he
will appoint an end of our miseries, or at the least moderate them, and give
us strength, whereby through his name we may overcome all incommodities and
dangers whatsoever. And of the remedy which Mardochaeus and the rest of the
Jews did seek, thus far.

The other remedy unto which Mardochaeus did flee, is the favor of Ester, for
which cause it is said that he went even unto the Kings gate, to wit, that he
might be seen by some of Esters retinue^ and so declare unto her in how great
danger both he and the whole nation o^ the Jews were: for he might not enter
within the Kings gate, being clothed with sackcloth. Where by the way we are
to note, that the Kings of Persia, that nothing might either come to their
ears, or be in their sight, whereby they might be made sad, (as are cries,
and weeping, and sighing, and the very attire of the afflicted testifying their
sorrow) would not that any should come into their sight in such apparel: and
besides that this was used to be done by them, that they might drive far away
all memory and thought of death. But this is not only a great niceness and
effeminacie, but it is also exceeding great and more then barbarous cruelty.
For to what end are Kings appointed, but that they should be the refuge of the
miserable and afflicted? So it comes for the most part to pass, that there
is no entrance for the distressed into the house, nor any way or means to
complain unto them: but they must comfort themselves with this, that the gate
of heaven is always wide open unto them, in as much as the Father of heaven
calls all that are afflicted unto him, and promises them help and aid.
Therefore Mardochaeus, seeing he could not enter into the kings house, cries
out in the streets, that Ester may be certified of this his sorrow, which also
came to pass by her maidens and Eunuchs: whereat she was grieved exceedingly,
and sent him other garments, that so he might enter into the kings palace, but
Mardochaeus refused them. By this we may know, that Esters gentle disposition
and nature, was not altered by her royal dignity and greatness, but that she
had a most loving carefulnes toward Mardochaeus, whom she worthily
acknowledges as her near kinseman, and holds him in steed of her father:
and besides would gladly relieve him, and if it were possible rid him of all
care and doubtfulnesse. A most worthy example for all to behold, and namely
for mighty men, who have all delights in abundance, that they may learn to
relieve the distressed: for for this end, have they received at Gods hand,
riches and abundance of all prosperity, that they should communicate them
unto others, and succor the afflicted. That Mardochaeus refuses the garments
offered, it partly proceeded of the greatness of his sorrow, which he could
not dissemble: partly that he would not seem to be careful of his private
commodity, but remaining in mourning, would more and more make app^rant the
greatness of his sorrow, both to Ester and to all his brethren. By which
example we are admonished, that in public calamities we must not have regard
of our private security, but of the defense of the whole commonwealth, and by
our example to move others to seek those remedies, whereby the safety of all
may be provided for: and that we may move others, there ought to appear in us
evident signs, that we are touched with the sense of Gods wrath, and feeling
of the common calamity.

Now Ester is not offended with this efusing of the garments, as Princes are
^ommonly wont to be angry, if all things ^e not done as please them: but she
sen^eth Hatach one of her Eunuchs, to en^uire diligently the cause of this
mour^ing, that when it was known, she ^ight remedy it. For she knew that
Mardochaeus was not wont to be so moved ^r a matter of nothing. By her
carfulness, and solicitude, we learn not to neglect the tears and mourning
of the afflicted, as though they touched us not. For it is the property of an
arrogant and disdainful person, not to be moved with the tears and groans of
those that mourn. When as this is one of the greatest griefs in misery, to
be contemned by those that are at case: besides that, if we diligently look
into the causes of sorrow, we shall find, that our state is in handling, and
that we had need take heed, when our neighbors house is on fire, which thing
we here see that Ester had experience of.

Mardochaeus being demanded, does particularly unfold what happened unto him; the
conspiracy of Haman against all the Jews, and the kings commandment, to
destroy them: and withal, sends a copy thereof unto Ester, showing besides,
what had befallen: he confesses that he has enflamed Hamans wrath against
him, because he would not bow unto him as other did, though he were often
solicited there unto: and so shows that he neither wa^ ashamed nor did
repent, not to have yee^ ded to a mortal man, and him accursed b^ God, that
honor which was due to God ^ lone. Therefore, when as doing well, and resisting
the pride and impiety of the wicked, we suffer calamity and affliction, let
us not be ashamed: and if by occasion our fact shall draw others into any great
danger and calamity, let us not therefore think that we are to be blamed: as
we oght not to blame David, for hatred of whom, Saul did slay 1. Sam. 21.
four score Priests at Nob, and afterward wasted their whole City with sword
and fire: neither also those wise men which Math. 2.
came out of the East to worship our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who being
warned in a dream by an Angel, kept not promise with Herod, but departed
secretly from him; and so were the cause of the slaughter of those infants, in
the region of Bethlehem, are therefore to be condemned.

That which he tells of the money offered by Haman, that he might obtain of
the king, authority to kill the Jews, it serves to show that he was the
author of the conspiracy, and so to thirst for the Jews blood, that he
thought to buy it though with so great a price. So that Haman of ^ur time, did
liberally bestow, and would ^aue bestowed even that which he held most
precious, as did also the Roman Clergy, in hope to root out the Church and
to abolish the Gospel, under the name and pretense of heresy, whereof they
falsely accuse it. He delivers also the copy of the Edict, that all doubt
might be removed from Ester, and that he might even set before her eyes, how
certain and present a danger did hang over all the Jews. So it behooves us,
before we be moved, and spread any report of fear and trouble, that we have
certainly tried the truth of those things whereof we speak, and not to trouble
any with vain and uncertain conjectures. I confess that we have cause to
fear all evils at the hand of our enemies, but yet not without wisdom, that
we be not moved, but so far forth, as God reuealeth their malice unto us. The
whole drift of all this relation, is declared about the end of the 8. verse:
for Mardochaeus wills Ester, as one whom he had brought up, that she should go
to the King to entreat him, and to entreat in his presence for her people. In a
matter then of so great moment, he speaks with authority, least Ester should
pretend any evasion or excuse not to go in unto the king, and to become ^ suter
unto him for her people. So that Mardochaeus here teaches them who are in
favor with Princes, not to favor themselves, if they fear God, but to make
supplication unto them for the Church, when it shall be in calamity and
oppressed by injury. Yea and those Kings and Princes who are neighbors unto
those that oppress the Church, ought to be intercessors unto them, both by
entreaty and admonitions to release the Church: nay further, if necessity so
require, to ay de it with men, munition, and money, which in these last
persecutions of Antichrist, many with praise have performed. By this example we
are also admonished, that we must not reject those lawful means which God does
offer for the preservation of his Church. Now what can be more convenient then
that the wife should entreat the husband for innocents? What more just then to
desire the stay of the unjust sheading of ma^s blood? for in what thing may we
better employ that favor and authority which we have? Wherefore, woe unto
them, who for fear of their delights and profits, which endure but for a
while, dare not once open their mouths, for the defense of the poor members of
the son of God, whom they see daily to be murdered: woe unto our sloth and
carelessness, unless when as we see and hear the Lords inheritance to be
wasted far and near, with fire and sword with these robbers, we do not at
least ioin our prayers with those who have not ceased continually these many
years to power out their prayers unto God, for the deliverance of his Church.
David shows with how earnest affection he wept and fasted Ps. 35. 13.
for his enemies, when they were afflicted; what then may we think, that we
ought to do, when we see the poor church of God so many ways on every side to
be oppressed? Assuredly our prayers and supplicatio^s shall not be in vain
with that Father of mercy: we have many testimonies by undoubted experience:
Let us not then be wearied in praying, looking when that just Judge will come
to revenge the cause of his and to set them at liberty. For God will Ps. 12. 5.
arise because of the sighing of the poor, and will come in a most convenient
time to deliver and save them, that in the midst of the church there may be
sufficient matter of praise and thanksgiving, through Jesus Christ; to whom
alone be glory for ever.

Amen.
THE TWELFTH Sermon.
The fear and excuse of Ester, the faith and constancy of Mardochaeus, and
the holy deliberation and purpose of Ester, after three days fast: from v. 9.
to the end.

9. So Hatach returning, told Ester the words of Mordecai.

10. Then Ester said unto Hatach, and commanded him to say unto Mordecai.

11. All the Kings servants, and the people of the Kings Provinces do know,
that whosoever, man or woman, that comes to the King into the inner court
which is not called, there is a law of his, that he shall die, except him to
who^ the king holds out the golden rod, that he may live. Now I have not been
called to come unto the king these thirty days.

12. And they certified Mordecai of Ester words.

13. And Mordecai said, that they should answer Ester thus. Think not with
thy self, that thou shall escape in the Kings house, more then all the Jews.

14. For if thou heldest thy peace at this time, comfort and deliverance shall
appear unto the Jews out of an other place, but thou and thy fathers house
shall perish: and who knows whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a
time?

15. Then Ester commanded to answer Mordecai.

16. Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Susa, and fast ye for me,
and eat not, nor drink in three days. I also and my maids will fast
likewise, and so will I go in to the King, which is not according to the law:
and if I perish, I perish.

17. So Mordecai went his way, and did according unto ali that Ester had
commanded him.


A Ffliction is the trial of our faith, and the fornance in which there is made
manifest both the weakness and infirmity of our flesh; as also the strength of
the spirit, which remains in the hearts of the faithful: it is also the
whetstone, whereby we are sharpened in earnest and vehement prayer unto GOD:
and which makes us wise, to seek the aid and help of men in a lawful manner.
All which things are most evident in this history. For in that extreme
affliction which hanged over the heads of the Jews, Ester strooken with fear,
refuses to go in unto the king to entreat for the^. Contrariwise, Mardochaeus
with an invincible faith and constancy, exhorts her to do her duty, which
she afterward purposes to do, fleeing to most fervent and extraordinary
prayer joined with three days fast, after which, she is fully determined to
speak unto the King for the safety of the Church. So that there are three
chief points here to be discussed, the first the excuse of Ester for fear of
certain danger, ver. 11. the second the faith and courage of Mardochaeus in
exhorting Ester to the deliverance of the Church, ver. 12, 13, 14. the third
the holy purpose and piety of this holy woman, being ready against all
events and danger for the succor of her people, ver. 15. and 16. These
examples are proposed unto us, that we may know what we should do in
adversity, what means we may use to be delivered from them, with what zeal,
what faith, what constancy and courage the Church is to be defended and our
brethren delivered.

Touching the first point, Ester being certified by Hatach of the decree made
against the Jews, and of the help that Mardochaeus did desire in this
necessity, does excuse her self by the great rigor of the law, made against
those who came unto the King not being called, and does add, that that was
the thirtieth day since she had been called to come in unto the King. This
seems a fair excuse: for there is lykely to fall on her a most evident
danger, seeing the law is manifest, and so much the more severely observed, by
how much it was more commodious for preservation of the Kings Majesty. It
increased her fear, because in thirty days she was not called in unto the
King, and therefore seems to be out of favor: and she distrusteth that she
should obtain her suite offending against the law; and so it was to be feared
least she should cast her self headlong into certain peril of death, and do
no good neither to her self nor her people. And so Ester desires Mardochaeus
to consider of it, and hold her excused. But the fear of private danger ought
not to affright her, but that nevertheless she should, with Gods favor, try
the Kings mind, and seek to turn it to hinder that horrible slaughter.
Hereby we see, that those who are come to great dignities, and possess much
which they may lose, are also more fearful then others: though for the most
part, men rather care for their own hinderance, then the common danger. And
you shall scarcely find any who will not seek some excuse, when he should
help the Church: and has not more regard of redressing his own
discommodities, then of relieuing the brethren. Moreover, it is no great
maruayle to see a woman affrayde of imminent danger, when it often times
happens, that men, even of a good courage, be so daunted with dangers, that
they leave their duties undone. This is apparent in the Apostles, and namely
in Peter, when they saw their Lord (whose miracles were yet fresh in memory,
and even as it were before their eyes) to be in the hands of his enemies:
therefore the weak and fearful men are not to be rejected, but rather to be
stirred up and encouraged.

Hence also it is to be noted, how inconvenient the condition is of unequal
marriage, when one part is greater and more worthy then the other: and how the
most mighty do most easily break the laws of holy matrimony, which are
these; That the man has not power over his 1. Cor. 7.
body, but the woman: nor the woman power of her body but the man: and that
they ought not to be separated, but for a time, with the consent of both
parties. We may observe besides, how kings under pretense of their security,
and defense of their princely majesty, do very often make tyrannical and
unjust laws, and quite contrary and repugnant to the end for which they are
appointed by God. For what I pray is more contrary to the office of a good
king, then under pain of death to forbid any man to enter into his court? What
more inhumane then to shut the door against those to whom Justice is due? How
great a barbarousnes is it, that the wife dares not come into the presence of
her husband, but that she shall stand in danger of death? Thus it comes to
pass, that Princes whiles they go about to maintain their dignity, do
degenerate into beasts, so that none dares safely come near unto them: and
their throne which ought to be the refuge and sanctuary of the poor and
distressed, is become a place offeare and terror. So did not the good Kings and
Emperors in old time, but themselves would judge the causes of every private
man, and hear 1. King. 3. 16.
every one: as we see that Solomon did patiently hear the controversy of
those two harlots, and with exceeding wisdom did decide it. So the good
Emperors of Rome, did themselves openly judge the controversies of their
subjects. Now what a misery, and what a mischief is this, the kings house and
ears are at all seasons open to Hamans false accusations and slanders, but it
is not lawful for the Queen to make intercession to the king for the just
defense of her self and her people? I confess that there ought to be great
regard to be had of the safety and dignity of Princes, but they are not to be
deprived of clemency and justice, then which they have not either surer
pillars or safer defense for their State. And thus far of Esters excuse.

Yet Mardochaeus accepts not of this excuse, but courageously exhorts, yea
in a manner compels her to do her duty, Think not, says he, in thy mind
that thou shall be delivered in the Kings house, only and alone of all the
Jews, For if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, a breathing and
deliverance shall come to the Jews by some other means: but thou and thy
fathers house shall perish: and who knows whether thou art come to this
kingdom for such a time. In few words he propounds unto her three chief
points of great moment. First, that she is greatly deceived, if she think that
she alone should be delivered from the common danger. Next, that if she held
her peace, yet God would otherwise provide for his people, and she should
perish. The third point is Gods providence, whereby not without some great
cause she was lifted up into the dignity royal, to wit, that in this urgent
necessity she should help the Church of God. He may seem to have spoken
these things as a Prophet of God: for otherwise, some will say, how could he
so confidently say, that succor and deliverance should* come unto the Jews,
and Ester if she held her peace should perish? Yet because he follows not
the usual manner of speech of the Prophets, Thus says the Lord, therefore in
this history, the words of Mardochaeus are not to be taken as a Prophecy, but
as an application of the general doctrine of the law and of the Prophets, to
this special fact. And these things will better be understood by the
explication of every part.

The drift of Mardochaeus, is to put out of Esters mind the fear of the
danger which privately might light on her, if not being called she had gone
in unto the King to make supplication for the Jews: that he might effect
this, he obiecteth a greater fear unto her: and that in two sorts: first that
she shall not escape free from this slaughter, if by force of this decree all
the Jews be put to death: then, she also has cause to fear, least if at
this time she deny her help unto the Church, it should be delivered by some
other means, and God would punish her sloth and cowardice. The first point was
very likely, if you consider Hamans malice, and his favor and authority with
the King, which was so great, that the King easily believed him in all things.
And truly when all the rest of the Jews were destroyed, as the fury and rage
of cut-throates increases by sheading of man's blood, it would be an easy
matter to persuade this profane king, to take away her life also, who only
being left alive of that whole nation, would even do naught but breath out
revenge for the injury received. The other point depends upon the promises
of God, to preserve and defend his Church, to hear the cry of the afflicted,
to arise for their help, to have his ears open unto their prayers, and his
hands stretched out to save them; and others of this sort many, whereof the
whole Scripture is full: and on the contrary part, upon the threatenings
against those who do not help and ay de those who are in misery and
affliction: and this by force of the covenant made with Abraham, I will Genesis
12. 3.
bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee. As also Debora
does curse Iud. 5. 23.
the inhabitants of Meroz, who came not, as their duty required, to help the
people of the Lord. Mardochaeus therefore fitly does apply to the present
purpose, the promises and threatenings made by God in his law, and so teaches
us in our greatest dangers, both public and private, to apply those precious
testimonies of Gods favor: as for example that saying of the Prophet, He that
touches you, touches the apple of Zach. 2. 8. and verse. 5.
^ine eye. Also, I will be a wall of fire about ^ou. And again, to the
stirring up of our own and other men's sloth and cowardice, the threatenings
are to be considered, wherein God threatens punishment, not ^nely to those who
oppress the Church, ^r laugh at her calamity, but also to all those who do
not help her (if they may) ^oth by word and deed: for this which Mardochaeus
sets down, is to be noted, ^f thou hold thy peace at this time, thou and ^y
fathers house shall perish. So that in the ^ngerous times of the Church, to
take ^re for thy self alone, and for thine own ^curitie, and not to dare to
speak any ^ing in the defense of the Church; and to separate thy state and
cause from the people of God; is to procure ruin and destruction to thy self.
For if safety be any where it is in Gods house. Whereunto appertain those
things which are spoken, Pro. 24, 11, 12. How great then is the madness of
those, who go out of the Church and abjure the truth, that they may provide for
themselves and their state? and how great is their fury, who hunt for
commodity only by the loss and ruin of the Church? Further out of this
place we may learn, that as the weak and fearful are not altogether to be
rejected, so also they are not to be nourished in their infirmity, but to be
pricked eue^ to the quick by the proposing of Gods threatenings and judgments
unto them? and when the question is of the safety of the Church, all fear of
dangers and threatenings which may proceed from me^, are to be despised. The
King Assuerus forbids that any should come unto him unless he were called,
great danger hangs over his head that does the contrary, but God bids
every one according to their power and ability to help his Church: Woe then
unto us, if we shall be slack or slothful, and unless we rather obey God then
man, which Act. 4. 19.
thing the Apostles themselves in their greatest dangers, by their example
have taught us.

The third reason is of greatest weight, from Gods providence, whereby Ester
was exalted into so great dignity for so necessary a time, who knows, says
he, whether for such a time thou art come to the Kingdom? as though he should
say: God who rules and governs all things by his providence, even the very
moments of time, has not without cause exalted thee to so great a dignity, by
so wonderful a means, but that weighing with thy self so great a favor of
God bestowed on thee, thou should serve* his purpose, for the profit and
deliverance of his people. For what unthankfulness shall it be, not to
acknowledge so great a liberality of Gods toward thee, not to consecrate thy
dignity to his glory, and thy favor and authority to the safety of his
Church? So it be houeth every one wisely to consider unto what God does call
him by his providence, and by his benefits, in every estate and vocation,
wherein God by his grace has placed us.

Kings and Queens must remember that Isai. 49. 23.
they are called and appointed by God to be nurcing fathers and nurces of his
Church: Ministers must remember that they give themselves to prayer and the
administration of the word: finally, by how much every one has received
greater gifts at the hand of God, and ability to help the Church, by so much
the more carefully ought he to employ himself unto it. Here also we may
perceive, that whereas Mardochaeus at the beginning commanded Ester not to
declare her nation and her people, it was not done to teach her to dissemble
her religion, and not to care for her brethren: but to help the Church more
conveniently when necessity should require. So then must we use discretion,
that we may show forth our faith when time shall require by all good effects,
and what our zeal is toward the house of God* Lo then with what reasons God
would have Ester to be instructed by him who had brought her up, that she
might be an instrument of his grace and mercy.

Let us now then proceed to see her holy purpose, being compelled by the force
and weight of so necessary reasons: She commands to call all the Jews which
dwelt at Susa together, to a fast of three days and three nights, and
promises, that she also and her maids will fast likewise, to cry unto God
for help and aid, to whose will committing her self and her life, she
determines with a settled mind to go to the King, and make supplication for the
safety of her people. The assembling of the faithful has been at all times
very necessary, when any necessity has been offered to pray more earnestly
unto God, and to make profession of public repentance, which is most evident
in the first and second Chapters of the Prophet Joel: and by the examples of
the Kings of Judah in their greatest dangers and distress, as we see that
Hezechiah did when he was besieged by Sennacherib; and Iehosaphat, 2. Kni. 19.
2. Chapter 20. 3.
when the Ammonites and Idumeans did set against him* I confess that the
miserable captives had no Temple at Susa where they might assemble themselves,
but they had Gods promises, who is present with all that call upon him: and
perhaps they had before obtained some place for the exercise of their religion.
So exact and rigorous a fast of three days and three nights without meat or
drink, in colder regions should exceed measure, because men in those countries
could not endure it: but yet in those hot countries it was not altogether
intolerable, though indeed it were very strict and rigorous. This fast also is
not commanded as a worship acceptable to God of it self, but as an inciteme^t
to more vehement and fervent prayer, to greater humility, and lively
repentance. Fasting therefore of it self is not acceptable, but because of the
sacrifice of a contrite and humble heart* because of prayers proceeding from
faith, because of the confession of sins, and expectation of help from Gods
mercy, as before has been said. Ester will have Sermon. 11.
them fast for her, not as though she alone were in danger, but because she
was to make intercession for all, and by her good or evil success, others were
to be dealt with: so that in her life or death, the life or death of others
did consist. The Church therefore does not without cause* pray so earnestly for
her, that she might find favor with Assuerus, and obtain that which she did
demand for the safety of the people.

The piety and godliness of this holy Queen, shows it self in this, that
she desires not more of others, then she would fulfill her self, giving her
self to fasting and prayer with her maids, three days and three nights. By
which also we learn what care Ester had used in instructing her maids in true
religion and the knowledge of God; and our negligence is so much the more
blameworthy, unless we follow the example of this noble Lady, as well in
prayer, as in the right education of her family. But what a shame is it I
beseech you, in these dangerous times wherein we are fallen, that the zeal of
many is so cold, in fasting, in praying, in calling upon GOD with humble
petitions, and in stirring up of one an other to the true exercises of
religion? Can any man marvel then, that we are overwhelmed with so many
euilles, and that our calamities increase daily more and more?

That she says she will go to the king against the law, she speaks it not in
contempt of the law, but that she might show, that she more esteemed of Gods
commandment, then of the Kings law* and of the peoples safety, then of her
own danger, therefore she commits her life into Gods hand, in these words:
If I perish, I perish. Think not that these words are rashly and unadvisedly
cast out by her, as though she did wilfully and by despair cast her self into
danger: for they are holy words, proceeding from her who offered up her self
and her life for a sacrifice with obedience of faith, whatsoever did betide,
being ready, and reposing the event on the good pleasure of God, esteeming her
self happy, if it happened that she should die in so just a cause. So did
that good Patriarch Jacob speak, when he sent his son Benjamin into Egypt,
Ge. 49. 14.
with his other brethren: If I be robbed of my child, let me be robbed.

Hence it appears, that faith, which is guided by the holy Ghost, is not
rash, and yet when necessity shall so require, and duty bind, it refuses
not any dangers be they never so great, with a trust and hope to glorify
GOD in his body, both in life and death: because the faithful are persuaded
that Christ is Phi. 1. 20. 21
unto them both in life and death, advantage.

Hereby also we may learn, how profitable the mutual admonitions and the
holy exhortations of the faithful among themselves are: for lo Ester, who
before was fearful, by Mardochaeus exhortation is made more bold, and that
with an holy boldness, showing in deed that to be true which was said before,
that she Chap. 2. 20.
was subject unto him, as when she was brought up with him. For if she had
sought for starting holes and excuses, as noble personages are wont when they
are overmuch pressed, she might take exceptions, that desperate men did little
care when they were past hope themselves, to draw others with them into the
like danger. She might also say, that she was not the cause of this mischief,
but Mardochaeus, who would not yield unto Haman, or at least keep himself
secret, rather then come into his presence. But a quiet and settled mind
seeks not such hiding corners full of arrogancy and contempt, but attends
what his duty requires, and trembles at Gods word. Last of all, we are to
see how Mardochaeus and the Church at Susa do also their duties, not casting
all the burden as many do, of the whole business, on Ester, but praying with
fasting and earnest supplication unto God, that he will favor and prosper her
enterprise. So faithful people ought to pray unto God for their Kings and
rulers, and for all that travail or be in danger for the defense or safety of
the Church, that they faint not under their burden. The people made prayer for
the King going forth to war, Psalm. 20. The Church at Jerusalem Act. 12. 5.
made earnest prayer unto God for Peter as long as he was kept in prison. And
this is the true means to preserve the Church, to wit, that on the one side
the Governors do their duties, and be the first by Gods guiding who undertake
any danger: on the other side, the people have a special care of them who
spare no labor nor pains for them: and all together look for safety and
deliverance at his hand, who never fails them that call upon him through
Christ Jesus, to whom be glory for evermore.

Amen.
THE THIRTEENTH Sermon.
How after the fast and prayer God prospers the entrance of Ester unto King
Assuerus, and gives her favor with him: from the first verse of the fifth
Chapter, unto the ninth.

CHAP. V. 1. And when the third day was accomplished, Ester put on her royal
apparel, and stood in the court of the Kings palace within, over against the
Kings house: and the King sat upon his royal throne, in the Kings palace,
over against the gate of the house.

2. And when the King saw Ester the Queen standing in the court, she found
favor in his sight; and the King held out the golden scepter that was in his
hand: so Ester drew near and touched the top of the scepter.

3. Then said the King unto her, what will thou Queen Ester? and what is thy
request? it shall be given thee to the half of the kingdom.

4. Then said Ester, if it please the King, let the King and Haman come this
day unto ^he banquet that I have prepared for him.

5. And the King said, cause Haman to make haste that he may do as Ester has
said. So the King and Haman came to the banquet that Ester had prepared.

6. And the King said unto Ester at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition
that it may be given thee? and what is thy request? it shall oven be performed
unto the half of the kingdom.

7. Then answered Ester and said, My petition and request is,

8. If I have found favor in the sight of the King, and if it please the King
to give me my petition, and to perform my request, let the King and Haman come
to the banquet, that I shall prepare for them, and I will do to morrow
according to the Kings saying.


THe promises of the Lord made unto the faithful, that he will be reconciled
unto them, as often as they turn unto him: and that he will hear them and
deliver them out of dangers, when they pour out their prayers before him, are
so many and so expressly set down, that no man who has but once heard of them
can doubt, but that he shall find God, as often as he shall seek him, and shall
by experience feel him to be a light in darkness, a comfort in adversity, a
stay in affliction, and a savior and deliverer in all evils. For what is more
plain then that which is spoken in the 145. Psalm, verse. 18, 19? The Lord is
near unto all that call upon him: yea to all them that call upon him in truth.
He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their cry
and will save them. And what more evident then that same of Amos the Prophet,
chap. 5. verse. 4? Seek the Lord and ye shall live: and that of Joel, chap. 2.
verse. 32. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.
Howbeit, then are we made much more certain, when we see the effects of such
promises in the notable examples of those which call upon God. As, when David
does in so many places testify that he was heard of the Lord when he cried
unto him; that he was set free out of distress, delivered from all enemies,
and confirmed against all dangers: that God was unto him a light, a Psalm. 18. 1.
refuge, defense, castle, weapon, and salvation; and therefore by his example
he inuiteth and exhorts all men to Psalm. 34. 8.
taste the goodness of God, to trust in him, and at all seasons and in all
things wholly to lean unto him. And unto this appertains this example, which
even unto the end of this history we shall entreat of, in which we see how
Ester, Mardochaeus, and the whole people of the Jews, after they had called
upon God in their extreme danger, did feel his blessing: and in all their
business, being happily led under his conduct, saw at the last, both an
admirable deliverance of themselves, and an horrible confusion and vengeance on
their enemies; that thereby we might more and more find by proof, that God
will be found to salvation, of all those who in their griefs and evils seek
him, and call upon him in truth. For the present we are to see, how God after
fasting and prayer did bless the entrance of Ester to the King Assuerus, and
gave her such favor, that he was willing to come twice unto her, unto the
banquet which she prepared. Wherein there are three chief points to be
unfolded: to wit, 1. the entrance of the Queen into the Kings court: 2. her
entertainment, and choice given unto her by the King, to demand whatsoever
she would: 3. the wisdom of Ester, before she would declare the chiefest part
of her request. An history worthy to be thoroughly discussed in every
particular of it, that out of every part we may draw some instruction.

And when the third day was accomplished, Ester put on her royal apparel, and
stood in the inner court of the Kings palace, over against the Kings house:
and the King sat on the throne of his kingdom in the Kings house. It is not
expressed whether she entered alone, or with some company, but if we have
regard to the prohibition, that none should enter into the court without
commandment, it seems that her train stayed at the gate of this court, into
which she alone entered: for so great was her charity, that she would not draw
any with her into danger, being content with these companions only, Faith,
Charity, and Repentance. She adorned herself with royal apparel, not for
pride or vain show, when she was as yet in danger of her life, but for
ornament and seemelinesse, least peradventure she should have been less
acceptable to the King her husband, if she should have presented her self unto
him in mourning apparel. Her body then was decked with magnificent ornaments:
but in her heart she retained deep sorrow. Neither is that to be accounted
dissimulation, but wisdom, to observe that which was seemly in the presence
of the King. For it appears that she rather sought to please God then men,
when by her three days fast she had made her self pale and wan: but it was
enough that God did favor her, who grants beauty and grace according to his
will. Wherefore they who are delighted with the novelty and vanity of
sumptuous and most luxurious apparel, that they may turn al men's eyes to gaze
on them, and their tongues to talk of them, glorying in their riches and
beauty, are nothing helped by this example, neither does it avail any whit to
excuse their pride and vain-glorie. Neither do we condemn that every one be
apparelled according to their degree and dignity, so that they seek not new
fashions of apparel and those immodest and unchaste: and that the heart be
adorned within with true humility and the fear of god, with charity,
submission to learn, and modesty.

Ester then enters with her royal robes into the inner Court, but she dares
not enter into that part of the house in which the king sat, but stayed in the
inner court over against the Kings house, until such time as she might be
espied by the King; which was not done without fear of that danger which she
had cast her self into. A most courageous enterprise of Esters proceeding from
faith and charity, by whose guidance she overcame all fear: for she might
always think with her self, that she offended against Assuerus law, and
that therefore she might be in like case with Vashti, for coming when she
was not called, as Vashti was for not coming when she was called. This also
augmented her fear and distrust, that for a months space she had not been
called unto the king. But on the one side, her confidence in the promises of
God, that he would be with them that fear him and walk in his ways, and on
the other, her charity and desire that she has to help the Church, do cause
her that she prefers the doing of her duty before all dangers.

Hence we are admonished straight after our prayers to set hand to work, and
constantly to prosecute our enterprise, as we see this holy woman to have done,
who after her fast, early in the morning without any delay, doubts not to go
in unto the King Assuerus. And besides, we are taught, that our faith, if it be
lively and working through charity, shall never be removed from performing
her duties, whatsoever danger seem to threaten us destruction: for faith will
afford us Gods present help in the midst of dangers, all which through
charity and desire to help others we shall easily overcome. And this is Esters
fact.

You shall now see the happy success which it had from the Lord. As Soon as
the king saw her, she found favor in his sight: and he held out toward her the
golden Scepter, and kindly calls her by her name, adding also the titles
which belonged to the dignity royal. Ester also draws near, and touches
the top of the Scepter, in sign of reverence and subjection: which modesty
most beseems al married women. So God holds the heart of the King in his
hand, and he turns it in a moment whither so ever it pleases him* as is
said, Pro. 21. v. 1. He also bewtifieth the countenance of Ester, with
sweetness and amiable favor, that shemay be the more acceptable. The golden
Scepter which is holden forth unto her, is a token of pardon against the
transgression of the law: in that the king calling her by the name of Queen,
asks what she would have, it is a sign of favor and good will: and in that
he also inuiteth her to ask, with so liberal an offer, even unto the half of
the kingdom, it puts her in hope of obtaining her supplication of the king.

For the King might easily gather, both by this extraordinary fact, and by the
countenance and gesture of Ester, that she had some great thing in her mind.
Yet the King was too liberal in promising, and might rashly have ensnared
himself, if Ester had been as ready in demanding, as he was in promising. But
Kings can hardly moderate themselves, whether they promise or threaten: and
surely it would better a great deal beseem kings, (who oght to do nothing
without justice) first with good counsel and mature deliberation to understand
what is demanded, before they bind themselves by any rash promise. We see
that it turned unto evil to Herod, that he bound himself in a Marc. 6. 23
rash promise: for thereby he defiled both himself and his table with the
innocent blood of John the Baptist. Nevertheless God would have the mind of
Ester to be filled with good hope and joy, and assurance by this immoderate
offer of the King.

Now if Ester had justly occasion of rejoicing, for that she found the Kings
favor and good will toward her to be so great: what may we do, who have so
excellent and large promises from God, as well of this present, as of the life
to come? For God who neither can lie nor be changed, Tit. 1. 2. Iam. 1. 17
does promise unto us eternal life, and not a part only or parcel of his
Kingdom, but a full fruition of himself, and all his good things, as it is
written, that God shall be all in all: and that we also shall 1. Cor. 15. 28 2.
Pet. 1. 4
be partakers of the divine nature. Here we see how effectual prayers be, by
which the entry is made open unto Ester into the Kings house, and the way made
easy, and the Kings heart mollified and made soft: which have in greatest
distresses procured an issue, in danger obtained security, and in the very
moment of death, have wrought life and deliverance. If therefore we desire to
wade out of our euilles and distresses, to have an happy end of our affairs,
to find favor with the fiercest men; behold here the only means and easiest
way; that casting our selves down before God with ardent prayer, we desire
his help, and place our whole confidence in him. For as the Prophet sings
sweetly, Psalm. 34. verse. 5. They that look to him shall be lightened; and
their face shall not be ashamed: as also in an other place he praises Gods
goodness when he says. Unto Ps. 59. 17
thee o my strength will I sing, for God is my defense, and my merciful God.
Thus you see how happy Esters entrance was.

Let us hear how wisely she uses this prosperous gale of the kings favor: to
wit: She bids the King and Haman to a banquet. In which thing her modesty,
wisdom, and integrity do shine: for she does not abuse the kings favor: she
breaks not forth by and by into tears, and howling and sobs, as perhaps there
seemed fit occasion offered unto her by the kings favor and Hamans absence. Her
modesty is exceeding great, in that she restrains her affections, and
patiently expects a fitter opportunity to complain unto the king, and make
her supplication. By this we learn, that we must bridle our affectious and
passions, least we be carried headlong by them, and that it is a commendable
moderation not to be rashly moved, although there be just cause of
complaint: for oftentimes a just grief does drive us beyond the bounds of
moderation, that hardly men or women can temper themselves, when they find
patient ears lent to their complaints: whereby it comes to pass, that
oftentimes the bitterness of our most just complaints, does take much away
from their weight and force.

Her wisdom appears, in that she inuiteth the King to a banquet, because
she knew, that thereby she should further procure his good will, for that
she had experience that he was delighted with feasts: as in the first
Chapter we have seen that he spent half a year in banqueting and
drinkings. So the faithful know how to use things indifferent without evil,
to serve their commodity. Yea even our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, did take
occasion at those banquets whereunto he was bidden, to teach the chief points
of our salvation. So he converted Zachaeus Lu. 19. 8. 9.
at a banquet: and in the house of Simon the Pharisee, he received that
miserable Lu. 7. 36. etc.
sinner into favor, teaching the Pharisee the doctrine of faith and repentance;
and by the occasion of being entertained by Matthew, whom of a Publican Mat.
9. 10.
he made an Apostle, he showed the end of his coming into the world,
cleared himself and his disciples from slander, and set open the door of
consolation to repentant sinners. Ester therefore is not to be blamed, if she
sought the opportunity of a banquet, more fitly to make her supplication to the
King. But it seems that her dissimulation cannot be excused, in that she
bids Haman the enemy of the Church, together with the King: but in that so
much the more appears her integrity and uprightness: for she prepares her
complaint to be uttered in his presence, that she might beforehand take away
all matter of exception and excuse, laying open the fraud whereby he did
obtain of the King so unjust an Edict.

And so Ester by those things which might seem to turn to her blame, as
though she were guilty of dissimulation and treachery, does receive the
praise of great integrity and justice. For the wicked have no cause to
complain, whether their wickedness be detected privately or publicly;
whether at a table, or in the place of judgment; so that there be no place for
fraudeor deceit: but that the fact be simply and truly propounded: neither in
a good cause is it a fault to use things indifferent unto profit and advantage.
For right and equity do not deprive us of the use of those things which
without blame we may employ in the defense of a good cause. To be silent in
prosecuting our right, is not to betray; to defer til occasion be offered, is
not to do injury to the adverse party; it is not cruelty or hypocrisy to
bid him to a banquet, whom you mean to accuse; to entertain an enemy at a
feast, is not to lie. But some will say, it is at least to dissemble: I
confess it. But all dissimulation is not evil and to be condemned. Christ
Jesus a great while suffered Judas Mat. 26.
at his table and committed unto him his purse, as to a good and faithful
disciple, and yet he knew him to be a devil and a traitor: of which yet at
last he warned him at his last supper. So Ester calls Haman to her banquet,
because it is not forbidden to do good unto the wicked: she entertaineth him,
and after accuses him to the King; because the benefits bestowed on evil men
does not exempt them from punishment, but make them more inexcusable. Wherefore
traitors and treacherous persons are nothing helped by this example in the
covering of their frauds, deceits and guiles whereby they set upon good men to
oppress them. Neither is this fact yet rashly to be imitated, but only the
occasion is to be observed, if any like unto this shall happen: for in this
present world so full of miseries, deceits and entrappings, we must not only
abstain from evil, but also from all show of 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
evil.

The King willingly agrees unto Esters request, and brings Haman with him,
who accounts it no small honor, that he only was invited by the Queen to
accompany the King. Whiles they were in drinking, the King Assuerus renueth
his former promise: thinking belike, that Ester durst not propose her demand
for the greatness of the thing. Therefore again he says, that it shall be
in her choice to demand even the half of the kingdom. But who can here
sufficiently wonder at the impudency and blasphemous speeches of the Doctors
of the Church of Rome? For one of them Gabriell Biel, is not afraid to say,
that that which Assuerus here offers to Ester, was a figure of those things
which God in deed has bestowed on the Virgin Marie, even the half of his
kingdom; For whereas, says he, the Father of heaven has these two the
chiefest gifts of his kingdom, Justice and Mercy, reserving Justice unto
himself, he has granted Mercy unto the Virgin Marie. Here hence it is,
that amongst them they give this title unto her, The Mother of Mercy. But let
us leave those blasphemous speeches, whereof even the most impudent amongst
them are almost ashamed.

Let us rather hear Esters answer, who yet refers her request until the
morrow, with that condition, that it will please the King again the next day
to return with Haman unto the banquet which should be prepared for him. It is
not easy to say what moved her to defer her request, when she had the king so
ready and easy to be entreated to grant whatsoever she would. But whatsoever
was her purpose, it is certain that God ruled the thoughts of her heart and
her speech, that by those things which the next morning happened to
Mardochaeus, who by the Kings commandment and the ministry of Haman himself
did obtain such solemn honors, she might have a certain assurance of
obtaining her petition: and that Haman who a little before had erected a
gallous, a foretoken of his destruction, being thrown down before by the
judgment both of his own conscience and of his friends, should have less
courage and force to resist; and so fall at last into the pit which he had
dug for others. Lo how God directs the goings, heart, and tongue of them
who put their trust in him, and by his most admirable providence, causes that
all things turn to their commodity and profit, and to the disadvantage and
destruction of the adversaries. Now this speech of Ester is full of sweetness
and humility not feigned, permitting all to the Kings pleasure, and arrogating
nothing to herself. What then had we need to do, when we address our selves
to call upon God? Is it not most rightful, that we acknowledge all things to
come unto us by his favor, and submit our selves to his good pleasure? In the
mean while Ester sufficiently shows that she purposed to demand some great
thing, that the King might be the readyer to grant that, which she had so long
pondered in her mind, and would not rashly utter until time and opportunity
served. Behold how the wisdom of the faithful does far pass all the
wiles and subtilties of the children of this world. Wherefore let us imitate
this example, and the notable virtues that shine in it, if we desire to wade
out of our miseries and calamities, and let us place all our confidence in him
who only can open an happy issue to all evils wherewith we are oppressed,
and gives life in the very gulf of death, through Jesus Christ, who has
saved us from death and destruction, to whom be glory, honor and dominion,
for ever.

Amen.
THE FOVRTEENTH Sermon.
Haman again being grievously offended, that he is contemned by Mardochaeus
alone, by the advice of his friends erecteth a gallows, where on Mardochaeus
should be hanged, from the 9. verse, unto the end of the fifth Chapter.

9. Then went Haman forth the same day, joyful and with a glad heart. But when
Haman saw Mordecai in the Kings gate, that he stood not up, nor moved for
him, then was Haman full of indignation at Mordecai.

10. Nevertheless Haman refrained himself, until he came home; then he sent
and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife.

11. And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his
children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and how he had
set him above the Princes and servants of the King.

12. Haman said moreover, yea, Ester the Queen did let no man come in with the
King to the banquet that she had prepared, save me: and to morrow am I bidden
unto her also with the King.

13. But all this does nothing avail me, as long as I see Mordecai that Jew
sitting at the Kings gate.

14. Then said Zeresh his wife, and all his friends unto him, Let them make a
tree of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the King, that
Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then shall thou go joyfully with the King into
the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman, and he caused to make the tree.


WHen the wicked enemies of the Church are in prosperity, they promise unto
themselves an happy and durable estate, which shall not be troubled by any
chance, as in the 10. Psalm. ver. 6. it is said: The wicked says in his heart, I
shall never be removed, nor be in danger: and if he have any enemies, he
thinks only with a breath to beat the^ down, as in the 5. verse. he snuffeth
at or defieth all his enemies: or if they deliberat of any thing, ^e supposes
he shall have an happy event of his counsels, as in the third verse. The
wicked is said to glory or to make his boast of his own hearts desire. Yet
notwithstanding many times by the just judgment of God they find a more
contrary event then they supposed, as in the 7. Psalm, verse. 14. The wicked
traueileth with wickedness, for he has conceived mischief; but he shall bring
forth a lie, that is a vain thing that shall deceive him: so that their joy
shall be turned into sorrow, and they made subject unto their enemies: yea
their counsels shall be turned into snares and ruin for themselves, that when
as they suppose to have attained the end of their designements, and to hold the
Church ensnared in their ginnes, so that no hope of escape remains: then are
themselves nearest to ruin and utter destruction. And all these things does
this history perspicuously set before our eyes. For hitherto all things have
happened most prosperously unto this Haman, the most deadly enemy of the
Church, even as his heart could wish, having subtly obtained of the king
authority and power to kill all the Jews, for which he altogether even
leapeth for joy; but he himself, seeing the constancy of Mardochaeus, does
trouble himself with his extreme ambition and rage. He takes advise of his
friends, and by their counsel erecteth a gallows, upon which himself the
next day is hanged by the most just and most admirable providence of God. Now
these things are proposed unto us, that we should not be troubled above
measu^e* seeing the prosperous and joyful success and triumphs of the enemies
of the Church, and hearing their threats, wherewith as though they had already
conquered all, they threaten shameful death to the poor faithful ones. For
God does suffer them patiently, until they fall into Psalm. 7. 15.
to the pit which themselves had dug, and be taken in the snares which they
laid for others.

Here then first let us see Hamans joy, then his sorrow arising upon the
constancy of Mardochaeus, and at last the conclusion of his deliberation. That
same day Haman went forth joyful, and with a ^lad heart. No marvel though he
were ^oyfull, who was exalted unto most high ^onor, endued with great
prosperity, beloved of the King, accepted with the Queen, and whom all men
honored; and who also had obtained whatsoever he could wish against the poor
Church of God. Joy and gladness of it self is not to be condemned, since that by
nature it is planted in all men, to rejoice in their own good and prosperity;
but joy is either good or bad according to the mind of him that does rejoice.
His joy is holy and good, who rejoices for the good things which he has
received of God, without injury done unto his neighbor, and gives him
thanks therefore: but he who puffed up with his prosperity, delights
himself with the contempt and reproach of his neighbors, and with stubbornness
and unthankfulness against God, his joy is profane and accursed: and those
are they of whom Christ speaks, Woe unto you that laugh, Luc. 6. 25.
for you shall weep and lament. So laughter and joy which are the gifts of God
(as it appeateth in that which Paul speaks, Act. 14. v. 17. that God fills
the hearts of the faithful with food and gladness) to them by their
unthankfulness are turned into mourning and misfortune. Let us therefore
learn in our joy and gladness, to acknowledge the true author thereof, and to
rejoice in good and honest things, and to keep a measure in mirth, and
especially let us take heed that it be not hurtful unto any, or turn to
contempt and disgrace of our brethren. But this joy of Haman, was turned on a
sudden into sorrow and melancholy. For when Haman saw Mardochaeus in the
Kings gate, who did neither arise nor move himself for him, he was enflamed
with great rage against him.

Here let us first consider the constancy of Mardochaeus, and then speak
afterward of Hamans wrath. We heard before, that Mardochaeus was bold upon
the most plain and express commandment of God, whereby the Jews were
commanded to have continual enimitie with the Amalekites, out of whose nation
Haman sprang: the reason is expressed Exodus. 17. verse. 16. and Deuteron. 25.
verse 18. 19. because ^he Amalakites came out to fight with the people in the
desert to destroy them. Now ^y how much the greater that Ha^ans pride was and
his cruelty against the Church, so much the more is Mardochaeus to be
commended, that he vouchsafes not to honor him whom God by an irreuocable
decree had commanded to be holden for an enemy, and had appointed to utter
ruin and destruction. For among the notes of a good man this is not the last,
to despise the wicked. Psalm. 15. 4.
Therefore Mardochaeus did not sin either in pride or rashness, or
desperatnes, when as he would not bow himself before such an enemy, who had
sworn the slaughter and ruin of the people of God: but on the contrary, his
constancy is worthy so much the greater praise, by how much the greater and
certainer his danger was: and so much the more commendable was his courage, by
how much the more the malice and cruelty of his enemy increased. Wherefore
this constancy witnesses that he has done nothing rashly from the beginning,
and that it repented him not, that he had rather obeyed God then man: and that
he had not cast off his hope for that bloody edict proclaimed against him and
his nation: and that he was not ashamed of his religion, nor of that testimony
which he had yielded unto the truth. This constancy our Lord Jesus Christ
requires in all the faithful, when he bids them not to be ashamed of him
and his word before Luc. 9. 26. Mat. 10. 26. 28.
men, neither to be feared with their threats, neither to fear men, but to
fear him who can cast body and soul into hell fire. This constancy brought
forth so many Martyrs and constant Confessors of Christ Jesus, who confessed
and defended his truth in the midst of torments. But if any man think that
Mardochaeus should have done better, if he had kept himself farther from the
kings gate, either at first, or at this time, that Haman might not have been so
incensed: I answer, that he was one of the porters of the kings gate,
otherwise he had in deed been an impudent fellow, if of purpose he had stood
there to provoke Haman: unless perhaps we shall say, that he was moved by some
^eculiar and extraordinary motion of Gods Spirit, which the prosperous end ^id
show. If any except, that although he ^ere one of the porters, yet he might
^ake some excuse for his absence, and ^ot provoke so mighty an adversary
against him and his nation: I say that a strong, faithful and courageous man,
does not willingly seek for starting-holes, which may easily turn to his
disgrace. Besides that, peradventure they who were the keepers of the kings
gate, were so straightly holden to their office, that it was no easy matter
for them to be absent, though they used some fair show and pretense, though at
this day it be usual: and although he had once or twice absented himself, yet
could he not always be away; now Haman always freque^ted the kings house, and
passed in and out every day by that gate. Therefore let us rather admire and
imitate this constancy of Mardochaeus, then seek out matter against it, or
carp and mock at it: and, so that we find sufficiently in our heart and
conscience, by the express testimony of the word of God, that we obey his
commandeme^t^ in not obeying men, let us little care for the reproaches of men,
who condemn ^^ as mad men and obstinate, least we be ca^ried hedlong into
destruction. I confess^ that earnestly and diligently we ought t^ desire of God
the spirit of wisdom an^ discretion, least perhaps under preten^^ of zeal and
constancy we be drawn (...) way by some vehement passion of the flesh, or
heat of mind. And here by the way we must unloose this question, whether at
this day a faithful man knowing the Pope to be Antichrist, such as he is
described, 2 Thessalonians. 2. may with a good conscience honor and worship him with
those honors which others do? The answer is easy: when as this so great honor
is given unto him not ciuilly but religiously, and that he thereby may be
acknowledged such an one as he would be accounted, to weete, the head of the
Church, the vicar of Christ, the Ambassador of God on earth, nay a God on
earth: a faithful man cannot with a good conscience give him this honor, nay
he ought not give him any honor, least by his assent he seem to confess that
he is such a one as he says he is. And unto this may that be referred which
Saint John says, that he is not so much as to be 2. Ioh. v. 10.
saluted, which professes not the doctrine of Christ. And we read also in the
Ecclesiastical history, that Saint John would Eusebius. l. 3. ca. 25.
not go into that place where Cerinthus the heretic was. And thus much of
Mardochaeus constancy.

By reason of this fact, Haman was very vehemently enflamed with rage. For men
are not more angered then to see that they are despised by good men: nor more
provoked by any thing, then by seeing the constancy and courage of the godly.
Hence also we perceive, that the joy of the wicked is not durable, because
themselves trouble it with their own passions upon very small occasion. For
what great matter was there here why Haman should so rage? Did it not suffice
him that he had attained so great riches, honor, possessions? was it not enough
that he was preferred before all the rest of the courtiers, that he was
reverenced of all, beloved of the King, invited by the Queen, although he were
not so honored by Mardochaeus, who was a base fellow, a captive, a stranger
without favor, without authority? But ambition and the desire of honor can
never be filled, neither grants it any rest unto them whose minds it has
once possessed. With ambition there is mingled a desire of revenge, and a
greediness to overcome all men, and make them subject unto them at their
pleasure, which are vehement passions, whereby the unquiet mind is ever tossed
up and down, so that it cannot long enjoy that good which they hane gotten;
but by how much the lighter the matter is wherewith they are offended, so much
the more do they wax mad, unless they bring it to pass according to their
mind: not knowing, that it is not a small virtue to contemn small things, and
such as cannot hurt: and on the other side, that it is great wisdom so to
rule his affections, that the use and enjoying of those good things which they
have gotten be not lost. But Haman does little esteem whatsoever riches,
estimation, dignity, and honor, which he has received of the King, unless
out of hand he be revenged on Mardochaeus: yet he is said to have perforce
refrained himself, and come home to ask counsel of his wife and friends. He
would no doubt willingly have laid violent hands on Mardochaeus, as revenge and
wrath do quickly move the cruel, but he repressed himself, because Mardochaeus
was as it were in a sanctuary, whiles he is in his office in guarding the
kings gate: and it would also be accounted a contempt done unto the King, to lay
bloody hands on any of his servants: besides he thought with himself, that it
was better that he should be put to death with shame, keeping therein also
some form of law, then that he should die by open force. Add hereunto, that
God does restrain the fury of the wicked, that they may not execute
whatsoever they determine. Hence let us learn even by force to restrain our
passions, not only for a time as Haman did, that after they may by deceit and
guile obtain a more cruel effect: but that evil desires may altogether be
restrained, and viterly extinguished in us, that we may be obedient to Gods
will, and drive out of our mind all desire of revenge, and if we have any
injury offered, that we leave our cause and revenge unto him. And thus far of
Hamans anger.

Now being thus full of rage, he calls his friends to counsel, and
especially his wife Zeresh as the chief and principal of his counsel. In
which thing he seems to deal prudently, as becomes a wise man: but,
neither was the matter o^ such weight, whereof they did consult neither ought
he to come to counsel so enflamed with anger; neither should he use those
counselors who depended only on his beck, and would say and do all things
after his lust; neither was the thing so hotly to be proposed. And truly he
uses not such counselors, who will persuade him to any moderation: but those
who will find a way how they may speedily fulfill his furious passion:
wherefore it is also not any whit to be marueiled at, that the conclusion of
this counsel was so foolish and arrogant. But let us hear how he proposes
the matter, He shows them the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his
children: and all the things wherein the King had promoted him, and whereby he
had exalted him above all the Princes and servants of the king: and which was
even the heaping up of his glory, that he only was brought in by the Queen with
the king to the banquet: and that he only was also bidden with the king the
next day. To what end all this? that he might procure the greater envy to
Mardochaeus, and that his fact might seem the more bold and intolerable, and
that thereby he might move his friends to the like rage and revenge against him,
and therefore might desire them to show him some speedy way whereby he might
be revenged of his enemy, otherwise he professes unto them what misery he is
in. For, says he, All this avails me nothing, at what time soever I see this
Jew Mardochaeus sitting at the Kings gate. That proud recounting of his
riches, the multitude of his children, and the honor and dignity to which the
King had exalted him, is a most certain testimony of the munificence, and
liberality of God toward the wicked, the effects whereof he does many ways
power out upon them: next, that the wicked do sufficiently know, their goods,
commodities, and greatness; but never attribute them to their true author;
whence it comes, that they wax wanton in arrogancy, vanity and foolish
presumption: yea and in exceeding cruelty, that it is a capital crime, if any
submit not themselves unto them, and yield not unto them divine honors.
Moreover, the nearer their end approaches, the more do they glory and set out
their magnificence. But this is above all most worthy of observation, which
out of Hamans own confession is manifest, that the grief and trouble wherewith
the wicked are driven, for that they cannot by and by as they would destroy the
godly, who they see cannot be bowed, or brought by any means to be subject to
their tyrannical affections; do let that they cannot have any taste of their
praise, glory, riches, honor, and nobility of their stock. So the enemies
of the Church of God, to whom at this time all things came to pass as they
wished, as abundance of goods, honors, estates, favors and dignities; yet not
content therewith, they desired to see the utter ruin and overthrow of the
faithful. For when they saw but one only Prince, loving true godliness, and
taking upon him the defense of the Church, al their joy perished and delight,
which they should have taken of those honors, riches, and favors which GOD had
in abundance heaped upon them. Yea and the hatred of the Gospel had taken such
deep root in the hearts of the poor commons, astonished and bewitched by the
conspirators, the successors of Haman, that they can abide none who professes
the sincere doctrine of the son of God. And what I pray, was the end and
mark of all the counselles and assemblies of their clergy, and of all their
Preachers? was it not that the people being stirred to vproares, should not
suffer any to enjoy life, who would not consent together with them to the same
idolatry? So then even with their own commodities and in the midst of their
quiet are they troubled, whiles they see any one Mardochaeus, that is, any one
that will constantly strive for god and his truth against the errors, pride, and
ambition of Antichrist. Thus have you the oration of Haman to his friends, not
from whom he looked for counsel, but whom he would kindle with him unto
wrath. But it becomes us when we are to deliberate of any matter, not to call
to counsel those who will speak for our favor, and smoothe up our desires,
but grave men, who with all liberty and freedom of speech will admonish us
what is honest, what is profitable: and all passion must be far away from our
counsels, they must rather be governed by reason, that we may be ready to hear
those things, not which please us, but which are honest and comely. Finally, if
we must deliberate of any matter, it must be free to discuss al things on
every side, to object, to gainsay, that by search there may be found, what
shall be most honest and profitable. Wherefore they are wide from the truth and
err most grievously, who asking counsel of their friends, desire to have
their passions approved by them; for in stead of counsel, they find confusion:
which here we see to have happened unto Haman.

For see I pray, what good counselors these friends and Zeresh his wife were,
Let there, say they, be made ready a gallows of fifty Cubits high, and in the
morning speak unto the King, that they may hang Mardochaeus upon it; and then
go in joyful with the King to the banquet: which thing when it seemed good
unto Haman, he prepared the gallows.

By this counsel it is plain, that Haman being fierce and cruel, had his
wife Zeresh and his friends as cruel as himself: and therefore by Gods just
judgment, they were at last wrapped together in the same destruction, God
rightfully revenging so bloody an advise.

They advise that which they think the king will easily grant; seeing Haman
so greatly in favor with the King, and the Kings readiness always so great
in granting his requests. Whereby it comes to pass, that men wax more bold
in demanding things dishonest, when as before they have very easily obtained
the like: besides that, that men are allured with favor and good will to hope
for greater things. They do not weigh that the king received a great benefit
by the care and faithfulness of Mardochaeus, before Chap. 2. of which fact
they could not be ignorant, when as there was open execution done upon the
traitors: they think not therefore that such a benefit might come into the
kings mind; but they persuade themselves that Mardochaeus is nothing else but
a miserable and vile Jew without favor, and already condemned to death:
wherehence it comes, that they counsel no moderate matter to Haman, but run
headlong into al inhumanitie. But surely any wise counselor might thus have
dealt with Haman. What stand you upon Mardochaeus this Jew, a man of no
account? he is not worthy that you should once think of him: do you think
that your favor and estimation depends upon him, turn away your mind and
cogitation from thinking of him, and be careless and secure, is he not
already adjudged to death? But wicked me^ delight in cruel and barbarous
counsels: for what needed a gallows offiftie cubits high, unless it were
that not only they would satisfy their thirst with the blood of an innocent,
but also they longed to expose him to all men's sight, with laughter and
reproach? So the enemies of our Lord Christ Jesus were not content we see to
have nailed him to the Cross, but they would have him hang in the midst
between two thieves, as a notorious and famous thief. They add, that when
this is done, he may go in merry unto the banquet. For the enemies of the
Church of God, do feign their only joy in the death of innocents, and do
only relish with delight, those meats which are sawced with the blood of the
faithful. So Herodias does little Mare. 6. 24.
care for all the dainties at Herodes table, unless John Baptists head be
brought her in a platter: so furious is the hatred wherewith every one of the
wicked does persecute gods servants, and him whom he thinks to be his enemy.
This counsel liked Haman well, for it agreed with his passion, and he thought
he should easily obtain it. So is it often done to ouer-loose and fearful
Kings, who dare deny nothing to those that are about them: There is nothing so
wicked or inhonest, which is not craved at their hands even with hope of
obtaining. He thought besides, that it would be a pleasant and a fair show, if
he might see him who would not bow himself before him, to hang with shame and
infamy on so high a galows. Therefore he sets up the gibbet in his own
house, as after we shall see, Chap. 7. verse. 9. Neither was it a hard matter
for him to get a tree of such a height, when as in the East the trees are of
such a length, that almost it passes all credit: or else many might be grafted
together, and so make the gallows of such height. Neither ought it to seem
strange unto any, that he erected such a gibbet, when he was in so great
favor and authority, and had the kings Ring, and was next in dignity unto
the king. So by the just judgment of God it comes to pass, that the worst
and most dangerous counsels please the wicked, as the counsel of the false
Prophets did to Achab, by whose persuasion he went to Ramoth Gilead, where he
received his deaths wound, and his army was overthrown. And as the wicked
are delighted with lies, so are they easily allured by the^ as by a bait, that
they may be ensnared in their own deceirs. And indeed it is just, that those
who will have their wicked counsels praised, and allowed, and do please
themselves in them, should at the last be taken in their own nets. But let us
embrace truth and integrity: let us use moderately our joy and gladness,
least we abuse our prosperity; neither let us suffer our selves to be carried
away headlong with our passions: let us not work treachery against any, let
us seek for counsel at God, who will be our guide in all our ways, defending
us by his power, and delivering us from all violence and reproach: and
whatsoever fall upon us here, at the last he will save us in his kingdom
with Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom alone be glory, strength, and dominion, for
evermore.

Amen.
THE FIFTEENTH Sermon.
Of the honor which was given by Haman to Mardochaeus, at the Kings
commandment, and even by Hamans own appointment, in the 11. first verses of
the 6. Chapter.

CHAP. VI. 1. The same night the King slept not: and he commanded to bring the
book of the records and Chronicles; which were read before the King.

2. Then was it found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigtana and Teresh,
two of the kings Eunuchs, keepers of the door, who sought to lay hands on the
king Assuerus.

3. Then the King said, what honor and dignity has been given to Mordecai for
this? And the kings servants that ministered unto him said, There is nothing
done for him.

4. And the King said, who is in the Court? (Now Haman was come into the inner
Court of the Kings house, that he might speak unto the King to hang Mordecai
on the tree that he had prepared for him.)

5. And the Kings servants said unto him, Behold, Haman stands in the Court.
And the King said, Let him come in.

6. And when Haman came in, the King said unto him, What shall be done unto the
man, whom the King will honor? Then Haman thought in his heart, to whom would
the king do honor more then to me?

7. And Haman answered the King, the man whom the King would honor.

8. Let them bring for him royal apparel, which the King uses to wear, and
the horse that the King rides upon, and that the crown royal might be set upon
his head.

9. And let the raiment and the horse be delivered by the hand of one of the
Kings most Noble Princes, and lot them apparel the man whom the kiug would
honor, and cause him to ride upon the horse through the street of the City,
and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man, whom the king
will honor.

10. Then the King said to Haman, Make haste, take the raiment and the horse as
thou have said, and do so unto Mordecai the Jew, that sits at the Kings
gate: let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken.

11. So Haman took the raiment and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and brought
him on horseback through the street of the City, and proclaimed before him,
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King will honor.


WE are not more troubled almost with any thing in the order which God keeps
in the governing and administration of this world, then when we perceive the
wicked to flourish and be in prosperity, when in the mean while, the good do
weep and mourn. But this perturbation partly springs from this, because we
look not beyond the bounds of this life: partly, for that by reason of our
impatience, we cannot expect the notable effects of Gods judgments; which
oftentimes in this world he turns on the head of the wicked and ungodly, when
the good are mean while delivered. That therefore we may meet with this so
dangerous a tentation, we must often call to mind those sentences which every
where are found in the whole Scriptures, concerning the care which GOD bears
over the godly, and concerning the vengeance wherewith he is revenged of the
wicked: as that which is set down Psalm. 33. verse. 18. 19. Behold the eye of
the Lord is upon them ihat fear him, and that put their trust in his mercy,
To deliver their soul from death, and to preserve them in famine. and Psalm.
53. 6. That God will break the bones of the enemies. And Psalm. 58. 6. 11. That
God will break the teeth of the ungodly: and that men shall say, verily there
is fruit for the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges in the earth.
Besides, we must often set before our eyes the notable and memorable Histories
of the judgments of GOD, whereof the holy Scripture is full, and which the
experience of all ages will abundantly afford unto us, if we be diligent in
observing of them.

Such is that which in this History is proposed, in which as in a lively Image
we see, that God after he has tried his, does deliver them from reproach and
affliction, and does lift them up, even by the hands and mouth of their
enemies: whom on the contrary he does ouerwhelme with shame and confusion,
bringing to naught their counsels and wicked practices. For behold Mardochaeus,
who out of sorrow and mourning, yea even out of death it self, is drawn on
the sudden to great honors, the^ which the kings of Persia did not bestow
greater on their brauest courtiers and dearest favorites, Assuerus fitly
calling to mind the benefit which he had received at the hand of Mardochaeus.
And Haman at unawares does himself set down the manner of this rare and
extraordinary honor, and is the first author of it unto the king: and afterward
is compelled with his own hand to perform that which he had prescribed. In
which action the singular and admirable providence of God does shine, seeing
that all things were so conveniently and fitly done to wit, the kings waking,
who could not sleep all night; the reading out of the Chronicles, which he
commands to be done before him; and therein the remembrance of Mardochaeus
benefit occurring; the ready will of the king to recompense is; Hamans so fit
coming, though to another end; the question proposed by the king, of him whom
the king would honor; Hamans answer and conceit of himself; and the kings
commandment of leading Mardochaeus with triumph through the city: that in
this narration especially, if ever in any, there appears the truth of this
common proverb, To him that awayteth, all things fall out fitly. For what
could happen more to be wished for, what more convenient, as well for Ester and
Mardochaeus, as for all the Jews, then that which here God does dispose,
commanding so many contrary things to meet herein together, to the
consolation of the godly, who were greatly oppressed, and to the confusion and
shame of Haman and his confederates? Let us then more diligently weigh every
particular, that we may the better taste the most wise counsel of God in all
things, and his wonderful government, and that we may acknowledge how good
and gentle he is toward his, and how sharp and severe to his enemies.

First therefore there is declared, that when the King could not sleep, he
commanded that they should read unto him the book of the records, that is,
the Chronicles. Memorable is that night, because in it by Gods purpose and
providence there was prepared a remedy, whereby the Church should be delivered
from all her fear and danger, and Hamans pride should be beaten down, and all
the enemi^es of the Church confounded. And as Assuerus took not his rest,
perhaps doutfull what the Q. Ester his wife would demand, so it is likely that
Ester also was* careful by what means she might best speak unto the king,
and propound her request unto him: and that Mardochaeus was in great fear, by
reason of Hamans fury, whereof he could not be ignorant, when as the galowes
was already set up, neither would Haman cease, until he had reue^ged himself,
and brought his furious purposes to an end. So good men watch in defense of the
Church and their own safeguard, the wicked watch for their destruction and
overthrow of the godly, and God takes away sleep from the King, that by his
means he may provide for the safety of his, and heap confusion on Hamans
head. Although therefore the kings sleep was hindered by some natural cause,
yet God of purpose would have him to watch, and sent into his heart a desire to
hear the history of his own time. So God either sends or takes away
sleep as seems good unto himself for the profit of those whom he will help,
so that he oftentimes waketh who would gladly sleep, and he sleeps who would
willingly awake, God by this means furdering his work, men for the most part
not knowing it, or thinking of it, until Gods decree be executed. Heerehence
it appears, that the kings in those times, were not like the kings of our
time, who turn the day into night: sleeping in the day, because they will not
do the works of the light: and passing the night without sleep, because they
are delighted with the works of darkness. I confess that is true which the
Greek Poet has: A counselor ought not to sleep all night: but to pass
whole nights in pleasures and delights, and to neglect ones duty, is the part
of mad men, not only overthrowing al modesty and honesty, but also the very
order of nature. But this is to be commended in the king, that for the ease of
his mind, and not to loose that time wherein he could not sleep, he commanded
not books of love, not fables, not trifles to be read unto him, which at this
day courtiers both night and day delight in, but the history of things done in
his time faithfully written, as before we have seen about the end of the
second Chapter. For I pray, who ought rather to be skillful in histories, and
especially of their own kingdoms then Kings, whereout they may learn
examples of all sorts to inform the^ manners and judgment, and that they may
know what is well done, what ill? Is it not a great shame that Kings know
nothing of the affairs of their state, but by the relation of others? Here
hence we learn, how profitable it is to have certain and true histories to
be written, and those to be read also of them who have the government of the
commonwealth. For otherwise what does it auail^ to have good and faithful
histories written if they be not read? By the exampl^ also of this King we
learn, what we^ should do when sleep forsakes us, to weete, either read
things profitable, as ^re the sacred histories, and whatsoever is contained in
Gods most holy word; or ^tleast repeat and record in memory, those good
things which we have seen, ^eard, or read; taking heed that we be not ^roubled
or vinquiet, either in body or ^inde.

Neither was it by fortune or chance, that this history of the conspiracy of
^igtan and Teresh against the king de^ected by Mardochaeus, was read unto the
^ing: but by Gods will, that the king ^ight call to mind, which he had forgot,
^he benefit received by his fidelity and ^atchfulnesse, and so yield
recompense ^or preservation of his life. That happe^ed about four years after
that Ester ^as preferred to the dignity royal, which ^as in the seventh year
of the king As^^erus: and the things which here are ^ecited, fell out in the
twelfth year. So ^^ng a space of time did pass, wherein ^he king remembered
not so great a be^efite, or did yield requital to Mardo^^aeus who had so well
deserved it. Al^hough in this respect, the king was not without fault, as
showing thereby an unthankful mind and forgetful of a benefit received, yet
notwithstanding God did defer the recompense of that benefit unto a better
time, and more commodious opportunity, as well for Mardochaeus, as for his
whole nation: and besides, for the ouerturning of Hama^s devises with greter
shame, then if by and by after the good turn performed he had received his
reward. The requital then of things well done never perishes with God, and
although their reward many times be deferred, yet is it not taken away, whether
God requite it by those who have received them, or by others, or whether
himself of his mere grace and liberality do recompense those that have well
deserved. Let us not then at any time be weary in well doing because of men's
unthankful minds, for at the last, though God seem to slack it for a time,
yet shall we reap most abundant fruit of those things which we have well done
by the direction of his word and the light of faith. For those things which are
well done, are more faithfully recorded in the Lords book, then in any records
of the histories of this world.

See now how God stirs up the mind of Assuerus by the reading of this
history, for he demands, What honor and dignity has been given to
Mordecai for this, and understanding by his servants, that there had been
nothing done for him, he does with advised deliberation purpose to do it. Who
can doubt but that this motion of his mind came from God, by whom only the wills
of men are disposed and inclined unto good? For unless God by some secret
force of his had wrought herein, what hope was there that the king, who when he
had the fact of Mardochaeus as yet in fresh memory, did not care or think of
requital of it, at which time it seems he would rather have done it, because
lately he was delivered out of the danger of death, and conspiracies of the
traitors: what hope I say was there that he should be stirred up, so long
after with the dead reading to think of the benefit received by Mardochaeus
fidelity and to requite it? For it comes to pass for the most part, that
unless whiles the benefit is fresh in memory it be requited, the grace and
estimation of it perishes in process of time, as men are wont in time to
forget thos^ good turns which we have received either of God or man: as the
old proverb witnesses; The memory of a good turn sleeps. That the king
therefore asks whether any honor or recompense has been done to Mardochaeus,
for it does show, that for these four years in this respect his mind had been
very forgetful. For who should have been more mindful then himself, either
of a benefit received, or of not recompencing it? And yet his servants remember
it better then he. Howbeit God so long a time after, does not only revive it
and call it to memory, but also give a desire to requite it. For these
principles are ingrafted by nature in every one, that every good turn
deserves a reward, and that the reward must be equal to the benefit. Now what
greater benefit can kings receive, then to have their life preserved from the
conspiracy of traitors, and so with their life to have their states defended?
Rightly therefore does the king think that this duty was worthy to be
requited with honor and preferment, and does also determine to perform it.
And would to God that this principle might take deep root in the minds of all
of what degree soever they be, high, mean, or low, that those who have
deserved well of us, are to be rewarded and honored according to the ability
of every one who receives a benefit: for then should we not daily see so many
unthankful minds, and much less so much perverseness in altering and
extenuating of those benefits which good men have done, whether to their King,
or to their country, or to their friends and neighbors. For what can remain
sound in the public state and society of man, if you take away the
punishment of wickedness, and the reward of well doing? The King then does very
well in enquiring whether Mardochaeus has received an honor for reward of his
fidelity: the servants do better, who remembering well all those things which
had passed, do certify the king of the truth of the matter. And surely it is
seemly that the servants of Princes should so mark what is done, that when
need shall require, they may be sure to render a faithful testimony of
every thing; not altering any thing either for hatred or for favor, which yet
courtiers are wont to do.

The good mind and unfeigned good will of the king to do Mardochaeus good, is
thereby apparent, that even early in the morning he enquireth who of the
courtiers were in the court, that he might consult with them about the
honoring of Mardochaeus according to his mind. And it seems that the
reading, and the communication of the king with his servants, continued even
until the morning, that together with the light of the day, God also might
bring some light of deliverance and safety unto him who by the most cruel
determination of his enemy was condemned to a shameful death. Here the most
notable and evident providence of God does appear, that Assuerus does not
determine of himself, neither takes counsel with his servants who were
present, what reward and honor Mardochaeus should have, nor in what manner or by
whom this honor should be done unto him. For perhaps it never would have come
into the kings mind or the minds of his servants, to have devised such a
kind of honor for Mardochaeus, as Haman prescribed when he was demanded. Lo
how God does lead and direct the wills and counsels, the times and seasons,
yea the words and talk of me^ by his hidden providence, to fulfill that which
he has decreed; and that even when men know not of it, and think or deliberat
of nothing less then to obey Gods will, or perform and serve his purpose and
providence: on which yet alone we ought to depend, bending our intent wholly on
this, to do our duty faithfully, obey him, and place our whole confidence in
him. Behold then how Haman when he came to desire that Mardochaeus might be
hanged on a gibbet, is most fitly by God and the king chosen, to set down the
sentence of most high honor to be bestowed on Mardochaeus, and himself to be
the minister thereof: and by this means yield unto him most exceeding honor,
whom he went about to bring to extreme shame and violent death. Haman was come
very early in the morning to satisfy his insatiable desire of revenge, by
obtaining authority to destroy Mardochaeus with a shameful death. So at this
day the deadly enimics of the Church sleep not, neither give themselves any
rest, but continually are in the Kings house, and stand at his elbow, and never
leave crying in the ears both of the king, and of all that are in any favor
and authority with him, to encourage them to the destruction of the whole
Church. Haman is called in out of the utter court, because (as we have heard)
it was not lawful for any to go in any farther, unless he were called by
name. Now that he was exceeding joyful it is likely: for he thought that by
this means there was most fit occasion offered unto him, to obtain his
bloody demand. That Haman of our time, that day that he was called early
unto the king, to receive the due reward for his deserts, did marueilouslie
rejoice, thinking that there was occasion offered unto him Luc. 6. 25.
utterly to destroy and root out the faithful professors of the Gospel. But
the matter fell far otherwise then Haman supposed, although allured by the
first speech of the kings, he nourish great hope in his mind, and did promise
unto himself greater honors then hitherto he had enjoyed. Assuerus therefore
asks him, What shall be done unto the man, with whose honor the King is
delighted? Wisely does Assuerus suppress his name whom he would honor: but
that wisdom came from God, who would have those honors due unto Mardochaeus,
to be appointed and described by the mouth and counsel of his most deadly
enemy. For otherwise it is not probable that Assuerus would mock Haman, or go
about to entrap him: but God did pitch the nets for this proud and crafty
enemy.

Moreover the Holy Ghost does open unto us the proud thoughts of Haman, when
he is said thus to have pondered in his mind, Whom would the King rather
bring to honor then me? So God is wont often to lay open the secret thoughts
of his enemies, that he may laugh at their pride, make known their insolency
and wantonness, and show the^ to be altogether inexcusable. Of this sort were
the foolish imaginations of the mother of Sisera, who when she perceived Iud.
5. 28. 29. 30.
that her sons chariots stayed, persuades her self that he was busy in
dividing the spoils, and that even then who^ he was dead, being ignobly slain
by Iael a woman. So Isai, does deride the foolish Isai. 14. 13.
boastings of the king of Babylon, as though he would climb up above the
clouds, and place his throne and seat in heaven, and make himself equal
with God. So the thoughts of Nabuchadnezar are detected, when he said in his
heart, Is not this that great Babylon, whose foundation Dan. 4. 30
my hands have laid? Heerehence we learn by experience, that the ambitious
are never filled with honor: and although they be most wicked and unworthy,
yet they think themselves worthy of all honor and magnificence: as this Haman
here persuades himself, that he alone amongst all the rest was worthy that
honor which the king meant to bestow upon any: and that he only deserved such
great honors as any man was able to devise. So are the wicked wont to build
castles in the air, even when their destruction hangs over their heads, as
Solomon excellently Prou. 16. 18.
describes, Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before a fall.
Wherefore we ought to hold for suspected, all vain hope of glory and
magnificence due unto us, wherewith we feed our fantasies: and then to fear
the greater fall, when we go about to be exalted above our measure. Let us
rather imitate David's modesty, so that we may truly glory with him: Lord,
mine heart is not Psalm. 131. 1.
haughty, neither are mine eyes lofty, neither have I walked in great matters
which are too high for me.

Wherefore Haman thinking that he shall pronounce sentence of honors to be
bestowed on himself, does thus answer to the kings question, That the man
whom the King would honor shall (1) be apparelled with the Kings apparel,
(2) be ^^ryed upon the Kings horse, (3) have the Kings crown set upon his
head, (4) and that by one of the chief Princes: (5) and so to be lead with
triumph thorough the streets of the city, (6) to have proclaimed before him,
Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will honor. Haman makes no
mention of gifts or rewards to be bestowed on him whom the king would honor, he
had forsooth riches sufficient, and he was only desirous of honor. And it
might be that he had this hope ^n himself, that when he was exalted ^^to so
high dignity, he might easily take what occasions he listed to get riches. That
Haman of our age, thought himself worthy no less honor then this did: nay
rather it is evident that he aspired to somewhat more, and indeed to have
desired the kings apparel that he might spoil the king thereof; to be
carried on the kings horse, that he might make him go on foot; and to put the
kings crown upon his head, that he might thrust him into a monastery: and so
having deposed his king, he might use the service of the Peers of the blood
royal, and be carried with triumph through the cities royal, and command to be
proclaimed, not by one but by all; not thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king will honor; but God save the king: him who is worthier of the kingdom
then the king himself. When ambition has taken root in the minds of Nobles,
it can abide no moderation, but desires to be lifted up above all dignity and
excellency. But how can it be that warlike men made drunk with the wine of
the fornicatio^s of that whore of Rome should not do thus, when that whore
dares to lift up her self above all that is called ^. These. 2. 4*
God? Thus have you Hamans advise, promising unto himself royal triumphs, but
the fool fell far from his imagination, which let us consider out of the
kings decree expressed in these words: Make haste, says he, take the apparel
and the horse as thou have said, and do so to Mardochaeus the ^ew, who sits
in the kings gate: omit not any thing of all that which thou have spoken. The
providence of God is to be observed in this commandment of the kings, who so
suddenly changed the Kings will, that he would command this Courtier so
beloved, so magnified to serve Mardochaeus, and to be compelled to so base an
office, from so high a degree of honor: and this is so much the more to be
observed, because the King could not be ignorant, with how great hatred Haman
followed all the Jews. Now Kings are not wont for a light cause without
offense so hardly to entreat and debase their dear attendants and those whom
they have magnified above the rest: but here the kings commandment is
straight and precise: Make have, take the apparel, do as thou have said, omit
nothing of that which thou have spoken. What could a man more straightly
enjoin his servant? But God would have the King speak thus peremptorily, that
Haman might be terrified, and his pride beaten down, neither that he should
flee unto the excellency of his dignity, but that he should execute the advice which he himself had given. Such is the estate and condition of
Courtiers, that after the lust of Kings, and at a word they are suddenly lifted
up, and suddenly thrown down: so changeable and unconstant is their condition
and dignity, which hangs upon that slender and rotten thread of man's favor:
Who oftentimes to make show of his power, is delighted with such sudden
changes, throwing down those whom he has lifted up: treading under feet,
those whom before he did extol: ouerwhelming with shame, those whom they had
ennobled with honor: finally, using them as things created by themselves, and
that worthily, seeing the courtiers are delighted with this manner of creation,
with wicked sacrilege, transferring unto men, that which is due unto god alone.

Haman affrighted with this voice, neither dares answer, nor resist: but,
though against his will, executes that which he was commanded. Hereby
appears how great the authority and power of Assuerus was, to wit, absolute;
such as at this day the Turk does exercise over all his subjects. And here
also appears the cowardice and base mind of Haman. He might (as it seems)
object many things; to wit, that this Jew was, his most hateful enemy:
already condemned by the Kings proclamation: that he was rebellious against the
Kings commandment of honoring him: that it should not be honorable for the
King to bestow so great honors upon a man of so base estate: that his
benefit was not so great, which proceeded not from any manliness or courage,
but only from the bare reporting of words which might be by any the most
cowardly slave, who should not therefore be accounted worthy so great honor:
finally, if he had objected nothing else but that he could not in a matter so
base, cast down himself before his most deadly enemy, it might have been
sufficient: for had it not been far more commendable for him before men, to
have dyed manfully, then so against his will to frame himself unto the Kings
will? But this for the most part, is the nature and disposition of them who
place their hope and felicity in the grace and favor of Princes, that they do
most seruilely abase themselves to the ministry of many things, which ought
to be unto them more grievous then death it self* So God oftentimes is wont to
throw down their courage who seem that they will rather die for mad, then
to yield but one iotte of their dignity and magnificence.

Mark here a wonderful change i^ the persons, as well of Haman as of
Mardochaeus. For Haman is compelled to apparel him whom he desired to spoil,
an^ to carry him upon horseback, of whom he would needs be adored; to
adorn^ his head with the Crown royal, whos^ neck he desired to break with
an haulter; to prepare a triumph for him, for whom he had erected a gallows;
and t^ proclaim before him whom he would have oppressed with reproach, Thus
she ^^ be done to the man, whom the King will honor: Finally, Haman here is
compelled to play the part of a servant, in apparelling of Mardochaeus; of a
horseman, in helping him to horse; of an usher, in going before him; and of a
crier, in proclaiming his honor.

On the other side, Mardochaeus being ^ppressed with tears and sorrow, is
ap^arelled with gladness: he that lay in the ^ust, is carried on the kings
horse: he that altogether was swallowed up with sad^esse, is Crowned with joy:
he who was ^ppointed to a shameful death, is honou^ed, and that by him who
had wrought all (...) mischiefs against him. Worthily ^^en might this
faithful servant of God (...) out, the Innocent shall not loose his la^our:
How precious is thy goodness o God, to them that put their trust under ^^e
shadow of thy wings! and that: * How Ps. 31. 20. 21
^^eat is thy goodness which thou have laid up ^^r those that fear thee! and
that Salua^^on Ps. 37. 39. Ps. 92. 11. 12.
belongs unto God: and also that Thou (...) lift up my horn as the horn of
an Vni^^rne, for I am anointed with fresh oil, And (...) eye shall behold thy
judgments against ^^ose that lie await for me. Now these ^^ings are written,
not that out of them every one of us should imagine to himself the like
triumphs that Mardochaeus had, or like honor in this world: but let it
suffice us to have made trial, that God is the defender of our honor, and that
he will bring forth thy righteousness as the light, Ps. 37. 6.
and thy justice as the noonday: that those who desired to seevs overwhelmed
with shame and slanders, shall be compelled to approve the righteousness of
our cause, and to honor our right: yea even the very enemies of the truth
shall be compelled to acknowledge the innocence of the Martyrs, and of those
whom they have persecuted. The full accomplishment and effect whereof if we
see not in this world, at the last when the time of refreshing shall come, we
shall behold it. Wherefore take courage my brethren, let us follow
righteousness and innocence; let us constantly suffer the cross of Christ
Jesus; let us not envy at the prosperity of the wicked; let us repose our
hope in the grace of our GOD; let us wait for the event of his promises, and
we shall see at length the confusion and utter destruction of his and our
enemies; and shall be Crowned at the last with glory and felicity in the
life everlasting with Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom only be power, glory, and
dominion, for evermore.

Amen.
THE SIXTEENTH Sermon.
Haman being beaten down with sorrow hides himself at home, and asks
counsel of his friends, who denounce unto him a woeful event: thence he is
called with haste unto the banquet, which is turned into a snare and deadly net
unto him. From v. 12. of this 6. Chapter, unto the third verse of the next.

12. And Mordecai came again to the Kings gate, but Haman hasted home mourning
and his head covered.

13. And Haman told Zeresh his wife, and all his friends, all that had be
fallen him, Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, Seeing
Mordecai is of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou
shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.

14. And while they were yet talking with him, the Kings Eunuchs came, and
hasted to bring Haman to the banquet that Ester had prepared.


CHAP. VII. 1. So when the King and Haman came to the banquet with the Queen
Ester:

2. The King said again unto Ester on the second day, at the banquet of Wine,
what is thy petition Queen Ester, and it shall be given thee? and what is thy
request? (...) shall be even performed unto the half of the Kingdom.


WHen as the Lord once begins to draw the most cruel enemies of his church
into judgment, to execute vengeance upon the^ according to the desert of their
prid^ and cruelty, suddenly are they seen t^ be entangled in the bands of
their iniquity, amazed with sorrow and mourning overwhelmed with shame to
seek to hide themselves, to be condemned by their own friends, and sentence
to be pronounced against them in the midst of their delights, wherein they
looked for comfort in their distress. Which here we see to happen unto Haman,
who when on the sudden he was fallen from his hope, hieth him home with his
head covered, by reason of his exceeding sorrow: and there he hears sentence
to be pronounced against him, that most assuredly he shall fall, seeing he
has to do with the Jews. Thence is he brought unto the banquet with the King
and the Queen: but that table was unto him a judgment seat of condemnation,
at which, as anon after we shall hear, judgment is given against him: that
here may be an example of the fearful vengeance of God upon his enemies, when
once he has turned his angry countenance against them. And ^his is that which
is spoken, Psalm. 39. 11. When thou with rebukes do chastise man for
iniquity, thou as a moath make his ^ewtie to consume. And in an other place,
Psalm. 68. 1. 2. Let God arise, and his enemies shall be scattered, they also
that hate him shall flee before him: As the smoke vanishes, so shall thou
drive them away, and as wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked
perish at the presence of God. Here also we see that fulfilled which is spoken
by Eliphaz, Job. 5. 13. God takes the wise in their craftiness, and the
counsel of the wicked is made foolishness: and that which the wise man
speaks in the Proverbs, Chap. 11. 6. 8. The transgressors shall be taken in
their own wickedness: when the righteousness of the just shall deliver the.
And, The righteous escapes out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead. But yet notwithstanding, this is not to be drawn into a general rule,
as though God dealt withal the wicked after this manner in this world: or as
though they were all to be accounted wicked and unrighteous, as many as are
oppressed with great and sudden calamities. For many good men are oftentimes
shaken with the greatest miseries and sorrows in this life, and on the
contrary part, many wicked and ungodly men live in prosperity, and die
quietly, as though they had escaped gods hand. Howbeit god does oftetimes show
forth in this world, notable signs of his wrath against the enemies of his
truth. Which although he execute after diverse sorts, yet this in general is
most evident, that they are overwhelmed with sudden mischief, as a woman with
child, and to hear their condemnation before their death, even by their
dearest and nearest friends: and that oftentimes the place where they imagined
to find rest and quiet, is turned unto a deadly bait. And these things in
general are most worthy the noting in this History, but let us also discuss
every part thereof.

First here is offered the modesty of Mardochaeus, who having received that
honor which we have spoken of before, returns to his ordinary office (as it
seems) to wit, to the Kings gate: testifying thereby, that his mind did not
swell with any pride, but to think of his duty with fear and carfulness,
and to remember that he is not yet delivered from all danger, that Edict
remaining yet written against the Jews. Besides, that honor bestowed upon
him, although it were very great and almost immeasurable, in regard of his
state, passed away in one morning, that rightly it may be said, if he received
none other reward, that it was honor without gain, yea honor full of vain
ostentation and pride only, and of no firm and stable dignity. But these
were but an entrance and a show before of greater and more continual honor to
follow, when Hamans malice was detected, and worthily punished.

Heerehence therefore we learn, not to be puffed up and wax insolent with
any courtly grace and favor, or any other honor. For the favor of men is
momentanie, and all honor slideth away, and vanishes as smoke into the air.
It remains that we use it well, to the defense and commodity of the Church,
and depend altogether upon Gods goodness, not placing our trust in any earthly
Prince, seeing that the greatest and most mighty Princes are nothing else but
vanity, nay altogether lighter then vanity: as it is said, Psalm. 62. 9. Let
us beware therefore, that we be not turned away the least jot from our duty,
by any blast of courtly grace or favor, or from any honest thought which
beseems us and our state, and which we ought to prefer before all things,
even the most precious. And thus far touching Mardochaeus, who though he
thought modestly of himself, yet he did not cease to comfort and cheer up
himself, considering and beholding with himself the wonderful governance of
the Lord, who had defended his right, and brought his integrity into light;
and honored his piety and righteousness, striking that proud Haman on the
other side with fear and astonishment, when he had delivered his life out of
his bloody hands. So Christian modesty does not hinder, but that we may
rejoice in those good and profitable things which are offered us from God, and
magnify the uprightness of his judgments, as it is said, Psalm. 52. 6. 7. The
righteous seeing the overthrow of the wicked which boasted of their
wickedness, shall laugh, and give God continual thanks for his judgments.
So we see David oftentimes to rejoice, that God had broken Ps. 3. 7. and 27. 2.
the cheeke-bone of his enemies, and their teeth in their mouth: and that he
saw those who came with open mouth to devour him, to be destroyed. But we
must take especial heed we mingle not carnal and fleshly joy, with that
spiritual joy which springs from the spirit of God, and a right zeal of his
glory. Lo here the joy and gladness of Mardochaeus.

Let us here now on the contrary Hamans sorrow and mourning, He hasted him home
mourning and his head covered. This he did according to the manner and custom
of those times, that those who had received any notable calamity, did cover
their heads in sign of that sorrow and grief which they felt in themselves:
that if it were possible they would neither see any body, nor be seen by any.
So David fleeing from Jerusalem, for fear of Absalom, went barefooted and his
head covered, by this sign testifying his great sorrow which he had for the
treason of his son, his people, and of him whom he supposed to have bin a
faithful counselor, Achitophel. So that as in prosperous matters, by reason of
joy, we lift up our head and countenance, as David did profess of himself,
Thou liftest up my horn as the horn of an Unicorn, and make me to walk,
with an upright countenance: so on the contrary, sadness throws down a
man's countenance, and harms received, do cover the head with shame and
disgrace.

Lo here then Haman, who promised himself high honors and great
magnificence, is over whelmed with shame and reproach: in sign whereof he
covers his head, either with the lap of his garment or with somewhat else:
behold him thrown down with sorrow, grief, and fear, which God uses as
Bayliffes and Seriants, to draw the wicked into judgment, that they may leave
off to wax proud in their fond cogitations and vain hope. And surely Haman is
not sorrowful without cause, partly because he seemed to loose that favor and
place which before he had with the King; partly because that he was so abased
before Mardochaeus, whom he esteemed no better then a dog: and was forced to
be Usher unto him whom he judged worthy naught but the gallows: who could
never be brought to bow himself before Haman, whom yet all other Courtiers did
honor.

But in very deed, so must the wicked who have provoked the Lord unto wrath,
and have risen up against his inheritance, so I say, must they be pressed
within with sorrow and fear, without with shame and reproach: which thing we
see David does most times pray for, against the enemies of the Church: as that
Psalm. 109. 18. 19. Let him be clothed with cursing as with a garment, and let
it come as water into his bowels and like oil into his bones. Let it be unto
him as a cloak to cover him, and as the girdle that he is always girded
withal. Also Ps. 55. 15.
, Let death seize upon them, let them go down quick into the grave. And
again, Lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and Ps. 69. 27. 28.
let them be put out of the book of life. Worthily then does he lie
overwhelmed with sorrow and shame, who went about the overthrow and destruction
of the whole Church of God. By this we learn, that we must give diligent head,
that we go not about to work hurt or injury unto any, if we will have our
sorrows to be assuaged by the consolation of the holy Ghost; and not to have
them made deadly and incurable, as was this sorrow of Hamans, who seeking
solace for his evils in his house, among his friends and familiars found no
where more matter of dolor and despair.

For when he had declared to Zeresh his wife, and to all his friends, all those
things that had befallen him, he received this only answer of them, Seeing
that Mardochaeus is of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to
fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall assuredly fall before him.
He felt himself already judged within himself: he sought therefore remedy
among his friends, and by them he is adjudged and condemned to destruction. So
it happened unto him, which God threatens unto the wicked by the prophet Amos:
that if they fled from a Lion, Amos. 5. 19.
a Bear should meet him, and if he went into the house and leaned on the
wall, a Serpent should bite him. In this counsel of his friends, Haman makes
no mention, as before of his riches, nor of the multitude of his children, nor
of all that dignity wherewith the king had magnified him, but he is compelled
to speak of his shame and folly. For he reckons up particularly whatsoever
came to pass, to weete, that the king proposed the question unto him, of him
whom he would honor; his answer unto it; the hope that he had conceived in
his mind; the straight commandment of the king to do all that honor which he
had set down unto Mardochaeus: finally, how all things came to pass contrary
to his expectation. This being done, and his wound discovered to his friends
and familiars, he sought of them a remedy, whereby either it might be healed
thoroughly, or at least by some means mitigated. Here is no mention made of
seeking unto God in prayer, or of repentance, or of asking pardon, but only
deceits and wiles to escape the hand of God that did persecute him: Haman
persuades himself that his wife is not to seek of some devise, and he hops
that by his friends means, he shall find some occasion, whereby by slanders
and false furmises he may make Mardochaeus odious unto the King, and at the
last triumpli over him as a conqueror. For the wicked promise unto themselves
deliverance out of all distresses, by their malice and deceits: but oftentimes,
in steed of medicine, they find poison. For lo what Hamans friends who are
called wise men, do answer in few words, Assuredly thou shall fall before
Mardochaeus: Why so? Because he is a Jew, and because thou have begun to fall
before him. They are not without cause here called wise men, giving such an
answer: for although they were not endued with the wisdom of Gods spirit, yet
against their wills they make a wise answer, out of that feeling which they
had of the wonderful works of the God of Israel. But what manner of answer I
pray, and how unusual? how variable and how changeable are they in their
counsels? for but the day before they gave counsel to hang Mardochaeus on a
gibbet, and yet they knew as well then that Mardochaeus was a Jew as now: for
so Haman had described him unto them in the Chapter last before, ver. 13. Why
then did they not think so at that time as now? Forsooth they endeavored then
to curry favor with their friends, whose prosperity dazeled their eyes: and
whereas Haman sought for flatterers, it was meet that he should receive
hurtful counsel at their hands. Now his friends are more quicksighted, the
mist of false honor being removed from their eyes, and the veil of felicity
and flattering fortune (that I may so speak) wherewith Haman was so de^ighted
being taken away. So the wise men of this world do never give sound counsel
to those that are puffed up with the success of their prosperity: for their
eyes wax dim with that outward blaze; but if adversity happen, then the
dimnesse being taken away, they are cleere-eyed, and they speak the truth more
frankly. Behold how the dispositions of men are changed with the alteration of
their state! But yet not withstanding they are not as wise as they should be
for their friends good. For why do they not at the least persuade him to throw
down the gibbet, the sign of his pride, and their wicked counsel? Why do
they not mitigate his sorrow with comfortable words, to weere, that th^^ was
but a sudden motion of the king and the honors bestowed on Mardochaeus, were
but a courtly blast, which would not continue long? Or why do they not rather
warn him to flee unto the God of Israel, to crave pardon, and to reconcile
himself unto Mardochaeus. The wicked though they see some sparkle of the truth
glittering, yet they are bleared in their counsels, as Job says Job. 12. 20.
God changes the lip of the eloquent, and takes away the judgment of the
ancient. Besides, the enemies of the Church do ^unne with such force and
fury to the de^truction of it, that they cannot take any ^ood counsel:
neither can they wade (...) of that depth, whereinto, laboring (...) ruin of
the Church, they have plun^ed themselves. Haman could not call ^acke the decree
made against the Jews, neither could he honestly go about it. What is then to
be done? Let him be (...), and receive sentence of his de^^ruction, even by the
mouth of his ^^iends and familiars, which they do pro^^unce, not as doubting of
the event, but (...) it were beholding his fall with their (...): for they say,
Thou shall surely fall ^^fore him.

They have reasons of great weight. Thou have begun already to fall. 2. He
(...) the seed of the Jews. And these things (...) speak, that they may
acknowledge (...) certain hand of God in those things ^^ich happened; that so
many things (...) Mardochaeus favor and Hamans con^^sion did not meet
together by chance: (...) God ruling and disposing all those ^^^ngs. For though
the Heathen gave much unto Fortune, yet often were they driven to acknowledge
the hand of God. So the sorcerers among the Egyptians, when they saw the
miracles of Exodus 8. 19.
Moses, which they could not imitate, they said, This is the finger of God. So
the Philistines, when they carried about the ark of God which they had taken
captive, at the last being brought under by 1. Sam. 6.
plagues, were compelled to confess that those things came from the God of
Israel. So these men perceive, that Mardochaeus could not obtain so great
honors as Haman told of, instead of that shameful death which they devised
for him without Gods hand. But whence at the last grew this opinion among them,
that he should perish, whosoever went about any mischief against the Jews? It
may be answered, that the wonderful work^ of God which he had wrought in
defending his people against their enemies could not be unknown unto the
nation amongst whom the Jews dwelt: an^ especially that which as yet was
fresh (...) memory, the band of their captiuiti^ broken by the subversion of
the Babylonia Monarchy: and that Cyrus the first Monarke of the Persians had
sent home the Jews, when by public proclamation he had set the^ free, and
bestowed upon them great gifts and rewards. Moreover the Amalekites, of whom
Haman was descended, could not be ignorant what slaughters they had sustained
by the Jews, and what sentence God had pronounced against them in his law, as
before we have showed out of Deuter. 25. and Exodus 17. All these things then
when as they might remember, they did the more boldly affirm that Haman should
fall, seeing he had entered into enimitie with the Jews.

Heerehence we are to observe, that among the enemies of the Church, there are
many, who whether they will or no, do acknowledge that God has oftentimes
stretched out his hand to the preservation of his Church, and is her most
strong defense, and that at the last, their counsels come to an evil end, who
have gone about to destroy her. But this feeling of theirs by every light
occasion is lost, and vanishes, as the wicked are driven in their diverse
thoughts, sometimes one way, sometimes another, like unto those who are tossed
with great tempests upon the sea. Yet notwithstanding, seeing the Lord shows
himself so plainly by defeating their counsels, breaking their practices,
and throwing down the heads and chief authors by violent death, unless they
be altogether Atheists, they are compelled at last to confess that the godly
are preserved by Gods mighty hand, whom the world goes about to overthrow.
We ought to take great comfort by this, and to apply by a true faith unto our
selves, as well the promises of God, as the admirable deliverances of the
Church, both in times past, and in this present age. For how often has he
dissolved the most furious practices of our enemies? By what means did he
break in pieces that Invincible, as they called it, and fearful navy and
army of the Spaniards against England. How did he in France throw down the
head of the Leaguers, and filled the enemies of the Church with turmoyles and
confusion? Ought not we to be affected with greater feeling of so wonderful
works of God wrought for our deliverance and safety, then are the miserable
idolaters, who are only feared and astonished with them? Let us therefore assure
our selves that we are made the people of God by the mercy of Christ Jesus,
Romans 11. 17.
and grafted into the good Olive tree, that we may be accounted the true
children of Abraham, and so all the promises made unto the Church to belong
unto us. Therefore let us certainly know, that our adversaries shall not
bring to pass their devises and practices, but that the Church shall be unto
them a heavy stone, all that lift it up shall Zach. 12. 3. Zach. 2. 8. Mat.
16. 18.
be torn, as Zacharias speaks: finally, that the firmness of the Church is
in heaven, and is conserved by him who has all power in heaven and in earth,
and who loves her as the apple of his eye. Wherefore neither the world, nor
Tyrants, nor Leaguers, nor the gates of Hell, shall prevail any thing against
her; but they shall all miserably perish, Psalm. 128. 5.
and be overwhelmed with shame and reproach as many as make war against Sion.
Thus far of the conclusion of Hamans friends.

In the mean while the Kings Eunuchs ^ame, who hasted to bring Haman to the
banquet that Ester had prepared. He would more willingly, I think, have
lamented his ill success at home, rather then to have hasted to the banquet:
for he who is in sorrow, is not greatly delighted with meat: and he whose
mind is sawced with bitterness, takes no pleasure in royal feasts. Howbeit,
Haman fearing the Kings displeasure, dares not refuse. He might also suppose
that it might make much to the covering of his disgrace, if he were so brought
unto Esters banquet with the King. And peradventure also he persuaded himself,
that in this feast he might take some occasion to hurt Mardochaeus. He goes
therefore, and is brought with honor together with the King unto the banquet,
but carries his condemnation in his bosom. So it comes to pass, that not
all that glistereth is gold, as it is said in the prouerbe^ and many times
they are accounted most happy, who hide great sorrow in their hearts, and do
stand in fear^ of death and destruction hanging over their heads. Let us not
therefore enui^ at the success of the wicked, or at their prosperity: for the
wrath of God does persecute them, and they carry their own conscience as their
executioner.

Assuerus again in this banquet, provoke the Queen Ester to demand what she
would, ratifying again that promise, not to deny her any thing whatsoever,
even unto the half of his kingdom. We have spoken before of these ambitious
promises of Princes, so that it needs not to speak any more here thereof:
only this is to be added, that God did so rule the kings tongue, that the
Queen Ester might more confidently be bold to propose her petition unto the
King. Whereunto also that did much further her, that Mardochaeus had such honor
given him, and that Haman was so debased before him. So that there could not
happen a more fit opportunity unto her, then this which God here offered.

So is there an heavy issue prepared for Haman, that the table and banquet
which for the most part have joy and delectation, be turned unto him into a
deadly snare: and that happens unto him which Zophar speaks in Job, chap. 20.
verse. 23. When the wicked shall be about to fill his belly, God shall send upon
him his fierce wrath, which he will rain upon him in steed of his meat. And
surely it is just, that as all things work for the best to Romans 8. 28.
them that love God, so all things should be turned to shame and dishonor to
those that hate God. Wherefore hereof let us make this conclusion, that the
portion of the wicked is accursed, that they shall fail of their purposes, and
loose their prosperity, and that God being armed to overthrow and root them
out, their destruction shall come in a moment, even in the mids of their
bankets and delights. Let us therefore learn to fear God, to put our
confidence in him, having this as most assured and proved, that nothing shall
hurt us if we follow that which is right and honest, and that our safety and
salvation shall be cared for by him, which he has purchased for us by the
blood of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be honor and glory for ever.

Amen.
THE SEVENTEENE Sermon.
Ester frames her accusation against Haman: and stirs the King so against
him, that he is altogether astonished and amazed, in the four next verses of
the seventh Chapter.

3. Then Ester the Queen answered, and said: If I have found favor in thy
sight, O King, and if it please the King, let my life be given me at my
petition, and my people at my request.

4. For we are sold, I, and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain and to
perish: but if we were sold for servants, and for handmaydes, I would have
held my tongue: although the adversary could not recompense the Kings loss.

5. Then king Assuerus answered, and said unto the Queen Ester, Who is he? and
where is he that presumes to do thus?

6. And Ester said, the adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman
was afraid before the King and the Queen.


THe wise Solomon noting the profit that comes of that wisdom which is of
God, says, that Wisdom Eccle. 9. 16. 18. 14.
is better then strength, and then any weapons of war. For examples sake he
says, That there was a little City compassed by a great King, and that by
the wisdom of one poor and wise man it was delivered. And to this belongs
the history of that wise woman, by whose wise speech, Ioab 2. Sam. 20. 16.
besieging the city Abel, was appeased, and the citizens persuaded to give the
head of seditious Sheba unto Ioab, and so the city was delivered by her.
Neither think I it meet to ouerpasse in this place that which the Scripture
delivers of Abigail, who by her wise oration made 1. Sam. 25. 18.
unto David, pacified his mind being moved against Nabal, and turned away the
evil which he had threatened against Nabals family: and farther did so please
him, that David when her husband Nabal was dead, took her to his wife. And to
this purpose also does this example especially belong, which here is proposed
unto us, of the most wise petition of Ester, whereby she not only turned away
the sword from her own and her whole peoples throats, but so turned the Kings
mind, that she moved him to execute vengeance with deserved punishments, upon
Haman and his confederates, for their fierce cruelty and wickedness. And this
example is here proposed unto us, that in it we may see what force the
wisdom of the Saints has, following as a guide the light of faith, and the
fear of God: and by what force it scatters the counsels of the enemies,
and procures the favor of the Kings of the earth.

Behold then here the oration of Ester, short indeed, but full of gravity
and holy art. If I have found favor in thy sight, o King, and if it please
the King, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my
request. Neither does that great and excessive promise of the Kings, or that
exceeding honor bestowed on Mardochaeus, make her any thing the more insolent
or proud, but that most modestly and most humbly she lays open her
petition: for she more esteems of the greatness of the matter whereof she was
to speak and the majesty of the king, then that leave which was granted her
to speak freely. She begins with the kings favor and good will, when she
says, If I have found favor, and if it please the King: showing that in this
petition she depends as well on the kings good will and favor, as to trust
to the equity of the cause. Her petition is simple, and not painted with
deceit, although it concerned great matters, her own life, and her whole
peoples: Let my life, says she, be granted me at my request, and my people at
my petition. She desires her life to be granted, that she may show, that she
received a great gift and reward of the kings liberality and bounty, both for
her self and her people, if she were delivered from the present danger that
hanged over them. She opens the cause of her most just petition, and the
certainty of the danger, in that she adds, For we are sold, I, and my
people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish: She says that they were
sold, because they were delivered unto death, and set in open market as sheep
unto the slaughter. For although there were no bargain made of their sale, yet
as those who sell any thing, deliver it over to be used at the will and
pleasure of him to whom it is sold: so also in that Edict which was set forth
against the poor wretches, they were laid open to every man's fury, as many
as would kill, slay, or destroy them. And indeed she retains the very words
of the decree, as we heard them before, Chap. 3. verse. 13. that thereby she
might more and more make known the equity of the demand. She might also
have respect unto the offer made by Haman of the ten thousand talents of
silver, although the King accepted it not, thereby to note his malicious mind,
who would not spare any cost to bring his bloody purpose to pass. She
adioyneth by way of yielding, an argument of great modesty and humility. If,
says she We had been sold for servants and handmaides, I would have kept
silence: so that it had bin profitable and gainful to the King, but he who
goes about to deliver us unto death, is not profitable, but indammageth the
King.

And this also she most simply sets down, for she might boldly have said,
What profit can there any way come unto the king by such cruelty, and the
bloody slaughter of so many innocents, without difference of men, women; old,
young; high or low degree? But she took diligent care, not to speak any thing
that might prick or trouble the kings mind, who had consented unto such a
decree, which might have been, if she had made any mention of cruelty, or had
amplified the heinousness of the decree.

But we must yet more exactly weigh the virtues of Ester, which do shine in
this Oration. For therein as in a Glass, do appear her wisdom, faith,
charity, humility and modesty, her uprightness and integrity, joined with
an holy boldness. Her wisdom is seen in all the parts of her speech. For
from the beginning that she might procure the Kings good will, she makes no
mention of her dignity, value, merit or worthiness, for kings do not
willingly hear those things to be spoken of by their subjects and
inferiors, but she speaks only of the Kings favor, of his good will and
pleasure only, for which things Kings especially delight to be commended. It
is wisdom, that in her petition she craves not revenge of the injury
offered unto her, but says that she will account it in lieu of a great
benefit, if her life and the life of her people be granted her at her
request.

How great wisdom also is there to be seen in these words, We are sold, I,
and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain and to perish. For in few
words, both she expresses both the truth of the thing, and the barbarous
cruelty of the fact, yet so, that she touches not the King, whom she
passes over unnamed, although he suffered that inhumane and bloody Edict to
pass. For though Kings err and be deceived, yet they cannot abide to have
their errors in express words to be laid before them, or to be reproved.
She does not also name Haman, until she had tried the Kings affection
toward her petition.

This also is wisely added by her, That she would have held her tongue, if
they had only been sold for slaves, so that it had been profitable and
gainefull to the king. For Kings are greatly delighted with such humility, and
liberal offer, that for their sake and profit, men avoid no incommoditie.
Besides, nothing could make more to procure hatred and envy against Haman,
though he were not named, then when she says that the enemy, who goes
about the death of so many, does not care for the Kings profit, but shall
rather hinder and endammage him. And this is her wisdom.

Her faith is apparent, in that she says, Let my life, and the life of my
people be granted me: And, I, and my people are sold. For so she confesses,
and in the midst of dangers, professes that she is of the kindred of the
Jews, that she embraces their doctrine and religion, and that she neither
has nor is willing to have any thing separated or apart from the people of
God, but that she would both live and die together with them. Whereby it
appears, that when by Mardochaeus commandment, she concealed her kindred
and her people, it was not done for want of faith or godliness, to dissemble
her religion, but of an holy wisdom, God so governing both her mind and
tongue, that she might more conveniently help both her self and her people,
in their greatest danger. And if at first by reason of fear there had been any
defect in faith, this confession is so plain, and simple, that it takes away
all matter of excuse from those who in time of persecution forswear their
religion, at what time they should more freely make confession thereof.

So Nicodemus, who when before he was somewhat fearful, and a secret
Disciple of the Lord, did in the time of greatest danger make himself known,
together with Joseph of Aramathia, begging John. 19. 39.
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and taking it down from the Cross, and
laying it with honor into the Sepulcher. How great a shame is it then for
those that glory in the name of Christians, so cowardly to forswear the
Gospel for fear of loss of their goods?

The charity of Ester consists in this, that she desires nothing for her
self alone, but bears a like care for her people as for her self; and
holds the church of God more dear then her life. Easily might she have
obtained for her self by name, whatsoever she had demanded without any ones
hatred or envy, by reason of that dignity and state which she held with the
King: but with the same feruentnesse of mind does she make her supplication to
the king, as well for her people as for her ownelife: which it seems she
should have lived and prolonged very sorrowfully, unless the same at her
request had been granted to her people. Such ought our charity to be, that we
should love our neighbors as our selves, so that they who are careful for
their own security and quiet only, little caring what becomes of others, are
void of charity, and worse then Infidels.

Her modesty and humility appears in this, that she says, She would have
held her tongue, if they had only gone about to bring them into bondage and
slavery, although she and her people had bin sold for the Kings profit and
advantage: which makes much to procure the Kings good will, and to move his
mind to mercy.

For who is so stony hearted, who would not be moved to hear so Noble a Lady
so far to abase her self, that she would suffer her self to be sold, if
it seemed good unto the King, and might turn to his profit? Besides, it made
to show, with how great a terror of death she was affected, refusing no
condition though it were of most hard slavery, so that she might escape death.

It served also very much to stir up more vehemently the kings pity toward
her, whom he had vouchsafed so great favor, and bestowed the crown royal
upon her before all other, if he should see her to stand in danger of her life,
and so vehemently careful for her safety, that she was ready to undergo any
slavery to redeem her life. Furthermore, her modesty is manifest by this,
that she does not make her complaint more heinous by great outcries and
exclamatio^s; or importune desire of revenge: but she commits the whole
matter to the kings will and good pleasure, esteeming of it as of a great gain
and benefit, to redeem her life and the life of her people, from the cruelty
of that Edict which was published against them.

Her integrity and uprightness appears in this, that she faineth or
deuiseth nothing, neither adds any thing besides the matter, to the
commendation thereof, or hatred of the enemy of the people: neither does she
fawn upon the king with any flattering words, to excuse his rashness: to wit,
that the goodness of his nature, and his uprightness in justice, would never
have suffered so great cruelty: that it could not be but that those Letters
were obtained by deceit, or were forged; for his goodness and clemency would
never have consented to so barbarous a fact: to conclude, she inuenteth no
flattery, for the Saints of God know not how to lie or flatter. Last of all,
her courage and constancy is wonderously to be praised, that she dare
complain on so mighty an enemy, so dear and in favor with the King, to
accuse him of such a crime to his face; and that unto the King without whose
disgrace and reproach it could not be done, when as rashly he had consented
unto that mischief, which Haman wickedly had devised.

Such is the boldness and strength of the Saints, who to the defense of the
Church, are more bold then Lions, as Solomon speaks.

Here hence we learn, that all our affairs must be managed by reason,
which must be accompanied with true faith; in which, charity must rule; unto
which must be adjoined, modesty, integrity, uprightness and courage, in
defending a good cause, that neither for fear or shame, we start from doing
our duty, if we desire to have the issue of them happy. For where these
virtues are wanting, either the truth is betrayed, or not well defended, and a
good cause is overthrown by impudency, or pride and rashness. But who does
at this day so govern his actions with reason, that he could be content to
have judgment given of them with like integrity and modesty? Who is now of
such constancy, that in the presence of Princes he will manfully defend the
cause of the distressed? Who is enflamed with so great an heat of charity,
that he will take care of the life of an other man, no less then of his own?
Who is of such courage, that he will constantly profess himself a member of
the Church, when he shall see it on every side to be oppressed with slanders,
and condemned to death. Truly you shall see few Esters at this day, who so
faithfully and wisely, and with such success will take upon them the defense
of the Church: but there want not on the contrary many like in disposition to
Iezabel and Athalia, by whom the fury of Kings shall be kindled to the hatred
and destruction of the Church.

Furthermore, if Ester did with so great reverence, fear, and humility,
speak unto a mortal King, what shall we think is our duty to do when we
come into the presence of the infinite and immeasurable majesty of the King of
Kings? Shall we bring our own Luc. 18.
merits as did that proud Pharisee? Or shall we speak with hatred and
contempt of our neighbors as he did? Or shall we proudly lift up our heads
unto the skies? Or shall it not rather become us following that Publicane, to
cast down our countenance to the earth, and to throw down and prostrate our
selves before God, with ^ true feeling of our sins, and sorrow for the same,
praying most humbly unto him for our selves, and the lives of our brethren? And
thus far of Ester.

Let us now hearken unto the Kings answer. Who, says he, is he? or where is
he? that presumes to do thus? By these words he shows that he was moved
not only to grant Esters petition, but also to take vengeance of him, who had
conspired against the life of her and of her people: saying, that he must
needs be a presumptious, and bold man, who dare attempt so great a wickedness.
For who can practice any thing against the life of the Queen, and not touch
and violate the majesty of the King? He asks therefore who he may be, and
where he is, that he may punish him: as it is the duty of Kings to pull
down those who extol themselves contrary to their duty, as David
protests concerning himself, That he would not suffer him that had Psalm.
101. 5.
a proud look and an high heart. But who could tell better then the King, who
it was who had invented so heinous a fact, when he himself not full ^wo
months before, had granted unto Haman whatsoever he desired for the
destruction of the Jews; had commanded the Scribes to write the proclamation
after Hamans direction; had given him his Ring to seal it; had sent his posts
to carry it with speed into every Province: as before in the third Chapter
has been declared? Had he forgotten so great a matter of weight so suddenly?
Or if he did remember it, why does he dissemble it? It may be said, that the
King did think that the Queen did speak of some other fact, and that as yet he
knew that she was a Jew: or if he remembered that fact, he was ashamed of it:
and, as Princes are wont to spare themselves, did lay the whole blame on an
other: or else that doubting he would more truly vnvnderstand the whole matter
whereof the Queen did complain.

This is wont to happen unto Kings that are not provident in their affairs,
and that do almost all things without counsel, and at the pleasure of
certain Courtiers do rashly govern and publish things of great moment,
oftentimes being more careful of the recompencing of some duty scarce
honest, then of the life of many thousands.

It may be, that by reason of the multitude and variety of affairs which
Kings do manage, they forget some things: but what a negligence and
blockishnesse was this, not beseeming him unto whose defense and government so
many millions ofmen were committed to be safely preserved, to have so little
care of a decree made to the destruction of so many innocents of all ages,
sexes, and estates, that so soon he had forgotten it?

Now Ester when she perceived by this answer, that the King was moved to take
revenge of him who was the author of so great a mischief to her and to her
Nation, is bold to name Haman, and set him forth with his deserved titles, The
adversary and enemy is this wicked Hama^. And this she speaks as it were
with her finger poynting at him, that he should answer, if he could take
any exceptions to this accusation. She terms him an adversary, because
injuriously and without cause he had conspired against the Church, and had
practiced the destruction and utter overthrow thereof.

She calls him an enemy, for that with deadly hatred he sought their blood
by whom he never was iniuried. And though perhaps he did not purposely bend
himself against the person of the Queen, concerning whom he might be
ignorant that she was a Jew, yet she accounts him her adversary and enemy,
because he hated the nation of the Jews the Church of God. So David said, Ps.
139. 21. 22.
that Gods enemies were his enemies, whom he hated worse then a dog or toade.
She says he is a wicked one, and that deservedly, for his false surmises, his
cruelty against the Church, his blasphemies against God, his abuse of the
Kings authority, and his extreme ambition, for which he went about to oppress
a quiet and innocent nation. These things at the first fight will seem to be
an injury, but it is lawful in judgment, to shew^ the wicked their faults,
and to note their offenses by name, and to reprove those that are convicted. So
Paul called Ananias Act. 23. 3. Ier. 22. 17.
a white wall: Jeremy said the Ioiaki^ did savor of nothing but covetousness
and Ezekiel called Sedechia king of Iud^ Ezekiel;
a wicked and polluted man: and John the Baptist termed the Pharisees which came
Mat. 3. 7.
to his baptism, a generation of vipers. Wherefore that which our Savior
lesus Christ does warn, that he that says unto Mat. 5. 22
his brother Racha, is worthy to be punished by the Council: and whosoever
shall say fool, shall be worthy of hell fire: is to be understood of injuries
which are done wittingly and maliciously by reproach or contempt, or desire of
private revenge. For otherwise the zeal of the glory of God, and the safety
of the Church, do require, that wicked me^ be resisted, and their heinous
faults noted by their proper names, whereby they may return to amendme^t; or
else be made known, and punished for their wickedness and obstinacy. Hereby
also we learn what is the simple and right manner of dealing in law before a
Judge, either ordinary or extraordinary, even such as this was, to weete,
that if it may be, it be done in the presence of the parties, and rather by
word then by writing, truly and simply, that the good cause of the oppressed,
and the public good and equity be defended against the malice and false
reports of the wicked.

Haman thus accused, was astonished, neither had he any thing to allege against
it, being convicted by his own conscience, and the truth of Esters
accusation, whereof the King himself was the best witness. So God is wont to
stop the mouths of the wicked, as David says, that Ps. 63. 11. and 31. 18.
and 5. 10. and 10. 12. 18.
when the wicked have long delighted in lying, at the last their mouth shall be
stopped and they shall be dumb: Neither also does he pray in vain that their
mouths may be shut, and that God would search out their wickedness, that they
may be deceived of their hope. On the contrary part, good men being accused
by false slanders and injuriously, have always wherewith to defend themselves
both before God and man: who if they happen to be oppressed by false
accusations 1. Ki. 22. 2. Chr. 24.
and violence, as we see Naboth condemned by false witnesses and stoned, and
Zachary the Prophet commanded to be stoned by Ioas: yet are they bold upon
the goodness of their conscience before God, and the innocence of their life
before men; God bringing forth at last their innocence unto light, and
clearing* it from all false surmises and slanders.

Hence let us learn patiently to expect, until God make inquiry, and search
out the wickedness of the ungodly, and set them every one in order before their
Psalm. 50. 21.
eyes, as he has threatened; in the mean while let us give our minds to truth
and uprightness, and the just defense of the faithful: every one according to
his power, condition and vocation, resisting the malice of the wicked enemies
of the Church, that the godly being set at liberty from the hand of their
enemies, God may be extolled by all, as well for his mercy as for his
judgments, for unto him belongs all honor and glory, in Christ Jesus his
Son for ever.

Amen.
THE EIGHTEEN Sermon.
The rest of the points of the accusation against Haman: his sentence, and the
execution thereof, from the 7. verse, unto the end of the 7. Chapter.

7. Then the King arose from the banquet of wine in his wrath, and went into the
palace garden, but Haman stood up to make request for his life to the Queen
Ester: for he saw there was a mischief prepared for him of the King.

8. And when the King came again out of the palace garden, into the house
where they drank wine, Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Ester sat:
therefore the King said, Will he force the Queen also before me in the
house? As the word went out of the Kings mouth, they covered Hamans face.

9. And Harbona one of the Eunuchs said in the presence of the King, Behold
there stands yet the tree in Hamans house fifty cubits high, which Haman had
prepared for Mordecai, that spoke good for the King. Then the King said, Hang
him thereon.

10. So they hanged Haman on the tree, that he had prepared for Mordecai: then
was the Kings wrath pacified.


David purposing to show how short and brittle the felicity of the wicked is,
and how sudden their destruction which they can never recover, does thus Ps.
37. 36. 37.
speak, I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green
bay tree, yet he passed away, and lo he could not be found: so that the very
signs of his place did not appear: which thing Zophar in Job does Job. 20. 4.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
more plainly declare, when he says: Know thou not this of old? and since
God placed man upon the earth, that the praise of the wicked is short, and that
the joy of the hypocrites is but a moment? Though his pride mount up to the
heavens, and his head touch the clouds, yet shall he perish for ever like
dung, and they which have seen him shall say, Where is he? He shall flee
away as a dream, and they shall not find him; and shall pass away as a
vision of the night, So that the eye which had seen him, shall see him no
more, neither shall his place behold him any more. These things do therefore
thus happen, because, as Psalm. 58. 11. 6. 7. 8.
David says, There is a God which judges the earth, who breaks the teeth of
these Lions, and makes that they pass away as water, and melt as a snayle,
and are as the untimely fruit of a woman which has not seen the Sun.

All these things we see to be most liuelye represented unto us in this
history of the fall of Haman, who in a moment does fall down headlong into
extreme confusion and destruction, from that most high degree of honor, which
in the Persian court he had obtained. We have already heard how Ester had
begun her accusation against him, and he held his peace, having nothing to
except against it. It remains to see how the King proceeded in this cause,
what faults he was farther charged withal, first by the King himself, verse. 8.
next by Harbonah one of the Eunuchs: verse 9. then his short sentence, and the
sudden execution thereof: that by all these we may learn to reverence the
Lord in his judgments, to contain our selves in fear and trembling, not to
be puffed up with prosperity, and patiently to expect until God bring forth
his vengeance, and deliver his Church from the force and tyranny of those that
oppress it. The setting down of this history is simple, but the things that
are contained therein are of great moment, which shall particularly be
discussed.

First there is mention made of the Kings wrath, wherewith being chafed he
rises from the banquet, and goes into the palace garden. This anger was unto
Haman a messenger of death: who makes supplication unto the Queen Ester for
his life: perceiving that evil was decreed by the king against him. His wrath
was kindled with shame and indignation, as well because he had been deceived by
Haman, in that he had obtained of him so bloody an edict against the Jews: as
also by the indignity of the fact, that he had so abused his name and
authority to trouble the Queen, and to bring her within the danger of her
life. Therefore enflamed with anger, he arises and goes into the palace
garden with exceeding great indignation, not any longer abiding the sight of
him by whom he had been deceived to the granting of so dishonest a fact.
Neither does he seem to have gone out into the garden to assuage, but rather
to sharpen his rage, as by the event of his return appears. But if he had
well considered the matter, he should rather have been angry with himself and
accused his own rashness, then with Haman. For although his malice and cruelty
was great, yet it had been of no force, unless it had been strengthened by the
Kings name and authority. But when Kings offend by evil counsel, they lay
all the blame upon the wicked counselors. And surely it is a just vengeance
against such naughty counselors, which ought to be an example unto others,
whereby they may learn not to be the authors of evil counsel. Yet are not
Kings therefore without blame, for that ouer-rashly they gave credit unto
them, when as they might if they list, take sufficient deliberation of every
particular. The Kings wrath then was enflamed more and more against Haman, God
so preparing for him his deserved punishment. If Kings be worthily angry with
those who lead them into error by deceit and show of reason, how much more
just is their wrath against those who by practices and conspiracies, by arms
and threatenings, by open force against their majesty and persons, go about to
compel them, and as it were to make them the ministers of their private
revenge, and the servants or rather bondslaues of their ambition?

In the mean while Haman makes supplication to the Queen for his life, and
for grief and sorrow falls on the bed. Lo, he who would needs be adored by
Mardochaeus, is compelled to lie down humbly at the feet of his cousin: he
that lately carried his head aloft unto the skies, altogether swelling with
arrogancy, breathing out nothing else but threats and death against the Church
of God, makes petition for his own life, being astonished with the gripes and
sorrows of death: and as it were hedged in on every side with fears and
trembling. And that deservedly, he that lately had filled the whole world with
threatenings, terrors, and tears, is now astonished and fears, standing as it
were at the judgment seat of the King of fear, to be devoured by the first
borne of death, as it is said Job. 18. v. 13. 14. I confess indeed that the
faithful also are griped with great sorrows and fears, as David speaks of
himself, that Psalm. 18. 4. and 55. 4. 5.
The sorrows of death compassed him, that fear and trembling came upon him,
and an horrible fear covered him: but in time they receive comfort, and are
delivered from their fears. For as the causes of grief wherewith the godly
are affected, are far other then of the infidels, so likewise the issues of
both are very different: for only despair follows the one, and consolation
as well in life as in death accompanies the other. Haman hoped that Ester
would be more easily entreated to grant him his life then the King, whose wrath
he knew to be violent, and not to be appeased: howbeit he found her as well as
him not to be entreated, God so restraining the Queens affection, that he
might exercise judgment without mercy, on him who never used mercy. Add
hereunto, that Ester could not with a good conscience make intercession for him
unto the king, and deliver him from death, who with so great a cruelty had
threatened the utter destruction of the Church. For as Solomon excellently
teaches in the Proverbs, He that justifies the wicked, Pro. 17. 15.
and condemns the innocent, they both are an abomination unto the Lord. And
without all doubt, they who are hardened in their mischief, can be tamed and
made gentle by no good turns. Heerehence sprang the Proverb, Deliver a thief
from the gallows, and he will hang thee thereon if he can. Yea it is an
unmerciful mercy to let a wolf escape with his life, who can do nothing but
hurt the sheep. Wherefore by very good right, he who had wrought the death and
destruction of the poor faithful ones, who had appointed a shameful death
for Mardochaeus, that same day, he himself is covered with shame, and has no
man to take pity of him: as David prays and wishes against the enemies of
the Church, Let there be none to extend mercy Psalm. 109. 12.
unto him, when he is in misery.

The king in the mean while returning out of the garden, and perceiving Haman
to be fallen down upon the bed whereon Ester sat, is reported to have kindled
with greater fury, and to say, Will he force the Queen also before me in the
house? The wretched man was fallen down upon the bed, whereon the Queen after
the manner of that country sat at the beginning of the feast, being astonished
with grief: the king persuades himself, or faineth himself to believe, that
he would offer violence unto the Queen, that might have the better show of
occasion to condemn him to death: although that those who are angry, do feign
any thing against those whom they hate, though they be never so unlikely, or
contrary to the truth. Haman then is accused by the king as one that would have
violated the Queens chastity. And the word is to be noted which he uses,
Will he also force? as though he should say: Is it not enough for him that by
his wiles he has laid snares for the Queens life, but that also he will force
her in the house before my face? And these things do make his fault the more
heinous. So he who with his false accusations did ouerwhelme every man, and
troubled the whole world, and filled all things with violence, he is himself
oppressed with a false surmise, and is accused as a violater of chastity. So
we see that fulfilled which the Son of God speaks, With what measure ye
meat, it shall be measured Mat. 7. 2.
unto you again. So likewise that happened unto him which David wished unto his
enemies, That their prayer should be turned Psalm. 109. 7
into sin, and that the wicked should be condemned, without either hearing or
inquiry of his cause; and that which is spoken in the 69. Psalm, verse. 27.
Lay iniquity upon their iniquity, and heap up sin upon their sin. And
yet not withstanding in this respect, Assuerus does him injury; and anger
hinders him that he cannot in this case see the truth, so that he judges
otherwise of Hamans fact then he ought: for there was not any the least
suspicion of this fact in respect of his present estate, neither was the Queen
left alone without company. But as our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ said,
that the blood of all the just even from Abel, should Mat. 23. 35
come upon the murderers of Jerusalem, as though they had shead it, in as much
as they hated the just and all righteousness: So in respect of Gods justice, it
was right that this wicked man, who would, by overthrowing the Church, abolish
all remembrance of God, should be accounted guilty of any crime. For being as
it were made of naught but sin, they are ready for any mischiese, if
occasion only Psalm. 36. 4
be offered unto them, as the wicked is said to abhor nothing that is evil.

As soon as the word came out of the kings mouth, they covered Hama^s face, as
one that was unworthy the kings sight, or to enjoy the use of the light being
co^uicted of such crimes. This was unto him a messenger of death, and being
alive, he began to feel the darkness of death, even as Zophar in Job says,
chap. 20. verse. 26. All darkness shall be hid in the secret places of the
wicked, that his light shall be put out, and the sparkle of their fire shall no
more give light. Finally, that they shall be driven out of the light into
darkness, and be rooted out of the land of the living, as is said, chap. 18.
verse. 18. And surely it is right that his face should be covered, that he may
look for nothing but for the darkness of death; who would have taken away the
light of life from others. The Kings of the West are not wont to cover their
faces whom they will see no more, but command them presently to be carried out
of their presence.

Now here steps forth one of the Eunuchs Harbona, who furdereth the sentence
against Haman. Behold, says he, the tree which Haman prepared for Mardochaeus,
who spoke good for the king, stands in Hamans house, fifty cubits high.
Haman is here accused of foolish arrogancy, who of his own private
authority did set up so high a gallows; then of extreme cruelty, for that he
would have Mardochaeus to be hanged thereon, an innocent man, and the Kings
servant; lastly, of unthankfulness and rash boldness, desiring to lay on him a
shameful death, who had done a singular benefit for the king. Harbona may
seem here to follow the manner of courtiers, who bend themselves with every
blast, as the king seems to favor or dislike, and are friends in
prosperity, and in adversity enemies. But it may also be, that Harbonah had
before noted and disliked the pride and insole^cie of Haman: and had also
observed the innocence of Mardochaeus: and therefore to show his affection
toward his cause, does accuse the pride and cruelty of Haman. Howsoever it
were, it appears sufficiently that Hama^ did not cover his mind and purpose,
and God by this means would have his arroga^cie disclosed. This is that which
is spoken by Zophar in Job, Job. 20. 27. Job. 15. 25.
The heaven shall declare the wickedness of the ungodly, and the earth shall rise
up against him, and even as he has lift up his hand against God, and made
himself strong against the Almighty, so the hand of all should rise up against
him. It is not therefore simply to be condemned, that those who stand in the
presence of kings, should having occasion offered, admonish the^, and help to
further their cause, whom they see to be oppressed by injury, and on the other
side, detect their malice and arrogancy who oppress them, so that it be not
done to flatter the Princes, and please their passions, but with a love of
truth and equity: which very seldom do possess a place in the minds of
Kings, or of the greater part of courtiers But why touch I here this fault
Psalm. 12. 2
in courtiers, when as David says, Every man speaks falsehood unto his
neighbor, flattering with their lips, and speaking with a double heart. We
have then Hamans cause furnished on every side, partly with true accusatio^s,
partly with false. The king without stay, without counsel pronounces
sentence; Hang him thereon: A short judgment: as the whole handling of the
cause was short, so the sentence was shorter, pronounced in one word, without
farther advise. For he who had wrested out so bloody a decree, admitting none
into counsel, is worthy to be condemned to death without any counsel. The
sentence is just. For it was convenient that he who had lifted up himself
against God, in seeking the destruction of his Church, should be lifted up upon
an high gallows, that his infamy might be manifest unto all men. Besides it is
just that the wicked perish by their own crafts; that wicked counsel bring
destruction unto those that give it; that they be taken in the nets that
themselves laid; that they be entangled in their own coards; fall into the pit
which they dug; be consumed with the fire which they kindled, and to have
the mischief fall on their own heds which they had prepared for others: that
God may be acknowledged to be just, when the wicked is snared Psalm. 9. 16.
in the work of his own hands. The king by this sentence shows his absolute
power and rule, without law and measure, such as the Turk exercises at this
day over his subjects, by his word and beck, appointing to death whomsoever
they please, even his own children, without any judgment. Which kind of
government almost all the kings of the world do now challenge unto them. The
laws of this realm and sentence of death are executed and determined by
Judges thereunto appointed, and by ordinary course, and not immediately by the
Prince. And this is just and most seemly, least that Princes in their rage
abuse their authority, and hasten judgment, wherein the life is called in
question, which being once lost, can not be restored: for nothing is so sacred
and inviolable, which the lust and affection of wicked Princes does not
sometime profane and violate.

The courtiers unto whom that charge was committed, do speedily execute the
sentence. Mark here a wonderful change, they who very lately adored Haman,
draw him now to the gallows: he who consented with him unto the death of the
Jews, in favor of the Jews condemns him to death. Such is the justice of
God, who puts enimitie between the sworn enemies of truth and equity,
that one of them destroys another. Nay you shall not lightly see any who have
conspired together in wickedness, to remain long at accord, but at the length
one of them rises against another, as it is said, that a fire went out of the
Iud. 9. 15.
bramble and consumed the cedars of Lebanon. So Assuerus who had consented unto
Haman for the death of the Jews, and destruction of the Church, now brings
him to a shameful death: then which thing, what could be more strange and
unheard of? He who caused that Haman of our time to be slain, had consented
with him to the butcherie of the french Churches, and by war sought the ruin
and destruction of the professors of the Gospel. Who will not here wonder at
the profound wisdom of the secrets of God? Who can choose but acknowledge his
justice? Who can but declare his wonderful works, and praise them exceedingly?
Who would not cry out with David: Psalm. 92. 5.
O Lord how glorious are thy works? how very deep are thy thoughts? And Psalm.
36. 6. Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains: thy judgments are like
the great deep: thou Lord do save man and beast. What talk shall we think
was then in Susa, what words of the faithful, but even those which David
sets forth in this Psalm. 118. 15. 16.
manner: The voice of joy and deliverance shall be in the tabernacles of the
righteous, saying; The right hand of the Lord has done valiantly; The right
hand of the Lord is exalted; the right hand of the Lord has done valiantly.
Worthily might they say, when they saw that wicked man punished as he had
deserved, that which is in the Psalm. 52. verse. 7. Behold the man that took not
God for his strength, but trusted in the multitude of his riches, and put his
strength in his malice. For as it is said, Psalm. 58. 10. The righteous shall
rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of
the wicked. Yea they might also say that which Debora sometimes sang in her
song, So let all thine enemies perish, o Lord: Iud. 5. 31.
And that which is, Psalm. 129. 5. They that hate Sion shall be ashamed and
turned backward. Yea and Mardochaeus himself might rightly say with David: I
will be glad and rejoice in thee: I will sing praise to Psalm. 9. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
thy name, o thou most high: For that mine enemies are turned back, fallen and
perished at thy presence. For thou have maintained my right and my cause; Thou
art set in thy throne, and iudgest right: Thou have rebuked the Heathen; thou
have destroyed the wicked: thou have put out their name eue^ for ever and ever.
O thou enemy, are destructio^s come to a perpetual end? Also Psalm. 54. 6. 7.
I will sacrifice willingly unto thee: I will praise thy Name, o Lord, because
it is good. For God has delivered me out of al trouble, and mine eye has
seen that which is right upon mine enemies. And what on the contrary part
might they think who were ignorant of the wonderful works of God? but even
that which is spoken, Psalm. 64. 9. All men shall see it, and declare the works
of God, and they shall understand what he has wrought. For as Isai says,
According as thy judgments Isai. 26. 9.
are in the earth, so the inahbitants of the world shall learn righteousness.
So is that also fulfilled which is, Psalm. 73. 19. How suddenly are they
destroyed, perished and horribly consumed? Therefore they which enjoy
prosperity in this world, and those who are in favor in the court, let them
learn not to trust in those things: nothing is sooner defaced and decays,
then favor and dignity in court: nothing is sooner blotted out, then the
deceitful show of this world. But it may not without cause be demanded,
whether the king did not offend and do amiss herein, seeing he was chafed both
with wine and wrath: and pronounced judgment so hastily without appeal,
neither hearing the party accused, neither giving him space to answer or to
repent: finally no form of judgment being observed. It may be answered to
this question, that there are diverse forms of judgment, according to the
variety of time and place: and that which at this time and upon this occasion
and circumstance is right and justice, is not so at others: Besides that even
in the same countries, there are observed diverse forms of judgments,
according to the diverse circumstances of time, fact, and persons. In war
there is an other form of judgment then in peace: an other when things are
quiet, then in sedition: an other against traitors, and those who have taken
arms against the state, then against those who are the breakers of any private
law. Moreover, what need we to be careful to clear the actions of an
heathen and infidel king, when it chances many times that christian Princes
do slip and err in their judgments? It is sufficient if here we acknowledge
Gods justice, using what instruments pleases him, and even by the hand of his
enemies, furdering and effecting his work, and always dealing most justly in
that thing, which oftentimes the instruments do not but with passion and
injustice. It is enough for us to know that they are most worthy of death,
which use fraud and deceit, and abuse their favor and authority to the
overthrowing of good and faithful subjects; and the name, authority, ^eale
and arms of Princes, only to serve their own revenge, covetousness, and
^mbition. By this example also let us learn, that God does not long leave the
open enemies of his Church unpunished, put that he takes vengeance on them by
some notable and horrible destruction. We have the examples in the holy
scriptures of three that were hanged, Achito^hel and Judas, with their own
hands, and Haman by others, upon that gallows which himself had prepared.
Pharao was Exodus 14. Iud. 4. 2. King. 19. Act. 12.
^rowned in the midst of the red sea with his whole host: Sisera fell by the
and of a woman: Sennacherib was slain ^y his own sons: Herod who slew ^.
lames, was stricken by an Angel, and ^aten with worms. The Ecclesiastical
^istorie is full of such examples of the ^udgements of God against the enemies
^f the truth of God, as it notes Nero amongst the rest, who raised up the
first ^ersecution; and who flew himself, was ^ondemned by the Romans, and
drawn through the streets of the city. Our age boundeth with examples
against those ^ho have persecuted the Church, as well in France and Germany,
as in England which it needs not to follow in man words, seeing they are yet
fresh in m^morie. If any man, except that thos^ who have undertaken the defense
of the Church, have also dyed of violent death I do indeed confess it, which
is also observed in the history of the Maccabee^ that many holy men were
slain in the war, or killed by the treason of the wicked enemies, but the
diversity of the who set upon the in hostile manner as those who defended the
Church does make the death of both different for precious before God is the
death (...) those who spend their lives for the d^fence of the Church, as of
Abel, and al the Martyrs since, though unto the wicked world it seem
shameful: but the death of the persecutors is abominalbe, thoug^ to the world
it seem precious and to be lamented. In short, when as all men dy^ the death
of one and other is not distinguished by any other means then ^^ faith and a
good conscience, which tr^steth only to the favor of God, and defense of a
good cause. Finally, it is to b^ observed, that these examples of Gods
^engeance, against the enemies of his glo^ie and our salvation, are proposed
unto ^s, that we should more and more be en^ouraged unto goodness, be confirmed
in ^ue patience, and in expectation and looking for help at Gods hand, that we
de^end on his providence, that we restrain ^he murmurings and reasonings of
flesh and blood, that we learn more and more ^o despise the felicity and
pride of the ^icked, confirm our minds against their ^hreats, and be stirred
so much the more ^chemently unto prayer. For if the prayers of his wife, did so
move a mortal king, ^hen she made supplication for her life and the life of her
people, much more will that great King of glory hear the ^roanes of his
Church, who is his wife, and arise up in his wrath to deliver her, and punish
her enemies. Let us therefore ^atiently commend our life into his hands, ^lace
our whole trust in him, and con^tantly look for his help. For whatsoever shall
happen unto us, he will save us in ^is heavenly kingdom, through Jesus Christ
his Son our Lord, to whom be ^lorie for ever.

Amen.
THE NINTEENTH Sermon.
Hamans goods are given unto Ester, and his honors unto Mardochaeus; Ester
obtains letters from Assuerus in favor of the Jews, the eight first verses
of the eight Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. 1. The same day did King Assuerus give the house of Haman the
adversary of the Jews, unto Ester, and Mordecai came before the King; for
Ester told what he was unto her.

2. And the King took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it
unto Mordecai: and Ester set Mordecai over the house of Haman.

3. And Ester spoke again before the King, and fell down at his feet
weeping, and besought him that he would put away the wickedness of Haman the
Agagite, and the devise which he had imagined against the Jews.

4. And the King held out the golden scepter* toward Ester. Then arose Ester
and stood before the King,

5. And said, If it please the King, and if I have fonnd favor in his sight,
and the thing be acceptable before the King, and I please him, let it be
written, that the letters of the device of Haman the son of Hammedatha the
Agagite, may be called again, which wrote to destroy the Jews, that are in
all the kings provinces.

6. For how can I suffer and see the evil that shall come unto my people? Or
how can I suffer and see the destruction of my kindred?

7. And the King Assuerus said unto the Queen Ester, and to Mordecai the Jew,
Behold, I have given Ester the house of Haman, whom they have hanged upon the
tree, because he would have laid hand upon the Jews.

8. Write ye also for the Jews as it likes you, in the Kings name, and seal
it with the Kings ring: but the writings which were written in the Kings name,
and sealed with the Kings ring, may not be revoked.


THe holy Scriptures do represent God unto us after two manners: on the one
side gentle and easy to be entreated, full of grace, favor and mercy toward
those that fear him: on the other side terrible and fearful as a consuming
fire to the wicked: as it is said, A fire shall Psalm. 50. 3. and 97.
devour before him, and that there shall go a fire before him, and burn up
his enemies round about him: that we may know that God though for a time he
show an angry countenance toward the faithful, yet his wrath is but for a
short time, and contrariwise his good will endures to life: and if h^ Psalm.
30. 6.
suffer the wicked to flourish and enjoy prosperity, it is but for a time, but
his wrat^ follows them to destroy them for eue^ as the wicked are said to
grow up as the Psalm. 92. 7.
grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flo^rish, that they may perish for
ever. Wherefore the estate of both is thus describe by the Prophet, The eyes of
the Lord a^^ Psalm. 34. 15. 16.
upon the just, and his ears are open to hea^ their prayer. But the face of
the Lord is against those that do evil, to cut off their rem^^brance from the
earth. This is here prop^sed unto us to behold in the three cha^ters which
remain of this history, (...) God did make evident his favor and blessing
upon Ester and Mardochaeus, and all the Jews, who were but lately condemned
unto death: and again on the contrary part his wrath and curse upon the goods
and posterity of Haman, and upon all that consented with him to the
destruction of the Church. These things ought to comfort us at all times, and
to nourish our hope of the grace and favor of God toward his people, and of
his vengeance upon his enemies, seeing he brings to shameful death the
authors of persecutions against his Church.

Now at this present we are to consider, how the Lord going on farther to power
out his vengeance against Haman, and to show his favor unto Ester and
Mardochaeus, caused that these enjoyed his substance and honors: in the two
first verses of this chapter. Next, how Ester being moved with exceeding
charity and zeal toward the Church of God, obtained letters of Assuerus in
favor of the Jews, that they might be safe from their enemies. Whereby we
learn, with what feruentnes of mind, and vehemency, the safety and
preservation of the Church is to be sought, which though the wicked enemies be
taken away, yet is she still in danger by their wicked practices and
conspiracies.

First therefore we are to see to whom the spoils of Haman came: to weet, his
goods and possessions were given by the king to Ester, verse. 1. and his honors
to Mardochaeus, verse. 2. In that same day (says the history) did the king
Assuerus give unto Ester the Queen, the house of Haman the adversary of the
Jews. Under the name of house, is contained, all his stuff and goods, both
moveable and immovable, which the same day that he was hanged were given by
the king to Ester, as being forfaited unto the king, and so at his pleasure to
bestow on whom soever it pleased him. The wife then of Haman we see and his
children and friends are deceived of their hope of succession; and Ester whom
he held for his enemy, and would have destroyed both her and her whole nation,
is his heir, so that although the sons of Haman ouerliued their father
almost eight months before they were destroyed, as we shall see in the next
chapter, yet they enjoyed no part of their fathers goods. So the house of the
wicked, the goods of the oppressor of the Jews, came into their hands who knew
well to use it: for Ester to whom they were given, set Mardochaeus to have the
oversight of them, which he well and faithfully discharged, that so it might be
fulfilled which Solomon spoke, That the Prou. 28. 8. and 13. 22.
goods of the wicked are gathered for the poor. And that which he says in
another place, The riches of the sinner are laid up for the just. Which is
spoken yet more expressly in Job, Though he should heap Job. 27. 16. 17.
up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay, He may prepare it, but
the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver. Whereby it
appears, that that testimony of David is true, That men disquiet Psalm. 39.
6. and 49. 10.
themselves in vain, heaping up riches, and can not tell who shall gather
them. As he also speaks in another Psalm, We see that wise men dye, and
also the ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for others. And (which is
another vanity of theirs,) they think that their houses shall stand for verse
11.
ever, and their habitation from generation to generation, and call their lands
by their names. But this man shall not continue in honor, he verse 12.
is like the beasts that die. Hereby then it is sufficiently tried, that none
do sooner miss of their hope, then the proud which make war against God;
for both their goods come unto others, and their memory is either utterly
extinguished, or remains detestable amongst good men for ever: as we see
Haman is noted by none other title but the oppressor of the Jews, that is, of
the true Church: and his goods are worthily confiscate, as guilty of treason
both against God and his Princess. For by his wicked devises he did rise
against God, defamed the King, and sought the life of the Queen. Heerehence
appears, that the law of the confiscation of goods is most ancient, and used
against those who were guilty of most heinous crimes, that so the pride of men
might be beaten down. For there is no man so wicked and ungodly, but he is
touched with a care of his children and posterity. In so much, that many are
not so afraid of death as that their children by their fault should be driven to
penury. Therefore to restrain and bridle the malice of men, ther^ are not
only appointed most grieuou^ pains for the more heinous offenses, b^^ also
the loss and co^fiscatio^ of their good. But if any shall except that the
children are not guilty of the fathers offenses, I say, that there is no
greater injury done unto them, though they be innocent, when they are deprived
of their fathers substance, then when they are deprived of their life and
defense. The confiscation then and taking away of Hama^s goods, was a just
vengeance upon him and his family. I confess that diverse times it may come to
pass, that the best, by the false accusations of the wicked, may be spoiled of
their life and goods, which we see was done unto Naboth by the malice of
Iezabel, who caused 1. King. 21.
him to be accused of treason, that so Achab might challe^ge his goods and
possession by way of co^fiscation: but the wicked do not long enjoy those
goods, as neither Achab had long cause of joy, when as shortly after the death
of Naboth, he received a message by Eliah the Prophet, of Gods vengeance, to be
executed upon him and his family, together with a most notable testimony of
Naboths innocence: as the same history does witness. So that those who enjoy
the goods of the poor faithful condemned for the profession of the Gospel,
by escheate and confiscation, shall not long rejoice, but shall shortly feel the
curse of God upon themselves and their posterity. As touching Ester, she might
with a good conscience possess the goods of Haman, who suffered justly for his
deserts. And if we shall say that the Jews did afterward abstain from the
spoils of those whom in their lawful defense they slew, although the king
gave them the spoils, and that therefore likewise Ester ought to have
abstained from the spoils of Haman: we may answer, that the circumstances in
these actions were diverse, and the manner of dealing therein diverse. Add
moreover, that some may for certain respects renounce their right: and others
with a good conscience use it, that God both in the ones abstaining and the
others using may be glorified. For the justice of God is so much the more
famous against a most deadly enemy of the Church, when as his goods are
possessed by Ester; and the equity of the Jews cause is so much the more
apparent, that being content to put away the force of their enemies, and danger
wherein they were, they do abstain from the spoil. Here is to be learned,
that those who enjoy goods given them by Princes, must wisely forese^ what
shall be convenient and lawful for them to do, and what be the circumstances
of the fact. And thus far of the forfaiture of Hamans goods.

Now his honors and dignities Mardochaeus obtained, who came into the kings
presence when Ester had told what he was unto her, and when the king had taken
off his ring which he had taken from Haman, and had given it unto Mardochaeus,
Mardochaeus had already received great honor, for that benefit which he had
done for the king, and his faithful service toward him, when he was led by
Haman through the streets of the city, upon the kings horse, and in the kings
apparel: but that honor was but short: now he receives firm and stable
dignity, so that he possesses the chief degree of honor with the king: as
Solomon faith, When the wicked Pro. 28. 28.
perish, the just are multiplied, who lay hid whiles the wicked reigned. These
things also holp him to obtain these honors, that besides his faithfulness
alredie known unto the King, the Queen Ester showed the King what he was unto
her, to weet, her cosen germane, who had brought her up, and been unto her in
steed of a father.

Wherefore the King who loved the Queen entirely, did therefore love
Mardochaeus so much the more. Hereby we perceive, partly the wisdom of
Mardochaeus, who hitherto had willed his kinswoman to conceal her kindred and
her Nation, partly the silence and discretion of Ester, in keeping secret that
which she was bidden. Notwithstanding, the Kings carelessness is wonderful in
this point, that in four or five years space he enquireth not, what an one,
or whence she was, whom he had chosen for his wife, and did so esteem of her,
that preferring her before all the rest, he bestowed on her the Crown royal.
But because she was brought into the kings house among the damsels of the
City of Susa, and dwelt in the City, it is likely she was accounted the
daughter of some native Citizen, especially when her father and mother being
dead, the contrary did not appear. But whatsoever was done or supposed herein,
the admirable providence of God shines in it, who in fit time does make known
the virtue and state of his, that he may prefer them to high dignity, so
far as is expedient for the good of the Church. The Kings Ring taken from
Haman and given unto Madochaeus, does note the chief degree of honor with the
King, of which Haman was worthily deprived, and Mardochaeus made possessor.

The King therefore acknowledging his error in choosing Haman, is now more wise
in the choice of an other, whose fidelity toward the King, wisdom and
modestic in government, constancy in adversity, and moderation in honor,
were sufficiently before hand tried.

This is a great benefit when kings have been deceived, whether by their
wills and rash affections, or by the deceits and crafts of those whom they
have preferred, that yet at the last, they bethink themselves to appoint men
for government, whose faithfulness and virtue is sufficiently known and tried.
And here in Haman, is that fulfilled which is spoken, Psalm. 49. verse. 17. That
every one when he dies shall take nothing with him, neither shall his pomp
descend after him. And likewise that which David wishes against the enemies of
the Church, That their days be few, and an other take Ps. 109. 8.
their office.

So Eliakim a faithful man and diligent, Isai. 22. 20.
succeeds Shebna an hypocrite, the steward of the house of Hezekiah: And
Matthias the faithful, in the room of Act. 1. 26
Judas the traitor. For although when they dye they carry not with them their
goods or their honors, or their estates and callings: yet those who use them
well, carry this praise with the^, that they have faithfully discharged their
duty, and do retain with honor the titles of that dignity which they had
attained: So when Moses or Isaiah are remembered, they are always named the
Prophets and faithful servants of God: but the memory of Achitophel and Judas
is always with reproach, and they are only called traitors. Wherefore the honor
of good men does as it were rest with them in their sepulchers, and yet flies
through the whole world in the mouths of men: but the name of the wicked
perish for ever, and those dignities which they have abused wickedly, are as it
were by violence taken from them with everlasting shame. Mardochaeus accepts
willingly the honor which is offered him by the king: neither did he think it
unlawful to bear office in the court of an infidel king, and to manage the
kings chiefest business. The same did Joseph in Egypt, and Daniel in Babylon.
Wherehence it is apparent, that it is lawful for a faithful man to bear any
office in the courts of kings though infidels, so that he be not thereby
compelled to do any thing against his conscience. Fardermore, the Lord to show
that kingdoms are governed by him, and distributed according to his good
pleasure, oftentimes by this means does promote his servants for the profit
and commodity of his Church, as in Joseph, and Daniel, and here in
Mardochaeus and Ester is evident. So Constantine the great was promoted to the
Empire, that he might bridle the persecutors of the Church, who had three
hundred years together raged against it, and repress the pride of Licinius
his companion in the Empire, who even then oppressed the Christians. In our
time God has raised up some good Kings and Princes, who by arms and lawful
power have defended the truth, and protected the Church from the violence of
tyrants, unto whom also the the Lord has given their dignities, who did abuse
them to the oppressing of the faithful. Behold how in a moment the Lord
changes the state of this world, casting down the proud and haughty, and
contrariwise, lifting up the abject and Luc. 1. 51. 52.
humble: as the blessed Virgin does sing in her Canticle. And this may suffice
to be spoken concerning Hamans being spoiled of his goods, and Ester and
Mardochaeus enriched with them.

Let us now see with what care, and with what mind Ester endeavored and
labored that her people might be delivered from that danger which hanged over
them. For the kings commandment set forth by Haman, though the author thereof
were dead, yet retained still his force. Ester therefore being glad with the
prosperous success of her former petition, proceeds to speak unto the King,
and falling down at his feet weeping, besought him that he would turn away
the wickedness of Haman the Agagite, and the device which he had imagined
against the Jews. Although then she had gained much, the chief enemy of her
people being dead, his goods being confiscate and she enjoying them, as
Mardochaeus also his honors: yet she thinks she has done nothing, unless
she deliver her people from the present danger.

Now because she perceived that it was a hard matter to desire the calling
back of the decree, which by the law of the Persians was irreuocable, she
entreats him with greater affection and humility, falling down weeping at
the kings feet, that so she might the more easily move his mind. For how, I
pray, could he be more moved to pity and commiseration on so many innocent
souls, then by the tears, carfulness, and sorrow of his most dearly
beloved wife? Now Ester casts all the blame upon Haman, because he was the
mouer, perswader, and promoter of this mischief against the Jews, whom by
false slanders he had oppressed: and wisely she omitteth the mention of the
King, though by his authority he had confirmed the device: For the King had
sufficiently witnessed, how greatly the matter displeased him. Besides when
she desires, that the device of Haman should be revoked, she covertly means,
that as by his authority the proclamation was approved, so also by his
commandment, the evil effect thereof ought to be turned away from the necks
of those miserable wretches, on whom it was like to light.

The King being moved with the presence of Ester, holds out unto her the
golden scepter, the sign of his favor and good will, whereby the Queen being
the more confirmed, standing up, does speak the more boldly unto the King. Her
speech is like unto that which we saw in the former chapter, full of
humility, wisdom, faith and zeal toward God, and fervent charity toward
her people. It is most seemly to speak unto Kings with greatest humility,
because of the dignity and majesty whereunto they are exalted, as those who
are also adorned with the title of Gods even by Psalm. 82. 6.
the Spirit of God, from whom they receive so excellent an office. Ester
therefore does rightly debase and cast down her self before the King when she
speaks unto him, not remembering her own dignity, nor desiring any thing but
that which is right, and beseeming the dignity of the king. And this indeed
ought to be the end of all petitions, so that all flattery be away, which is
most hurtful unto kings, as was that of the Tyrians to Herod Agrippa, when
they cried, The Act. 12. 22. 23.
voice of a God, and not of a man: which when he did not repress, it was the
cause of his death.

The sum of her petition is, Let it be written, that the letters of Haman be
revoked, which he wrote to destroy the Jews, which are in all the kings
provinces. It is most rightful to give life unto them whom we know to be
wrongfully condemned. But if any shall except that her petition was unlawful
and uncivil, seeing that by the laws of the Persians all Proclamations were
not to be called back again: the answer is easy, that there is no place for
any law of man, against equity, and the laws of God and nature. For is it
just, that because an evil law is received and in use, therefore no man may
make any petition unto Princes for equity, for truth, for the life and
innocence of good men? Hereby appears Esters holy boldness: what then shall
become of their sluggishnes and cowardice, who live in those kingdoms, wherein
edicts do wax old of themselves, and may every hour be called back by
contrary edicts, and yet though they have authorities, dare not once open their
mouths in the defense of Gods Church? If Ester had sought excuses and means to
hide her self, she would have said, that she had done as much as lay in her,
Haman being hanged, and Mardochaeus promoted into his place and dignities; that
it were a foolish, rash, and inconsiderate part to talk again to the king in
his fury, and that it was against the custom and laws of the country to go
about to compel him to revoke his commandment: but she, because the matter
concerns the safety of the Church, the glory of God, and the honor and
estimation of the king, is no whit afraid to crave that, which otherwise might
seem to be uncivil.

She shows also her zeal and charity in the reason which she brings in
these words, How can I behold the evil, which should come upon my people, and
how can I see the destruction of my kindred? for it is as much as if she should
say, that she had rather lose her life, then with her eyes to behold the
destruction of her people and kindred; and that nothing should be afterward
more bitter unto her then her life. And so very openly she witnesses, that she
desires nothing more, esteems nothing more, then to be accounted amongst the
people of God: neither is she ashamed to join her self to that people whom
condemned unto death, every one contemned: and this also made much to move the
king to seek a remedy for this almost incurable mischief. The faith and
charity of this Queen is so much the more commendable, how much the rarer it
is: seeing we shall find but a few at this day to be so inflamed with the zeal
of the house of God. Let us then at the least by her example, with humble
prayers call upon the King of heaven, that he will turn away from our
brethren, the wicked counsels and crafty practices of our enemies. For
although the head of this League and conspiratours, the oppressor of the Church
of God be destroyed, yet many remain infected with this venime, and the fury
of his crafts and practices even at this day every where moves wars, and
fills al places with seditions and most detestable apostasies. Of Esters
petition thus far.

The answer of Assuerus is full of humanity and gentleness, and in granting
the protection of the Jews, easy and courteous: but yet it shows a troubled
mind, when he says, That he had done what he might, having condemned Haman to
the gallows, who would have laid his hand upon the Jews, and having given his
goods unto Ester: and that he does now moreover permit, that they write for the
Jews, as it shall seem good unto them: but yet he adds, that the writing
which was written in the Kings name, and sealed with the Kings seal, could not
be called back. Notwithstanding what could be done in favor of the Jews, but
it would be contrary to the former proclamation? Lo into what straights
Princes are often brought by the fraud and malice of wicked counselors:
behold also how, seeing the weakness of men's wit is so great, it is not
expedient that all the constitutions of a kingdom should be irreuocable. For
when as the King dares not call back his former Proclamation, what does he but
lay open his people to the slaughter, by two contrary writings, being both of
like authority, arming his subjects one against another? And if God himself
had not helped the poor oppressed, it is most certain, that the former
proclamation would have had the greater force. Here then let us rather admire
Gods providence, then praise the Kings wisdom. These things are written for
our comfort, that in our greatest dangers, and hardest distress, when the
mischief seems past remedy, we flee unto him who made a way for his people
through the midst of the sea: who lighteneth our most thickest darkness by the
brightness of his light: who opens the graves, who delivers us out of the
shadow of death, as heretofore he preserved by wonderful means his people,
and the three children cast into the fiery furnace, and finally Daniel in the
very den of Lions. Howbeit, the kings humanity and courtesy is to be
commended, who so willingly consented that they should write in favor of the
Jews: but it is no marvel if he could not by his own wisdom wind himself
out of so intricate a business, and therefore committed the whole matter to the
fidelity and wisdom of Mardochaeus. Hereby it is evident, that Princes need
nothing more then faithful counselors: It is therefore our parts to obtain
them by our prayers for our Princes at the hand of the Lord; and to pray that
God will direct their minds to follow the advice of faithful and good
counselors. For otherwise the Lord will find out many ways to punish the
enemies of his name, and to deliver his people out of all distress, that they
may give him eternal praise and immortal glory; for unto him belong only
all glory and dominion, through Jesus Christ his Son our Lord.

Amen.
THE TWENTIETH Sermon.
What wisdom Mardochaeus did use in writing the Proclamation in favor of the
Jews, in the great anguish and trouble of his mind, from verse 9. to 15. of
the 8. Chapter.

9. Then were the Kings Scribes called at the same time, even in the third
month, that is, the month Sivan, on the xxiij. day thereof: and it was
written according unto all that Mordecai commanded, unto the Jews, and to the
Princes, and Captains and rulers of the Provinces, which were from India, even
unto Ethiopia, an hundred and seven and twenty provinces, unto every province
according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their speech, and
to the Jews according unto their writing, and according to their language.

10. And he wrote in the King Assuerus name, and sealed it with the Kings
ring: and he sent the letters by poasts on horseback, and that road on beasts
of price, as dromedaries, and coltes of mares.

11. Wherein the King granted the Jews (in what city soever they were) to
gather themselves together and to stand for their life, and to root out, to
slay, and to destroy all the power of the people, and of the province which
shall invade them, their children and women, and to spoil their goods.

12. Upon the same day in all the provinces of King Assuerus, even the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.

13. The copy of the writing was, how there should be a commandment given in
all and every province, published among all the people, and that the Jews
should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.

14. So the posts rode upon beasts of price, and dromedaries, and went forth
with speed to excute the Kings commandment, and the decree was given at Susa
the city royal.


A Braham the father of the faithful, in the greatest troubles of his mind,
when he was in the way going to sacrifice his only son, who demanded of him
where was the lamb for the burnt offering, gave this memorable answer full of
faith, saying, The Lord will provide. Genesis 22. 8.
For in the midst of distresses, which no wit of man could have remedied, he
shows that he depends altogether on Gods providence: and teaches us, that
in all hard and doubtful matters, we must do our duty, and use that wisdom
which God gives us, least we be fearful like the infidels, and leave the
eue^ts and doubts which we can not redress, to Gods providence and most wise
government, who has promised to be a light unto us in our most thickest
darkness. This also we see to be performed by Mardochaeus, in this History:
for, the King granting him leave to write what letters he would in favor of
the Jews, and yet not reuoking the former which were written for their
destruction, it is not to be doubted, but that he wrestled with many doubts and
diverse fears; perceiving the Kings mind to be mutable and easily changed: and
besides, foreseeing many dangers, after what manner soever he should write the
decree. For, as we here see the Edict written, to grant the Jews, that
being gathered together, they might stand for their life against all that
would as enemies invade them: was it not to set them open to a hard and most
dangerous Combat, against the natural subjects of the kingdom, armed no
less with the Kings authority, then the Jews, who were only poor captives
and strangers, and far less in number then their enemies? Mardochaeus
therefore in these straights, did what he could in duty, and by the authority
granted him from the king, remitting the whole event of the matter unto the
mercy of the Lord, whose wonderful means in delivering of his Church, he had
already had experience of, in that happy end of so many dangers, which the
mind of man could not have thought on: hoping that it would come to pass,
that God who had begun the deliverance of his Church by so sudden and unhoped
means, would perfect the same unto his glory. Here then we are to consider
how Mardochaeus did provide, that this new proclamation might go forth absolute
in all parts and form, and what was the substance and argument thereof.
Wherein shall be observed his wisdom, equity and diligence, in guiding and
furthering the public affairs of the Church; which are particularly to be
unfolded by us, that in all things we may observe the care and direction which
God bears over his: and how he disposes all things for their safety and
commodity, as often as it seems good unto him; and that so we may learn, to
rest upon his fatherly care, doing not with standing our duty, as much as in
us lies.

The ninth verse, declares the time wherein that proclamation was made in favor
of the Jews: by whom, unto whom, and how it was carried. The time, is the 23.
day of the third month, which is called Siuan, which answers to part of our
May. Whereby it is apparent that this Edict went forth two months and ten
days after the other, which as we saw Chap. 3. verse. 12. was made the
thirteenth day of the first month. Besides from the publishing of this Edict
unto the execution thereof, there was eight months and about twenty days: For
as in the next Chapter we shall see, it was fulfilled on the thirteenth day of
the twelfth month. The time is thus precisely noted, not only for the
certainty and truth of the History: but also that the state of the Church may
be set before our eyes, what it was at that time, first for the space of those
two months and ten days, wherein it was half buried, as it were being
condemned to death and destruction, which seemed impossible to be avoided.
After, how in the space of other eight months, beginning as it were to breathe
again, she prepared her self to her just and lawful defense: yet not without
many difficulties, whereby she might be feared, until God gave her a full
victory over her enemies.

God therefore will have the estate of his Church to be such in this world,
that she shall seem sometimes to be oppressed, without hope of restoring,
sometimes armed with some just defense, sometimes also to have the upper hand
of her enemies: that so being tried by all means, she may the better know her
infirmity, and the hatred wherewith she is troubled by the world: and yet not
withstanding that she has her whole defense resting in God alone by whom she
is stayed up, and who as often as it seems good unto him, turns all things to
her profit and commodity. We see then, that the people of God was accounted as
miserable and past hope, as well in the opinion of the wicked, as in their own
judgment, having the sentence of death pronounced against them.

And this was not a little profitable unto them, that they might the better be
stirred up unto repentance, which in prosperity is neglected: and that she
might be made like unto the son of God, who was consecrated by afflictions:
and that the wonderful power of God in delivering his, might be the more
known. For if there were no oppression, where were deliverance? unless we
were plunged in the darkness of death, how should that light of life whereby
God quickneth us be known? God therefore being about to show forth any notable
deliverance, and great work of his glory, first suffers his to be drowned,
and as it were shut up in the grave, that in their safety, his glory may by
some more excellent means shine most clear, and the hand of god may be
acknowledged in it, and that it may be said, The Lord has done it. But he
exercises his Church sometime more grievously sometimes but lightly, and
either lengtheneth or shortneth the time of calamity, as he sees it
expedient, yielding them strength and patience, according to the measure of the
time which he has prescribed unto the affliction.

Afterward there is expressed by whom the decree is written, to wit, by
Mardochaeus, who did endite the substance thereof unto the Scribes, who brought
it into form as he prescribed. Here then the king affoordeth the same favor
unto Mardochaeus, which before he did unto Haman, permitting to his pleasure
whatsoever was needful to be done, so that he were not compelled to recall in
express terms, the former proclamation. In which thing, the King may
worthily be said to have dealt inconsiderately, to permit that whole matter
unto one man's will and pleasure, which ought to have been done with great
deliberation and stayed counsel. For although in plain words the former
decree was not revoked, yet of necessity this must be made contrary unto it.
But yet not without the exceeding great wisdom of God, do these things thus
come to pass: for if the counselors had been called together, perhaps they
would not have consented, to a decree so favorable for the Jews so contrary
to the former, and so hurtful unto the Kings natural subjects. But so much
the greater was the care and trouble of Mardochaeus, because he alone must
sustain the whole hatred and envy of that proclamation.

And it is not to be doubted but that he was greatly troubled, when he
should endite that Edict unto the scribes; seeing that he was a ma^late raised
to that so great dignity, in a place so slipperie, and in the guiding of
matters of so great weight, even which concerned the whole state of so great a
Monarchy; having also to do with a King so unconstant, himself besides,
having in so few years, bin the beholder of so many changes. Howbeit God gave
him sufficient wisdom, as he is wont to bestow gifts necessary upon all
whom he calls to any lawful vocation.

The Scribes are called, not to set down their opinion, but to write as they
were commanded. Wherefore they do not admonish the King neither of the
repugnance of this Edict with the former, neither of the consequence which
might fall out by it, neither of the damage which should come to all the Kings
subjects, who should destroy themselves by civil murder: whereby appears,
that the kings authority was on all sides absolute, and that none durst
gainesay him, or except any thing against his Decree.

Such at this day is the authority of the Turk; but the better and more
moderate Princes are wont for the most part to hear the opinion of their
counsel, and servants. Now these Scribes it seems cared not what they
wrought, so that they were assured that it was the Kings will.

The proclamation is appointed to be sent to the Jews, because it concerned
their security: then unto the Princes, Captains and chief Governors of the
Provinces, that they should publish it, and least that they should hinder the
Jews in their just defense; and that those who had received the former
co^ma^deme^t from the king, should now be certified of his contrary pleasure.
So we see that the king does little esteem what his Lieftenant and governors
would judge of so sudden a change, and so contrary opinions and decrees.
Whereby it appears what fearful and absolute or rather immoderate dominion
he exercised over his subjects. These think themselves to be gods, that may not
be reprehended nor reproved, so that no man may so much as look into their
actions, much less gainsay them.

The manner of the writing of the Proclamation is diverse, according to the
style and language of every province, that no man might pretend ignorance. But
if the commandments of earthly kings ought to be written in all the tongues of
their subjects, how much more the law of the eternal Jehovah, which none can
be ignorant of without certain loss of their salvation?

Of those to whom the letters are committed to be carried into the seven and
twenty provinces, we shall speak more commodiously afterward, verse. 14. So
that here we are to weigh that which is said, That they were written in the
Kings name, and sealed with the Kings seal. For so they were made authentical
without cotradiction. For as in these days Kings and Princes, are wont to
seal their Patents with great seals, that they may add force and authority
to their graunts and commandments, that same were the kings of Persia wont to
do with sealing with their ring. The King then saw and allowed what soever the
Scribes had written at the commandment of Mardochaeus. So we see that it is
most ^ight that Kings hear and see those things which are published in their
name unto their subjects, especially in things of great moment: for otherwise
neither can they avoid the note of ca^elesnesse, and negligence, nor their
counselors of deceit and treason, if letters shall be sent out in the Kings
name concerning the estate of the kingdom, which the King neither saw, nor
with sufficient deliberation did weigh and consider.

Let us now then view their substance and argument, in these words; That the
King granted unto the Jews (in what city soever they were) to gather
together and to stand for their lives, and to root out, and to slay, and to
destroy all the power of the people and of the province which should invade
them, their children and wives: and to spoil their goods. In these later words
there is some ambiguitie and doubtfulnes: for it is uncertain whether the
Jews are permitted to kill, not only their enemies, but also their wives and
children: or only to kill those who would oppress them their wives and
children? But this later sense does better agree with the humanity of the
faithful, neither is it likely that Mardochaeus, without Gods exprese
commandment, would have women and children to be slain. But some man will
except: that the enemies of God and his Church are worthy to feel that
punishment, which without cause they threatened unto others. But there appears
no such thing in the execution which shortly after did follow. So that to
avoid all ambiguitie and doubtfulnes of speech, the Hebrew may be thus
translated, That it was granted unto the Jews by the king, that they should
slay all those that went about to lay violent hands on them, their wives or
children: and that the spoils of the enemies slain was given by the King to
the Jews. So that the sum of this Proclamation was, that it was granted by
the King unto the Jews, that they should be gathered together to defend their
lives, and to destroy all those that would offer them or theirs any force or
violence, and besides to spoil their goods. So that they were not to set upon
any, but using their lawful defense, to kill those that did lie in wait for
their lives. And this is most rightful, that being armed with the authority
of the chief Magistrate, they might fight for their life, for their liberty
and religion, for the defense of their wives and children, and as the Proverb
is, for their Temples and houses. For this cause wars are lawful, whereby
the inrodes and invasions of enemies are repressed: in so much that they who
take away from the faithful the sword of lawful defense as the Anabaptists
do, do make a way for the wicked, and let loose the bridle to all manner of
robberies: and do as it were lay open the innocent bound hand and foot to
their fury: and besides condemn all the Saints the faithful servants of
God, Abraham, Moses, Joshua, the Judges, David, and almost all the other good
kings, who did lead the Lords hosts, and fought his battles. In the mean
while the former edict not being revoked, does still retain his force, and so
there arise here great difficulties, so that it seems that there is small
provision made for the safety of the Jews. For who would hope that the
natural subjects of the king being more in number, and first strengthened with
the Kings authority, could be overcome and defeated by the Jews, being only
seely captives, dispearsed here and there, without armor, without authority
Besides is it not likely that the governors of the provinces would either
secretly or openly rather incline to their own men's side then to the Jews.
Finally it being granted that the Governors would incline to neither part,
are not the natural subjects rather stirred up by this means against the
Jews, even to thirst their blood, when as they were first armed by the Kings
authority against them, and had more ways to set upon them then the other had
to defend? Without doubt Mardochaeus did sufficiently perceive these
inconuemences. But what could he do? Only this procure that it may be lawful
for the Jews to use their just defense, and hope that God would help their
just cause, as he had already begun to favor and bless his people, and that
he would send a fear upon their enemies: which thing the issue did confirm.
He did also suppose, that when they should know the cause wherefore Haman
was hanged, and understand whereupon this new decree was granted, and hear
of the favor which the Jews had with the King, as well in regard of Ester the
Queen, as also for Mardochaeus sake, they would all slake that anger they bare
unto the Jews, and abstain from inuading them, seeing by that means also
themselves might be quiet. For as the favors and graces of Princes do lean
either to this part or to the other; so are the wills and affections of
subjects changed.

Heerehence also is to be observed, that Kings, howsoever they would seem to
keep their laws holy and inuiolate, yet by subtle and by-ways they
oftentimes overthrow them. The King would by no means seem willing to depart
from his former commandment, which notwithstanding by this contrary decree,
he ouerturneth, and in deed takes away. Had he not dealt better with his
subjects, expressly to have revoked that former decree, then by this to set
them thus together by the ears. For this inuading on the one part, and defense
on the other, could not be done without bloodshed on the one side or the other,
or both. But Gods providence ruled and guided all these things, that the
enemies of the Church might receive the punishment they had deserved. Here is
also farther to be noted, that the wicked counsels of the enemies of the
Church, are made deadly both to themselves and their confederates. And although
also after their death they leave behind them the effects of their treacheries
and conspiracies, yet at the last they are all ouerturned, to the great
confusion of those, who shall follow their most wicked counsels.

Moreover, Mardochaeus retains the very terms of the former edict to
terrify the enemies of the Church, when he says, that it is granted to the
Jews to kill, slay, and destroy: whereby they might perceive, that the
mischief which they had prepared for others, should fall upon their own
heads. And even in this age, beyond all expectation, do we see the experience
of all these things. For after the death of that Haman the head of the League,
we have seen the force of former edicts repealed, and other proclamations
sent out from the King against his companions and confederates, unto whom
notwithstanding license was before granted to destroy the godly. These are the
admirable works of our God, which no man can sufficiently wonder at, and in
meditation where of all our senses will fail. For God does fulfill those
things before our eyes, which no man could expect, or so much as hope for.

There is a set day appointed for this matter throughout all the provinces of
the king Assuerus, to weete the xv. day of the xij. month, which is the month
Adar, and which was appointed for the destruction of the Jews: so that the day
which was by Hamans malice prefixed for their ruin and overthrow, by the
goodness of God should be turned into safety and deliverance. Until that day
came they might at leisure meet, and prepare and furnish themselves with
things necessary for their just defense, diligently foreseeing as well the
number of the enemies, as their purposes and strength whereby they prepared to
set upon them or by what means they sought to (...) them. So it comes to
pass, that for the most part those times which the enemies of the Church did
think to be most fit to obtain an happy issue of their devises and
practices, God does appoint for their destruction: whereof we oftentimes have
had experience. And thus far of the duty of the Jews.

Let us see what is commanded unto the Governors: That the coppie of this
writing should be published among the people, in every Province; and that the
Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.
This might seem hard un to the Lieftenants and Governors, who lately had
published an Edict altogether contrary unto this. But they were in subjection
even as servants, unto this great Monarch, neither dared they as much as to open
their lips against his pleasure. But what I pray could they imagine, when they
saw such contrary commandments, but that either the King was indiscreet, or
used evil counselors, or else was delighted with the mutual hatreds and
discords of his subjects, and would therefore make trial which part was
strongest? Notwithstanding they go on, and proclaim the Edict.

Whereby it comes to pass, that the Jews are sufficiently furnished to be
revenged on their enemies. Although then private revenge be in express words
forbidden. Math. 5. 39. Yet the public granted by the magistrate in a just
cause is always lawful, and commanded by God.

So David gives thanks unto God, Ps. 18. 41.
that he had given him power to avenge himself. It is likely that many
contemned this decree, as being wrested from the King by the importunity of a
woman: and persuaded themselves, that the King indeed would not have those
things to be done, which were contained in that Edict, and that therefore they
would stand unto the former.

But by this means God drew on his enemies unto the day of slaughter. So
diverse in our time trusting unto that Edict, which was first made against the
professors of the reformed religion, accounted of the Kings latter Edicts, but
as trifles and to be laughed at. Which opinion yet was and will be to their
hinderance.

Let us now pass over unto those by whose diligence those Letters were carried
into all Provinces, to wit, by the hand of swift posts, which rode on the best
horses and beasts provided for the Kings affairs: for the Kings of Persia used
to have stage posts, prepared for the iournies of every Province, that so in
short time they might receive news of the whole affairs of the Kingdom, or
send into the Provinces as need required: of whose faithfulness no man would
doubt seeing they had commandment from the King.

So God provided, that his should speedily receive the gladsome tidings of
their deliverance, that in their anguish they might be comforted, and in their
sorrows cheared and made glad: and that by the effect it self he might
approve unto them, that he had heard their prayers, and understood their cries.

So when it seems good unto the Lord, all things are changed, and turned
unto the good and joy of the Church. For the Kings will and lips wish and speak
whatsoever shall be for their profit: the Scribes write that which Mardochaeus
commands them, who sets down that which he thinks necessary for their
preservation: the Princes and Governors they publish that which they are
commanded; the Posts speedily carry the Letters into all Provinces: So God is
wont to comfort his after afflictions. Let us therefore wholly depend on him,
serve him continually in fear, patiently expect his help, looking until he
make us joyful in Christ Jesus, by whom our joy is purchased; to whom be
glory for ever.

Amen.
THE ONE AND twentieth Sermon.
The magnificence of Mardochaeus, the joy of all the Jews, and the fear of
all people. From the 15* verse to the end of the 8. Chapter.

15. And Mordecai went out from the king in royal apparel of blew and white,
and with a great Crown of gold, and with a garment of fine linen and purple*
and the City of Susa rejoiced and was glad.

16. And unto the Jews was come light, and joy, and gladness and honor.

17. Also in all and every Province, and in all and every City, into
whatsoever place the Kings commandment and his decree came, there was joy and
gladness, afeast and good day, and many of the people of the land became
Jews: for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.


THere is none of us who does not most willingly confess, that the saying of
Paul is most true, That God according to that power which works Ephesians. 3. 20.
in us, is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think.
For who knows not that Gods power does infinitely surpass the reach and
desires of our mind? Howbeit when as the truth of this sentence is made open
unto us by clear and evident examples, or when as God by experience does show
forth the same in our own affairs, then with greater assurance and delight do
we prove it to be true, whereby we do power outmore abundantly the praises of
God, proclayming his power and bounty, which is far greater then all our
wishes, desires, or demandes.

Therefore the holy Scripture does set before our eyes many notable examples,
in which the liberality and bounty of God does infinitely pass our hope and
petitions. This is clear in Joseph, being sold sor a bondslaue into Egypt,
and Genesis 39. 41
by the slanders of his Mistress cast into prison. For what more could he
desire of God in this case then to be set free out of bonds into liberty, and
restored to his fathers house. But God bestowed on him greater gifts, lifting
him up into the government of all Egypt, and giving him the next degree of
honor unto Pharao. The same favor did Daniel feel in Babylon; for when as
he durst not hope Da. 2. 48. and 6.
for any greater matter then to be set at liberty to return unto Jerusalem,
he was made the chief of all Princes by Nabuchadnezzer. The same here is
seen in Mardochaeus, and the whole state of the Jews, which were dispersed
throughout all the Provinces of the kingdom of Assuerus. For whereas they
could not think or wish for any greater matter, then to be delivered from
death which by the decree of Haman did seem to hang over their heads: yea were
ready to change that bloody death for the most hard bondage, as we learned
before out of Esters speech, Chap. 7. v. 4. Behold now what God by an unhoped
means does make them to behold: to wit, the good will and exceeding favor of
the King toward them; their enemy overthrown, his goods given unto Ester,
and his honors bestowed on Mardochaeus; an Edict proclaimed on their behalf,
the greatest part of the people favoring them, their enemies fearing them: and
finally as (God willing) in the next Chapter we shall see, a full victory over
their enemies, after which followed a public joy, and a solemn feast, the
king allowing it. Is not this to do exceeding abu^dantly, above all that we
dare desire or think? And do not we at this day find the like, partly in
respect of the churches in France, partly in respect of those that defend the^?
The churches beginning to enjoy some peace and tranquillity, and the defenders
of them attaining greater honors then before they had, or durst to desire, the
Pope in vain thundering with his excommunications?

Besides the head and Captain of the co^spiracie being by so unlooked and
unhoped for means slain, and his other companions condemned of rebellion and
treason? Who I say, some few months before could have hoped for or thought
of these things? Therefore it is our duty as well by those examples, which we
see in others, as by those things the taste where of by experience we find in
our selves, more and more to be confirmed in the hope of greater favor and
help from God, then in our thoughts we can attain unto. For the Lords hand is
not shortened, neither is his goodness abated; but we must certainly assure our
selves, that God will show himself no less admirable in these days then
heretofore he has done in the defense of his church. Wherefore let us so learn
to discuss those things which we have in this History set forth unto us,
that we apply them to our own use and comfort.

First here is mention made of the honor and glory of Mardochaeus: then of the
joy and gladness of all the Jews: and lastly of the fear where with their
enemies were affright. The glory of Mardochaeus is commended by two things: the
first is, his easy access unto the King; the other his gorgious and precious
apparel, for he is said, to have come out from the presence of the king in
royal apparel of blew and white, and with a great Crown of Gold. Such was
their apparel whom the Kings of Persia would honor, and unto whom they gave
the chief places of dignity about them, that they might govern the
weightiest affairs of the whole Kingdom.

For it is seemly that those who are called by the King to the government of
their State, should be discerned by some notes, whereby their dignity and
majesty may be known, and authority procured unto them by that means: now
by purple and fine linen, and a golden Crown, the highest dignity which was
next unto the Kings was noted. For great Princes will have certain signs of
greatness and m^iestie to shine as it were in their chiefest officers, that
their glory may thereby appear the greater: in as much as they can do these
things in those, whom it pleases them to advance.

So we see, that garments which at the first were provided only for
necessi^ie, were at the last sought for comeliness and ornament, and for notes
and distinctions of dignity. Mardochaeus then did not himself of his own
mind provide this apparel, so to boast of his dignity, but admitted such as
the King commanded after the manner and custom of the Persian Kings. Whereby
it is apparent that the faithful may with a good conscience use all things
that are mean and indifferent so that they retain godliness, modesty, and
charity; not proudly lifting up themselves against others, nor pampering and
delighting themselves in pleasures, neither abusing that favor and authority
which they have received. So Daniel of whose holiness noma^doubteth, received
precious ornaments, a chain of gold, and purple, when they were offered him by
the King of Babylon. Wherefore holiness, and rich ornaments of apparel, are
not contrary one unto an other: neither religion and the government of public
affairs; nor humility or modesty, and high authority in those that use it
well. For Joseph, Daniel and Mardochaeus, are never a whit the less holy, for
that they be apparelled in precious garments: nor the ^TXT less religious, for
that they governed the affairs of mighty Monarchs: nor the less humble and
modest, for that they attained to high honor. Nay on the contrary, pride many
times lurketh under course clothing, and often they who exercise holy functions
have not the most godliness, and under the empty show of holiness,
hypocrisy and dissimulation lie hidden.

Lo here how god can in a moment change the miserable condition of his
servants, into an happy and flourishing estate, that his power in this matter
may be the more apparent. For the Holy Ghost does not lay down these things
unto our view, that we should consider the gorgious garments of a mortal man,
but that excellent change which his hand has wrought. What then could
Mardochaeus say, but that which David says after he had prayed for the help
of God to deliver him? Thou have turned my mourning into joy, thou have loosed
my Ps. 30. 11. 12
sack and girded me with gladness. Therefore shall my tongue praise thee and
not cease.

Might he not also rightly say that of himself, which is, Ps. 31. 7. 8. I will
be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have known my trouble, thou have
seen my soul in aduer sitie: and thou have not shut me up in the hand of the
enemy, but have set my feet in a large room. Neither does that any less
agree unto him which the same Prophet says. Thou art a place to hide me in,
Ps. 32. 7.
thou shall keep me from trouble, and compass me about with songs of
deliverance.

So God for the most part is wont to dispose the affairs of his, that great
joy shall succeed great sorrow, and great gladness follow after many tears;
that great glory shall ensue after great disgrace, and after great abasing,
high honor and magnificence, whereof the known examples of Job and David do
make proof, as David himself does acknowledge in these words, Thou have
caused me to see great P s. 71. 20. 21.
troubles and adversities, but thou will again revive me, and take me up from
the depth of the earth. Thou will increase mine honor, and return and comfort
me. Ought not we then by these things to become more constant and bold in the
midst of our dangers and greatest distress? And thus far of Mardochaeus
glory.

The joy and gladness of the Jews, is next to be considered: and first of
those who dwelt in Susa, and then of those who were dispersed in other Cities
and Provinces, ver. 17. Of the Jews which were abiding in Susa, it is said in
the end of the 15. verse, that the natural inhabitants rejoiced for their
sakes; unless we will follow a more simple sense of the place, and say, that
there was light and joy in the City of Susa; that is among the Jews. But it
may also be, that many of the Citizens of Susa, perceiving the kings favor to
the Jews; the authority of Ester, and love which the King bare to her; and
the ho^our of Mardochaeus, did give forth some ^^gnes of rejoicing for this
felicity of the Jews, as for the most part we see it to ^appen, that unto
what part the Kings ^^uour and affection does bend, to the (...) also the good
will of the people does ^^cline. Many therefore being moved ^ith so sudden and
wonderful changes, and seeing them revived whom before ^^ey thought dead,
might well say with (...) Prophet, Psalm. 126. 2. The Lord has ^ne great things
for them: And so (...) unto them that deliverance which the Lord had wrought
for his Church. Wherefore it is rightly said, concerning the Jews, whose this
happiness properly was, that there appeared unto them a light, and gladness,
and joy, and glory. Light is set against the darkness of affliction; gladness
against sorrow; joy against tears; glory against shame and abasing.

The fountain of this gladness, was the light of the countenance of the Lord
which did shine over them for their safety. The matter was that happy chang^
of their estate, their chief and most hate full, enemy being dead and
destroyed the king greatly favoring them, the commandment sent forth in their
behalf Ester and Mardochaeus being exalted into the highest dignity and grace
with the king: the end of this joy was the testifying of a mind, not
unthankful for so many benefits bestowed upon them b^ God. It is lawful
then, nay it is expres^ commanded, that the faithful reioyce^ be glad, when as
they receive the testimonies of Gods favor. Therefore is D^uid wont most often
when he would she the greatness of his joy, and his than^full mind for the
benefits which he (...) received from God, to inuit and stir Ps. 103.
up all the works of God, to praise God with him. Let us not therefore suppose
that this was a profane joy, or the laughter of the children of this world,
who delight themselves with all intemperancie and riot, but a true spiritual
joy proceeding from God, which had taken so deep root in their minds, that
they did show forth the effects thereof in all the parts of their body, and
namely with their mouth, in so much that they brast forth into Psalms and
praises of god, together with the faithful in these words: Praised be the Ps.
68. 10. 20.
Lord, eue^ the God which ladeth us daily with benefits: This is our God, even
the God that saves us, and to the Lord God belong the issues of death.
Likewise also the rest of the Jews which dwelt in every Province are said to
have joy and gladness, feasts and mirth: for they did not keep any festival
day until after the execution of the decree, and destruction of their enemies,
as afterward we shall see.

Feasts agree with prosperity; fasts with adversities and calamities: but the
^easts of those which rejoice in the Lord, ^re seasoned with te^perance, and
with thanks giving, and adorned with the remembrance of the exceeding glorious
works of the Lord. For if the very Ethnickes, in whom there was any sparks of
honesty left, were wont in their feasts, to treat of grave and honest
matters, and to tell of the false miracles of their Gods: what is seemly for
Christians to do unto whom so abundant an argument of praising god is offered,
as well in the former deliverances of his church, as in these latter which daily
we see to be performed? but some man will say, there is not yet so great an
occasion offered unto the Jews of gladness, but that by reason of the dangers
to ensue, there remains yet much more cause of fear and carfulness.

For the former Edict as yet being in force, and the Jews having many enemies,
who are as well armed with public authority to invade them, as they are for
their own defense, does there not seem to be greater occasion of fear and
dread, then of joy and gladness? especially seeing the success of wars is
so diverse: and when as no part overcomes without great loss.

It is not to be thought that the Jews did so give themselves to joy, that
they were not careful for their affairs, or did not provide themselves
against the day of execution: and no doubt to this end did they often call upon
God in their prayers. The joy then that was bred in their hearts for this new
benefit which they had received from God, did likewise encourage them to hope
the more boldly for that which was to come, because God being so excellent a
workman, is not wont to leave his work imperfect, as Psalm. 138. 8. it is
said, The goodness of the Lord endures for ever, and that he never for saketh
the work of his hands. The Lord therefore does so make glad those that are
his, that not withstanding he leaves them sufficient occasion to pray unto
him, and to look carefully unto their affairs. And yet not with standing
leaving unto them a certain pledge and earnest of full deliverance, he gives
them hope of happy success, which yet depends wholly upon him: as also the
Prophet Isai speaks, chap. 26. 12. Thou o Lord wilt give us peace; for thou
also have wrought all our works for us.

That which is added in the end of this verse, might avail much to raise up
the Jews into a good hope, to weete, that many of the people of the land
became Jews; because the fear of the Jews fell upon them. So that it came to
pass, that on the one side many for desire took part with the Jews; on the
other side they were stricken with fear, whosoever went about to procure their
death. That it is said that many of the people of the land were made Jews, may
thus be understood, that either they took part with them, or that they did
embrace their Religion, acknowledging the God of the Jews for the true God,
who alone can save and deliver out of danger, those that put their whole trust
and confidence in him. And this is one of the fruits which is gathered out of
danger, those that put their whole trust and confidence in him. And this one of
the fruits which is gathered wonderful deliverances of his church, that many
who before were ignorant, and despised or even hated and persecuted the Church
and her doctrine, when as they perceive that so mightily, beyond all
expectation, deliver his out of the jaws of their enemies, and not only our of
their teeth, but even almost out of the bottom of their belly, and bowels as
it were, whereinto they seem quite to have swallowed them, then they take part
with the Church, and confess that this God only is to be worshipped and
served. So when God had by so many miracles tamed and subdued Pharao and all
Egypt, and after the last plague when his people went out with an high and
mighty hand, a great multitude joined themselves to the Israelites, to go
together Exo. 12. 38.
with them out of Egypt. In the time of David, when as he had obtained those
noble victories, many joined themselves unto him, some (as himself says) for
Psalm. 18.
servile fear, some willingly, and of their own accord. Many strangers also
followed the people, returning out of the captivity of Babylon, as it is said
in Ezra, that Ezra. 2. 59. 62.
some were put from the Priesthood because they knew not their genealogy. In
the Christian Church also, when as after that Licinius was overcome by
Constantine, the persecutions of the Church ceased, which had continued almost
three hundred years together, an innumerable company of people which before
served idols, was content to be received into the Church. So it comes to
pass, that those miraculous deliverances of the people of God, are not only
profitable unto themselves, but also turn to the salvation of many idolaters:
so that the Church receives a double benefit by this help from God, that is,
both her protection and defense, and her increase also and multiplication: so
that as Isai speaks, chap. 49. verse. 21. She marueileth whence so many
children are borne unto her, who was so long barren, and as it were a widow. We
are therefore to wish not the desolation and destruction of those that hate us,
and persecute us of a false zeal, being bewitched by the false doctrine of the
Papists; but rather their conversion and salvation. And if any come into the
Church, either by force, or for fear and in hypocrisy, in that also God is
glorified, for that his enemies are forced to acknowledge his power, and
confess his majesty, and yield some sign of obedience. Hence then did there
arise unto the Jews good hope that many would stand on their part, and on the
other side also they received great comfort, when they saw that the fear of
them fell upon the people. For this fear was from God, who as often as it
seems good unto him, takes away courage from the mighty, and makes them
fall away like water, that either their weapons fall out of their hands, or be
turned to their own destruction. And the holy Scripture oftentimes makes
mention of this fear whereby God protected his, but terrified their enemies:
as Genesis 35. 5. the fear of God is said to have fallen on all the cities near
unto Sichem, that they dared not follow after Jacob, whose sons Simeon and
Leui, had spoiled the city of Sichem, and slain the inhabitants thereof. And
Iosue, chap. 2. ^ver. 9. Rahab, which received the spies, amongst other things
tells this: I know that the Lord has given you the land, for the fear of
you is fallen upon us, and all the ^^habitants of the land faint because of
you. This same God foretold unto Moses should come to pass. Exodus 23. 27. I
will ^end my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people, among whom
thou shall go, and I will make all thine enemies turn their ^acks unto thee.
This is that fear I say, ^hereby the enemies of the Church are ^estrained,
whereby their hands are bound, ^r their weapons fall out of their hands, and
they are made either made or senseless.

Out of all this we learn, that a great part of the glory of the Church
consists in her deliverance, which God bestows upon her after adversity
and calamity: in which as in a furnace she is melted and purged; that being so
tried, she may come forth more pure out of the midst of the flame. The Church
then by those things which she suffers is made more famous, after that she is
delivered by God, then if she had always continued in one and the same estate:
yea, Gods hand is made more known, and his deliverance more glorious, by how
much the greater the affliction was. Let us not therefore bear grudgingly the
length of afflictions, or despair in mind, though they be hard and violent,
whereby also we are as it were thrust down^ into the grave, and unto the gates
of death: for so much the more admirable shall our deliverance be, how much the
greater the danger was. For God does a^ it were throw us down into the dust
whom after he will lift up so much the higher: and casts us into the grau^*
that in quickening us, his force and power may be the more notable. So we see
David give thanks unto God, sometimes, that he had lifted him up from the gates
of death: sometimes, that he had made him to ascend out of the grave:
sometimes, that he had drawn him out of the deep pit: sometimes, that he had
brought him out of the bowels of the earth. Let not us therefore bear it
impatiently, if we be as it were plunged into the grave, when as the Son of
God remained three days in it: being assuredly persuaded, that as Jesus Christ
our Lord, by rising again did abolish the shame of the cross, death, and
sepulcher, and brought life and immortality to light: so also it shall come to
pass, that we by his power being quickened together with him after the laying
down of the shame of the cross and ^eath, shall be also made partakers of his
glory and immortality, that through ^im we may praise God in the life
eter^all, to whom belongs all honor and glory for evermore.

Amen.
THE TWO AND twentieth Sermon.
By what means the Jews did execute that which was contained in the
Proclamation made in their favor from the first verse of the ninth Chapter
unto the II.

CHAP. IX. 1. So on the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, upon the
thirteenth day of the same, when it drew near that the Kings commandment
and his decree should be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the
Jews hoped to have power over them (but it turned contrary, for the Jews had
rule over them that hated them.

2. The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the
provinces of the King Assuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt, and
no man could withstand them: for the fear of them fel^ upon all people.

3. And all the rulers of the provinces, and the Princes and the Captains, and
the officers of the King, exalted the Jews: for the fear of Mordecai fell
upon them.

4. For Mordecai was great in the Kings house, and the report of him went
through all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater.

5. Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with strokes of the sword and
slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them.

6. And at Susa the city royal slew the Jews, and destroyed five hundred
men.

7. And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,

8. And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,

9. And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha:

10. The ten sons of Haman, the son of Amedatha, the adversary of the
Jews slew they: but they laid not the^^ hands upon the spoil.


WE have hiterto heard many notable and excellent effects of prayers, which
proceed from true faith and repentance. For those prayers piercing the
heavens, found favor with God: made open a safe entrance for Ester unto the
King, obtained his good will, got a place for her petition, yea and obtained
that which at the first she would not hope for, to weete, the shameful death
of Haman the most cruel enemy of the Church, the great honors of Mardochaeus
succeeding in his place, a Proclamation in favor of the Jews, from which
there arose a public joy unto all the people, whereof we spoke in the last
Sermon. Such and so great were the fruits which the prayer of faith brought
unto the Jews, who fled unto God by their prayers, as unto their only helper
and defender in their greatest troubles and distress. There remains the
greatest and most excellent effect, proceeding from the same cause, to weete,
the victory which they had over all their enemies, whom being armed with the
authority of the chief Magistrate, they utterly destroyed, to execute the
just vengeance of God against the enemies of his Church. L^^ then the execution
of the decree: th^^ very same day, wherein the enemies (...) the Jews hoped to
have dominion over them, they could not resist them, because the Lord had cast
a fear into them; and because Mardochaeus had gotten so great favor and
authority with all men, that even the greatest and noblest peers did
reverence him. So that it was no marvel if the Jews even at their pleasure
did turn back again upon their enemies heads, the mischief which they
practiced against them. This whole matter is generally proposed in the five
first verses, and then particularly explicated until the 17. verse. We shall
deal at this present concerning those five hundred me^ which were slain in
Susa with the ten sons of Haman, where there is set forth unto us very
notable and most necessary doctrines, to weet, that by fervent and faithful
prayer, all things are obtained from God, even victory against allsorts of
enemies, as David shows, Psalm. 56. 9. When I cry unto thee, mine enemies
shall be turned unto flight. Also, that God gives strength unto the weak, and
weakeneth the minds of the strong, when it seems good unto him. And farther,
that the end of the ^nemies of the Church, is at the last shameful and full of
sorrow, and their wicked counsels turn at the last to their destruction, and
are made a ruin and confusion unto them. But these things will better be
learned in the explication of the particulars.

First therefore the day of this execution is noted the thirteenth day of the
xij. month Adar, which answers to part of our February, and the beginning of
March. In that day the counsels of the enemies are reported to fall out
contrary to their opinions: for when they hoped to exercise dominion over the
Jews, they were overthrown and subdued by the Jews. So the lots which Haman
cast that he might find out a fit day to root out the people of God, were
found to be deceitful and lying: and those who (...) their trust in them,
received a just reward of their impiety. Although therefore sometimes it fall
out, that Satan the author of all sorceries, enchantments, and diuinations, do
speak truth (God by his (...) judgment and vengeance giving force (...) to
his errors) yet this is his only end, (...) delude and draw into perdition all
those curious folk which employ themselu^^ to such arts full of sacrilege
and impiety: that those who were not lovers of the truth may perish as they
have deserved, for as much as they have left God, in whom is the fountain of
life and truth, to turn themselves unto the author of death, and father of
lies. By this means were our idolatrous Leaguers deceived, who by force of the
Bulls and Pardons they had from the Pope, of their Jubilees, Pilgrimages, and
Processions, of their madness in the worshipping of images, and foolish
devotions, and by the foretellings of certain Almanacks, and deceits of other
like leger-du-maines, did promise unto themselves the wished and happy end of
their purposes, which was the abolishing of the Reformed Churches, and doctrine
of the Gospel: but the time and day which seemed unto them most fit for their
designements, was turned unto them into a day of sorrow, shame, and eternal
confusion.

Hearken now what way the Jews took by the Kings permission to destroy their
enemies, They gathered themselves together in their cities through all the
pro^inces of the King Assuerus, to lay hand upon those that sought their hurt.
They did then wisely provide for their affairs, so that they did not give
themselves so to joy and gladness, but that they did diligently stand upon their
guard, provided them of armor, gathered themselves together at certain times
and places, and principally did flee unto God by prayer, desiring that he who
hitherto had showed the^ so great favor, would make perfect the work of their
deliverance. And surely then had they most need of Gods help, when they were
to fight with their enemies: for unless God had daunted their courage, and
weakened their force and prowess, there was no hope that the Jews could be
vanquishers of their enemies. Furthermore, they contained themselves within the
bounds of the Proclamation, that they would only use force against those that
sought their hurt: that is, those that were in arms to hurt them, their wives
and children: for this was the form of the first edict, chap. 8. verse. 11. So
that we must needs say, that the same day the enemies of the Jews assembled,
to destroy and slay them: for else how could they know who were their enemies?
or by what law could they have used violence against those who kept themselves
quiet and peaceable in their houses? But by what law did the enemies of the
Jews take armor against them? Even bearing themselves bold upon the Kings
Decree, which was not called back, although one contrary were published.
Besides upon the confidence of their lot-casters; and moved with the hatred of
God, and true religion: being then principally driven by Godssecret providence
to gather themselves together, that he might deliver them into the hands of his
people: and that they should receive a just vengeance of their ungodliness and
cruelty, as God is said, to harden the hearts of the Canaanites, Josh. 11. 20.
to go out to meet the Israelites in battle; that so he might destroy and
overthrow them under the pretense of this Proclamation. Whereby it appears,
that the King was not very careful of the quiet and safety of his people. For
if he would not or could not call back again the former edict, why did he
not at the least secretly signify, that he would have every one remain
quiet, and leave the Jews untouched. But mark here the just vengeance of
God, when he is bent against any kingdom: there is easily place given unto
evil counsel, and so all things are troubled and turned vpside down, so
that no place is left for sound advise: Kings do not in time repress the
fury of the wicked, but by their lenity and negligence rather nourish it: and
the people following evil leaders, are carried headlong willingly and with a
blinded course into their own destruction. The enemies of the Jews therefore
do assemble themselves furnished with weapon and a mind to hurt them: but they
can not stand before the Jews, nor resist them, so much can a good cause,
which uses good counsel and lawful means, prevail, when it pleases God
to cast a fear upon the enemies, as here it is said, That the fear of the
Jews fell upon all people, For whence came this fear but from God, who made
his servants, though few in number, to be terrible and cause of fear to
those, of whom most mighty nations and all the people of the world stood in
fear? Is victory then from any other then from god, who fears the enemies,
and gives unto his, strength and courage? So say the faithful when they set
forth Gods praises, that neither by their own nor their fathers sword came
they into the possession Ps. 44. 3.
of the la^d of Canaa^, or did hold it so many years: but by Gods right hand,
and the light of his countenance* So David giving God thanks for the victories
which he had gotten, says, that he followed his enemies Ps. 18. 38. 39. 40.
and stroke them, so that they were not able to arise, because God had girded
him with strength, and had bowed down those under him who had risen up against
him. And in an other Psalm, he acknowledges that Ps. 144. 1
it is God that teaches his hands to fight and his fingers to war. For this
cause also the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, says, that the ancient
fathers through Heb. 11. 34.
faith were made strong in battle, and turned the Armies of the Aliants into
flight. These are the most sure and strong armor of the faithful, whereby they
are unto all their enemies most fearful and invincible Wherefore their
arrogancy and rashness can never sufficiently be reproved and condemned, who
professing themselves Christians, and fighting for religion, think of nothing
less, then of calling upon God. Hence also we have sufficient proof, how
great the favor of God is toward all that fear him and call upon his name,
and defend a just cause with lawful arms; when as he makes even an handful
as it were, ofseely captives dispersed here and there, to be terrible to all
the people of so great a Monarchy. These things then will us to hope well in
the lawful defense of a just cause, against the disturbers of public peace
and tranquillity, and the sworn deadly enemies, not only of the state, but
also of the truth. Thus have ye the first and chiefest cause of the victory,
which the Jews had over their enemies, who were terrified with fear and fled
from them. The other follows, that the Rulers of the Provinces, and the
Princes, and the Captains, and the officers of the king furthered the Jews.
How much the favor of rulers and those who are the kings officers can prevail
in the furthering of any part, no man is ignorant* But mark you here a
strange matter* the Princes and rulers take part with the Jews, against the
natural subjects of the land: but they sufficiently perceiue^ to what part the
Kings affection did bend; whose favor when as they were willing to have, they
favor that part which the king is most affectionate unto, although perhaps
they wish the Jews utterly destroyed.

Moreover, the fear of Mardochaeus had taken hold of them, that when they saw
him in such favor and authority with the King, and that all things were
guided by his counsel, and ruled at his beck, they would also seek to
gratify him. Out of which also it is evident, how that God not only in a
moment lifts up whom it pleases him, but also does furnish them with
Majesty, spreading far and wide the honor of their name: and by their
exceeding great glory casting a fear of them far and near into the hearts of
men; and at the last repressing the sparks of envy which commonly are wont to
be kindled against such, as out of base estate do sudde^ly rise unto high
honor. For who could sufficiently marvel that a man newly risen and a
stranger, and bringing a marvelous change into the state, at his first
coming, eue^ such as was hurtful and dammageable unto the natural subjects
of the King, should not be open unto the hatred, envy and slanders of all
men, and especially of those who thought so much to be abated from their
dignity, how much he was exalted? but so much the more clearly does God show
himself to be he who at his good pleasure lifts up men and throws them
down, and that he has in his hand the hearts and wills of men, which he turns
what way pleases him: Wherefore we are here taught to depend on his
providence, and to rest wholly thereon, not curiously seeking how they are
promoted unto honor who take upon them the defense of the Church, or by what
means they retain it, and how they avoid the hatred of one, and the deceits
of an other; and finally how they defend themselves from many dangers which
stand round about them. For he that exalted Mardochaeus, and made him to be
reverenced and feared of the Princes, and preserved unto him his dignity safe
and whole, knows also by what means to defend and protect those whose work
he will use, to the defense of his Church, scattering and turning to naught all
the crafty counsels of the enemies which shall threaten any evil against them.

But here especially this is to be observed, that Mardochaeus did ascend unto
this honor by these steps, godliness, the fear of God, zeal of his glory, a
pure affection of helping and defending the Church; so far forth as it
pleased God to put to his hand to give any quiet and tranquillity unto the
Church, which was so miserably afflicted. By these virtues then is the dignity
of those who undertake the defense of the state of the Church increased, and by
the same shall it continue. These are the means which it pleases God to use
to the succouring of his.

Let us now look into the execution of that vengeance which was granted unto
the children of God against their enemies: which is set down in general in
the fifth verse, and after particularly prosecuted in those which follow. The
Jews then are said to have strooken with the edge of the sword, and slaughter,
and destruction: and to have don unto those that hated them what they listed.
So that although the enemies fledd, and by reason of that fear wherewith they
were stricken durst not resist, yet were they sought out to be destroyed, and
to receive a just reward of their iniquity. Which thing the Jews with a good
conscience might do, seeing they were armed with the authority of God, and of
the chief Magistrate: and also by all laws both humane and divine, in a
lawful war and natural defense against those which sought their life, it
was ever permitted so to do.

Neither does it here any whit help to say* that they were to be spared,
because they took arms being deceived with the show of the former Edict:
because that every one who was not altogether void of humanity, or blinded
with despite, might easily of himself judge, that that Edict was beyond all
equity.

But if any again shall except that there was no place for revenge, seeing it
is written, Vengeance is mine* and Deuteronomy. 32. 35. Mat. 5. 44
Christ Jesus bids his, to love their enemies: the answer is easy, that
GOD, who forbids private revenge, which every private man takes upon him in
his own cause, does also command those to whom he has committed the
sword to do justice, to exercise his judgments, and to execute vengeance and
revenge: so that he has oftentimes hardly chidden and severely punished those
who by foolish pity and clemency have been more slack in executing those
judgments of God, and who have spared those enemies whom God has commanded to
be slain. This is evident in 1. Sam. 15. 2. Kin. 20. 42.
Saul, when as he spared the life of Agag, the king of the Amalekites, and in
Achab when he made league with Benadab the King of Syria, the most deadly
enemy of the people of God, unto whom GOD commanded his Prophet to tell, that
seeing he had spared a man that was worthy to die, his life should be pledge
for the others, and the life of his people* for the life of the people of his
enemy. Therefore Pro. 17. 15.
also Solomon sath, He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
righteous, they both are an abomination unto the Lord.

Now who I pray you, are more worthy to die, then those who with a settled and
grounded hatred, do endeavor by all ways and means they may to destory the
godly, spoil their goods, deprive them of their dignities, root out the
Church, and extinguish the truth? why then should they whom the Magistrate
armeth with public authority, and God calls thereunto, spare those that are
such? But Christ commands to love our enemies: I confess: but after the
manner of a good Judge, who does command those that are condemned to be carried
to execution, and yet loves them and is sorry for their evil: so that to love
and to kill are not so contrary, but that they may meet at the same instant,
in one and the same man, who by reason of his duty and office exercises the
judgments of God against the wicked, of whom he hates not the nature, but
the untamed wickedness which cannot be cured by any means but by cutting
off. Neither does God always observe one manner in revenging himself upon
his enemies.

For diverse times he performs his work without the work and ministry of
men, as when Pharao was drowned being overwhelmed with the waves of the Exodus
14. 2. Ki. 19. 35.
Sea: and Senacheribs host wholly destroyed in one night by an Angel. Diverse
times by his enemies themselves mutually Iud. 7. 21.
destroying one an other, as in the Madianites battle; and in that fight 2.
Chr. 20, 22, 23.
wherein that great army which came against Iehosaphat, did among themselves
destroy themselves. Diverse times and that most commonly, he uses the hands and
weapons of his people to beat down the fierceness of the enemies, who rose up
against him. So by the hand of Joshua, the Kings and people of Canaan, were
vanquished and destroyed: So by the Judges were they overcome, who oppressed
his people: So David and other Kings of his ^osteritie, did subdue and bring
under ^any Nations. Here God would by the and of these poor captives,
overthrow ^he pride and malice of the enemies of his Church* that they might be
certified, that ^lthough God had chastised his people, ^et had he not
altogether cast them from ^im: but rather contrariwise, was present ^ithin fit
and convenient time to defend ^^d protect them against the violence of ^^eir
enemies.

Moreover, hereby we perceive what punishment the enemies of the Church do
deserve, and what shall be their success at the last. Besides, here it is
clear how those who conspire against the Church at the last perish through
their own devises. For Haman and all that multitud^ whom he had stirred up to
overthrow the Church, might have lived peaceably an^ honorably, if they had
attempted no ne^ matters: but by the just and secret judgment and vengeance of
God, they with great ado kindle a fire, and are at the la^choked with the
flame. This same thin^ Isai threatens unto the enemies of the Church of God in
these words, Y^ shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stu^ble, Isai. 33. 11.
12.
your own breath is the fire that she devour you. And the people shall be
(...) the burning of lime; and as thorns cut (...) shall they be burnt in the
fire.

That which was spoken in genera^ is in parts delivered in the verses
f^lowing, to wit, that there were (...) hundred men slain by the Jews in
(...), the City royal, and amongst (...) the ten sons of Haman, whose
(...) for the greater credit of the History, recited.

It is marvel that in Susa the City ^yall, any durst move against them, ^hen
as so many signs of the Kings fa^our which he showed to Mardochaeus and the
other Jews could not be hid: ^ut the vengeance of God will not suf^^r the
wicked to rest, who retain that ^esire and rage to do hurt in their hearts,
^ut of necessity they will break forth, (...) be carried headlong (as wild
beasts (...) into the nets) upon the lawful (...) which God had furnished his
(...) with. Yet notwithstanding, all that (...) up against the Jews in Susa,
could (...) in one day be taken, wherefore a (...) diligent search is deferred
(...) the next day, as after we shall (...). As concerning Hamans sons, they
(...) deservedly punished by death, first (...) they were of the stock of the
(...), concerning whom God had (...) that they should be utterly (...), and not
one of them left (...). Besides, because it is likely (...) in desire of
revenge of their (...) shameful death, they had done (...) they might in
stirring up to sedition, those mutinous fellows which they could find, either
in that great City of Susa, o^ in any other where they had any authority. So
that happened unto Haman, which the Spirit of God pronounces should come upon
the wicked, and the enemi^^ of his glory, to wit, that which Job says He shall
neither have son nor nephew ami^ Job. 18. 19
his people, nor any posterity in his dwelling whereunto also appertains
that which is, Psalm. 21. 10. Their fruit shall thou d^stroy from the earth,
and their seed from t^^ children of men. Wherefore the wick^^ who are so
careful for their posterity, (...) destroy them by their own wicked d^uices,
and over throw them by their fu^^ous practices, when even from their i^ fancy
they teach them to hate the tru^ and persecute the Church of God. A^^ if
sometime the stock of the God God so willing it, do decay, this does (...)
happen in his wrath, but with a certai^ testimony of his favor and mercy
t^wards them. For what soever come pass, this remains vnmooueab^^ The death
of the righteous is precious (...) Ps. 115. 16.
God.

What then remains but that (...) carefully employ our selves to
righteousness and holiness, call unfeignedly upon God in all our necessities
and calamities, patiently expect his help, and wait for his vengeance against
our enemies, whose good and salvation yet let us seek, that so they being
turned unto God, rather then turned from him and destroyed, we may altogether
sincerely and with all our hearts, serve him in Christ Jesus his son our
Lord, to whom be glory, praise, and dominion, for ever.

Amen.
THE THREE AND twentieth Sermon.
The rest of the execution of the Edict, and of the full victory which the
Jews obtained against their enemies: from the 11. verse of the 9 Chapter, unto
the 17.

1. On the same day came the number of those that were slain in Susa, the
City royal, before the King.

12. And the King said unto the Queen Ester, The Jews have slain in Susa the
City royal, and destroyed five hundred men, and the ten sons of Haman: what
have they done in the rest of the kings provinces? Now what is thy petition
that it may be given thee? or what is thy request moreover that it may be
performed?

13. Then said Ester, if it please the King, let it be granted also to morrow
to the Jews that are in Susa, to do according unto this days decree: and that
they may hang upon the tree Hamans ten sons.

14. And the King charged to do so, and the decree was given at Susa, and they
hanged Hamans ten sons.

15. So the Jews that were in Susa assembled themselves on the fourteenth day
of the month Adar, and slew three hundred me^ in Susa, but on the spoil they
laid not their hand.

16. And the rest of the Jews that were in the kings provinces assembled
themselves, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and
slew of them that hated them, seventy and five thousand; but they laid not
their hand upon the spoil.


EVery man confesses that victory comes from God, so that there is scarcely
any found even among the Heathen so wicked or stubborn, who having obtained a
victory, did not by some sign testify his thankfulness unto him who^ he
supposed to be agod. But this was so proper and peculiar unto the people of
Israel, as being better instructed, that they have made thereof a proper name
of God, calling him the God of Hosts.

And if he worthily be acknowledged the giver of all victories, how much more
of those, in which expressly does shine his especial favor and goodness
toward his Church, so that in every part thereof, the beginning, middle and
end, an happy and blessed token of his grace, and wonderful power is
apparent: which in this most happy victory of the Jews did come to pass,
who, by Gods favor, though they were seely captives, and dispersed through the
Provinces of the Empire of Assuerus, did yet triumph over their enemies, so
that no man cannot call it into question, but that the hand of God was mightily
stretched out for their safety and commodity.

We have already seen the beginning: It remains that we see also the
proceeding and end, the sum whereof is; that by the Kings permission and
decree, the ten sons of Haman were hanged on a tree; three hundred men more
slain in Susa; and in the other Provinces seventy and five thousand; without
any loss of the Jews, without any sedition following, without any hatred or
public envy against the King, and finally without any conspiracy or farther
attempt against the Jews. All which are so much the more wonderful, by how
much the rarer they are, and obtained so happy an issue. For how could the
king so lay open his natural subjects to be slain and destroyed by
strangers? how could a woman obtain so much? how could seely captives dare
commit so great a slaughter? how could so mighty a people suffer it, without
some extraordinary motion and Gods special favor? There is therefore here
proposed unto us, a most profitable doctrine of the love of GOD toward his
Church; of the vengeance which he takes on his enemies; and of the peace and
tranquillity which he gives to his, who call upon him in their greatest
troubles. But we shall better understand these things by the several
explication of every part.

First it is said, That upon that day the number of those that were slain in
Susa the ^itie royal, came before the King. It is not known by whom, or upon
what intent ^he king was certified of the number of ^he slain. It seems very
likely unto me, that it was done by some, who by tel^ing that there were so
many slain in one ^itie, would willingly have stirred up the ^ings wrath and
hatred against the Jews. But whence so ever the King was certi^^ed, it is
certain it was a sufficient mes^age to have stirred the kings mind unto ^ust
anger for the slaughter of his subjects ^ade even as it were in his sight. For
in ^uch bloody slaughters, kings if they have ^ot cast off all humanity, and
natural af^ection, at last repent them of that which ^uer-rashly they granted,
and are angry ^ith those by whom they were perswa^ed and induced unto it.
Besides, this ^ng might call to mind that his subjects ^ad attempted nothing
against the Jews ^ut by his commandment, and that there was too great
liberty granted to a strange people against the natural subjects, and that
the courage of his people was too much daunted. But none of all these things
come unto his mind, but he goes merrily unto the Queen, rejoicing for her sake
at the number of those that were slain, and again giving her liberty to
demand whatsoever she list. For these are the words of our author: The king
said unto Ester the Queen, The Jews have killed and destroyed in Susa the
city royal five hundred men, and the ten sons of Haman: what have they
done in the rest of the Kings provinces? Now what is thy demand, and it shall
be given thee, or what is thy petition moreover, and it shall be done? By these
words he does partly gratify Ester, in the revenge abundantly taken upon her
enemies: partly also gives her power to do somewhat more if she list, that
nothing may be omitted which she would desire to the full revenge on the
enemies of her people. Whereby it appears, that he did all these things more
upon passion then by reason, and that he would rather please his wife in the
affection of his love, then have care of his subjects in regard of justice. For
seeing he was an infidel, he sought not Gods glory, whom he knew not, neither
the quiet of the Church, whose doctrine he did not understand. And if in regard
and love of justice he would have repressed the malice of his subjects, which
sought the destruction of the Jews, yet unless he had cast off all humanity
and all care which a king ought to have of his subjects, he would have lamented
that the blood of his people armed at his commandment, should so miserably
have bin shead. Among the chiefest co^mendations of a good Prince, this is not
the least, that he hold the blood of his subjects dear and precious: and
provide by good laws and constitutions that by tumults blood be not shead, and
that it be not made lawful by a confused liberty warranted by the laws, for
one to make assault upon an other. But for the most part it comes to pass
that Kings little esteem the life of me^, whom they think only to be borne
for their pleasure: so that they sell nothing for a less price, many times
more careful of a little pleasure or honor, then of the preservation of many
thousand men's lives, as though that loss might most easily of al be recovered.
But whatsoever here happened, God did use this scarce humane affection of the
king toward his people, and his ouergreat willingness to pleasure the Queen,
to the procuring of peace and tranquillity to his Church, and to the taking of
revenge upon the hatred and despite of his enemies. So great then is the
goodness of God, that he makes al things to turn to the commodity and
profit of his: so great also his wisdom and purity, that those things which
are rashly and inconsideratly done by men, he conuerteth into his glory. For
we see that Assuerus does not any thing here advisedly, but only of a
vehement and forcible affection to please his wife: who, if he had had many an
immoderate and immodest woman, would have forced him to do many unjust and
wrongful matters. And indeed it is not seemly for kings to be too large and
prodigal in their promises; and to subject the lives of his subjects and
government of their affairs unto the lust and pleasure of a woman.

This so liberal a grant made unto Ester, she demands, If it seem good unto
the King, let it be granted unto the Jews which are in Susa, to do to morrow
according unto this days decree; and the ten sons of Haman to be hanged on
the gallows. By this demand, it is sufficiently manifest, that many who either
by bearing of weapon or some other means, had the day before showed themselves
enemies unto the Jews were escaped, the Jews not being ignorant thereof,
because they were not sufficient in number to follow them: farther also it
appears, that the ten sons of Haman conspired or consented with their
father unto the destruction of the Jews. But this demand of the Queen at first
blush may seem to proceed from too much desire of revenge: for was it not
sufficient that in the city of Susa only, there were slain with the edge of
the sword five hundred men, but that she must also desire to rage yet more
cruelly against those that had escaped, when as even in the most bloody
battles, and between the most deadly enemies, after the fury of the
conflict, those who have escaped, either yield themselves, and so are to be
carried into bondage, or set free for their ransom; or else the victory only
does suffice? Besides, does not that seem also to pass the bounds of
humanity, to desire to have the ten sons of Haman to be hanged with shame
and reproach, being already slain, when as many have granted burial unto
their enemies being slain? But the godliness of Ester which she showed in all
her life, does hinder that we should think that she gave place to any passion:
but on the contrary, we must rather say that she sought the glory of God in
the revenge of the enemies of his people, and the quiet and tranquillity of
the Church, which those who were escaped might when they saw their time
disturb, and therefore she desired that the rest might be punished, and Hamans
sons hanged on the gallows as they had deserved, for example unto those who
are not a shamed to abuse the name, authority and forces of the King, to
effect their wicked counsels and practices; and to the detestation of those,
who with all their power go about the destruction of the Church. So that the
free speech and holy boldness of Ester, is rather to be praised in following
the punishment of the wicked, then to be condemned as though she had bin a
slave unto her affections. For we read that God has approved the like
punishments against the wicked and ungodly, as it appears in the seven sons
of Saul, who were delivered by David to the Gibeonites 2. Sam. 20.
to be hanged on the gallows, because Saul had broken the oath and faith given
of old time by the Israelites to the Gibeonites. Number. 25.
Besides, God commanded the Princes of the congregation which had led the
people into wickedness with the idols and women of the Madianites to be hanged;
and many thousands of the rest of the people to be slain with the sword, so to
satisfy the wrath of God. So Gedeon not content Iud. 7. and 8.
with this, that the Madianites were slain with their own swords, does follow
with all his force upon the rest, and did execute punishment for example unto
others, upon those who being requested would not help him. God forbid therefore
that we should reprove as faulty, all sharp and severe punishment which is
executed against the enemies of Gods people. Notwithstanding whosoever he be
that will imitate such examples, must first most diligently search his own
heart, that under a false pretense he give not place unto any evil passion of
the flesh. In which thing the slip is easy, which thing by their example those
two disciples of Christ do teach us, who by a perverse imitation of the fact of
Elias, would have fire to descend from heaven, to consume that city of the
Samaritanes, Luc. 9. 44.
which shut their gates against the Lord when he would have entered.

Now the King here shows himself as easy to be entreated in granting the
petition of Ester, as he was in promising. For he is reported to have
commanded that it should be done, so that there was a Decree given at Susa,
whereby they hanged the ten sons of Haman. As soon then as Ester had
spoken, the commandment was given and published, God so enclining the kings
heart, that the Church might afterward enjoy the more firm peace and
tranquillity. For otherwise it might worthily seem a wonder, that the King
should make so little account to spend the blood of his subjects, whom he so
easily laid open unto the slaughter: and that he feared not sedition in his
people, or that he was accounted by them a Tyrant, who by contrary edicts
would arm his people one against another, and play as it were wi^h the blood
of his subjects. But he never thought on any of these things: it was enough
for him to gratify Ester. Whereby it appears, that his power was
sufficiently established: whereby he was the bolder to dispose of the life of
his subjects* Hereby also we may perceive; how mutable the favor of Kings is:
and how shame and reproach do follow those who abuse their honor and prosperity.

The commandment being published, the Jews are ready for the execution: for
it is said, that the Jews which were at Susa, gathered themselves together
upon the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men in
Susa, but laid not their hand on the spoil. In which, their constancy and
boldness deserves high commendation, and admiration: for they might have used
many delays* and cast many doubts; they might have excused themselves that
they should run into hatred and the note of bloudthirstie men: and moreover
might have pretended that it was to be feared, least hereafter the Kings mind
changing, they should be called to an account for the sheading of so much
blood: as we see that such wounds often wax raw again though they seem
healed, in all states, such a slaughter being made, how good so ever the cause
be. They might also except that there was more commendation in remitting
somewhat of their right, and dealing mercifully, then in prosecuting their
injuries with extreme rigor. But when as they perceived that they were called
by God, and armed with the authority of the lawful Magistrate; and did set
before their eyes the cheerfulness of their ancestors in executing Gods
judgments, they overcome all these difficulties, and execute the work they
are commanded, looking upon this, that God would no less be praised and
glorified in the punishing of his enemies, then in the mercy and protection
showed unto his. They might therefore with a good conscience execute that,
which the king without sufficient and stayed counsel had granted. Howbeit, it
behooves not any rashly, and but with great discretion and wisdom to follow
these kind of examples: least both those who yield themselves being overcome,
and those who fight in the heat of the battle, be accounted both alike, and
without difference be slain. Also there is always a great difference to be
kept between an infidel, and him that professes the same religion with us;
between a stranger and a citizen; finally, there are many circumstances of
times, persons, laws, and customs, whereby it falls out, that neither we
may, neither is it lawful to imitate this fact: in which notwithstanding* it
is not to be doubted but the Jews kept themselves within the bounds of the
Edict, and did only execute cruelty against those who had professed
themselves open enemies, and had sought the death and destruction of them,
their wives and children. For otherwise, it had been an unruly liberty and
confusion, if they might without controwlement set upon whomsoever they would
say was their enemy. For those are the effects of an headless sedition, to
(...) cruel against all whomsoever they (...), friend or foe, guiltless or
guilty* And when as none of the other inhabi^ants of Susa did stir, it is to
be affirmed (...) the Jews did not abuse their power, neither killed any which
was innocent: and besides, that God opened the eyes of those who remained
peaceable and quiet to see the barbarous injustice of the former edict: and to
perceive the good cause of the Jews, grounded as well on natural equity, as
upon the justice and authority of the latter decree: so great is the force of
right, equity, and truth, that those who were dead, were judged by their
fellow citizens to be rightfully slain And thus far of those things which were
done at Susa.

Let us now pass unto those things which were done by the Jews that were
dispersed through the other provinces, to weete; The other Jews did gather
themselves together, that standing for their lives they might be quiet from
their enemies, and slew of those that hated them 75. thousand^ but on the
spoil they laid not their hand. So that there was one manner and the like
issue every where, saving that the Iewe^ which were in the provinces in one day
dispatched the whole matter, taking revenge upon their enemies: the number of
whom is here expressly set down whereby the excellentie of this victori^
might be the better known unto all which cannot sufficiently be extolled,
(...) we consider the great favor of (...) toward his, or the severity of
the ^^nishment upon his enemies, For, I (...) you, who ever would have
perswa^^d himself that the king would have (...) so affected to the Jews,
that he would (...) over so many thousands of his (...) to such a butcherie? who
ever would (...) thought that silly men who had this (...) time bin captives,
and not exercised (...), could so easily overcome so war^^ a people, which was
feared far and (...) throughout the whole world for (...) and skill in war?
was this also (...) that the Governors of the pro^^^ces would rather take part
with these ^^ngers, and favor them rather then the ^^^^rall inhabitants of the
country? that (...) fellow citizens would so contain ^^^elues, and yield them
no assistance in conflict? and that the State could (...) quiet, after so
bloody an execution? that the Jews not only should not (...) all men's hatred,
but be after holde^ ^^eater price and estimation? Finally, (...) would have
thought that there (...) have followed no sedition against the King, when
oftentimes for less causes, as fear or some light suspision subjects have
risen against their Prince* All these effects therefore of the Lord right hand,
are most worthy to be note whereunto also this is to be adjoined, the none of
the Jews perished in this reue^g the Lord providing for them the swe^ fruit of
so great a victory and admiral deliverance. So has the Lord oftenti^^
wrought, that he might make it know^ unto all the world, that his people are
(...) unto him, as the apple of his eye, as he sp^keth in Zachary, chap. 2. v.
8. Besides that that so great a number of the e^mies were destroyed, God would
sig^ how great a fault it is to rise up against Church his Spouse, and to seek
her uerthrow. Wherefore it is said in Isay^^ Isai. 37. 32.
zeal of the Lord of hosts will perfor^ this: and verse. 23. of the same
chapter* vpbraideth the insolency of Sennach^ against his Church in these
words, W^ have thou rayled on and blasphemed? an^ against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, have lifted up the haughtiness of thine e^^ even against the holy
one of Israel. By servants have thou rayled on the Lord. A^ the Lord, willing
to show the horrible vengeance of his wrath against his enemies, says by
Moses, I will lift up my Deuteronomy. 32. 40. 41.
hand to heaven and say: I live for ever. If I whet my glittering sword, and
my hand take hold on judgment, I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and
will ^eward them that hate me. I will make ^ine arrows drunk with blood,
even the blood of the slain and of the captives, and (...) sword shall eat
flesh, when I begin (...) take vengeance of the enemy. And do (...) not in
these days in part, see the (...) effects of Gods wrath against his enemies,
after that he has chastised his Church? Could there any thing seem ^ore to be
marueiled at, then that which God has set before our eyes? to weet; (...)
enemies of the Church armed against ^he^selues; the innocence of the Church
^pproued; the conspiratours condemned (...) disobedience and rebellion; the
King ^ade their enemy; and he again by them (...) far as their power
stretched, deposed and ^epriued of all dignity; finally the whole (...) of the
war turned from the faith^ull, and turned against the rebellious (...)? We
have not yet I grant, obtained so happy an end, neither do we as yet enjoy so
great prosperity, but that there is daily offered unto us great matter to cast
down our selves before God, and to pray for his favor with tears and
repentance, whereby at the last he may bring an end to those manifold
confusions, and all kind^ of mischiefs which civil wars do draw with them.
Howbeit, these so wonderful works of God are nevertheless to be observed,
that we may extol him with deserved praise, and give him condign thanks, as
we are invited by the Psa. 66. 5.
Prophet in these words, Come and behol^ the works of God; he is terrible in
his doing toward the sons of men: and like wise Psalm. 46. 8. O come and
behold the work of the Lord. Moreover, that we may learn^ to flee unto him in
our greatest distresses, and patiently expect his help; constantly every one do
our duties in ou^ vocations, tremble under his judgments and depend on his
mercy, whereof at the last he will make us partakers in Christ Jesus, to whom
be all glory and dominion for evermore.

Amen.
THE FOUR AND twentieth Sermon.
The public and solemn joy of the Jews for the victory obtained, which
Mardochaeus does consecrate to be yearly celebrated for ever with solemn
rites: from verse 17. unto 15. of the 9. Chapter.

17. This they did on the thirteenth day of the month Adar, and rested the
fourteenth day thereof, and kept it a day of feasting and joy.

18. But the Jews that were in Susa, assembled themselves on the thirteenth
day and on the fourteenth thereof, and they rested on the fifteenth of the
same, and kept it a day of feasting and joy.

19. Therefore the Jews of the Villages that dwelt in the unwalled Towns kept
the fourteenth day of the month Adar, with joy and feasting, even a joyful
day, and every one sent presents unto his neighbor.

20. Eor Mordecai wrote these words, and sent Letters unto all the Jews that
were in all the Provinces of the king Assuerus, both near and far.

21. Inioyning them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month
Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, every year.

22. According to the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and
the month which was turned unto the^ from sorrow to joy, and from mourning
into a joyful day, to keep them the days of feasting and joy, and to send
presents every man to his neighbor, and gifts to the poor.

23. And the Jews promised to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had
written unto them.

24. Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the adversary of all the Jews,
had imagined against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur (that is a
lot) to consume and destroy them.


BEsides, that one and only sacrifice of the Son of God* once offered for
the remission of our sins, of which the old sacrifices were figures; there
have bin always among the faithful two sorts of sacrifice most acceptable
unto God, the one, the sacrifice of a contrite Ps. 51. 17 and 50. 14. 23.
and broken heart, the effect of true repentance in adversity: and the other,
of praise and thanksgiving in prosperity: that the one of these may yield
unto God the praise of justice in correcting us; the other may set forth his
clemency and mercy, in delivering us from evils. We have seen before in the
fourth Chapter, how the Jews in their troubles offered unto God the sacrifice
of an humble and contrite heart, and what fruit they reaped from this
conversion unto God, with fasting, weeping and prayer, to wit, deliverance by
God, as it were out of the jaws of their enemies, and a most admirable
victory: there remains now for us to see how having received so great
benefits at Gods hand, they offered unto him with great joy and gladness, the
sacrifice of praise and thanks giving, and thereof would have a perpetual
monument to remain.

In three verses, then it is recited how all the Jews willingly and of their
own accord, did celebrate their day of rest with gladness, giving thanks
unto God for the benefit received: they who dwelt in the Provinces upon the
foureteenth day, and those who dwelt in Susa, upon the fifteenth: afterward it
is declared how Mardochaeus by a public writing ordaind that those two days
should be observed amongst the Jews, by a perpetual decree: and that this was
willingly accepted by them, and again ratified in the name of Ester and
Mardochaeus: and these things are contained in the latter end of the Chapter.
At this present we are to consider that which is contained from the 17 verse:
to the 25. whereout we learn, with what gladness and what feruentnesse of
mind, the benefits and deliverances of our eternal God, are to be
acknowledged by us, and set forth with praise.

The Jews then which dwelt in the Provinces out of the City Susa, when as
upon the thirteenth day they had now obtained a full victory over their
enemies, and rest from them; rested upon the fourteenth day, and that day was
unto thema day of joy and gladness: but those who dwelt in Susa, being as yet
occupied on the fourteenth day in following the rest of their enemies, rested
on the fifteenth day, giving themselves unto joy in the honor of God; and
celebrating the memory of their deliverance: this is the sum of these
threeverses, which are now more diligently to be weighed by us.

Neither of these then, either those that dwell in the Villages, or those that
dwell in the City, do defer the matter and delay it* until an other time,
but by and by after the victory, they consecrate the next day to the praise of
God, and thanksgiving, which is understood out of that word, They rested. For
it is spoken of an holy rest, and dedicated to the setting forth of the
goodness of God: for why otherwise should there be mention made of Rest: when
no man is ignorant, that after labor rest follows, and after victory, joy
and gladness? This therefore which here is spoken of, is a rest dedicated to
God: which is afterward better expressed, when as Mardochaeus ordains those
two to be holy days unto them and to their posterity, that it might be a
perpetual memory and monument of their deliverance and of that safety which
they had by their prayer and fasting obtained at Gods hand: as it is expressly
noted after, verse 31. No man is ignorant that the rest of holy days ought
altogether to be consecrated unto God, that his works may be set forth, his
praises sung, his goodness, might and power magnified: that by this means
they might exhort one another to repose their trust in him, to fear him and
worship him in all holiness for ever: but yet with diverse manner of praise,
according to the variety of the matter, for the which the feasts were
ordained. So the seventh day, which by an excellency is called the day of
rest, instituted as the feast of the nativity of the world, was dedicated unto
God to set forth, and call to remembrance, his goodness, power and wisdom,
in the creation of the world, and his most wise government of the same.

This only feast do we read to be celebrated from the beginning of the world,
until the departure of the people out of Exodus 12. and 13.
Egypt: at which time the Lord added the feast of the Passover, and of
unleavened bread, for a perpetual memory of gods, saving the people from the
hand of the Angel, which slew the first borne of the Egyptians, and of
bringing them out of bondage, that they might be unto him an holy people, and a
Nation free to serve him.

After when God had given his law in mount Sinai, and had ordained the form of
his service, and appointed both the ciuell policy, and Ecclesiastical among
that people, the feast of Penticost was adjoined to the former, for the
memorial of so great a benefit, whereby God had showed himself to be the
Teacher, King and lawgiver of this people. Then ^he p^^ple entering into the
land of Ca^aan, the feast of Tabernacles was decreed (...) remembrance of the
benefits which the people received by the space of 40. years, (...) the
wilderness. There were also besides ^ertain feasts, as the Kalends of every
(...), which were the first day of every new Moon, that they might be warned
that ^ll good things came unto them from god, and proceeded not from the course
of the Moon, or the influence of other stars. Besides the feasts of
Trumpets and Expiation, whereby they might learn, that their filthiness was
only washed away by the mercy of God in the blood of the Messiah which was to
come. Here therefore the Jews being delivered by the only goodness of God,
and following the examples of their ancestors, would give thanks unto God for
so great a deliverance, and to this end dedicated unto God a day of rest: and
when as they had not means to offer the sacrifices prescribed in the law,
because they were far from the Temple, they offered at the least the sacrifice
of praise. They are not reported to have made any new songs, as in time past
Moses, Debora, Anna the mother of Samuel, David in many (...) and other holy
men many had done before them. For in their C^^ticles they had sufficient
matter of praise. They might with David sing that which is in the 9. Psalm,
verse, 1, 2, 3. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart: I will speak of
all thy marvelous works, I will be glad and rejoice in thee, I will sing
praise to thy name o most High. For that mine enemies are turned back: they
are fallen and perished at thy presence. They might also worthily say that out
of the 34. Psalm, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. I will always give thanks unto the Lord:
his praise shall be in my mouth continually. My soul shall glory in the Lord:
the humble shall hear it and be glad. Praise ye the Lord with me and let us
magnify his name together. I sought the Lord and he heard me, yea he
delivered me out of all my fears. Besides, that which is in the 103. Psalm.
verse. 2, 3, 4. My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits:
Which forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities: Which
redeemeth thy life from the grave, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassions. Could they also sing any thing more fit and commodious, that they
might acknowledge god to be their defense and strength, their buckler, refuge
and most sure place of defense, then that which is most zealously and sweetly
sung by the Prophet in the 18. and beginning of the 144. Psalms. And join
unto all this, that out of the 116. Psalm, verse. 12, 13, 14. What shall I
render unto the Lord, for all his be^efits toward me? I will take the Cup of
Sal^ation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the
Lord, even now in the presence of all his people. Wherefore also at this day,
what need is there of new Psalms and songs, when as the holy Ghost does
sufficiently afford us, wherewith to praise God and give him thanks for his
benefits of all sorts? Howbeit they are not to be reprehended, if any by the
instinct of the holy Ghost do compose any new songs, whereby the goodness of
God may be set forth and extolled. This then was the chief point in the Jews
Rest. The other as feasts, mirth, sending of presents one to an other, and
gifts unto the poor, were only annexed to declare their joy beseeming the
children of God, joined with all honesty. Their feasts then were holy and such
as God in his law commanded, to feast in his sight with gladness: saving that
they were far from the Temple, and could not eat of the sacrificed meats.
Their joy also was holy, in as much as they rejoiced in the Lord, the God of
their salvation, and acknowledged that he had filled they hearts with
gladness, and their mouth with laughter* praying that that joy might
continue. In that they sent gifts one vnt^ an other, it was done that they
might stir up one an other to give thanks unto god, for the preservation of
their life, their wives and children, their liberty and goods: and for these
things might testify their thankfulness before all men. The gifts bestowed upon
the poor, were signs of their charity. For whereas we have almost always
among us poor and needy, sick, old, Orphans and others who live hardly with
small sustenance, should it not have bin a cruel point in the public joy, if the
rich should not extraordinarily have had them in remembrance, that by their
abundance their want might be relieved, and occasion of rejoicing also with the
rest, given unto them? Wherefore we worthily detest their bankets, who in
celebrating their feasts, give themselves unto drunke^nes, riot, and
intemperancie. For God accurseth such feasts, wherein his name is profaned, his
good gifts trodden under foot, and his beneficence, drawn into an occasion of
mischiefs. Their profane mirth also is detestable, which have learned to do
nothing on the holy days, but dance and play, that they may so be more and
more stirred up to uncleanness and looseness. And how can the gifts of rich
me^ bestowed among themselves be acceptable unto God, if casting away the care
of their miserable brethren, they suffer them to be oppressed with poverty and
want, whom yet our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus has commended unto them as
his members? It is lawful then to banquet, be merry, and send presents one
unto an other, on the holy days, so that our bankets be seasoned with
sobriety and the praises of God, our mirth and pastime tempered with talk of
his goodness: and sending presents unto the rich for friendships sake, we also
bear a careful regard of the poor: For otherwise woe unto our feasts, woe unto
our mirth and rejoicing, which cannot please GOD unless they be consecrated to
his name, and referred to his glory.

Out of this example we learn, that we owe unto God a thankful acknowledging
of his benefits, and praise for thos^ goods things which we have received a^
hishands, for they are as the Prophet Hoseah says, the Calves of our lips:
they ar^ also a sacrifice more pleasant and acceptable unto God, then those of
Oxen an^ fat beasts which were offered under the Law, as in the 50. Psalm
after the Prophet had said; that God had no need of the flesh of Bulls, nor
blood of Calves, he adds in the 14. verse, Sacrifice unto God praise; and
perform thy vows unto the Lord; and in the last verse he says, He that
offers praise, he glorifieth me: as on the contrary, God complains of
nothing more then of the unthankful mind of his people, not acknowledging his
benefits. Wherefore he also calls heaven and earth to witness against the
unthankfulness of his people, yea even the Ox and the Ass to condemn them.
Isai. 1. 3. And in the fifth Chapter he complains against his people under
the parable of a vine in these words, verse, 4. What could I have done any more
to my ^ine-yard, that I have not done unto it? Why ^aue I looked that it should
bring forth ^rapes, and lo it brings forth wild Grapes? And by Jeremy he
complains in this ^rt. Chap. 2. verse. 5. What iniquity have our fathers
found in me, that they are gone ^rre from me? and almost in the same ^ords in
Michah. 6. verse. 3. O my people that have I done unto thee, or wherein have I
grieved thee? Wherefore it is not without cause commonly said; that nothing is
more unjust, nothing more against nature then an unthankful person. For As the
testifying of a thankful mind contains many duties in it, and namely,
justice and truth, by which that is given unto God which is due unto him, and
he is acknowledged to be the author of al good, whereof we are void: so on the
contrary, an unthankful mind is an heap and as i^ were a bundel of many
vices: wherhenc^ we see it often come to pass, that thos^ who have received
great benefits of God and have not acknowledged it, have shortly after perished
miserably. Which is apparent in those of Sodom and Gomorrh^ whom Abraham
delivered out of the hand of the four Kings their enemie^ For when as by this
deliverance they d^^ nothing profit, shortly after they we destroyed by fire
from heaven.

Therefore we see that David and there the faithful servants of God beei^^
delivered out of danger, are wont ca^^ fully to vow unto God, the setting for
of his praise and perpetual obedience namely in the 115. Psalm, David sai^
verse 7. 8. 9. Return unto thy rest o my soul, for the Lord has been
benificiall unto thee. Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine
eyes from tears, and my feet from falling; I will walk before the Lord in
the land of the living

Let us know then, that true thankfulness consists first and principally in
this, that we yield up our bodies a lively sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto
God, which is our reasonable serving of him, as the Apostle Paul speaks, Romans
12. 1. then that also with our lips we set forth the goodness of God,
whereunto that of David is to be referred, It becomes the upright to praise
God, and he says by name the upright, because the praise proceeding from an
infidel, not repenting, does displease God, as God himself in these words
reproves the ungodly; What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that
thou should take my covenant in thy mouth? Seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? And in the first Chapter of Isai,
the Lord rejects the worship which hipocrites and the irrepentant did yield
unto him.

Do not we then stand in fear, least God should say the same of us, if after
so many benefits received at his hand we go on still in our sins, and
think that we have sufficiently satisfied him, with presenting our selves to
hear his word, with the often singing of Psalms, or the multitude of prayers
inconsiderately powered out? and that he should in these terms complain: what
make your bodies before me without your hearts? what care I for your singing?
what weigh I your prayers? they are abomination unto me: when you multiply
your prayers, I will turn away my face from you for your hands are full of
blood.

The celebrating then of festival days with songs and mirth, are of no moment
or weight with God, unless we be turned unto God with all our heart, hearken
effectually with obedience unto his voice, and rely wholly upon him. And these
things are to be noted concerning these days of rest and public joy, which
the Jews willingly did celebrate after their victory.

There follows after, how these things became a perpetual law and custom by
the decree of Mardochaeus, which Ester the second time does confirm, as we
shall see after, verse. 29. Mardochaeus then as a Magistrate wrote and sent
letters to all the Jews which were in all the provinces of the King Assuerus,
far and near. Inioyning them that they should keep the foureteenth day of
the month Adar, and the fifteenth thereof, every year: adding this reason,
According to the days wherein they rested from their enemies, and the month
which was turned unto them, from sorrow to joy, and from mourning to mirth. He
notes unto us, that the memory of Gods benefits and graces does soon slip
away, except it be stayed by some notable means, wherefore he commands that
those two days wherein they obtained the victory over their enemies should be
kept holiday, that they might rest in them with an holy rest, thereby to call
to memory the benefit of so great a deliverance, and to celebrate the grace of
God, who by a wonderful means did turn their sorrow into joy. In which thing
he performs the duty of a good and faithful Magistrate, whereof it is a
part to take care that good order be preserved in the Church, the worship of
God retained pure, and the memory of his benefits continued for ever: that in
all ages every one may learn to put his trust in God, and to look for all
help and good from him. Hereby then we learn, that when the chief Magistrate
neglects those things which make to the conservation of pure religion,
because he is ignorant thereof, the inferior Magistrate ought not therefore to
cease, but by reason of his office, procure whatsoever shall appertain to the
nourishing and preserving of godliness: as here we see, when Assuerus little
cares for the doctrine of the Jews, which he did not understand, Mardochaeus
does not therefore leave off, but decrees those things which he thought to
appertain to the maintaining of the remembrance of so memorable a deliverance.
Wherein there shines not only his piety and care of the Church, but also his
courage and constancy. For it could not choose but be odious unto the native
inhabitants, when they should yearly see this feast to be celebrated, and so
call to remembrance the slaughter and destruction of their fellow citizens by
the Jews: seeing that no monuments or signs of victory or offenses amongst
the people adjoining, can be beholden without indignation and great grief. But
the memory of the benefits received from our God is not to be omitted for the
grief and sorrow of mind, which the ignorant take at the remembrance of true
religion. Yet is it wisely to be foreseen, that after civil wars there be
nothing done, whereby the minds of men may be offended, and old wounds wax
green again, and war eftsoons stirred up. Hence also we learn, that it is
the duty of the faithful Magistrate, either to decree, or approve by his
decree, that which is already by authority well ordained, to the preserving
and establishing of the good order of the Church, and the outward service of
God, so that the word of God be always the rule and squire whereby he frame
all his actions. And this is so much the more diligently to be noted and
understood, by how much we see that the slip is easy in that part, when
the question is concerning the power of Magistrates in the ordering of
Ecclesiastical matters. For some grant unto the highest Magistrate, to
ordain in the Church whatsoever pleases them, or whatsoever shall be
persuaded unto them by others. But what is this other then to overthrow all
religion, by granting such license unto men? So we see that the kings of Israel
cleaving to their own opinions did pervert the pure worship of God: and also
the kings of Judah imitating them, when leaving the doctrine of the law, they
followed their own wisdom and sense, as by the example of Achaz and Manasses
it is apparent. Othersome will not have the Magistrate to take any care at all
of Ecclesiastical matters, which opinion the Pope holds, to uphold more
easily his own tyranny. What is then here to be done? That the Magistrate
invade not the Pastors office, as to preach the word, administer the
Sacraments: also that he change not or innouate any thing in religion at his
own pleasure, or by worldly wisdom and policy: but remembering that he is
appointed of God a keeper and defender of the Church, of wholesome and heavenly
doctrine, of the worship of God, and of order requisite in the Church, he use
his authority and sword to the defense of the Church, against all force, that
the Pastors may retain their right and authority, and that those who are
slothful may be stirred up: that sound doctrine, and the right use of the
Sacraments may be conserved; and that by the judgment of the Pastors good
laws may be made, agreeable unto sound doctrine, that all things may be done
in order convenient in the house of God. And if the times be such that the
state of the Church be altogether depraved, and need reformation; the duty
also of the Magistrate requires, that he set hand unto the work, and provide
that all things be restored to their integrity, according to the word of God
rightly understood, and applied unto his right use and end. So we read, that
the holy kings of the I. Chro. 24 and 25. and 26
Israelites did, as David by the advice of Gad and Nathan the Prophets did
distribute the orders of the Priests and Leuits, and the courses of their
service and ministry. Solomon also dedicateth the Temple which he had built
with that notable and solemn prayer which is read, 1. King. 8. and confirms
the order appointed by his father. Iehosaphat restored as well the 2. Chro. 19.
2. Kings. 12.
State civil as the Ecclesiastical. Ioas also in his time, after the
confusions brought in by Athalia, did by the counsel of Iehoiada restore
those things that were confounded, and repair the ruins of the temple. But
the zeal, godliness, and constancy of Ezechias and Josias, are especially 2.
Chro. 29. 2. Kings. 23. Eusebius. de vit. Constanti. 1. 1. c. 37. and alibi.
commended, who in their times so happily reformed the Church. So Constantine
the great was present in the Counsel of Nice, and heard and approved the
sentences of the Fathers grounded upon the word of God, and by his authority
maintained and defended the sound doctrine, and condemned heresy. Out of all
which examples, let the faithful Magistrates learn what parts and place they
hold in the Church. It remains to be showed how the Jews did execute that
commandment prescribed by Ester and Mardochaeus, but those things shall be
after declared more at large: So that it shall be sufficient for us, if at this
present we learn to submit our selves unto good co^stitutions, by which the
remembrance of the benefits of God is confirmed in the Church, and that we
testify both by word and deed, even in the whole course of our life, that as
we are the people whom God has redeemed and freed from all misery and
accursednesse, brought into liberty from the thraldom of death and sin,
delivered from so many dangers, and adorned with so many gifts of his
liberality: so we will also do all that we may, that his name may be set forth
with worthy praise in Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for evermore.

Amen.
THE FIVE AND twentieth Sermon.
There remain those things which belonged to the institution of the days of
Purim, prescribed both by Mardochaeus, and by Ester, from the 25. verse, unto
the end of the Chapter.

25. And when she came before the King, he commanded by letters, Let this
wicked devise which he^ imagined against the Jews, turn upon his own head:
therefore they hanged him and his sons upon the tree.

26. Therefore they called those days Purim of the name of Pur, and because of
all the words of this letter, and because of that which they had seen besides
this, and of that which had come unto them.

27. The Jews also ordained, and promised for themselves and for their seed,
and for all that joined unto them, that they would not fail to observe those
two days every year, according to their writing, and according unto their
season:

28. And that those days should be remembered, and kept throughout every
generation and every family, and every province, and every city: even those
days of Purim should not fail from the Jews, and the memorial of them
should not perish from their seed.

29. And Ester the Queen the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote
with all authority to confirm this letter of the days of Purim, the second
time.

30. Which letters he sent to all the Jews in the hundred and seven and
twenty provinces of the kingdom of Assuerus, with words of peace and truth.

31. To confirm those days of Purim, according to their appointed times, as
Mordecai the Jew and Ester the Queen had appointed them; and as they had
promised for themselves and for their seed: the monuments of their fasting,
and of their prayer.

32. So when the decree of Ester had confirmed these words of the days of
Purim, it was written in this book.


WE began to declare, how that custom of celebrating those two days, in the
which the Jews rested, to give thanks unto God for their deliverance obtained,
was established for a law and an ordinance for ever, to weete, by Mardochaeus
as a Magistrate, letters being written unto all the Jews wherein that was
commanded, the reason being added, because they rested from their enemies, and
because that their sorrow was turned into mirth, and their mourning into joy:
wherefore they ought to consecrate those days of gladness unto the Lord,
making a solemn commemoratio^ of that victory which God had granted unto
them. Let us now go forward in those things which appertain heereunto unto the
end of the Chapter: for there is contained in these letters of Mardochaeus, the
chief cause of this ordinance, which is here expressed, to weere, the
conspiracy of Haman, which by the wisdom of Ester returned upon his head:
verse 24. and 25. After the names of these two feasts, which are called the
days of Purim, verse. 26. And last of all how by Esters letters all these
things were confirme^* in the four last verses. Whereout we learn, with how
great care and diligence the memory of Gods benefits is to be preserved, good
order appointed in the Church, and retained when it is once rightly
established. Hence also we may easily gather what is the right and lawful use
of festival days.

This is then the especial and most express cause of the yearly celebrating
of those two days, the malice of Haman* who thought to have utterly destroyed,
casting lots that he might find out a fit day to accomplish his practices: but
that day by the prayer of Ester, and express commandment of Assuerus, fell
upon his own head, and was unto him deadly, but unto the Jews happy.
Therefore here again is there mention made of the malice of Haman, and of the
charity and faith of Ester, that in the celebration of this feast, the malice
of Haman should never dye, and the goodness of Ester remain in blessedness.
So it comes to pass, that the memory of the notable deliverances of the
people of God which they have had from their enemies, cannot be ^^peated,
without making mention of the faith and piety of the one; and on the contrary
of the cruelty and ungodliness of the other: as if at any time me fall in talk
of the deliverance out of Egypt, there is mention made of the hardness of
heart, and pride of Bhazao, and of his destruction. If Jerusalem be said to
have been delivered from the siege of the Assyrians, by and by there is added
the slaughter made by the Angel, and the shameful death of Sennacherib
himself. Who can make me^^ion of the death of the Son of God, Christ Jesus
our Savior, but that he shall ^eake of the treason of Judas of the enui^ ^f
the Scribes and Pharisees, of the unjust ^ntence of Pilate* condemning him to
each, when he pronounced an innocent? ^o it comes to pass that the names of
the ^icked do so often send forth their stench, ^oft as there is mention made
of them, as if a man, for examples sake, would note a sworn and most hateful*
enemy of Gods people, he would call him another Haman: if a traitor, another
Judas. On the contrary, by the remembrance of the Saints, their courage and
constancy, and their acts done for the defense of the Church and of the truth
are blessed for ever, and God is praised, who powered vengeance on the wicked,
but defended the godly, and delivered them out of their throats. Thus have you
the cause of these feasts.

The name of Purim is added, from the name Pur, which signifies a lot: whi^^
name is rather taken out of the Persian language, and because Haman cast lots,
(which yet deceived his expectation and desire) rather then from any other,
that the remembrance of this benefit of God, might remain also amongst the
strang^ nations: and that the vanity of all lot^ casters, and other the like
superstition^ which the idolaters were wont to vse^ might be the more known,
seeing th^^ God at the prayer of his by his prouide^c^ and infinite wisdom,
had overthrown all the expectation of the idolaters; an^ turned it upon their
own heads. The name then of Purim, did serve to call to memory whatsoever God
had done in favor of the Jews, Hamans practices being overthrown, which upon
confidence of the lots he took in hand. It much avails to give convenient
names unto feasts and holy days, which may fitly express the matters for
memory whereof they were ordained: although ^he names we use are not so much
to b^ ^egarded, so that the matter be well vn^erstood, and that we abuse them
not to ^^perstition. There follows the man^er of celebrating and keeping this
feast, (...) weete, that the Jews upon Mardochaeus ^^tters, and upon those
things which they ^new by Hamans letters, by which they ^ere put in danger of
their life and goods: (...) also by the contrary letters of Assuerus, (...)
which it was granted that they might ^^fend themselves by arms against their
^^emies, did willingly consent to observe ^^ese things which follow. 1. That
they ^ll procure that these two days, shall incon^ently be celebrated,
observed, and solemni^d: 2. according to the appointed time, yearly: by all,
themselves and their seed, and all that should join themselves unto them: 4.
in whatsoever province of the kingdom of Assuerus they were dispersed, in
every age, family, province, and city for ever. That the days of Purim
should not fail from the Jews, and their memory should not perish from their
seed. By which it appears, that as they lacked the Temple, or a public
place where they might all meet, so this feast was kept by them every year in
every city, village, and family* Besides, it seems that the Iewe^ which
were already returned into the^ country, were not bound to this feast: neither
is there in any historian, mention made of these days of Purim kept in Iudaea.
Neither is there any punishment appointed for those that neglect it, seein^
they knew well that the constitutions o^ men, neither ought, nor could bind^
the conscience* or have the nature of the worship of God: for nothing properl^
is to be accounted the worship of Go^ but that which he himself has expres^^
in his word prescribed. I grant in deed that those things which ought to be
done in those days, were of themselves acce^table and pleasing unto God, as to
mee^ to hear his word, to call upon him, to give him thanks, and magnify
his works, and namely, this so notable a deliverance: to make confession of
their faith, to relieve the necessity of the poor, to stir up one another
with mutual exhortations to love, fear, serve, and worship God with a trust
in his goodness: but that all these things were no better on these days then
on other, it is certain.

It is moreover to be noted, that this feast is not dedicated unto Mardochaeus
or unto Ester, but unto the living God only, who only is to be called upon in
the Church. For as he speaks in the 42. chap. of Isai, verse. 8. I will not
give my glory unto other, nor my praise unto images. From hence therefore we
must gather, unto whose honor, and for what causes feasts and holidays may be
ordained, and what is the right means of celebrating them: to weete, all
intemperancie, wantonness, and riot, which at all times displease God, are to be
banished far from them: besides, we must abstain from these works, though
otherwise good, and of their own nature lawful, by which those holy and
divine actions which are to be done upon the day of rest might be hindered:
moreover, al manner of worship and service which is used upon them, ought to be
holy unto God: and finally, there must be reverend mention made of the faith,
constancy and piety of them whom it pleased God to use to the preservation
and commodity of his Church. So most willingly shall we make mention of the
faith of Abraham, the holiness of the Prophets, the constancy of the Martyrs,
the purity of Virgins, and especially of holy Marie the blessed Virgin, that
elect vessel by the singular grace of God to bear in her womb the fruit of
life: but to dedicate holidayes unto them, to appoint them any service or
worship, to call upon them or pray unto them, we say is profane, and joined
with manifest abuse of Gods worship. And thus far of Mardochaeus letters.

It follows after, that Ester also wrote letters to confirm, and by her
authority to establish these things, and that they were sent to all the Jews
through the hundred and seven and twenty provinces of the king Assuerus, with
words of prosperity and assurance: and that thereby those days of Purim were
yet farther confirmed and established. This iterating done by Ester, was not
without cause, or that she might be talked of: but it is likely, that both she
and Mardochaeus did fear least the Jews which were dispersed through so many
Provinces, would by little and little wax forgetful of so great a benefit.
And namely, because those days of Purim could not be celebrated without the
indignation and grief of the rest of the inhabitants of that regio^, for that
the memory of those that were slain, to the number of seventy and five
thousand, besides, that eight hundred which were slain in Susa, and the ten
sons of Haman* would by this means again be refreshed: besides seeing they
had no public place to meet in, as they were wont in the Temple at Jerusalem,
it would be the harder to observe this feast. Unto al which you may add, that
it was to be feared least after that Assuerus, Ester and Mardochaeus were dead,
the favor of the Jews should decay; and in stead of that favor which they had
received, there might rise up some new conspiracy against them: as for the
most part it comes to pass, that old brawles and hatreds are eftsoons
renewed, and that the remmembrance of hurt sustained with disgrace, can hardly
or almost never be put out of men's minds. Therefore so much the more diligently
did they renew this commandment unto them: the end whereof is principally to
be noted, which is expressed in the end of the 31. verse: that it should be a
monument of their fasting and of their prayer: that is, by these feasts they
would erect a monument for ever, by which it might be testified, that God had
regard of their humility, heard their prayers, and was the author and
furtherer of so great and so admirable a deliverance. The end then of those
feasts was an open testifying before all men, that God above does help those
who cast down themselves before him, and call upon his name. Which is the
principal fruit to be reaped by this whole History, least that we be
discouraged in persecutions: but rather that we should be the more stirred up
to seek God in time convenient, being assuredly persuaded, that he is near
unto them that call upon him in truth, and seek him with an upright heart: and
that it shall come to pass, that those that put their trust in him shall never
be confounded. By this example of Ester, all women whom God has lifted up unto
any dignity and authority, are taught so to use that favor and authority
which they have, that they may procure good order to be stablished in the
Church, and to labor that the memory of Gods benefits toward her be never
blotted out: being assuredly persuaded, that if they be carried with a right
zeal of the glory of God, their names be written in the book of life: and
that the acts performed by them are registered most faithfully in the Lords
mo^^ments and records, never to be put out or abolished by any tract of time.
And thus fair let this suffice concerning the institution of the days of
Purim.

There remain yet in this matter certain questions to be dissolved. The
first, whether it were lawful for Mardochaeus and Ester to ordain festival
days to continue for ever: when as the Law expressly warns, that Deuteronomy. 12. 32
nothing is to be added, nothing to be taken away, in those things which God
has commanded concerning his worship, and Isaias says, That God is
worshipped in vain Isai. 29. 13.
by the commandments of men. I say, that it was not Mardochaeus purpose, to
institute any new worship of God: or to asscribe unto the days of Purim any
greater holiness then unto others* neither to bind any man's conscience to the
observation of this ordinance, as they are to those things which God himself
has commanded: but whereas God has granted unto man six days of labor,
and has left it to his will, either to labor or to employ it in holy things
and those which appertain properly unto his service, Mardochaeus only
respected this, that these days should rather be bestowed in the remembrance
of the benefits of God, and in giving thanks for such a deliverance, then in
any handiworks; but yet so that they should not be bound with any opinion of
necessity, as though God himself had commanded it. The same purpose Judas
Macchabaeus had in instituting the feast of the dedication of the Temple, after
he had purged it and the altar from the pollutions of Antiochus* Of this feast
the Evangelist S. John makes mention, and says, that our Savior Christ was
present at it, walking in Salomons porch. And if any great abuse or corruption
should creep into these feasts instituted by men, it should be lawful for the
Church to abolish them, if by no other means it could not take away the abuse.

Let Ezekias be an example unto us, who brake the brazen serpent in pieces,
because they offered incense unto it, although it were erected by Gods
commandment in the Wilderness, that those who looked upon it might be hea^ed
from the biting of the fiery Ser^ents. But when as God did not command that
it should be kept for ever, as ^ remembrance of so great a benefit, He^ekaih
did not doubt to stamp it to pow^er. So that if God have commanded any thing
without this clause of perpetui^e, they may for abuses growing thereby ^e taken
away, and then how much more ^ose who are ordained by men? Where it to be
noted, that although the Jews received sundry benefits at Gods hand, at
sundry times, yet did they not for every one of them ordain a festival day
^ay we read not that they did dedicate any day for any never so great a
benefit, besides this, and the dedication of the Temple after it was purged by
Judas Macchahbaus. For as touching that feast which we read instituted in the
book of Judith, the History is not authentical. Therefore least that
festival days should be too much multiplied, and groweinto too great a
number, there was no feast instituted for that so miraculous a passage over
Iordane; none for the fall of the walls of Jericho; nor for the slaughter of
the Madianites in the time of Gedeon; nor for that other no less admirable of
the Ammonites; and other people confederate, in the days of Iehosaphat;
neither for that of the Assirians when the Angel of God in one night destroyed
their whole host.

And who can reckon up those so many the like miraculous deliverances, for
remembrance whereof notwithstanding there were no solemn days dedicated.

And this is especially worthy the observation, that Noah being safely
preser^ed from the flood by so many evident miracles, did nevertheless
institute no so^emne d^y or festiuitie, for the memorial of this miracle, but
was content with continual meditation thereof in himself, and declaration of
it unto others, who were delighted with the rehearsal of such miracles.
Neither do we al^o read that Abraham did ordain any* ^estiuall day, though
he received from God many notable promises, and won^erfull deliverances.

The instituting therefore of certain eastes, was a part of the
schoolemaisters ^ffice belonging to the law, in which GOD gave shadows and
figures of things to come, wherefore by the com^ing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
all the old ^easts, with the rest of the ceremonies, are ^bolished.

This doubt being dissolved, the unswere unto the rest will be the ^ore
easy: as if any man demand ^hether there be any holidays ex^resly
commanded by God in the Chri^ian Church, we answer; There are not. For it
appears by the words of Paul, that Christians being well instructed in the
faith, did make no distinction of days, not esteem of one more then an other:
and writing to the Colossian^ he faith, Let no man condemn you in respect of
an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabboths. It is a part of Christian
liberty purchased by Christ, if we well know that all our days are equal,
and all of like holiness, even as the use of all things is holy to a faithful
man, as the Apostle says. So the ancient Christians came to togithre every
day without difference, to hear the word of God, be partakers of the
Sacraments, and to prayer and thanksgiving.

I confess indeed, that the Apostles, that they might win the Jews unto the
Lord, did frame themselves unto their dispositions, to wit, taught in the
Temple, and in the Synagogues on the Sabboths and holy days, which is apparent
in the History of the Acts. Afterward the Church increasing, when all had not
opportunity to come every day to the holy assemblies, there was one day chosen
in the week, wherein all the people should come together to be taught, and to
employ themselves with one accord in holy exercises. And it seems unto me
most likely, that the first day of the week wherein Christ rose again from
the dead (called therefore the Lords day) was rather chosen then any other to
be dedicated to that holy meeting as it is easily gathered out of 1. Cor. 16.
2. but yet without law or commandment, or any band of necessity, but only to
keep an ^rder, and that the people might have a certain day of assembly,
without difference of other days, or opinion of greater holiness. Howbeit
antiquity, the use of the Apostles and the consent of all Churches have
brought to pass, that it should seem a barbarous and insolent wantonness, if
any should refusing that, appoint any other day for Ecclesiastical assemblies.
In which thing not withstanding, there is nothing derogated from Christian
liberty, which hinders not ^ut that all things should be done in ^rder in
the Church, as Paul has commanded.

There remains here to be observed ^y us, that all other holidayes, which at
this day the Church observes, have bi^ brought by little and little into the
Church since the time of the Apostles, some sooner some later, that for the
space of four hundred years, these were the only solemn feasts in the
Church, Easter, Whitsontide, the Nativity of Christ Jesus, the Ascension, and
the Epiphanie, when he was worshipped by the wisemen. Afterward many were by
little and little added a sundry times, which grew at the last into an excessive
number. Wherein there again is offered an other doubt to b^ discussed, how,
and how far forth it (...) lawful for Christians to institute su^^ feasts.
The answer is easy, that (...) long as this doctrine of Christian libert^^
remains, that all days are equal, an^ that there is no greater holiness in
(...) then in an other, but that any day might alike be consecrated to Gods
worship; has been lawful unto Christians f^^ good orders sake, and for great
conuenencie, to instruct the simple, to ordain certain days for the better
calling (...) remembrance and more plain expou^ding yearly unto the people,
of the chi^fest benefits of our redemption, of whi^^ sort are the Nativity,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ; and the sending of
the holy Ghost: And also those days which though in some churches they bear
the names of Saints, yet are ordained to put us in mind of some notable thing
belonging unto Christ, wherein the ministry of the Saints did concur: as
the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin is proper unto Christ conceived by the
holy Luc. 1. 31 Luc. 2. 22 Luc. 1. 76. 77. Mat. 16. 16 Act. 9. 20. and 22. 21.
Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin; and the Purification to Christ presented in
the Temple: the day of the Nativity of 8. John the Baptist, puts us in
remembrance of the preparation of Christ's coming in the flesh, for the
salvation of mankind: the day of Peter, of Christ professed to be the son of
God: the day of Paul, of Christ preached, even unto the Gentiles: the day of
S. John, Ioh. 21. 24.
of Christ published by the writing of the Gospel, etc: as it is clear by the
prayers which those churchesmake, and the parts of scripture which they read on
those days. But yet behold what errors by little and little have crept in, as
well in the celebrating of these feasts, as in the instituting of others.

1. Eue^ at the very beginning there by and by arose an opinion of necessity,
even with fear of sin for the breaking of them: which is contrary unto
Christian liberty.

2. Next the holiness of one day was accounted greater then of an other, as
though Gods grace were more easily found, and more largely granted on the
festiual days then on others, and in this feast rather then in that.

3. Then also was there adjoined an opinion of merit, even by the work it
self wrought, as though by the visiting of the temples, and ceasing on these
days from work, remission of sins were purchased, and safeguard or
deliverance from certain diseases, yea and as though eternal life were due
unto them for it.

4. There followed a negligence and contempt to hear the word of God, and give
themselves unto holy exercises upon other days.

5. Lastly, there ensued a careful and scrupulous ceasing from all handiworke
after the manner of the Jews, and the observation of the time of the feast,
from one twilight unto the other. But the ful^ heap of profanation was in the
multipliing of the feasts almost without number in every place, after every
man's fancy and in dedicating of them to the honor of Saints, yea even of them
of whose holiness and sanctity there was no certain testimony: unto whom
also there was their peculiar worship prescribed, that by this means their help
and intercession might more easily be obtained, whereof it came to pass, that
all kind of Idolatry did grow into an exceeding greatness: pride and
wantonness as a river ouerflowed all, and did eue^ almost choke and quench all
godliness. That therefore the state of the Church so miserably fallen, might
be restored: not without cause first were all those feasts abolished which were
tainted with superstition, after the right use of godly feasts was renewed in
the reformed Churches, which feasts notwithstanding for the old abuses from
which the people could not be reclaimed, were ^n many places altogether left
off: which thing was lawful to be done, because they were but the constitutions
of men, and men could not otherwise be taught what was Christian liberty.
Howbeit those Churches which in stead of all other ^eastes do only retain
the Lords day ^or order and public assemblies, must diligently take heed that
they condemn not other Churches, in which many such feasts are still retained,
so that men's consciences be not inthralled with the yoke of men's constitutions
as though they were Gods, and that all abuse, al opinion of the holiness of one
day more then an other, of merit and the like errors which before we have
spoken of, be taken away and earnestly reprehended, and all insolency and
excess be driven far away. Finally Christians are bound all the days of
their life to follow true holiness, preferring no day as more holy then an
other, continually mindful of Gods benefits, as every day there is mention
made of them in the articles of faith: submitting themselves otherwise to order
and Ecclesiastical discipline, that with one consent they may be partakers of
doctrine, Sacraments, prayer, praise and thanksgiving and exhorting one an
other to the worship and honor of God, and to mutual^ love and charity, to
holiness and righteousness, and to retain that liberty which Christ Jesus
our Lord has purchase^ with his blood, to whom be all honor an^ glory for
ever.

Amen.
THE SIX AND twentieth Sermon.
The honor of Mardochaeus is confirmed and augmented, and peace granted to the
Church.

CHAP. X. 1. After this the king Assuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and
upon the Isles of the sea.

2. And all the acts of his power, and of his might, and the declaration of the
dignity of Mordecai, wherewith the King magnified him, are they not written in
the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia?

3. For Mordecai the Jew was the next unto King Assuerus, and great among the
Jews, and accepted among the multitude of his brethren, who procured the
wealth of his people, and spoke peace to all his seed.


AMongst other reasons wherewith David stirs up both himself and others to
praise God, he also brings this, That his anger endures but a while, but in
his favor is life: so that if weeping lodge with us at evening, yet joy comes
in the morning. This is confirmed by many examples, and ordinary experience,
especially in the Church, which is the house of God, in which he does show
forth the riches of his bounty and mercy. That one book of the ludges does
afford us many the like examples, if the times wherein God chastised his
people, be compared with those in which sending them deliuerers, he granted
them peace and quietness.

But this History which we have in hand, ^oth clearly enough show the same
unto us: for, as we have seen, when as the Jews being for two months space
afflicted, did humble themselves before God, and cried upon the Lord, they
obtained at Gods hand that deliverance which we have heard, whereby their name
became fearful unto the Gentiles, and they obtained rest from their enemies.

Now this book is concluded and shut up with the recital of their
tranquillity, which was confirmed and increased by that great authority and
favor wherein Mardochaeus was, and which he so used, that he was dear unto
the king, and beloved of all the people. He was also careful especially for
the good of the Jews, and provided what he might for the rest of his
posterity. Whereby it came to pass, that they enjoyed long and happy peace,
the Lord bestowing his favor on them a long while, when as his wrath had
passed in a moment. This conclusion of this book is now to be weighed by us,
with a brief recapitulation to be gathered of the chief points of those
things which we have expounded, that we may constantly expect our peace and
quiet from his grace and favor, who in all ages has granted it unto his
Church, after that he has exercised it for a season under diverse afflictions.

First it is said, that king Assuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon
the yles of the sea. There is mention made of this tribute as of an
extraordinary matter. And it is likely that it was then imposed, when Xerxes
the son of Assuerus made his preparation for his voyage into Greece, for
which he gathered so great an army, to weete, of twenty hundred thousand men,
if we may believe Herodotus: for which action, there was of necessity required
a huge mass of gold and silver, and therefore there was need of
extraordinary tributes and subsidies: from whence it seems that common
proverb sprung among the Persians, that Cyrus was a Father, Cambyses a Lord,
Darius an huckster of the kingdom, as though he made retayle of his people. So
that kings do not by any thing sooner purchase the note of tyranny, or of
covetousness and filthy desire of gain, then by great and extraordinary
exactions upon their subjects, But why is there here mention made of this
tribute? It is likely that it is in regard of that which follows, wherein is
declared in how great favor and authority Mardochaeus was with the king, and
that it might be signified that the Jews were free from this tribute, which
was the greatest amplification and increase of the peace and tranquillity of
the Church. In which matter the singular favor of God does shine, who causes
the poor captives to be spared, when in the mean while the natural subjects
of the kingdom are charged, some with the labors and dangers of war, some
with exactions and diminishing of their goods and substance. Lo what the grace
and favor of a wise Governor can do, in the sparing of those that have most
need, such as it is likely that the Jews were, in comparison of the natural
inhabitants. Wherefore Mardochaeus did nothing unworthy praise or against his
duty, when he procured their release with especial care. I grant that some are
not to be oppressed, that others may be released, when the case is of those
burdens and taxes which belong unto the profit or defense of all: but yet there
is no cause but that poor strangers may wisely relieve themselves from those
burdens which Princes exact of their natural subjects. So Joseph released the
family of Jacob his father from Genesis 47. 12
all the burde^s of the Egyptians, who were compelled to sell their flocks and
their possessions unto Pharao for corn: when the Israelites were freely
sustained by the munificence and liberality of the king, for the love which he
bare to Joseph, for that faithfulness and wisdom which he had sufficiently
tried to be most necessary and profitable for him and his whole kingdom, in
the government of the affairs of the realm. So that it was no marvel, if
the king Assuerus for the like experience which he had of the faithfulness and
discretion of Mardochaeus, profitable for the government of his kingdom, did
for his sake make the Jews free from this extraordinary tribute.

More over the history passes over in silence the acts of Assuerus, and the
setting forth of the dignity of Mardochaeus, wherewith the king had magnified
him: because they are written in the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of
Media and Persia. There was indeed a great preparation made by Assuerus, under
the conduct of Xerxes his son, but very unlucky as all histories do observe:
and the rest of his acts the Chronicles of the Persians being lost are now
unknown. Now as touching Mardochaeus, it is to be supposed, that his wisdom,
faithfulness, and watchfulnes, were sufficiently tried and approved by Assuerus;
seeing that he made so great account of him. For although sometimes Princes do
promote unworthy men upon sudden advise and affection, which we have seen in
Haman, yet that dignity continues not long: for in short space they bewray
either their pride and folly, or their wickedness, and so in a moment fall
headlong back again. Wherefore it is certain that Mardochaeus was adorned
with virtues fit for that place and dignity which he sustained: for otherwise
being an alien, newly vpstart, and lifted up from base state to so high honor,
and procuring at his first coming to his estate that edict, by force and
authority whereof the Jews slew seventy and five thousand of their enemies
at one massacre; it is sure that he was watched, and await laid for him, in so
much that if he had not showed great faithfulness in his office, been most
trusty unto the King, and most wise and upright in his government, he should
not long have retained that dignity. Nay if besides, all things had not had
prosperous success which he dealt in, there would not have wanted those who
would have accused and slandered him as the cause of all the confusions which
might arise in so great a monarchy. Therefore God did adorn him not only
with gifts meet and necessary to bear out so great a charge, but also did
compass him with special grace and favor, whereby he might be safe from all
the bitings of envy and despite, and covered against all the false slanders
and injuries of the malicious. So was his government profitable unto the whole
kingdom, and procured peace unto the Church: whereby it appears, how great
difference there is between him who rules the commonwelth in the fear of God,
and him who is ruled by his affections. The government of Haman was troublesome
to the Church, hurtful to the people, dishonorable unto the king, and hated
of all men: but the rule of Mardochaeus was profitable and peaceable unto the
Church, gaineful unto the kings subjects, and finally most honorable unto the
king. Wherefore it is for the behoof and profit of all States, that their
government be committed unto wise men fearing God: contrariwise it brings
destruction unto the^, if men ambitious, covetous, desirous of revenge, and
doing all things with passion for their own profit, do sit at the helm to
govern the rest. So we read that when Joseph governed Genesis 41.
Egypt, the kingdom was happy and quiet: and under Samuel the state of the 1.
Sam. 7. 1. Sam. 2. 1. Sam. 31.
people was blessed, which under the rule of the sons of Heli was most
unhappy. The same kingdom being almost spoiled and wasted under Saul, was
restored 2. Sam. all.
by the wisdom and piety of David. Finally, all affairs either public or
private do speed well, if good me^ and careful in their office do manage
them: on the contrary, when wicked or negligent men have them in hand, they
come to nothing; and therefore Iethro the father in law of Moses, when he gave
him advise for the choosing of Judges, by whom he might be helped in deciding
of controversies, warns him that he choose men of courage, fearing God,
dealing truly, Exo. 18. 21.
hating covetousness. So David promises, that he will not suffer either in his
house Psalm. 101.
or in his kingdom wicked and vicious men; but that with great care and
diligence he would seek out godly men, that they might dwell with him and
serve him. So that there is no certayner prognostication, whereby either hurt
and infelicitie is threatened unto any State, then when the wicked reign and
bear rule therein: or whereby happiness and good success is promised, then
when godly men sit chief in the government thereof. Wherefore we are with most
fervent prayers to crave at Gods hand, that the commonwealth may be governed by
men that truly fear God, and that are careful of public peace and
tranquillity, respecting the common good, and not their own profit.

In few words are the dignity and virtues of Mardochaeus set forth in the
third verse: his dignity, that he was next unto the King Assuerus, and great
among the Jews: his virtue, that he was accepted of all his brethren, procured
the good of his people: and spoke peaceably to all his seed. It was no small
honor to possess the second place of dignity to the king, in so mighty and
flourishing a Monarchy: so that he had need to be furnished with rare,
exquisite, and heroical virtues, to be able to guide the affairs of so great
an estate with praise and honor. But it was a far greater honor and dignity
unto him to be a member of the Church; and to retain true godliness and
religion among the delicacies and riot of so great a court, then to be the
Viceroy of so high a Monarch. Of this mind was Joseph, when Genesis 48. 1.
he more esteemed to have his children partakers of Jacobs blessing, then of
all the riches of Egypt. The like also Moses did, who had rather suffer with
the Heb. 11. 24. 25. Daniel. 6.
people of God, then to be accounted the son of Pharaos daughter. Daniel also
in Babylon had rather endanger his life in the Lions jaws, then neglect his
duty in praying unto God. It is not said, how long this dignity of
Mardochaeus lasted, but it is likely that it endured unto his death, to the
profit and commodity of the Church of God: wherefore God also blessed the
Monarchy of the Persians, because his Church therein had a peaceable seat. So
God is wont to bless Nations and Kingdoms in which his Church is harbored,
with quiet and tranquillity: and he does diverse times choose out some of his
Church to be rulers, that thereby the peace of the Church may the better be
confirmed and established. And who can hinder the purpose of God, but that he
may promote whom pleases him to the highest top of honor? So the kingdom of
David was established, maugre Saul and all his practices, and in spite of all
the borderers, who labored to hinder the settling thereof.

Of the virtues of Mardochaeus, the first is gentleness and courtesy, whereby
he was accepted of all his brethren. For i^ unmindful of his former estate
he had despised his brethren, or had behaved himself toward them proudly by
reason of his dignity, he should not have ben^ esteemed or beloved by them:
but on the contrary he loved them, and did abase himself to their estate,
whatsoever dignity he obtained; showing that he esteemed nothing more
precious, then that he might be accounted among the seed of Abraham, a member
of the Church, and a brother of all the faithful. This thing David did set
forth in himself, saying, All my delight is in the Saints that are on Psalm.
16. 3
the earth, and in those that excel in virtue. Another of his virtues is his
study and carfulness for the wealth and commodity of the Church, and his
dilligent search of all those things which made any whit to the preservation of
the doctrine of the law, and the service of God: a most worthy care certainly
for all those whom God has exalted to any dignity or authori^ie. For what
greater thing I pray, can they perform, then to preserve that people which God
has chosen unto himself for his inheritance, and as a most precious jewel? by
what means can their memories be more highly commended? Truly those great me^
David, Ezechias, Josias, Constantine the great, are not so much commended for
their great exploits which they did, although every one were most renowned in
them; as for their zeal toward God, and careful preservation of his Church,
and the establishing in it of Gods worship, and the safe defending it against
all heresies, by the bright shining of the heavenly doctrine. Finally,
Mardochaeus spoke peace or prosperity to all the seed of the Jews: that is,
he provided for them against the time to come, and took care that after his
death the state of the Church should prosper and remain flourishing: which
care assuredly does especially beseem those whom God has called to such
public places. So we see with how great care David did provide 1. Chr. 22. 6
for his Solomon, giving him precepts, and exhorting him unto his duty,
together Verse. 17.
with all the Princes of his people, that the Temple might be built, Gods,
service maintained pure, and the state governed with religion and justice. If
then the fathers of families and private households are wont not without cause
to provide for their posterity, how much more ought they to do it who bear
the name and charge of the fathers of the people, and nourses of the Church? By
these virtues was Mardochaeus great among the Jews, and left behind him an
happy and blessed memory for ever.

It remains that we gather into a brief sum, those things which
particularly have been hitherto expounded. The principal scope and drift of
this book is, that God might set before our eyes the care which he bare
toward his Church in the time of Assuerus, and delivered it from the
conspiracy of Haman, and gave it a notable victory over all her enemies. The
end of this deliverance, as also of all other which God at sundry times
bestowed on his people, is this, that we may learn in the time of affliction
and persecution, to hope and look for help, succor and deliverance from God
alone, who sends it unto his when it is most convenient time, even as we have
seen it to come to pass in all the regions about us, as in Swizerland,
Germany; England and Scotland: in which, when as there have been troubles
raised for religion, God has delivered those Churches, and given them peace
and tranquillity. Whereupon France and Flanders ought to be raised up with
good hope of deliverance, which this long while, and at sundry times, have
sustained the burden of most cruel persecutions and sharp wars. We have
seen then for the setting forth of the greatness of this deliverance, the
largeness of the empire of Assuerus described in the first chapter, and the
magnificence and excess of his feasts. The end of which feasts was lamentable
and unlucky, the Queen Vashti refusing to come at the Kings commandment,
whereupon she was divorced, that so there might a way be prepared to the taking
in of Ester, which is declared in the second Chapter, together with the
benefit wrought by Mardochaeus for the King; God so before hand prepating fit
instruments for the bringing to naught of Hamans wicked devises: which things
in the third chapter we have discussed. For when as he was lifted up by the
King above all his courtiers, and was worshipped of all saving Mardochaeus, he
took so great indignation at it, that he took counsel how to make away
Mardochaeus, and the whole nation of the Jews at one slaughter. To which
purpose by his false accusations and slanders, he obtained of the king an
edict, whereby partly by Hamans false suggestions, and Assuerus over great
credulity, the Church was laid open to be spoiled and murdered, without any
difference of men or women, children, or infants. Which being published and
made known, the Jews turned themselves unto mourning, weeping, fasting, and
praying, and namely Mardochaeus, who left not to urge and solicit Ester, until
he had persuaded her to make supplication unto the King for her people. Which
thing she did after three days and three nights fast, celebrated, as well by
her self, as by all the Jews inhabitants of Susa. We have seen the effect
of these prayers: that by them there was an entry made open for Ester unto the
King, she found favor in his sight, with great promises of obtaining
whatsoever she should demand, even unto the half of the kingdom. But she
was content at the first, to request the King and Haman to come unto her to a
banquet: and then desired none other thing, but that the next day it would be
the Kings pleasure to come the next day unto another banquet. In the mean while
Haman took counsel speedily to make away Mardochaeus, and by the advice of
his friends erected a gallows, that the next day they might hang Mardochaeus
thereon: but as in the sixth Chapter is showed, God turned his counsel to a
contrary effect: the King commanding him to lead Mardochaeus through the
streets of the city with that great honor, which Haman himself had
prescribed: whereupon returning sad and full of indignation unto his house, he
hears from his friends the sentence of condemnation, which we have declared
in the 7. chapter, and which at the Queens complaint and petition was
fulfilled, Haman being hanged on that same gallows which he had prepared: and
this was also besides, a great effect of the prayer and repentance of the
Jews: but far greater did follow in the eight Chapter, wherein is declared,
that the riches and goods of Haman came unto Ester, and his honors unto
Mardochaeus: and there was a contrary edict unto the former written in favor
of the Jews, whereupon the Jews were made partakers of joy and public
gladness as in the ninth Chapter. We have heard also how the Jews performed the
matter, being authorized by the Kings Proclamation, and slew seventy and five
thousand and eight hundred of their enemies, who sought the goods and the lives
of them, their wives and children; so that the rest of the people being made
afraid, dared not once to open their mouths against the Jews, God restraining
their minds, and as it were compassing them about with a wall of fire. Which
singular benefit of the Lords, Mardochaeus with Ester the Queen, magnifying as
they were bound, and fearing least in short time the memory thereof would
decay, did by their authority and proclamation, command that the fourteenth
and fifteenth days of that month wherein their enemies were slain, should be
celebrated with a perpetual festiuitie, and called the days of Purim: because
the lots which Haman cast, did appoint those days for the utter destruction of
the Jews; but God had heard the cries and fastes of his, and had returned on
the heads of the enemies, the mischiefs which they had devised for others.
Finally, we have seen that the power and honor which before were Hamans, and
after bestowed by Assuerus the King upon Mardochaeus, were more and more
increased and confirmed: and peace and tranquillity procured unto the Church
then dispersed among so many Nations. Out of al which we learn, being taught
by experience of Gods goodness, that in the greatest distresses, and most
dangerous and desperate cases, our trust is to be reposed in God: whose power
is so great, and confirmed unto us by so many proofs, that it is not to be
doubted, but that he will most powerfully deliver us out of all dangers, if we
cry unto him: yea and which more is, Satan and all the world in vain wringing
at it, he will give unto us eternal life, which that most precious blood of
Christ Jesus our Lord shead once upon the Cross, has purchased for us. To him
alone be all glory, praise, and all power and strength for ever.

Amen. Glory be to God alone.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF the chief points which are contained in these 26. Sermons, upon
the ten Chapters of the Book of Ester.
CHAP. 1.
SERMON. I.
VEr. 1. What fruit is to be gathered out of Histories, and namely out of the
holy Histories of the Bible, and especially out of this History of Ester. pa.
1. 2. 3. The chief points of those doctrines which are contained in the
History of Ester. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. etc. Assuerus though uncircumcised
possesses ^ great Kingdom. Gods favor then is not to be measured by worldly
dignities, but is to be sought in Gods free adoption. 15. 16 God will have his
to be subject unto Kings, though Infidels. 17. Great Empires are as bands
whereby many Nations are joined together. 18. Verse. 2. Gods providence
establishes, and transferreth them from one people to an other. 19. 20.
SERMON. II.
3. Of sumptuous feasts. 27. 25. 26. With these two conditions we may use
those things which God has created, first, that God be glorified: next, that
all intemperatenesse and unthankfulness be avoided. 26. 27. 28. 4. What manner
of ones the feasts of Kings and Noble men ought to be. 29. What ones the
feasts of those that fear God should be. 30. 31. Of the patience of God
toward the children of this world, unto whom he gives so many good things.
32. 6. 7. 8. Of riot used for the most part by great men. 32. 33. 34. 5. Of
that humanity and gentleness which best beseems great estates. 35. 36. 37.
9. Of the manners and customs of diverse Nations. 38. Of modesty and
temperancie in common conversation: and of the contrary extreme. 39. 40.
SERMON. III.
10. The slips of Princes in observing of laws. 46. 47. Against drunkenness:
even that merry drunkenness which men scarcely esteem so. 47. 11. The vanity
of the mind of great Princes. 48. What inconveniences many times arise by
beauty. 49. 12. Against the unchaste curiosity of women. 50. 51. Of the
reverence which wives owe to their Husbands. 52. Wrath and anger is a fruit of
drunkenness. 52. How much Princes offend, who are governed rather by passions
then by reason. 54. The dangerous effects of the wrath of Princes. 53.
Moderation is especially required in Princes. 54. 13. How great the profit is
of wise Counselors. 55. What manner of men the Counselors of Princes ought
to be. 56. 57. By what means the discretion and felicity of a Prince is
known. 57. 58.
SERMON. IIII.
Ver. 15. What order is to be observed in deliberating of great affairs. 64.
65. 66. None, be he never so high in calling, ought to be judge in his own
cause. 67. 68. Ver. 16. Of the virtues of a wise Counselor. 68. 69. 70. How we
ought to judge of other men's doings. 71. 72. 73 The uncertainty of humane
things. 74. 75. Of the use of good laws, and of rewards and punishments. 75.
76. 77. The obedience which wives owe to their husbands. 78. The laws of
Nature, and of Nations, is confirmed by the Law of God. 79. Ver. 21. Of the
number of Counselors. 79. 80. Ver. 22. All hastiness is dangerous in
public Counsels, and in Proclamations which cannot be revoked. 81. 82.
CHAP. II.
SERMON. V.
Ver. 1. Passions are assuaged in time, and the use of reason called back
again. 87. 88. Ver. 2. 3. In matters of great weight, the judgment of young
men is to be suspected. 90. 91. The misery of the flatterers in Court. 93 How
great the infelicitie is of Princes, who reign wickedly, and yet have servants
ready to obey and fulfill their wills. 94 Verse. 4. Flattery is the bane of
Princes. 95 The goodness of God in using the disorders of Princes to the
commodity and profit of his Church. 97 Ver. 5. 6. The estate of certain of
Gods Church in this world. 97 Ver. 7. How far forth beauty does help women
that fear God. 98 Ver. 7. 11. What care Parents ought to have of their
children. 99 We must have especial care of Orphans after the example of
Mardochaeus. 100
SERMON. VI.
Ver. 9. 15. The means of procuring love and favor. 107. 108 The fruit of
the fear of God. 108. 109 110 Verse. 10. Of wisdom and silence, 110 111 Ver.
12. Of pleasure lawful and unlawful. 116. 117. 118 Ver. 17. The special
providence of God. 120 Of the honor and greatness of the faithful. 121. 122.
SERMON. VII.
Ver. 18. Of what sort the bankets both of high and low ought to be. 128. 129
Ver. 20. Modesty does exceedingly become great men. 131. 132. etc. Ver. 21. Of
conspirators. 136. 137 The instabilitie of the state of Princes. 138, 139 22.
The wonderful deliverances of Princes. 140. 141 Of false accusers. 143 Ver.
23. How causes are to be ordered in judgment. Ibid. Public Histories and
their use. 144 We must alwais perform our duties. 144* 145
CHAP. III.
SER. VIII.
Ver. 1. The unadvisedness of Princes i^ choosing their servants. 149 Gods
patience in suffering the wicked. The church oftentimes beholds the
prosperity of her enemies. 15^ Ver. 2. The vanity of Courtiers. 15^ The
constancy of the faithful. 154. 155 Ver. 3. The inconstancy of Apostataes.
157 Ver. 4. Against privy accusors. 158 Ver. 5. 6. Of the rage and fury of
the proud. 159
SERMON. IX.
Ver. 7. Of Lots. 167 Against diuinations. 168. 169. etc. 8. The accusations of
the enemy of the Church. 174. 175 The hatred and conspiracy of the wicked
against the Church. 176. 177 9. Of the expenses of the wicked, to overthrow and
destroy the Church. 178. 179 10. The carelessness of Princes, and the effects
of false slanders. 18^. etc.
SERMON. X.
12. The falls of those who serve Princes. 194. 195 13. Cruel proclamatio^s
against the church. 196 197. etc. The furious zeal of persecutors. 199 14. The
dangers of the faithful, and Gods care over them. 200. etc. 15. The wicked
will of the ungodly. 206 Their pleasures and delights in the distresses of the
Church. 206. 207.
CHAP. IIII.
SERMON. XI.
1. What the godly ought to do when they hear the practices of the wicked.
213. 214 Of the outward signs of sorrow. 214. 215 Of repentance and the
circumstances thereof. 216. 217 4. In public calamities private men may not
give themselves to mirth. 222. 223 5. We must have a care of those that are
afflicted. 223. 224. etc. 6. 7. We may not blame that which is well done
whatsoever ensue of it. 227. The duty of all, and namely of those who are of
greatest, authority in helping the Church. 228. 229
SERMON XII.
Ver. 9. The fears of great Princes. 233 The misery of unequal marriages. 236
The greatness of Kings. 237. 13. The fearful are to be confirmed, but yet
without flattery, and to be stirred up to do their duty. 238. etc. 16. Of
holy assemblies, fasting and prayer. 244. 245. The duty of all in public
dangers. 246.
CHAP. V.
SER. XIII.
Ver. 1. Of the ornaments of apparel. 256. 2. The fruit of faith, and humbling
our selves before God. 258. 259 3. The immoderatenesse of Princes. 260 4. Of
the modesty and wisdom of the faithful. 263. 264 5. Whether the wicked are
to be honored, and how far we may gratify them. 265 266.
SERMON. XIIII.
Ver. 9. What joy is to be commended, what to be blamed. 273. 274 The
constancy of the faithful. 275. etc. What honor we may give or refuse to give
to the wicked. 278. 279 The restless estate of the ambitious. 280. 281 10. Of
bridling our passions. 282 The furious rage of the wicked. 283 11. Their vain
glory and foolish anger. 284 285 13. What our co^sultations ought to be. 286.
287 14. A pattern of wicked Counselors and of evil counsel. 288. 289 The
furious cruelty of the enemies of the Church. 289. 290. 291.
CHAP. VI.
SER. XV.
Ver. 1. Of the care that God carries of his. 296 The wonderful means of the
delivery of the Church. 296. 297 Of the waking and care of Princes. 299 The
use of Histories. 300. 301 2. Good deeds are never forgotten before God. 302 3.
Of their rewards. 304. 305 Of good Counselors. 305. 306 4. The consideration
of the admirable effects of Gods will, for the profit of his. 307. 308 6. The
foolish arrogancy of the wicked when they are near their fall. 308. 309 9.
The wonderful fury of Ambition. 310. 311 10. The hearts of Kings are in the
hands of God. 313 The misery and uncertain state of Courtiers. 314 11. Their
base and abject mind. 315 The admirable changes in the estates of the good and
of the badde. 316. 317
SERMON. XVI.
Ver. 12. The confusion of the enemies of the Church. 321. 322 The modesty of
the faithful. 323. 324 The effects of sorrow in the wicked. 326. 327 13. Their
shame, distress, and blindness in afflictions. 329. 330 What are the
counselles of the worldly wise. 331 Destruction of the enemies of the Church.
332 14. The miserable condition of those who are bidden to mirth, when they had
rather lament. 338. All things turn to the worst unto the wicked 338 339
CHAP. VII.
SER. XVII.
Ver. 3. How men ought to behave themselves in the government of the Common
wealth. 348. 349. 351. etc. 5. The grievous ouersights of unskillful Princes.
356. 357 6. We may openly name the wicked who are convict of their wickedness.
357. 358. Of the confusion of the wicked. 359. 360
SERMON XVIII.
Ver. 7. What dangers the evil counselors of Princes do incur. 364. 365 The
fear of the wicked. 366 Of the severity of the godly against the wicked. 368.
369 8. Why there are some things some times laid to the charge of the wicked,
whereof they are not guilty. 370. etc. Ver. 9. Their crafts and iniquity at
t^^ last are made manifest. 373. 374 The wrath of kings is the messenger of
death. 374. 375 Ver. 10. The wonderful judgment of God, upon the wicked, who
are the cause one of an others destruction. 377. 378 Of the order of justice.
380 The difference between the violent deaths which the wicked and the godly
suffer. 381 382.
CHAP. VIII.
SER. XIX.
Ver. 1. Of the nature of God. 386. 387 Of confiscations. 388 The vain hope of
the wicked. Of the felicity of Princes. 338. 389. etc. Whether it be lawful
for the faithful to exercise any public function among the Infidels. 392.
393. etc. Ver. 3. How Kings are to be spoken unto 398 Ver. 4. Of Edicts
reuocable and irreuocable. 399. etc. Ver. 5. How much clemency beseems
Princes, and what need they have of faith full Counselors. 404. 40^
SERMON. XX.
9. Of the distresses of the Church, and her deliverances. 408. 409. Wisdom is
given of God according to the necessity of things in hand. 409. 410. The
duty of Princes in making Proclamations. 411. 412. etc. 11. How great the
authority of Magistrates is. 414. 415. The admirable providence of God in
guiding of men's counsayles. 415. 416. etc. 12. Of repelling force. 418. 419.
13. Of private and public revenge. 419. 420. etc. 14. God wants not means
to comfort and lift up his. 427. 428.
SERMON. XXI.
15. The sudden changes of the state of the Church. 430. Of the use of things
indifferent. 434. The deliverance and glory of the faithful. 435. 16. Of the
joy of good men. 436. etc. 17. Of the favor of the wicked toward the godly.
442. 443. etc. How much calamities profit the Church. 446.
CHAP. IX.
SERMON. XXII.
1. The falsehood of those praedictions and foretellings, which are given out by
the Devil. 452. etc. Of the vengeance of God. 455. 456. etc. 2. Of the fear
of the wicked. 459. 3. The inconstant inclination of the minds of men. 460. 4.
The means whereby God is wont to defend those that worship him. 461. 5. Of
revenge, when it is lawful, and when not. 461. 462. How our enemies are to be
loved. 462. The judgments of God upon the enemies of the Church. 463. 464. The
destruction of the posterity of the wicked. 465 466.
SERMON. XXIII.
11. Of the author of victories and happy success. 471 472. 12. The chief
commendation of a good Prince. 475. 13. How far the punishment of Gods
enemies may proceed. 478. 479. 14. Of the alteration of the favor of Princes.
480. 481. 15. The boldness of a good conscience. 481. The efficacy of
natural justice and equity. 482. 483. 484. 16. Of the excellency of the
deliverances of the Church. 485. 486.
SERMON. XXIIII.
Verse. 17. What be the sacrifices of the Church. 491. 18. Of the quiet and
feasts of the Church. 493. 494. 495. Of thanksgiving. 496. 497. 19. Of
banquets and gifts. 498. 499. 20. Unto whom the care of religion and good
order appertains. 500. 501. The office of a good Magistrate. 505. 506. etc.
How we ought to obey good constitutions. 509. 510.
SERMON. XXV.
V. 25. What the remembrance ought to be of the Churches deliverance. 515. 516.
26. The convenient and fit names of feasts. 516. 517. 27. Of Traditions, humane
and divine. 518. 28. Against superstitious feasts. 519. 29. The true end of
feasts, and holidays. 520. The zeal of the faithful in their vocation. 521.
522. 31. Of the institution of holidays, and what power men have therein. 522.
523. Against the multitude of holidays. 524. Whether there be any holidays
expressly commanded by God in the Christian Church. 525. 526. etc. The
profanation of holidays. 532. 533. among Christians, and the remedies
thereof. 533. 534.
CHAP. X.
SERMON. XXVI.
1. Of tributes, and of the Jews being exempted from them. 537. 538. 2. The
difference between a wise and an unwise governor. 539. 540. 3. God lifts
up, and casts down whom ^t pleases him. 541. 542. The virtue fit for a
wise Governor. 542. 543. etc. The sum of the chief points of the whole
treatise. 549. 550. etc.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1599.


