A PILL TO PVRGE OVT POPERY: OR, A Catechism for Romish Catholics; Showing
that Popery is contrary to the grounds of the Catholic RELIGION, and that
therefore Papists cannot be good CATHOLICS.

LONDON, ^rinted for Benjamin Fisher: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paternoster Row at the Sign of the Talbot. 1623.

A PILL TO PVRGE OVT POPERY: OR, A Catechism for Romish Catholics; Showing
that Popery is contrary to the grounds of the Catholic Religion, and that
therefore Papists cannot be good CATHOLICS.
The Speakers. A weak Christian A Minister.


DIALOGVE I.
Christian. AMong the diversities of opinions that are in the world, how may I
know which is the truth whereto J must cleave, and who are the true Church, and
true Catholics?


Minister. 1. Ioh. 4.1.
Believe not every spirit (that is, every doctrine, which men bragging of the
Spirit do teach) but try them whether they be of God or no; 1. These. 5.21.
Examine all things, hold fast that which is good,


C. Whereby shall I try them?


M. By the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17.11.


C. I am unlearned, and the Scriptures are hard to be understood.


M. There are indeed many things in them, hard to be understood: 2. Pet. 3.16.
but such things as are necessary to be known of all to salvation, are
plainly set down, Prou. 8.9. The meaning of which place is this:

The Word of God, in points necessary to salvation, is easy unto all that
have a desire unto it. Turn to the places of Scripture, added to every answer
of the Catechism, and you shall find this to be most true.


C. Is there no other way and means, whereby to try and know the truth and the
true professors thereof?


M. Yes, it may be done even by the aforesaid grounds of Religion. Whatsoever
doctrine is agreeable thereunto, is true, and to be received: but whatsoever is
contrary to the same, is false, and to be rejected. As many as do sincerely and
soundly embrace, profess, and practice the same, they are the Catholic
Church, (that is, parts and members of the Catholic Church) and true
Catholics indeed. But such as teach, profess, and practice things contrary
thereunto, are not the true Church, nor true Catholics.


C. The Papists say that they only are the true Church, and true Catholics,
and that we are not.


M. So the Jews cried: Jeremy 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord: Ioh. 8.33, 41.
We are the seed of Abraham: the children of God.

But Christ told them they were the children of the devil, Joh. 8.44.


C. Are not the Papists then good Catholics?


M. No: but rather gross Heretics.


C. What is an Heretic?


M. One that does err in any fundamental point of Christian Religion, and
does obstinately teach, maintain, and defend the same.


C. Do the Papists err in the fundamental points of Religion?


M. They do teach and maintain many false opinion against the very grounds of
Religion; as by and by shall be showed in many particulars.


C. Are all Papists then Heretics?


M. No: for there are (no doubt) many of them that do err of simplicity and
ignorance, and which would be brought from their errors, if they had the
means, namely, the Scriptures in their own language, preaching, catechizing,
and the like. We do not therefore account them all Heretics, but only those
before mentioned.


C. How do you prove that they are not good Catholics?


M. I prove it thus: They are good Catholics, which are of sound faith, and
good life. ( Aug. lib. quaest. in Mat. Chap. 11.) but Papists are neither of
sound faith, nor good life: therefore they are no good Catholics.


C. How do you prove that they are not of sound faith?


M. Even by the Apostles Creed (which may serve in stead of a rule, whereunto
the faith of all men ought to agree) contrary whereunto they teach many things.


C. Show me wherein.


M. The Creed is a confession of faith, containing the sum of the Gospel,
and of such things as are necessary to be believed of all that will be saved.
They have devised many other new Articles of faith, besides, and contrary to
the Articles of the Apostles Creed: which they hold necessarily to be believed
of all that will be saved: As namely, Indulgences and a treasury of Saints
merits, the real presence, the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, and such like. In
the Council of Trent, the curse Anathema is pronounced upon all such as deny
these or any of them, Master Perkins first Vol. page 621. The Creed teaches
what every one in particular is to know and believe: and a true faith cannot
stand without certain knowledge. The Papists maintain an implitite, or an
ignorant faith; namely, that it is enough to believe as the Church believes:
though they know not what the Church is, nor what the Church believes. And
^hey commend this faith by the example of an old devout ^ther, a Colliar, who
being tempted of the Devil, and asked how he believed; answered, That he
believed as the Church believed: being asked again how the Church believed, he
answered, As I believe: whereupon, the Devil (as they say) was feign to depart.


C. It should seem it was but a simple Devil: for if he had been wise, he
would have asked him this question; What if the Church believe that thou art a
fool; what would the Colliar think you, have answered then?


M. I think he would have said nothing: for if he should have said, I believe
so too, the devil might then have begged him for a fool indeed. And yet such
fools are the simple and ignorant Papists, which content themselves with this
kind of faith: for thus one may reason with them; You are to believe as the
Church believes: but the Church believes that you are fools: therefore you
are to believe so too. This their implicit faith every one of himself may
have. The devils in some sense may be said to have a better faith then this:
for they know what is contained in the Scriptures, and believe it to be true,
Mat. 4.6. Jam. 2.19. This fond and ridiculous kind of faith, is a notable
means to muzzle people in blindness, superstition and perpetual ignorance.
Again, faith is a certain and true persuasion of the heart, whereby we are
persuaded, and in some measure assured of the forgiveness of our sins, and
eternal salvation. The Papists say, It is presumption to be assured of
salvation, and will have men to doubt thereof: the which is contrary to the
nature of true faith. They call the certainty of remission of sins, a
faithless persuasion: and the faith of devils, not of Apostles, Council. Trid.
Sess. 6. cap. 9.12, 13. Rhemists Annot. 1. Cor. 9. Sect. 9.


DIALOGVE 2.
C. Show me, I pray you, what things in particular they teach c^^rary to any
Article of the Creed.


M. I could show you many, but I fear that then I should be tedious to you: I
will therefore set down only the chiefest. In the second and third Article is
described and set forth unto us both the person and office of our Mediator,
namely, that he is both God and man, a Prophet, Priest, and King.

Concerning his person, although in words they confess him to be God and man,
yet in deed they deny it: for they ascribe to him a body invisible and
infinite: they teach that he is corporally present in infinite places at once,
which is proper only to God, and contrary to the nature of a true body. And so
in effect they do even deny his Manhood. The Son of God is called Jesus,
because he is a Savior, yea the only and perfect Savior which saves us
from our sins: that is, has delivered us not only from the blame, or
guiltiness, but fully also from the punishment due to our sins, Mat. 1.21.
Acts 4.12. Heb. 7.25.

The Papists teach, that there must also some satisfaction of our own come to
make up our perfect Redemption, Council Trid. Sess. 14.6.8. Can. 11.15. They
will not be saved only by JESUS CHRIST, but by the merits also of Saints, their
own merits, Popes pardons, etc. yea, they ascribe that to others, which is
proper to Christ alone, and so consequently make them their Saviors: As for
example.

They ascribe to St. Francis the same titles, properties, power, and the very
same office due to Jesus Christ, and in all respects they make him like to
Christ: whatsoever Christ did, that (as they say) did S. Francis. And what is
this in effect, but to make him their Savior? That they do ascribe the former
things to S. Francis, is to be seen, in a Book written on purpose, to show
the conformity between him and Christ, called [The Conformity of Francis] the
which has bin confirmed by the authority of the Church of Rome. Pope Gregory
the Ninth, enjoined the faithful to hold, and firmly to believe the things
taught in the said book concerning S. Francis, and that he should be punished
as an Heretic, that would think the contrary. Confor. F. 2. lib. 1. Fol. 3.


C. To whom else do they ascribe that which is proper to JESUS CHRIST?


M. To the Virgin Mary. They describe her nature by her name (Maria,)
consisting of five letters, and these (as they say) do import the five offices
to be exercised by her toward us. The first is Maternitatis, of Mother-hood:
signified by the letter M: for she (as they say) is the Mother of mercy,
through whom we obtain mercy. Her second office is Conseruationis, of
conseruing the treasure of God: signified by the letter A: which represents
Arcam thesauri, the chest of treasure: for in her (as they say) we shall find
an infinite treasure of the wisdom and grace of God. Her third office is,
Directionis and gubernationis, of direction and governing by example of her
life. This is imported by the letter R. and therefore she is named Regina, the
Queen. Her fourth office is, Iaculationis, and repulsionis inimicorum, of
flinging and repelling back of enemies: signified by the letter I: and
therefore they pray thus to her: Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis
suscipe. Protect thou us from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death.

Her last office is Aduocationis, of Aduocation, imported by the letter A. From
whence they pray thus: O our Advocate, turn thy merciful eyes unto us. And
what do they herein, but even place her in the room of Jesus, and make her
their Savior? These be the very words of Friar John Viguerius, (a Doctor, yea
and a public professor of Divinity among them) in his Institutions to his
Catholic Theology, Cap. 20. Sect. 9. Fol. 214. And herein he is like to such
as can make Bells to sound, even what pleases their fantastical brain, and
as best may feed their superstitious humors.

Further they say, That she is the original of our salvation, the recouerer of
grace and forgiveness, our hope, our salvation, resurrection, etc. yea that to
her it is given to bruise the Serpents head, that she has done it, and
procured that peace between God and man, which no man could procure, Viguerius
ibid. 214. 215. Confor. Fran. in conclus. Lib. 1. Is not this to make her a
Savior?


C. Surely yes: and J think it most horrible blasphemy.


M. Account you this blasphemy? what say you then to that which Carolus
Scribanius, a Jesuit, has written of her? As namely, First, that the milk of
Mary may come into comparison with the blood of Christ. Secondly, that the
Christian ma^s faith may lawfully take hold of both as well as one. Thirdly,
that the best compound for a sick soul, is to mix together her milk and
Christ's blood. Fourthly, that the sins and spiritual diseases of the soul,
are cured as well by her milk as by his blood. Fifthly, that her milk and the
merit and virtue of it, is more precious and excellent then Christ's blood.
These most horrible blasphemies, with many such like, are to be found in the
aforesaid Jesuits book: which M. C. has put into English, and sufficiently
answered, calling it, [The Jesuits Gospell] besides all these things, in a
book called the Ladies Psalter, they have put out the word Lord, and put in
the word Lady. As for example, Psalm 110.1.

The Lord said unto our Lady, Sit thou mother at my right hand, etc. The like
they do in the rest of the Psalms. And is not this good stuff, think you?


C. These books were written long agone, and it may be that they are now
rejected by the Papists.


M. The later of them was indeed written long agone, but is not rejected, but
stands uncontrolled, or rather defended by the Jesuits, and those of the
principal. The formeh was written but lately. And whereas both the Author and
his book (as M.C. says) deserved the fire and halter, it was so far from
being misliked in the Roman Sinagogue, or any way censured, that the book
has bin reprinted, and the Author and his book stand enrolled, approved, and
commended (in their great volumes set out for that purpose) for good and
Catholic. As they place St. Francis and the Virgin Mary in Christ's room, so
do they the Pope also: a^ribing that to him, which is proper unto Jesus
Christ, and ^ay not (without blasphemy) be ascribed to any creature. They say
that the Pope is the Sun: The Church the Moon. The Pope is the Bridegroom:
the Church the Bride. The Pope is the head: the Church the body. And what is
this, but to place the Pope in the room of Jesus Christ; and even to say that
the Pope is Christ? Confor. F. 2. li. 2. fol. 10. That they do thus place S.
Francis, the Virgin Mary, and the Pope in Christ's room, and so make them
Saviors, is more at large, and sufficiently proved (out of their own Writers)
in a little Treatise (set forth by M. Thomas Rogers in the year 1589.)
entitled, An historical Dialogue of Antichrist and Popery.


DIALOGVE 3.
Chapter Hitherto you have showed, how the Son of God is called Jesus, because he
is a Savior, and how the Papists do place others in his room: Now show me
also why he is called Christ, and what that title signifies.


M. Christ signifies, Anointed: which title sets forth his office: namely,
that he is our only true Prophet, Priest and King.


C. Do they teach any thing contrary hereunto?


M. They do even deny this Office of his, and so consequently, deny the fruits
of his coming in the flesh, 1. Job. 4.3


C. Show me wherein they deny his Office.


M. Christ is a Prophet to teach his Church, and to reveal the will of God
unto us, to whom all are to hearken, Mat. 17.5. Ioh. 10.27. Act. 3.22, 23. And
this he has perfectly done in the Scriptures.

They prefer their own blind traditions before the Scriptures: they lay
aside the Scriptures, accounting and calling them dumb Judges, A nose of Wax,
The black Gospel, Inken divinity, etc. Piggius Contr. 3. de Eccl. Hierarch.
lib. 3. cap. 3. A certain popish Doctor reasoning with M. Tindal, was not
ashamed to say, that we were better to be without Gods Law then the Popes. They
likewise set up Images to be Laymens books, and so in all this they deny by
consequence his Prophetical office. Christ is also a Priest, and that for
ever, after the order of Melchsedech, Heb. 7.24* And in this his office he has
none to succeed him. The^ acknowledge not this, but maintain still an outward
an^ corporal Priesthood, to offer up an outward sacrifice, eue^ Christ
himself, Rhem. on Heb. chap. 7.7. Sect. 7.8.


C. If this were true, why then, the Priest were become a Mediator between God
and Christ: the which is most absurd, to think that any creature should be
such a one.


M. It is indeed most absurd: and yet in the very Canon of the Mass they
intimate thus much, when they request God to accept their gifts and offerings
(namely, Christ himself offered) as he did the sacrifices of Abel and Noah.
And which is more absurd than this, (yea blasphemy for any to affirm) they (by
their former doctrine) do make the Priest to be more worthy, in some respect,
then Christ: for the person that does offer a sacrifice, is of more worth and
honor then the thing which he offers; but the Priest (as they say) offers
up Christ to God his Father: therefore the Priest that offers him, is of more
worth and honor then Christ, whom he offers.

As Christ is a Priest, so he alone, (and that but once for all) offered
himself: and by his one offering once offered, has made a full and perfect
satisfaction for all our sins, so that now there remains no more offering
for sins, Heb. 9.12, 14, 26, 10, 14, 18. They teach that in the Mass, there
is daily a sacrifice offered for the sins both of the quick and the dead: and
so they make Christ's sacrifice not to be the perfect and only sacrifice of
the New Testament, but set up another in stead thereof.


C. They say that their sacrifice is not a new sacrifice, or another from
Christ's, but that it is the same.


M. The Author to the Hebrews teaches, that Christ's sacrifice neither may,
nor ought to be reiterated and repeated: for as it is but one, so it was but
once offered. And this word (Once) he uses five several times, Heb. 7.27, 9,
12, 26, 28, 30.


C. They say that Christ indeed was offered but once after a bloody manner: but
he is often offered after an unbloody manner.


M. This distinction of theirs has no warrant out of Gods Word: nay rather it
is directly against the Word: for, Heb. 9.^2. it is said, Almost all things are
by the Law purged with blood: and without shedding of blood is no remission.
From whence we may thus reason, Without shedding of blood is no remission: but
in the Mass is no shedding of blood: therefore no remission. And therefore it
is no sacrifice for sin.


C. Though this their distinction be not to be found in the Scriptures, yet
it is in the writings of the Fathers.


M. The Fathers indeed make mention of unbloody Sacrifices: but they hereby
understand not outward and bodily Sacrifices for sin, but the Spiritual
Sacrifices of Christians; and they so call them, in comparing them with the
bloody sacrifices of the Law, and with Christ's bloody sacrifice.


C. The Papists do not say that the sacrifice of the Mass is an expiatorie,
but an applicatorie sacrifice: that is, it serves not properly to make any
satisfaction to God, but rather to apply unto us the satisfaction of Christ
already made.


M. Their doctrine is, that it is a sacrifice propitiatory: that is, available
to obtain ( ex opere operato, by the very work wrought) remission and pardon
of all their sins: yea, that it is auailable to obtain all other benefits;
as peace, health, and such like, Council. Trid. Sess. 22. Can. 3. Bellar. lib.
1. de Miss. cap. 25. lib. 2. cap. 3. But let it be (as you say) that they
account it but an applicatory sacrifice, yet this makes nothing for them. The
Sacrifices of the Law did serve to apply the virtue of Christ's Cross: and yet
the Apostle excludes them by this reason; that where there is remission of
sins, there is no more Sacrifice, Heb. 10.18. Wherefore if the Apostles
reason be good, it concludes also against their Sacrifice applicatory. Again,
the Apostle teaches, that therefore the Sacrifices of the Law are abolished by
the death of Christ; because they were but shadows of good things to come, and
could not make the offerers perfect, etc. Heb. 10.1, 2, 3. And therefore, this
kind of applying sacrifice (which they feign themselves) has ceased. We need
not now a Sacrifice for the application of Christ's death: for Christ to that
end has appointed the preaching of the Word, and has instituted Sacraments,
whereby his death, with all the benefits thereof, are most fruitfully applied
unto us, Gal. 3.1. 1. Cor. 11.26. Again, this their applying sacrifice, is
against the nature of a Sacrament, in which God gives Christ unto us: whereas
in a sacrifice God receives from man, and man gives something to God.


C. The ancient Fathers used to call the Supper of the Lord, a Sacrifice: it
should seem therefore, that there is some sacrifice offered therein to God.


M. It is true that they called it so: not that Christ is therein offered a
Sacrifice to God, but in other respects. First, because that therein there was
an offering and giving of alms, bread, wine, etc. which are a Spiritual
Sacrifice. Secondly, they called the Sacrament, a Sacrifice, not properly, but
figuratively: because there was therein a representation of that Sacrifice
which was offered upon the Cross, and because it is a commemoration of Christ's
body, which he offered for us, and of his blood which he shed for us. Thirdly,
It is called a sacrifice, because it is an application of the Sacrifice offered
upon the Cross, unto our selves. Fourthly, It is so called, because of the
sacrifice of prayers and thanksgiuings: and because in the Lords Supper we
offered our selves unto God to be consecrated unto him, and serve him in body
and soul.


C. What is then your opinion of the Popish Mass?


M. It is an abbridgement of all superstition and idolatry: there is in it
adoration directed to bread: there is (as they say) the body of Christ offered
really in a sacrifice of propitiation: which was never offered but once with
shedding of blood. There is adoration of stocks and stones, invocation of dead
men, saying of Masses to the honor of Saints and Angels, worshipping of dead
men's bones, and such like abominations.


C. If the Mass be such an idol, and so contrary to Christ's sacrifice,
whence had it then its first beginning?


M. The Mass had this original: First, the Lords Supper was celebrated in
most simple and plain manner. Secondly, it ^egan to admit some increase of
ceremonies, especially the offerings for the dead, which was but a thanksgiving
for them, until more then two hundred years after Christ. Thirdly, prayers
for the dead, got entrance into the Lords Supper about the year four hundred:
and then came in Purgatory, and the redemption of souls from thence by Masses,
M. Perkins 2. Vol. 554. 1. D. Again, you are to know that the Mass is like a
beggars cloak, patcht up with many pieces, whereof some were put in at one
time, some at another. One Pope puts in one patch, another Pope puts in
another: and it was not fully patcht up, as now it is, till twelve hundred
years after Christ, Acts and Monuments, page 1274. etc. And in the Canon of
the Mass, there are to be found a full half hundred of errors and
blasphemies, Synopsis Papismi, the 13. general controversy, quest. 8.


C. But how can the Mass be so late and now, seeing that the Fathers in their
writings make mention of it?


M. The word (Missa) (which is now called the Mass) in the Fathers, signifies
a public meeting to the communion, and to prayers, or the solemn dismission
of that meeting, or even the form of their religious worship. And the Phrase
Missam facere, (used in some of the Fathers) does not signify to say the
Popish Mass, but to dismiss some out of the assembly. After the Sermon the
Catechumenists, (that is, such as learned the Catechism, and were not yet
admitted to the Lords Supper) are dismissed. And hereupon the Communion was
called Missa figuratively, because when it began, there was a dismission of
some, Perkins 2. Vol. 552. 2. D. 553. Synopsis Papismi. the 13. general
Controversy, Quest 2.


C. I am satisfied touching the Sacrifice of the Mass, by which (as I do now
plainly perceive) they do even deny the Priesthood, and the only sacrifice
of Christ: I pray you now to show me wherein else they deny his Priesthood?


M. Christ's Priesthood consists of two parts, Satisfaction, and Intercession.
As by his own Sacrifice once offered, he has made a perfect satisfaction for
our sins: so he now continually makes intercession to God for us, Romans 8.34*
Heb. 7.25. The Papists teach, that the Saints in Heaven do^ make intercession
to God for particular men, according to their several wants: and that having
received particular men's prayers, they present them unto God. And so herein
they do also deny the Office of Christ's Priest hood, Rhem. on Luke 16. Sect.
4. on 2. Cor. 1. Sect. 3. on 2. Pet. 1. Sect. 3. and in many other places.


C. They say that Christ indeed is the only Mediator of Redemptions but the
Saints are also Mediators of Intercession.


M. This is but an idle distinction: for Christ only is the Mediator as well
of the one as the other. For in a true and sufficient Mediator, there must be
these properties: first of all, the Word of God must reveal and propound him
unto the Church. Secondly, he must be perfectly just, and such a one as in whom
was no sin ever found. Thirdly, he must be a Propitiator, that is, bring
some thing to God, that may appease and satisfy his wrath and justice for our
sins. Now, these three properties are not to be found in any creature, but in
Christ alone: and therefore he is the only Mediator of Intercession, as well
as of Redemption, Perkins 1. Volume. 603. 604.


C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the Kingly office of Christ?


M. Yes, they teach that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and head of the Church;
that he can make Laws to bind the Conscience; that he can make new Articles,
and abolish the old; that he can dispense with all the precepts both of the old
and new Testament: And so herein (and in many other such like things) they deny
the Kingly Office of Christ.


C. It seems then to me (by this which you have said) that though in words
they confess Christ, yet in deed and in truth they deny him.


M. They do so indeed: for whosoever denies the office of Christ, (for the
performance whereof he came in the flesh) denies in effect, Christ to be come
in the flesh: but the Papists deny his office, therefore they deny him to be
come in ^he flesh: and so they are no good Catholics, but rather Here^ikes.


C. What should move the Church of Rome in words to acknowledge CHRIST, and
yet to deny his office?


M. It makes much for her profit, and by this means they do the more easily
deceive people. That their profit and advantage is the only end they aim at,
appears by a most blasphemous speech of a Pope of Rome, ( Leo the 10) who
being somewhat moved against one of his Cardinals, for alleging a place
against him out of the Gospel concerning Christ, answered him thus, Quantum
nobis profuit ista fabula de Christo? O what advantage has this fable of
Christ brought us? Sleydan de statu Relig. etc. Reip. lib. 1. They are herein
much like to a Fowler, who spreading his net to catch Larkes, has tied to his
net an artificial Lark, a Lark in show, but not indeed. This he causes to
move and stir, the which the Larkes perceiving, and thinking it to be a Lark
indeed, they fall down by him, and so are caught in the net. So they have a
Christ in their mouths, to draw people to them, but it is a counterfeit
Chirst. Or if it be the true Christ, yet they do it but as the Larke-catcher
does, who many times has in his net a true and living Lark indeed, but it is
to deceive the Larkes, and the more easily to catch them in his net. So they
profess Christ, have his Word and Sacraments among them, but it is only to
deceive simple people, and to make a prey of them.


DIALOGVE 4.
C. Do they teach any other thing, contrary to any other article of the
Creed?


M. Yes, diverse things. In the Article we profess to believe, that Christ was
conceived by the Holy Ghost: and so he, and he only, was conceived without
original sinne^ They teach, that the Virgin Mary was also conceived without
origin all sin: and that by this means it came to pass that Christ was free
from all spot, Council. Trid. Sess. 5. Cap. 1. ^peccato originali. And so herein
they do altogether ouerthro^ this Article of Christ's conception by the Holy
Ghost, (...) whose only power the Scripture does impute Christ's holiness, and
not the Virgin Marie, which was no less then all others conceived and borne in
sin, and did need Christ to be her Mediator as well as the rest of mankind.
There was a long time a foul stir in the Church of Rome, between the
Dominicans and the Franciscans about this point, Acts and Monuments, pa. 732.
It was the common opinion of Fathers and Writers until Lumbards time, (which
was about the year 1150.) that she was conceived in Original sin, Perkins 2.
Vol. 596. In the fourth Article we profess, that Christ suffered, etc. by
which he has made a full and perfect satisfaction for the sins of his elect,
and for the whole punishment thereof, both eternal and temporal.

The Papists teach, that Christ has satisfied for sins going before
Baptism; but concerning sins following Baptism, the fault is remitted by
the Passion of Christ, and the punishment (which of infinite is made finite) is
to be satisfied for, by men themselves, either here or in Purgatory: that is,
men themselves must satisfy the justice of God, for the temporal punishment
of their offenses, either on earth or in Purgatory.

There is (say they) a certain infernal place in the earth, called Purgatory,
in the which as in a prisonhouse, the souls which were not fully purged in
this life, are there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be received
into heaven: Bell. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 1. and cap. 3. lib. 2. cap. 6. Rhem.
on 1. Cor. 3. Sect. 4.

They say also, that it is an Article of faith, to believe that there is a
Purgatory; and that he which believes it not, is ^^re to go to hell, Bellar.
ibid. l. 1. c. 15. But this is so far from ^eing an Article of faith, as that
it is a mere fable, and con^rarie to an Article of faith. The blood of Christ
is the Pur^atory of our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.7. Afflictions are called the fie^
trial, 1. Pet. 1.7.4.12. whereby we are cleansed from our ^orruption, as gold
is from the dross by fire. No other Purga^^rie is to be found in Scriptures.
The Scriptures mention but two sorts of men, believers, and unbelievers; and
but two places after this for them, heaven for the one, and hell for the other,
Luke 16.25, 26. John 3.36. Revelation 20.14, 15.21.7, 8. They that dye in the
Lord, rest from their labors: which cannot be true, if any of them go to
Purgatory. Their works follow them, that is, the reward of their works,
Revel. 14.13. If any man should have gone to Purgatory, then the thief upon
the Cross had gone thither: who repenting at his end, wanted time to make
satisfaction for the temporal punishment of his sins: but Christ said to
him, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. The doctrine of Purgatory came
into the Church, out of the Heathen writers, for the Philosophers and Poets
were the first that ever wrote of it: and Popish Purgatory was unknown to the
Fathers many hundred years after Christ, Perkins. 2. Vol. 568.569.


C. If Purgatory be but a fable, contrary to an Article of faith, then what is
the cause that the Church of Rome so stifty maintains it?


M. There is great cause why they should so do, for it keeps in the fire in
the Popes Kitchen: for, if the fire of Purgatory were not great, the fire in
the Popes Kitchen would be but small; for, by this means they have store of
money for Pardons, Masses, Diriges, and other such like trumperies.


DIALOGVE 5.
C. Do they teach any thing else contrary to the Creed?


M. Yes: The sixth Article says, that Christ ascended into Heaven, etc. and
the Scriptures say, that the Heavens must contain him, etc. Acts. 1.11.3.21.
They teach contrary hereunto, namely, that Christ is corporally present in the
Sacrament, and that in many places at once: The which (...) contrary to the
nature of a true body, and contrary to the nature of the Sacrament, which is a
remembrance (...) Christ. Virgilius against Eutyches. lib. 4. says thus: When
(...) (that is the flesh of Christ) was on earth, it was not in he^uen: and
because it is now in Heaven, it is not on eart^ This is the Catholic faith and
confession. It is an Arti^ of faith to believe the Catholic Church: and faith
is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Therefore the Catholic Church
is always unto the world invisible, and not to be espied but by the eyes of
faith: because things seen are not believed. The Papists teach that the
Catholic Church is, and has bin always visible. Rhem. on Mat. 5. Sect. 3.
The Church is said to be Catholic, that is, universal, because it is not tied
to any one special place, but is spread abroad over the face of the earth. They
tie it to Rome alone, which can be but a particular Church, and not universal,
In the Church there is a Communion of Saints: and these are they that are
sanctified by the blood and Spirit of Christ, having the perfect holiness of
Christ put upon them, by imputation of faith, and the quality of imperfect
holiness powered into their heart by the Spirit of sanctification, And such are
the Faithful here on earth, 1. Cor. 1.2. Psalm. 16.2.

The Papists acknowledge none to be Saints, but such as are in heaven, They
teach that the Pope can canonize Saints: whereas to make one a Saint, is only
the work of God, 1. Cor. 11. The Pope has canonized many, that indeed were
never true Saints of God, but wicked men, and rank Traitors to their Princes,
as Becket, with many others.

This canonizing of Saints was never heard of with the Fathers, until the
year 880. and then Adrian took up this authority. And Alexander the Third,
after him, confirmed it in his decrees.

In the Creed we profess, to believe the forgiveness of sins, that is, I
believe that God, for Christ his sake, does freely forgive the sins of his
Elect, and my sins also. And herein consists our justification, namely, in
the free forgiveness of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness
to us. The Papists teach many things contrary to this Article. First, that men
are to make satisfaction for their sins. Now, satisfaction for sins, and
forgiveness of sins, are contraries. If we satisfy in our own person, we are
not justified freely: if we be justified freely (as most certainly we are,
Romans 3.23.) then we make no satisfaction at all. If a man can satisfy and pay
a debt, then he needs no forgiveness: but if the debt be forgiven him, then
it is plain, that there is no satisfaction made. The satisfaction for our
sins was made by Christ, and not by us.


C. Did not the ancient Fathers teach men to make satisfaction for their
sins?


M. The satisfaction which they maintained, was an ecclesiastical and public
mulct, or penalty imposed upon notorious offenders, thereby to testify their
repentance, and to satisfy the Church whom they had offended, Perkins. 1. V.
577, etc 2 vol. 165. 2 D. 166.

The efficient caus^ of our justification, is God alone. It is God only that
forgiueth our sins. Esa. 43.25. Mar. 2.7. To. 8.33. They teach that the Pope
can forgive sins, and we know that he gives pardons, not only for the time
past, but also for the time to come: yea they teach that priests have right to
remit sins, and they allege these places to prove it: Math. 16.19. Ioh.
20.23. Now we are to note this, that as none can forgive a debt, but the party
to whom the debt is due: so none can forgive sins, but God only, against
whom the sin is committed, Ps. 51.4. The power of binding and loosing
committed to the Apostles and Ministers of the Word, is, by declaring the will
and pleasure of GOD out of his Word, both to pronounce forgiveness of sins to
all that are truly penitent: and the retayning of them to the impenitent. The
Pope and his Clergy are never able to prove themselves to be the true
Ministers of Christ: and they cannot so much as challenge this latter
authority and power to themselves, much less the former which is proper to
God only. The motive or impulsive cause, which moved God to justify us, was
not any thing in us, but only the grace of God, that is the free good will and
pleasure of God, Romans 3.24. Ephesians. 2.8 Tit. 3.5, 7. They teach that we are not
justified by grace only, but by works also, that is, by the merit of our
works. And to this end they have (of late years) devised a first and second
Justification. The first is, when a sinner (of an evil man) is made a good
man: and this (they say) comes only of Gods mercy by the merit of Christ.
The second is, when one (of a good or just man) is made better and more just:
and this proceeds from works.

But we are to know, that there are not two kinds of justification, a first and
second; but one and the same justification, considered in different respects.
In respect of Gods actual acceptance of a man's person, justification is
absolute: but in respect of the actual application, and manifestation of Gods
acceptance unto a man's conscience, justification is by parts and degrees. (M.
Scudder on the Lords Prayer, page 303. to 309.

And further we are to note, that the Papists second justification, is no other
then sanctification, which is an effect and fruit of justification: the which
is imperfect, and not able to justify us before God The material cause of our
justification, is the active and passive righteousness and obedience of Jesus
Christ, his inherent holiness, his fulfilling of the Law, his death,
sacrifice, and full satisfaction.

The formal cause, or the form of justification, is the righteousness of
Christ, imputed of God unto us, Romans 5.19. Romans 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1. Cor. 1.30. 2.
Cor. 5.19, 21. Phil. 3.9. The Papists deride this doctrine, that Men are
justified by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ: which
righteousness is not in us, but in Christ. The Rhemists call it a new
no-iustice, a fantastical apprehension of that which is not. Rhem. on To. 3.
Sect 7. They hold them accursed that so affirm and teach: And they teach, that
the only formal cause of our iustifica^ion, is the justice of God, whereby
we are not reputed and ^ccounted just, but are made just indeed: and this
justice is that which every man has within himself, and is inherent ^n him,
Council. Trid. Sess. 6. can. 10, 11. Rhem. on Phil. cha. 3. Sect. 3. ^he
isntrumental cause of justification, on our part, is a true and lively faith,
whereby we receive and apply unto our selves the mercy of God, Christ Jesus
and all his benefits, resting upon him alone for salvation.

They teach, that faith does not justify, as an instrument in apprehending the
righteousness of Christ, but as a proper and true cause, it actually
justifies by the dignity, worthiness and meritorious work thereof, Bellar.
l. 1. de iustificat. cap. 17. They teach also, that faith is not the only
cause of our justification, but that there are other also, as hope, charity,
almsdeeds and other virtues: yea, they say, that works are more principal
then faith, in the matter of justification: and pronounce him accursed that
shall say, a man is justified only by faith. Rhem. on Romans 8. Sect. 6. and on
I^m. 2. Sect. 7. Bellar. l. 1 de iustif. c. 13. Council. Trid. Sess. 6 Can. 9.
These and other such like things they teach, contrary to the doctrine of
justification, which is a maine ground of Religion. And if there were no more
points of difference between us, these were sufficient to keep us from
uniting of our Religions: for hereby the Church of Rome does raze the very
foundation.


C. You said before, that we are justified freely: I would know how this can
be, if we be justified by the righteousness, and for the merit of Christ.


M. Because the Decree of God the Father for our Redemption is free, and we pay
nothing again to God of our own. And therefore by the word (freely) our
merits are excluded, but not Christ's. By which it appears, that in respect of
our selves, we are justified freely of Gods mere mercy and grace, without any
respect of our own righteousne^ or worthiness, but yet through Christ, and
for his righteou^nesse and obedience imputed to us: both which are signifie^ by
the Apostle, Romans 3.23, 24.


C. Show me (I pray you what is meant by (Merit) what the dect^^ of the Papists
is concerning merit, and whether that our works be m^^^orious or no.


M. By (Merit) we understand any thing, or any worke^ whereby Gods favor and
life everlasting is procured; (...) that for the dignity and excellency of the
work or thi^ done. Now the true merit whereby we look to attain the favor
of God, and life everlasting, is to be found in the person of Christ alone, in
whom God is well pleased. The Papists make two kinds of merit: the merit of
the person, and the merit of the work. The merit of the person is (as they
say) a dignity in the person, whereby it is worthy of life everlasting. The
merit of the work, is a dignity or excellency in the work, whereby it is
made fit, and enabled to deserve life everlasting for the doer of the work.
See Rhem. on Romans 8. Sect. 5. We now do renounce our own personal merits,
and all merit of our own works, and rely only upon the merits of Christ, and
we hold that no works of ours can merit. That no man by any works of his can
merit, may be proved by the properties and conditions that must be in a work
meritorious, and they are five.

First, the work must be absolutely perfect: but all our works are imperfect,
as well in parts, as in degrees of accomplishment. In parts, because we omit
many things which the Law prescribes, and do many evil things which the Law
prohibiteth. In degrees, because the works of the Saints are unclean, Esaias
64.6. Phil. 3.8.

Secondly, a man must do the work of himself, and by himself: for if it be
done by the help of another, the merit does not properly belong to the dooer.
But the good works which we do, are not ours, but are wrought by God in us.

Thirdly, a man must do the work, of his own free will and pleasure, not of
due debt: for when we do that which we are bound to do, we do no more but
our duty. But whatsoever we do, we do it as poor debtors; nay, we are worse
then poor debtors; we are miserable bankerupts, we have nothing; we have
less then nothing to pay, Luke 17.10.

Fourthly, the work must be done to the benefit and profit of him from whom we
look to be repayed. But no man by any work of his can bring any profit unto
God, Job 22.2.35.7. Psalm. 16.2.50.12. We may benefit men, but we cannot benefit
our Maker, from whom we have received life and limb, soul and body, and all
that we have: we can give him nothing, and therefore can deserve nothing from
him, Romans 11.35, 36.

Lastly, the work and the reward must be in proportion equal: for if the
reward be more then the work, it is not then a reward of desert, but a gift of
good will. But there is no proportion between our works, which are altogether
imperfect, and the excellency of those great blessings, and benefits which the
Father gives us freely in his Son, Romans 8.18. And therefore in this and the
former respects, there can be no merit in any mere man: wherefore it is no
less absurd to say, that we merit salvation at Gods hands by good works, then
if one should say, Thou have given me an hundred pounds, therefore thou
ought to give me a thousand.


C. Was not this doctrine of merit taught in the times of ancient Fathers?


M. Merit being taken in his proper sense, for due and just desert, was never
allowed of the sound Professors for a thousand years after Christ, Perkins 1.
Vol. 574, 575. second Vol. 535, 536. Such therefore as will be justified and
saved by their own works, and challenge eternal life by their merits, do
show themselves to be most proud and unthankful persons, and deserve most
justly to be condemned eternally.


C. The Papists at their end, do renounce their own merits, and profess that
they look to be saved only by the merits of Christ.


M. If there were nothing else but this, it were enough to prove their doctrine
of merit, to be a false doctrine: for if it were a truth, then a man is not
only in his life time to profess it, and maintain it, but also in his death;
yea rather to dye for it, then to deny it. But seeing they in their life
profess it and maintain it, but at their death renounce it; it is a manifest
argument, that even they themselves do know, that it is not a true, but a
fal^e doctrine.


C. If they know that it is not a truth, what makes them then in their
lifetime so stiffely to maintain it?


M. It serves greatly to maintain and uphold the Popes kingdom: for they
teach, that the ouer-plus of Christ's merits, and of the merits of Saints and
Martyrs, is the treasure of the Church, which being gathered together, and put
into a store-chest, is in the Popes custody, and he alone has the plenary
opening and shutting of this Chest, and the ordering and disposing of these
merits: by virtue whereof, he gives out Indulgences and Pardons when and to
whom he will: So that such as have not merits enough of their own, may have them
from thence. And so hereby he maintains and vpholds his kingdom: for hereby
comes in infinite wealth and revenues, Perkins 3. vol. 1. part. page 165 2. D.
2. vol. 590. 2. a. In these and many other particular points, the Papists teach
contrary to the Articles of the Creed, and therefore are no true Catholics,
neither do they belong to the Catholic Church, as is thus proved: Whosoever
have not the Catholic faith, do not belong to the Catholic Church: but the
Papists have not the Catholic faith; therefore they do not belong to the
Catholic Church. That they have not the Catholic faith, is plain by that
aforegoing.


DIALOGVE 6.
C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the doctrine of the Sacraments?


M. Yes, many things. Christ ordained but only two Sacraments. The Church of
Rome has added to them five more; namely, Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony,
Orders, and ext^eme Unction.


C. Are not these Sacraments indeed?


M. No surely: for there are four things necessarily required to make a
Sacrament. First, the authority of Christ commanding it. Secondly, the element
or outward sign, as the matter of it. Thirdly, the word of institution, as the
form. Fourthly, the end and use, to be a seal of our faith, for remission of
sins. These four things are not to be found in their five latter Sacraments,
and therefore they are no Sacraments indeed. Master Attersoll on the
Sacraments, page 119. to 150. Synopsis Papis. Controu. 14, 15, 16.


C. May not the Church then institute and ordain Sacraments?


M. None may ordain a Sacrament, but only the Lord. As none may put a sign
and seal to a man's last Will and Testament, but only the maker of the
Testament: so none may ordain Sacraments (which are signs and seals of the
new Testament and covenant of grace) but only the Lord which made the
covenant. And therefore the Church of Rome, in doing the contrary, proves her
self not to be the true Church of Christ, but rather the Church of
Antichrist. They do also in many other things teach contrary to the doctrine
of the Sacraments. As;

First, that the Sacraments do give grace, and namely, remission of sins, ex
opere operato, by the work wrought, Rhem. Acts 22. Sect. 1.

Secondly, that not only faith does justify, but the Sacraments also, Rhem.
Romans 6. Sect. 5. Whereas Sacraments are signs and seals of justification,
Romans 4.11.

Thirdly, that Infants dying without Baptism, cannot be saved, Rhem. Ioh. 3.
Sect. 2. They have also added many idle ceremonies to Baptism, as Cream,
Tapers, Salt, etc. with an opinion of salvation and worship annexed unto them:
yea in times past they baptized Bells, but now they begin to be ashamed of it,
and say that they were but only hallowed and consecrated to holy uses, Bellar.
l. 4. de Pont. Romans c. 12. Synopsis Papismi, Controu 12. Quest. 5. Concerning
the Lords Supper, they have likewise most grossly abused it in many things.

First, they take away the Cup from the Laity: whereas the Church of Rome for
above a thousand years after Christ, used both signs in the Communion. The
Communion under one kind, was decreed, defined, and determined as a public Law
in the Council of Constance, about the year 1114. Perk. 2. Vol. 554.2. b.

Secondly, they reserve the Bread in boxes, pixes and other vessels of the
Church, for days, weeks, and months. They show it to the people, the Priest
lifting it over his head, an^ going with it in procession. All this is contrary
to the Sacrament: for it is no Sacrament, unless there be a giving, receiving,
eating, and drinking, M. Attersoll on the Sacraments, 386, 387.

The reservation of the Sacrament was not allowed of, but rather found fault
withal by the Fathers, Perk. 2. vol. 557.

Thirdly, they adore, fall down and honor the Sacrament with divine worship,
calling it their Lord and God. A thing never heard of among the heathen
Idolaters, namely, to worship a piece of bread, or rather, a thin Wafer.

The adoration in the Sacrament belongs unto Christ sitting in heaven: and is
an inward worship of the heart, or lifting up of the mind, being stirred up
with the outward signs. Pope Honorius the third (in the year 1220.) was the
first that ever instituted the adoration of the Sacrament. And after him Urban
the fourth ordained a feast in honor of the body of Christ. Perk. 2. Vol. 564.
Attersoll on the Sacraments, 388, 389.

Fourthly, they turn the Sacrament into a sacrifice for the quick and the
dead, abolishing the fruit and remembrance of the death of Christ, disannulling
his Priesthood, giving him to his Father, whereas the Father has given him to
us, etc. ibid. page 390.

Fifthly, they maintain Transubstantiation. These are their very words: If any
man shall say, that there remains the substance of Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, after the words of consecration, or shall deny that the whole
substance of Bread and Wine is changed and converted into the body and blood
of Christ (the forms and shows only of Bread and Wine remaining: which
singular and miraculous conversion the Church calls Transubstantiation:) let
him be accursed. Con. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 2. This their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is a very fable to mock fools withal, and it ouerturneth
both the nature and use of the Sacrament, Attersoll on the Sacraments, page 45.
46. and page 365. to 369. If there were a miraculous conversion (as they say
there is) of the Bread and Wine, it would appear to the outward senses. For all
true miracles are wrought openly, clearly, and evidently to men's senses, Ioh.
6.26. But the Bread and Wine, by the judgment of all the senses, remains and
appears to be the same in substance which it was before, of the same quality,
quantity, color, taste, handling, smelling, virtue and nourishment: there is
not any one sense, or all the senses together, that can judge otherwise of it,
then it did before. If a man should be called in, when the Bread and Wine is
set on the Table, and bidden to consider well what he there sees, smells and
tastes, and then is willed to go forth, and to come in again, after the
Consecration is ended by the Priest, and to do the like: and then is asked what
he thinks of it: he, no doubt, will answer (unless fear of persecution
make him to conceal the truth) I see, feel, smell, and taste the same
wafer-cake, and wine that I did before: I can perceive no natural and
substantial change therein. And therefore it follows, that there is no
miracle wrought, and consequently, no transubstantiation at all. The difference
that is, is in the end and use only. Before consecration, it was common bread
and wine, ordained for the nourishing of our bodies. After consecration, it
becomes holy Bread and Wine, sanctified by the Lord, not so much to feed the
body, as the soul.


C. Did not the ancient Fathers hold this doctrine of Transubstantiation?


M. They knew nothing hereof, for at least 800. years after Christ. Afterward
begun the disputations of Transubstantiation, but not approved as an Article of
faith. The Church for a whole thousand years taught no other then spiritual
receiving of Christ. In the year 1215. Transubstantiation was decreed and
determined in the Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the Third, and made
a maine matter of faith, Perk. 2. vol. 558, 559.


C. What say you then of their Transubstantiated, or consecrated host (as it is
called) or the bread in the box carried in processi^n and worshipped?


M. Surely it is nothing else, but a wheaten, or breaden god, or rather an
Idol, nothing inferior to Aarons Calfe, or Ierohoams Calves, or the Nehustan,
and piece of brass that Ezechias brake in pieces: nay, as vile and detestable
as an Idol among the Heathen. And for a conclusion of their doctrine of
Transubstantiation, I will here set down a witty conceit which one showed me
not long since: I have kept the matter, but changed the meeter, to make it
sound somewhat the sweeter.

The Priests do make Christ's body and blood,
Hereof none must once doubt:
They eat, they drink, they box him up,
They bear him all about.

DIALOGVE 7.
C. I am satisfied touching the first point, namely, that the Papists are not
of sound faith: but how do you prove that they are not of good life, seeing
they do so many good works?


M. I prove it thus: Where the Doctrine is corrupt, the life cannot be good:
but their doctrine (as you have heard) is most corrupt, therefore their life
cannot be good. A true faith is the ground of a good life, and without which
it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. yea, whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin, Romans 14.23. A true faith they have not, and therefore their works
cannot be good, and such as may please God. That they have not a true and sound
faith, has bin showed in many particulars, and it further appears also in
this, that they do even wilfully reject the means whereby it is wrought,
namely, the preaching, hearing and reading the Word of God. They have not,
neither will they have the Scriptures to be soundly preached, read, and heard
in their own tongue. That they cannot abide to have them in their own
language, appears by this one example* One Pauier a Towne-Clarke of London
(in the time of King Henry the Eighth) hearing that the Scriptures should be
put into English, he spoke to this effect, and confirmed it with an oath: viz.
that if he knew that the Scriptures should be put into English, and that the
King would have them to be read in the Church, rather then he would l^ue so
long to see it, he ^ould cut his own throat: But (as Hall says, who heard him
speak it) he was not so good as his word: for, instead of cutting his throat,
he hanged himself.


C. What is the cause that they cannot abide to have the Scriptures in their
own language?


M. S. John gives the reason. For, every one that does evil hates the light,
neither comes to it, left his deeds should be reproved and discovered, Ioh.
3.20. If the Owl flies abroad by day, the birds by and by discern him,
follow him, and fall upon him; and therefore he flies abroad in the night, and
then he is quiet. If the Scriptures should be suffered to be expounded and read
of all Nations in their own language, then that Owl of Rome (the Pope I
mean) with all his fooleries and abominations, would be discerned and
discovered, and then the world would hate him, follow after him, and persecute
him, (even as the small birds do the Owl:) and therefore they cannot abide
the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, but love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil: John 3.19.


C. What say you then to their good works, as building of Churches, giving of
Alms, etc?


M. These and such like works, required in the Law of God, in themselves are
good, and to be practiced of all: but to them they are (as the Fathers called
the virtues of the Heathen) but splendida peccata, glittering dross, and
beautiful deformities.


C. Do they teach any thing contrary to the moral Law, and to the doctrine
of good works?


M. Yes, they do both teach and practice many things directly contrary to
Gods Commandments. They reach for good works, such things as are not
commanded, but rather forbidden in the Law of God, as namely, to go on
Pilgrimage, to vow single life, to fast forty days and forty nights* etc.

First, concerning set Pilgrimages unto certain Images there was none of the
Fathers did so much as dream of the for 600. years after Christ at the least,
Perkins 2. Vol. p* 141, 542.

Secondly, the necessity of the vow of continency was established first, and
annexed unto Orders, about 380. years after Christ, and that by Pope Siricius.
But it had no universal admission, until the time of Pope Hildebrand, in the
year 1070. Perkins 1. Vol. 583. to 587. 2. Volume 575, 576. Acts and
Monuments, 1151.

Thirdly, their doctrine of single life was never commanded of God, nor known
in the Primitive Church, but has sprung up since, and is indeed the very
doctrine of Devils, 1. Tim. 4.13. So is also their forbidding of meats for
religions sake. They teach also, that a man may fulfill the Law; yea, do
works of Supererogation, that is, more then the Law does require: and that
men of their abundance, may allot to others such works of Supererogation,
Rhem. on 1. Cor. 9. sect. 6. 2. Cor. 8. sect. 3. This doctrine of theirs makes
the Law of God to be imperfect, and is directly contrary to the words of
Christ, Luke 17.10. And it was not known of the ancient Fathers. They spoke
indeed sometimes of Supererogation, but in a far other sense then Papists
do. There are no such works to be found in the person of any mere man or
Angel, but only in the person of Christ, God and man, Perk. 1. vol. 598. 599.
2. vol. 540. 541.


DIALOGVE 8.
C. Show me, I pray you, in particular, what things they teach contrary to the
commandments?


M. I could plainly prove unto you, that they do both teach and practice many
things contrary to every one of the Commandments: but I will only set down
the chiefest, and such as most men know to be true.

The first Commandment concerns the inward worship of God: the ground of
which worship is the true knowledge of God; and without which, none can truly
worship and serve him: for such as our knowledge is, such is our worship, ^.
Chron. 28.9. Psalm. 9.10. Ier. 9.24. The Papists teach, that ^gnorance is the
mother of devotion: but the truth is, it is ^he mother of superstition and
idolatry, Gal. 4.8. The Papists therefore being ignorant, and without the true
knowledge of God, cannot truly worship him, but must needs be Idolaters,
worshipping they know not what. The first Commandment requires that we have
the true Iehoua for our only God. They make Christ's body to be God, because
they hold that it may be in many places at once, which thing is proper only to
God. They make the Pope to be God, and that in plain words. Christopher
Marcellus said to the Pope, Thou art another God upon earth: and the Pope took
it to himself, Council. Later. Sess. 4.

They give the power to the Pope, which is proper to God, and so make him to be
God. As, that he can make holy that which is unholy, pardon sins, etc.
Perkins 1. vol. 400. 1. and they give divine worship to creatures, and so make
the^ their Gods. The second Commandment concerns the outward worship of God,
or the form and manner of his worship. This Commandment they have clean put
out of the Decalogue, and to fill up the number, they divide the last into two.
The scope of this Commandment is, that no Image is to be made of God, nor any
worship performed to him in an Image, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. But they teach it lawful
to make Images of the true God, and to worship him in them, and that there is a
religious worship due to them, Belarm. (...) imag. sanct. lib. 2. cap. 21. And
in the second Nicen Council it it was decreed, that the Image of God should be
worshipped with the same worship that is due unto God. Their practice is
answerable to their doctrine: for they worship the Images of God, of Christ,
the Saints, the wooden Cross, yea, a piece of bread.


C. They say, that they do not worship the images, but God, Christ, and the
Saints in the image.


M. Suppose that this were true, yet in so doing, they commit gross idolatry,
and the same that the people of Israe^ did, for which God plagued them greatly,
Exodus 32.5, 28. (...) think there is none so very a Calfe, as to think that
they did worship the Calfe it self. The Calfe was but a representation of God;
and yet they sinned greatly in making it, and worshipping God in it. The
Heathen in times past could say as much for themselves, concerning their
worshipping of Images, as the Papists now do: and yet as they were Idolaters,
so are the Papists: for as touching their superstition and idolatry, blood
cannot be more like to blood, or an egg to an egg, then the one of them is to
another. The Heathen had for every Nation and Province, some peculiar god.
Among them, the Elements had their several gods to rule over them. The Heathen
had a certain god assigned to their cattle. The Heathen had peculiar gods for
learning and learned men, and for handi-crafts men. And all these have the
Papists likewise. The Heathen erected Altars, ordained Priests to offer
sacrifices, fell down before their idols, etc. So the Papists deck and adorn
their images, go on Pilgrimage to them, fall down upon their knees before
them, and make their prayers unto them. And what is all this, but to worship
the very images themselves, the which is most gross idolatry? Musculus on Psa.
16. ver. 4. page 139. 140, Virels grounds, page 87. to 92. Attersoll on
Philemon, page 63. 64.


C. They say, that there be degrees of religious worship, the highest is
latria, and this is due unto God: the lowest is Dulia, proper to Saints, etc.
Bellar. de imag. Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 25 The Scripture acknowledges one only
kind of religious worship, and that due only to God, Math. 4.10. Reu. 22.9.
And this distinction of theirs was not known and received into the Church, till
400. years after Christ, Perk. 1. ^ol. page 696. 2. vol. 530.


C. Was not the making and worshipping of Images approved of (...) ^he ancient
Fathers?


M. There was no use of Images among Christians, speci^lly in their Churches,
for 379. years after Christ. Adora^^on of Images was never publicly
authorized till 788. years after Christ, in the second Council of Nice, Perk.
1. vol. page ^6. 2. vol 421.

If you be disposed to see more at large when images first ^^e up, how they
were forbidden and condemned by Fathers, Emperors and Councels, and how all
that the Papists can say for them, is answered: then read the book of Homilies
against peril of idolatry: for I know none that has written more soundly,
fully, and plainly thereof.


C. Do they teach and practice any thing else against the second Commandment?


M. Yes: to the right worshipping of God, there is required a reverend use of
the means of Gods worship and service, the which are sincere prayer,
preaching, hearing of Gods Word, and the use of the Sacraments. Concerning
prayer, it must be made with understanding, 1. Cor. 14 ver. 15. Contrary
hereunto is their praying in an unknown tongue. In the purest Churches for the
space of 800. years at the least, divine prayer was never performed in a
tongue unknown to the people, Perk. 2. vol. 557. Concerning the Sacraments,
they do not rightly administer and receive them, but have added and taken from
them at their pleasure.

The helps and furtherances of Gods worship are specially two; vows and
fasting. The Papists make these to be parts of Gods worship: yea, they make
fasting to be a work of satisfaction to Gods justice, for the temporal
punishment of sin, and a meritorious work, Rhem. on 1. Cor. 15. Sect. 7.
Perk. 1. vol. 596. Synopsis Papismi. The sixth general Controversy, quest.
3.4. The 19. general Controversy, quest. 8. In a word, all their carnal
ceremonies, devised by men, and wherein they place the worship of God, are
contrary to the second Commandment. The most of which ceremonies, they have
borrowed, partly, from the Jews, partly from the Gentiles. Wil^^^ on Jude,
page 215. 216.


DIALOGVE 9.
C. Do they teach and practice any thing contrary to the Commandments
following?


M. Yes: The third Commandment concerns the gl^rifying of Gods name in the
whole course of our life. The teach men to give the glory which is proper to
God, to cre^tures, as to the Virgin Mary, the Pope, etc. They teach it lawful
to swear by Saints, and not by God only. They maintain perjury, because they
teach with one consent, that one being examined, may answer doubtfully against
the direct intention of the Examiner, framing another meaning to himself in
the doubtfulnesse of his words. As for example, A man is asked whether he were
not such a day at the Mass, in such a place? They affirm that he may say no,
and swear unto it (although he were at it) reserving this to himself; not
with purpose to reveal it to the Examiner: whereas (in the very Law of nature)
he that takes an oath, should swear according to the intention of him that
has power to administer an oath: and that in truth, judgment and
righteousness, Ier. 4.2. They are also egregious blasphemers of Gods name. They
have uttered most horrible blasphemies concerning the Scriptures. See Doctor
Willets four pillars of Papistry, pa. 49. to 61. The fifth Commandment
requires subjection and obedience to Superiors, and namely, to Kings and
Princes, who are supreme and next under Christ, To. 13.1, 2. 1. Pet. 2.13. They
teach that the Pope is supreme head over all persons, etc. that he owes no
subjection to Kings and Princes, but has power to make them, and to put them
down at his pleasure. The Pope and his Clergy will not be in subjection to
them, but rather exercise Lord-ship over them The Popes supremacy was unheard
of and unknown, till the year of Christ 600. It was first broached by the
murdering Emperor Phocas, at the ambitious desire of the proud Pope Boniface
the third, about the year 607. And since that time, the Popes have showed
their intolerable pride, in their behavior toward Princes. The Pope in his
writings calls himself, Seruus seruorum Dei, The servant of Gods servants: but
in his actions he will be Dominus dominorum, the Lord of Lords: wherein he
plainly shows himself to be that man of sin and Antichrist, which
exalts himself above all that is called God, 2. These. 2.4. This may be
showed by many examples.

Alexander the Third, did tread upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick the
First, blasphemously abusing the words of the Psalm, Thou shall tread upon the
Lion and Adder, etc. Acts and Monuments, pa. 185. Pope Celestine crowned Henry
the Fifth with his foot, and with his foot spurned it off again, ibid. 221. The
Papists also teach and maintain disobedience to Parents: for, they teach that
it is lawful for the child, being a Roman Catholic, to deny his duty to his
parents being Heretics. And as the Scribes and Pharisees taught, that if the
children did bring to their Corban, (that is, their Treasury) though they
neglected their parents, yet they were free: so they teach children to give
that they have to Monasteries, etc. wherewith they should relieve their
Parents, Bucanus Common places, page 901.


DIALOGVE 10.
C. Do they teach and practice any thing contrary to the sixth commandment?


M. Yes, the sixth commandment forbids us to kill, or hurt any man. They
teach it lawful for subjects not only to rise up against, but even to kill
their Princes the Lords Anointed (if they be excommunicated by the Pope) and
that it is a meritorious work so to do. This with other such like devilish
doctrines, and the Authors thereof, are to be seen more at large in Bucanus
Common places, concerning Magistrates: and in Master Tailor on Psalm 32. page
208, 209.


C. Can you name any that have put it in practice?


M. Yes, Pope Gregory the Seventh, called Hildebrand, hired one to kill the
Emperor. A Monk poisoned King John, Henry the third, King of France, was
slain by a Friar. Yea, Pope Sixtus Quintus highly commended the Friar for
doing of it. Henry the fourth of France was also slain by a Papist. Many of
them, (yea of their Priests and Jesuits) have attempted to kill our late
Queen Elizabeth, and our King James, with all his royal Issue, and that after
a most barbarous manner. These Popish Traitors may very fitly be compared to
that base and unnatural bird the Cuckoo: who though he be hatched, fed and
brought up by a little bird, yet he deuoureth both the natural young ones, and
also the damme her self.


C. Are there none that teach and practice the killing of Princes bu^ Papists?


M. This doctrine was never maintained by any Heretics (besides the Papists)
as our most Christian and learned King has showed in a speech of his, uttered
in the Parliament house, in the year ^605. by occasion of the Gunpowder
Treason. And herein you may see how contrary they are both to the doctrine and
practice of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, who both taught and
practiced subjection, even to wicked and idolatrous Princes, and did never so
much as attempt to hurt them. As for example: Saul was a wicked King, forsaken
of God, and one that did most cruelly persecute David, who was anointed to be
King after him. At two several times the Lord delivered Saul into his hands,
so that he might (without any resistance) have killed him: yea, Abishai desired
that he might strike him but once with his spear. But what said David? Touch
him not, for who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless?
Nay, his heart smote him for cutting off the skirt of Saul's Robe, 1. Sam. 24.4,
5, 6. etc. chap. 26.8, 9, etc. And afterward, when one brought tidings to
David that he had slain Saul, what did David? Did he commend him for it, as
the Pope did the Friar? No, he caused him to be slain for his labor, 2. Sam.
1.14, 15, 16. Now what think you of David?


C. He was a man after Gods own heart, endued with the Spirit of God.


M. It is most true: and therefore the Papists (which both teach and practice
the contrary) are endued with the Spirit of Satan. S. Paul says, that to
forbid marriage and meats, is a doctrine of devils, 1. Tim. 4.1, 3. If that
be a doctrine of devils, then much more is this. In the sixth Commandment is
also condemned all cruelty: yet herein they exceed and excel all others. And
this is a special note of a false Religion; and yet this is one special
means whereby Popery is vpheld. See Tailor on Psalm. 32. p. 204. to 208.
Solomon describes an Harlot by three properties, cruelty, treachery, and
flattery, Pro. 2.16, 17, 18. As a dishonest and unchaste woman is thus
discerned, so is a corrupt religion. And these are the very ^adges and ensigns
of the Whore of Babylon: Where they get the sword, they show all cruelty: where
their power fai^eth, they work by treachery: where this speedeth not, they will
deceive by flattery and hypocrisy. See the Preface to Doctor Willets Treatise
on the Epistle of S. Jude, page 2, 3, etc.


DIALOGVE 11.
C. What do they teach and practice contrary to the seventh Commandment?


M. They hold and teach, that marriage is unlawful in the Clergy: and that
the marriage of Ministers is the worst sort of incontinency and fornication,
Rhem. on 1. Cor. 7.9. Sect. 8. whereas marriage is the remedy against
fornication, 1. Cor. 7.2. They allow their Priests to keep harlots, (rather
then to marry) so they do it closely: for this caveat is given them: Si non
cast, tamen caute. If thou can not live chastely, thou may keep a whore
warily. And what uncleanness and filthiness has bin committed by many Popes
and Popish priests, all the world knows. A taste hereof, I will give you in a
few examples.

Pope John the 13. was an Adulterer, and an incestuous person. Being found
without the City with another man's wife, he was so wounded of her husband, that
within eight days after he died, Acts and Monuments, page 143. Pope Sixtus the
fourth erected at Rome a Stews of double abomination, not only of women; but
also of men, ibid. 6. page 667. Alexander the sixth committed incest with his
own daughter Lucretia, Guicciardine lib. 3. Jnnocentius the eighth had diverse
bastards, and boasted of them. See Willet on Jude, page 188. They had one Pope
that did beget no child, but was begotten with child, and brought it forth in
going on procession: and that was Pope John the eighth, who proved to be Joane,
and not John. This they deny, but there was of late years written a book by
M. Alexander Cook: and another written in Latin by a stranger, wherein they
prove (and that out of Popish Writers) that there was such a one. For they
sufficiently prove themselves to be men indeed, in begetting Bastards. It is an
old saying, It must needs be a holy Procession, where the Devil bears the
Cross: so it must needs be an holy, chaste and pure Church, that has such
unholy, impure, unchaste, and filthy heads, as many Popes have been. And as
were the heads, such was the rest of the body. Their Monasteries and Monkish
Cells were detected of most infamous incests, fornications, etc. as does appear
in the inquisition made in the time of King Henry the eighth, Praefat. Balaei.
de actis Roman. Pontif. See a little book (lately set forth) called the Friars
Chronicle. Contrary to the eighth Commandment are the Popes Bulls, Indulgences
and pardons for sins and all for money. They sell such things as are not to
be sold, namely, remission of sins, and the merits by which men may come to
the Kingdom of Heaven. But no penny, no Paternoster, Synopsis Papismi.
Controversy 14. part. 3. Popes Bulls and Indulgences (wherein is given
absolution from the guilt of temporal punishment) were not known to the
Catholic Church, for 1000. years and more after Christ, Perk. 2. vol. 589.
And herein they maintain licenciousnesse: for what need one care what sin
he commits, when for a little money he may have a Pardon for it?

One Roger Holland (sometime a Papist) says thus, I was of this your blind
religion; having liberty under your auricular confession, I made no conscience
of sin, but trusted to the Priests absolution; he also for money, doing some
penance for me: which after I had given, I cared no further what offenses I
did: no more then he cared, after he had my money, whether he fasted with bread
or water for me or no, Acts and Monuments, pa. 2040.


DIALOGVE 12.
C. Show me also, I pray you, what they teach and practice contrary to the two
last Commandments.


M. The ninth Commandment condemns all lying, and dissimulation, railing,
mocking, etc. They maintain equivocation, which (as the Secular Priests have
said) ( Quodlibet 3. Art. 4. page 6.) you may term in plain English, lying,
and cogging. They are notorious liars, and slanderers, raylers and mockers,
Willet on Jude p. 195. and 205. 212. They have falsified men's writings, putting
in, and putting out what they please, as is to be seen in their Index
expurgatorius. See Perk. 2. vol. page 489, etc.

There have been in times past games appointed for lying. If there were any
such now, the Papists would carry the whet-stone from all the Heretics in
Christendom. The tenth Commandment condemns original corruption, and the
very evil thoughts and lusts of the heart without consent.

They teach, that concupiscence in it self is not sin. These are the very
words of the Council of Trent: This concupiscence (which the Apostle sometime
calls sin) the holy Synod declares, that the Catholic Church did never
understand to be called sin, because it is truly and properly sin in the
regenerate, but because it comes of sin, and inclines unto sin: If any
man think the contrary, let him be accursed, Sess. 5. cap. 1. de pecc. orig.
Wherein they both decree against the Apostle himself, Romans 7.23. and also they
gain say themselves: for if this concupiscence boil out of original sin,
as out of a fountain, and that is damnable: it follows, that concupiscence
or lust is also sin before God, and does deserve condemnation. They say that
in the regenerate it is venial. But this is an undoubted principle, that all
sins in themselves and their own nature are mortal. And concerning this
venial sin, it was not known among the Fathers for 700. years after
Christ. And thus you see, what gross things they both teach and practice
contrary to the Commandments of God: whereby it plainly appears, that
Popery cannot be of God: for thus I reason: Whatsoever religion does teach
things contrary to the Commandments of God, is not of God: but Popery does
so, and therefore it is not of GOD: and so by good consequence, Papists cannot
be good Catholics.


DIALOGVE 13.
C. Hitherto you have showed, that the Papists teach many things contrary to
the Creed, the Sacraments, and the ten Commandments, now tell me, I pray you,
whether they teach any thing contrary to the Lords Prayer?


M. They do likewise teach and practice many things contrary thereunto, I
will but only name some of them. The Lords Prayer teaches us to call upon God
only. They teach and practice prayer to Saints. In the first Petition, we pray
for the hallowing of Gods Name. They give unto Saints departed, that which is
proper to God, and so dishonor Gods Name. In the second petition, we pray for
the erecting of Gods Kingdom of grace in our hearts, and also for the means
thereof, namely, the preaching and hearing of Gods Word. They hinder the
coming of Gods Kingdom, in rejecting the Word of God, and in persecuting such
as will preach, hear, and read it. Contrary to the third petition is their
doctrine of free will. Contrary to the fifth petition is their doctrine of
satisfaction for sin. In the sixth petition, we pray for strength to withstand
Satan and his temptations. They teach people to drive away the Devil with
holy water, and such like childish toys. These and other such like things,
they teach and practice contrary to the Lords Pray^r.


DIALOGVE 14.
C. If Popery be so contrary to the grounds of Religion, then we may ^ot join
with the Papists in their profession?


M. It is true indeed: we must therefore do as the Lord ^^de Jeremy (Chap.
15.19.) Let them return to thee, but re^urne not thou to them. We may join
with them in respect ^f civil society, but not in respect of Religion: and
yet even then we are to take heed, left we be corrupted by them: ^r he that
touches Pitch, shall be defiled therewith. Some think that our Religion, and
the religion of the present Church of Rome, are all one for substance, and that
they may be united: but they are grosely deceived: for an union of these two
Religions can never be made, more then the union of light and darkness, and
that because the Church of Rome (as has at large bin showed) has struck at
the very foundation.


C. If Popery be so contrary to the very grounds of Religion, then, what is
the cause that so many (yea, of the more wise and learned sort) do embrace and
cleave to it?


M. One special cause of it is, that because men will not receive the love of
the Truth, therefore God will send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie, 2. These. 2.10, 11.

A second cause is, ignorance of the Scriptures, and of the grounds of
Religion, for if men would well acquaint themselves herewith, they should
easily see the grossness of Popery.

A third cause is, that Popery is very agreeable and pleasing to man's corrupt
nature: As for example: to be justified by our good works: to have images to
worship God in: to live in ignorance: to have pardons for our sins: to serve
God in outward ceremonies, as in choice of meat, difference of days, etc.
these are things very agreeable and pleasing to our corrupt nature, and
therefore one especial cause why so many embrace Popery.

A fourth cause is, the tyranny of the Church of Rome, whose chief means to
uphold her religion, is fire and sword for were it not for this, many thousands
in a few years would utterly renounce Popery.

A fifth cause why so many (especially of the Learned) d^ embrace it, is pomp
and profit: that is, ambition and covetousness.

This was that which made the Scribes and Pharisees (eue^ against their own
knowledge) to withstand Christ and (...) Gospel.

And this makes many learned Papists to do the like. They know (no doubt) that
in some things they err: as it does appear by the words of Stephen Gardener
on his death bed.

The Bishop of Chichester seeing him to be in a desperate case, comfort him
with the hope of remission of sins by the merits of Christ. Gardener hereunto
answers thus: What, will you open that gappe now? you may speak it to me,
and to such as are in my case: but if you teach it to the people, then farewell
all; meaning our authority, pomp, and profit by absolutions, Masses, etc.
These are the special causes why so many embrace Popery.


C. There is one thing more that I would gladly know concerning the Papists,
and that is, whether a Papist may be saved, seeing that Pope^ie is so contrary
to the grounds of Religion?


M. You are then to mark what a Papist is. A Papist (as the Rhemists on Acts
11. Sect. 4. do describe him) is one that cleaves to the Pope in Religion,
and is obedient to him in all things.

Every one now that is under the jurisdiction of the Pope, is not to be counted
a Papist: for there are some even in Italy, ^paine, etc. that hold the Grounds
of Religion, do sigh and ^rone under the Romish yoke, and desire to be freed
from (...), yea, would rejoice to see it.

Again, there may be some, that (for want of knowledge, and the means
thereof) are entangled with some points of ^opery, but yet they hold the
foundation, which is CHRIST ^ESVS, and look to be saved by his merits, and not
by their ^wne, or any others. Such we account not Papists, but the ^^e Church
and children of GOD. But by Papists, we mean such as cleave fast to the Pope
in Religion, are in all ^^ings obedient to him, will not be reclaimed from
their er^^urs, refuse to hear the Word of God, to read the Scrip^^res, or any
other good books. Of such we may boldly say, ^^t if they thus continue to the
end, they cannot be saved.


DIALOGVE 15.
C. I do now plainly see that Papists are no good Catholics, because they
are neither of sound faith, nor good life: but tell me (I pray you) who indeed
are the true Church, and true Catholics?


M. All that do truly and sincerely embrace, profess, and practice the
aforesaid grounds of Religion, in what Country soever they live.


C. Is the Church of England the true Church?


M. Yes, for it has the special marks of the true Church namely, the Word of
God sincerely and soundly preached and the Sacraments rightly administered.


C. The Papists say, that there are diuersiities of opinions among v^ that we
cannot agree among our selves, and that therefore we are (...) the true
Church.


M. In all substantial points of Religion we agree both amongst our selves,
and also with all other sound Protestants in Christendom. In other things
there have bin, are, and will be diversities of opinions and differences to the
worlds end. They should first pluck out the beam of their own eyes: for we
can truly charge them with greater differences: As namely, with that sharp
and bloody contention between the Franciscans and the Dominicans; and with
the late bitter contention between the Jesuits and the secular Priests:
wherein the Priests did write as bitterly against the Jesuits (and namely,
against Parsons) as ever did any Protestant: nay there was never any Protestant
Written that did lay such foul and odious crimes to their charge, as the
Priests did. And herein they verified the old Proverb When thieves fall by
the ears, true men come to have the^ goods. For one dissension that is among
us, they have ((...) least) ten among themselves. Doctor Willet (in his fourth
^^ler of Papistry) has set down at large:

First, the conradictions and diverse opinions of old Papi^^ and new.

2. The contradictions of the Jesuits anongst themsel^^

Thirdly, that their stoutest Champion, Bellarmine, is at ^riance with
himself, shamefully forgetting himself, say^ and unsaying: now of one
opinion, by and by of anoth^^ And no marvel. Oportet enim mendacem esse
memorem. A liar had need to have a good memory.

Fourthly, he shows the repugnances, inconveniences, and inconsequent
opinions which Popish Religion has in it self. And thus you see, how they
charge us with that, wherein themselves are most faulty.


DIALOGVE 16.
C. Are there none among us, that maintain any strange and new opinions,
contrary to the grounds of Religion?


M. If there be any such, our Church does not approve of them, but rather
censure and punish them.


C. There be some that profess the former grounds of Religion as we do, and
yet say that there is no true Church among us: and therefore will not join
with us in prayers, hearing the Word, and in the use of the ^acraments, but
separate themselves from us: what say you of such?


M. I say, that they are possessed with the spirit of pride and singularity;
and that in so doing, they do even deny ^hese Articles of faith, the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints, and are such as the Apostle speaks of,
To. ^6.17. Heb. 10.25, 39. Master Perkins (in his first Vol. page 409.) ^ls
them a schismatic and indiscreet company, and says, ^^at they are full of
pride, thinking themselves to be full, ^hen they are empty; to have all
knowledge, when they are ^^norant, and have need to be catechized. Another
says thus (...) them: The error of those men is full of evil, yea of
bles^^emie, who do in such manner make a departure from this church, as if
Christ were quite banished from hence, and ^^at there could be no hope of
salvation to those that abide ^^ere. And further he says, that if they cannot
find Christ ^ere, they shall find him no where. The errors of these ^^n you
may see in a little Treatise set forth by M. Bernard, ^^led, The Separatists
Schism.


C. I pray show me some example, that they ought not to separate ^^^mselues
from us, and that they do sin in so doing.


M. In the Church of Corinth, the incestuous man was not ^^nished: fornication
was lightly regarded, yea there were some that even denied the Resurrection,
yet S. Paul does account and call them the Church and Saints: he does not
persuade any to make a separation, but does plainly rebuke them, and shows
how they should punish the evil doer. I speak not this to excuse any gross
sin that reigns amongst us: (for I wish that the same might be severely
punished) but to show, that where the Word is truly preached and the
Sacraments rightly administered (as in our Church they are) none ought for any
cause to separate themselves* And, that such as do it, do sin grievously, I
will show yo^ by a familiar example. A mother conceiueth and brings forth a
son, and that with great travail and pain: She^ traineth him up to man's
estate, and that not without great care and labor: This son at length
espying some spot and blemish, or some infirmity in his mother, forsakes her,
and will not acknowledge her to be his mother, what would you now think of him?


C. Surely I should think such a one to be a very wicked and unnatural son.


M. Even such are they, who (for some seeming faults i^ our Church) deny it to
be a true Church, and do separat^ themselves from it: whereas this Church has
conceiue^ them, brought them forth, and nourished them. For if e^e^ they were
truly begotten unto Christ, and borne anew, i^ has been by our Church, and
our Ministry, by which likewise they have been trained up, and brought to
th^^ knowledge which they have.


C. There are many amongst us that make great profession of R^^^on, but I can
see no good works come from them: nay, they are (...) only barren in good
works, but also live in some one gross sin or (...)* Are these the true
Church, and true Catholics?


M. Though they live in the Church, yet they are no^ the Church: they are but
Hypocrites, and shall (if they rep^^^ not) have the reward of Hypocrites: yea it
shall be e^^ in the Day of Judgment for many Papists, then for the^^ because
by their barten and fruitless, yea wicked (...) they have caused the Name of
God, his Gospel, and the true Professors thereof, to be evil spoken of. Let
all therefore that will be accounted the true Church, and true Christians, be
careful to adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things, and that by a
godly conversation, and by doing of good works.


C. The name of God be blessed for this our conference, whereby I find my
self much edified. There remains yet one thing more, which I will demand of
you: and that is, How I may come to know and be assured, that I am indeed a
member of the true Church, and that I shall certainly be saved?


M. Be diligent to hear the Word of God preached. Read the Scriptures.
Receive often the Sacrament. Acquaint your self thoroughly with the aforesaid
grounds of Religion. Join hereunto earnest and hearty prayer. Set apart some
time for these things, specially be careful to spend the Sabbath herein. And
to all these things join an holy conversation, indeuouring above all things to
have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men. In doing this, you
shall at length come to that full assurance, whereof S. Paul speaks, namely,
that you are the child of God, and that nothing shall be able to separate you
from the love of God, which is in Christ, Romans 8.38.


Babylon is fallen, is fallen; Reu. 14.8. Praise, honor, glory and power, be
unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

Revelation 5.13.
FINIS.

