IVDGE OF HERESIES, One GOD, One FAITH, One CHVRCH, Out of which there is no
Salvation.

Excluding all Infidells, Mahumetans, Jews, obstinate Papists, and other
Heretics of all sorts, and consequently all Newters, who conform themselves
only externally to any Religion, from hope of participation of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

If they finally persist therein, and return not to the knowledge and zealous
profession of the true Faith.

By JOHN MERIDETH, Sub-Deane of CHICHESTER.

John. Epist. 2 Verse 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for John Grismand,
and are sold at his Shop in Paul's Alley, at the Sign of the Gunne. 1624.

TO THE Worshipful and Religiously affected, William Drury Esquire, of
Watergate in the County of Suffex.
SIR:
THe principiall Motive, which Impelled me to Consecrate the subsequent
Treatise unto your Name, is the self same, which at the first Invited me to
Pen it, and publish it to the benefit of the well-disposed Reader; And that
was my Zeal toward the Truth of Christian Faith; which is so depraved in this
Irreligious age by sundry sorts of Haereticks, so dissembled by Newters, so
derided by Atheists, so disturbed by Schismatics, that we may say thereof, as
our Savior spoke of himself; The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to rest his head.

By Foxes, mean the Cunning Politicians of this Age, who can (howsoever the
state of Religion stands) Seruire Scenae, act their part according to the
time; And the Birds I do understand, The vain, vnconstent, light, Professors
of the Christian Faith, who were neither of them ever soundly seasoned with
Religion, and the true knowledge of GOD, and therefore, they so basely esteem
thereof, as if it were a matter of Indifference, what* or whether a man believe
or not.

And these kind of men abound in all places, and live in greatest applause and
high estimation, while the zealous Servants of Christ who will not bear the
defacing of the Faith by Haeresie, or the abusing thereof through Hypocrisy,
are exploded as the outcasts, and off-scowring of the world.

Now sorasmuch as I have observed in you at all such times, wherein I have
conuersed with you, an affection to the knowledge of the Mysteries of
Salvation, by your frequent Inquisitions, always accompanied with a reverend
sobriety, which the Apostle requires as the limits of a Christian man's
knowledge, and also a zealous desire, that other should be quitted from
Ignorance; I could not forbear upon the joy of mine acquaintance with a
Gentleman of your rank and Eminency in these parts, so well affected in
Religion, and so certain a welwisher and Favorite unto Learning, where the
first is derided, and the other despised, that the Church and University, may
both take up the Lords complaint against the ungrateful Jews, and apply it
unto the greater part of the Inhabitants in these Coasts; I have nourished and
brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me.

I could not forbear, I say, in consideration of the Praemises, to ^estifie my
Love and observance toward you, to Dedicate this Book unto your Name, and the
rather, because, as I doubtedly believe, you are one of those, whose name God
has written in his Book of Life.

For as I said before, that I penned it of a Zeal I do bear unto the Truth,
so I do dedicate it unto you of a hearty affection I do bear unto you;
because you do fear the Lord, meditate in his Law, and have respect unto his
Commandments; Such a one (says David) shall not be Psalm. 119.
confounded.

Secondly, because I am invited hereunto, by your Courteous humanity toward
these my poor and unworthy Labors, the which as I have destinated unto you,
so you desire to Dedicate them to CHRIST his Church; And therefore as the
Daughter of Pharoh reputed Moses (whom she saved from the fury of the Floods)
as her own Son; So this Treatise shall justly challenge you for its Father,
by whose Christian zeal it was delivered from obscurity, and promoted to call
Israel out of Egypt; and let those Israelites who by this means, shall find
the comfort of their deliverance, call upon GOD for a blessing, upon you and
your generation.

And now (worthy Sir) I beseech the Lord, who has begun this good work in
you, that he will perform it until the day of JESUS CHRIST; and this I pray,
that your Love may abound, yet more and more in Knowledge, and in all
Judgment, that you may allow those things which are best, that you may be
pure and without offense, until the day of Christ; to which end the Lord
preserve you Constant, and zealous in the profession of the true Faith, that
you may in the next life, receive the Crown of Life, which Christ has
purchased, and promised unto all those, who continue faithful unto the End.

Your Worships in hearty Christian affection: JOHN MERIDITH.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. Shows that God requires truth in Religion, which must be squared
to the Rule of his Word; and therefore Jews, Turks, and Papists, whose
Religion is false, because contrary to the Scriptures, cannot be saved if they
persist in their obstinacy; and that Papists are but Pseudo-Christians. CHAP.
II. Proves, that Infidels and Heretics, by an Innocent life, and virtuous
actions, (if they could perform any) cannot be saved, unless they be
Orthodoxall Christians also; and the Error of Lodouicus Viues, is confuted.
CHAP. III. Declares, that a good intention, or meaning toward God, avayleth
not Heretics, to preserve them from damnation, without the right knowledge of
the true Faith; where is proved that Negligence, and Ignorance, in matters of
Faith is damnable, which ought to be expelled, and prevented by diligent
reading, and examining of the Scriptures; with a detection, and conviction of
the Popish political tyranny, in prohibiting the Laity, from reading of the
Scriptures; containing also an Apology for our Ancestors of the Laity, who (for
the most part) dyed true Christians, under the domination of Antichrist, as is
plainly proved at large; and that the estate of those Papists, who live under
Protestant Princes, is damnable, unless they renounce Popery* CHAP. IV.
Proves, that an Eroneous Conscience is no sufficient bond, to oblige a man to
persist in a false Religion, as the Papists teach, but such a conscience ought
to be deposed, reformed or abandoned, and altered according to the rule of Gods
Law; and therefore the case of those Papists who are trained up in blindness,
is miserable and lamentable. CHAP. V. Answers Objections made from the divine
Phylanthropy, or love of God unto mankind, who, (say they) will not condemn
unto everlasting death, such infinite multitudes of people, who dye in
Infidelity, and Heresy, and save but only a few true believing Christians:
where is plainly proved also, that very few, (in respect of those who are to
be damned) shall be saved. CHAP. VI. Proves from the Nature, and Attributes of
God, that Atheysts, Hypocrites, Epicures, Heretics, Pagans, Idolatrers,
Libertines, are in a damnable case; and contains an inuectiue against, and
admonition unto all Newters, who conform themselves externally only, unto
diverse and contrary Religions, as is Popery, and the Orthodoxall faith
professed by the Protestants, proouing them to be Traitors to Christ, and no
better then Atheists, who communicate outwardly with the Papists in their
Religious Rites, and seem also to be Protestants in heart and affection, with
Saint Augustine his Censure, of the forenamed, for a Conclusion.
THE PREFACE UNTO the READER.
We are fallen upon those times, (Christian Reader) unto which our Savior
Christ had reference, saying, When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith
on the earth? Luke ^.
By which Interrogation he foretells the rarity of Faith and paucity of
Believers, which should be found in those days; These are those times, wherein,
as the Spirit spoke manifestly, some should depart from the Faith* Tim. 4.


For S. Hillaries Speech of the state of Religion in his time, may fitly be
applied to our age; Tot nunc sides existum, Lib. v^t. ad Constant.
quot voluntates etc. In these days, there are as many Religions, as wills of
men, as many Doctrines as there be manners insundry people, as many causes of
blasphemy sprout up, as there be Vices; when Religions are so written to be, or
are so understood; and seeing there is one God, one Lord, one Baptism, so
there should be one Faith only, we are departed from that faith, which is the
only Faith, and while more faiths are made, we are come to this pass, that
there is no Faith.

For now too many imitate the Sampsaean Heretics, in their Religion, of whom
says the Father, they are Epiphan. (...). ^. Tom. ^. (...). 53.
neither Christians, nor Jews, nor Pagans, sed medii simpliciter existentes,
nihil sunt; but being a confused medley compounded of the former, are of no
Religion. There are such among us (though not of us) who have forged an opinion
to deceive their ow^e Souls; viz. That it avails not, of what Sect or
Religion soever a man be a Professor; So that he conceit it to be good and
pleasing unto God, so that every such man shall be, (say these Nullisidians)
saved (...) own Law, or Sect, if he observe it, and therefore, they will be
neither Reformed Catholics as are the Protestants, neither Pseudo-Catholicks,
as are the Papists, nor Anticatholicks, as are all Heretics, but
Diacatholicall Monsters, as are all Newters, and consequently are priuatiuely
Atheists, having as much interest in God, as they have in Godliness, whom though
they profess with their mouth, yet in their heart, these fools say there Tit
1. Psalm. 14.
is no God. The occasion whereof I do ascribe principally unto the Defect of
Gods grace in such persons, whereof they are worthily destitute, and
wherewithal they should have been enlightened. Secondly, to their damnable,
gross, careless inexcusable Ignorance, into which they are plunged, through
Negligence; whereby it comes to pass, that though they know God, they worship
him not as God, but become vain in their thoughts, and have their foolish
hearts full of darkness; and not knowing the Truth, clean unto their own
opinions, thinking it sufficient to worship him according to their own
immaginations, rather then to use any requisite Inquisition to find out the
truth; imagining with the old Pagans, That it is Gods desire by diversity and
disparity of opinions, Socrat. Lib. 4. Eccles. Hist. cap. ^^.
to illustrate his glory, that therefore every Sect might the more reverence
his Majesty, because that no man might readily know him accurately; therefore
they choose rather to waver in doubtful opinion, which is always uncertain,
then to stand by faith, and knowledge, which confirms unto Security.

Which pernicious, pestilent and damnable error, was first broached by that
Sect among the Pagans, who were termed Academicks or Septicks, who held Gellius
lib. 11. N^ct. (...). Cap. 5.
bl^ssednesse to consist in the Inuestigation of the truth, though they never
attained to the Intention thereof, but concluded all with doubtful suspension
of their Judgment; The Authors of which Sect are said to Galen lib* de ^p^*
doc^ndigene^^* Sta^^^ in (...).
be Fauorinus and Pyrrho, two ancient Philosophers; from whom those Heretics
in the Primitive Church drew their opinions; that Tertullian might w^ll say,
Lib. ^duers^^* Hermogene^^.
that the Philosophers were, Patriarchae Hereticorum, the great Grandsires of
Heretics.

From their Pappes (questionless) Ap^lles sucked that dangerous Position; Non
prorsus opus esse rationem Niceph^^us lib. 4. Eccles. Hist. Cap 28.
fidei inquirere, sed in sua quemque persuasione perseuerare debere; that it
was a needl^sse matter, to search into the reason of Faith, and Religion; but
that every one ought to persist in his own conceit and persuasion.

From their Doctrine Rethorius and his Disciples in Egypt, and Alexandria,
derived their most Heretical Thi^as^er Cataogo Hares.
Heresy, Qui omnes laudabat Hereses, etc. who praised all Heresies, and said,
that every man's several opinion was good, and that none among them all did
err, but that they walked all well and believed aright.

Hence drew Mahumedes Sergius, that plausible tenent to flesh and blood: that
all Sects, as Christians, Alc^oran (...) 2* and 4*
Turks, Jews and Infidels, may be saved in the observation of their own Law,
though it be never so impure and sensual; which opinion is received and
applauded by the Heard of Swinish Epicures, who live in any Religion or Sect
whatsoever in these days, who accommodate themselves unto that Religion, which
best relisheth their voluptuous palate. Wherefore, because of the abundance of
Lukewarm Newters, who are infected with this execrable error in these days,
and sprout up as Tares among the Wheat, in most part of this and other
Churches, (who by this means are destitute of all faith and Religion) and in
danger of utter perdition, if they be not firmly established in the true faith
of Christ; I have thought it a Work worthy my labor, and belonging unto mine
Office and Calling in the Church of Christ, wherein I am a most unworthy
Minister, and the least and weakest among my Brethren; while other who excel
in many singular graces, are (through their Charitable conceit of men) silent
in this point, and neglect it as needless altogether, and unseasonable for
these days, wherein the bright light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
has dispelled the darksome and gloomy mists of Error, Ignorance, Heresy and
Infidelity, out of the hearts of all, or most of the Inhabitants of this Land,
(which I wish with longing desire) were even as their Charity presumes; which
(I do pray with fervent zeal) that in short time it may be so effected,
through Gods grace and the strong operation of the Ministry of his Word, which
is able to mollify the most obdurate heart, and to open the eyes of the blind,
and to raise up him that is plunged, even into the deepest depth of Impiety. I
think it fit (I say) in this secure silence, but great and crying necessity;
yea, most needful I deem it to use the best means I am able, to save their
Souls who are upon the brinke of Hell, and run with no small alacrity to
destruction, as if it were unto Salvation; By propounding unto them the end of
their Deuiall Course, which is In^uitable Damnation, if they continue unto the
end therein; and by reducing them into the right way, which conducteth unto
eue^lasting life and endless salvation; that we being gatherd together into
one fold, may be safe under the tuition of the great Shepherd of our Souls,
Christ Jesus our Lord and only Savior.

THE IVDGE OF HERESIES.
CAP. 1. Shows, that God requires truth in Religion, which must be squared
to the Rule of his Word, and therefore Jews, Turks, and Papists whose Religion
is false, because contrary to the Scriptures, cannot be saved, if they persist
in their obstinacy; and that Papists are but Pseudo Christians.
THough the most high and mighty God, does not stand in need of Man's Service;
yet so has he ordained that Man should do him certain worship, and that ad
dandam ^onauext: Breuiloq. Par. 3. Cap. 11* 1.
viam perueniendi, ad Coronam per obedient^am, to make a way for man, and to
op^n him a door to obtain a Crown of Immortality by Obedience; with this
bond of Piety are we obliged unto God, this is the Su^me of the Religion we
profes^e.

To this end, God made Man Exceptorium bonitatis, and Organon Clarificationis
eius, says Irenaeus, the Treasure-house Iren^^^ lib. 4. ad^ers. ^arcs. Cap. 24.
of his goodness, and instrument of his glory; and again, Exceptorium Justi
iudicii ^ius, the vessel of his wrath, fury and indignation, if ungratefully
he neglect the exhibition of that allegiance he does owe unto God, the which
he has r^uealed unto man in his word.

But as Augustine observes, Duobus modis hic peccatur, antequam sapient fiat,
A man may offend two ways before Lib. 3. de lib. Arb.
he has pe^forn ed it; if either he refuse to apply himself to the
knowledge of his Word, or having received it, will not shape himself to those
Duties it requires: for p^^u^ntion whereof, God made Man by nature to aff^ct
these two things Wisdom (says Lactantins) and Religion; L^b 3 d^ sa^s. ^a
pient cap. 11. Idem (...). 4 de vera Sap cap. 3.
inseparable also in Office; because, In colendo sap^re debemus, we must be
wise in worshipping; that is, we must know what and how we worship; and In
sapiendo colere, in our wisdom we must worship, that is, fulfill in Act and
deed that which we know.

Therefore there is, Religion in Wisdom, and Wisdom in Religion, for which
cause they cannot be separated; because to be wise, is naught else, Nisi Deum
Verum Justice Ibid.
and piis cultibus honorare, but to honor the true God with due and devout
worship: for the selse same God he is, who must be understood and that by
Wisdom, and be honored and that by Religion: ^ut Wisdom must have the
preced^nce, Religion must follow; Quia prius est Deum sc^re, consequens colere,
we must know God before we can worship Ibid. Cap. 4.
him.

Our Savior did vpbraid the Samaritanes for worshipping that which they knew
not, declaring that God will be worshipped I^b 4.
in Spirit and in truth; that is, purely against Hypocrites and Newters, and in
truth, against Infidels, Jews, Mahumetans. and Heretics.

The last Condition he annexeth, for those who seem to worship God in mind,
Non tamen rectam habent scientiam, but want true knowledge; for we must
worship him in Mind, and sanam opinionem de ips^ habere, and have a sound
Theophilact. Ibid.
opinion of him, for such worshippers God requires, Quoniam spiritus est
Spiritus, Spirituales, quoniam veritas est veros, as he is a Spirit,
spiritual, as he is truth, such as must worship him in truth.

And thus much the Pagan could discern by the dark glimmering of Nature,
saying, that it is the chief matter to be regarded in Religion toward God,
(...) Epicte^* in Enc^yrid. cap. 38.
(...), to have right opinions of God.

Therefore it sussicet^ not to Believe Simply, but Sicut dicit Scriptura, as
the Scripture teaches us; for the true faith Theophil Super cap. 7. Job. I^id.
is drawn out of the Scriptures; therefore our Savior says He that
believes in me, as the Scripture says, that is, as the Scripture testify of
me; for many think they believe in him, Sed non vt dicit Scriptura, but not as
the Scripture directs, and so they follow their own Sects, such are all
Heretics; for they bear Witness of Christ, and whatsoever is requisite for
us to know concerning God is cont^ined in them; therefore Caietan says the
Scriptures are, Deus dicens Seipsum, God declaring himself, and his will unto
man.

In them God has set down what manner of worship he requires of us, and what
we ought to beli^ue of him; for every one, worshippeth, God, according to that
belief he has of God gathe^ed out of the Scriptures; and this belief is
acc^ptable un o God, and Salvation unto men, In which all those are saved, who
are predestined unto Salvation, and without which it is not poss^ble for any
man to be saved.

Whosoever therefore, shall believe or maintain any thing of God, and his
Christ, which is cont^adictory to his holy word does e^re, and that da^nably.

For as the Philosopher says; An Affirmation and Nega^ion are never true of
the same Subject: Therefore it is impossible that Turks, Jews, Pagans,
Heretics, and Orthodoxall Ephesians. 4.
Christians, should al^ speak, and believe truth of God ^ hom they profess,
s^eing they believe contrary things of him, and that directly contrary to the
Scriptures also, which are the Rules of Faith.

This is that Faith, in which all Believers, since the beginning of the world,
until this present day, have been saved; and wherein our future Posterity
vn^ill the dissolution of the same, shall be saved; Even that Seed of the
Woman Genesis 3.
which bruised the head of the Serpent; foreseen by the Patriarchs, for^told
by the Prophets, decla^ed by the Euangeli^^s, pr^ached by the Apostles, and
their Su^cessors in fu^ction and Office, and believed by all the fa^tl full
until this day: E^ cum pr^dicantium diuersa sunt tempora, non tamen Max (...).
in Nat^^^.
du^ersa narratio, and though they lived not all at the same time; yet they
consented in the same matter.

One Christ, was ever b^lieued; so that the Faith of the forenamed Ancients,
and Ours, is one and the self same; Christ was, an^ is, Heri, Hodie, and ipse
in S^cula, yesterday, Hebr. 13. August.
this day, and the same for eu^r, Tempora mutata sunt, non fides, the ^imes are
changed, the Faith is one and the self sa^e, they believed h^e should come in
the fullness of ti^e, we believe and are assured, that he is come; Therefore
he is called (...) and (...) the first, and the last, the beginning, Apocal.
and the end.

So says the Father, Res ipsa quae nunc Christiana Religio August* lib. 1.
Retract.
nu^cupatur, erat and apud antiquos etc. That every thing which is now called
Christian Religion, was in use among the old Patriarchs, and Prophets, neither
did it cease to flourish from the Creation, until Christ his coming in the
flesh; at which time immediately, the Religion which at that time was began to
be called Christian* And Christ said of Abraham, that he saw his day and
rejoiced; And the Apostle said, Ioh 8. 1 Corinthians. 10.
that all the Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink the
same spiritual drink, because they were justified by the same ^aith and
Religion in Christ.

Wherein that man might walk more confidently, and securely unto the truth;
the truth himself being God, even the Son of God assuming our humanity, not
consuming his Divinity, did constitute, and founded the same faith, that there
might be a way for Man unto God, by Man who was God; for this is the Mediator
between God and Man, even the Man Jesus Christ: Christ as he is a Mediator,
is Man; and the way to attain unto God. Now if he be the middle way between
him that walks, and the place unto which he walks, there is hope of
attaining unto it.

But if you fail or be ignorant of the way through which you must pass* what
avails it you, if you know whither you must go? for Christ is the only
strong and most certain way against all errors, He himself being both God and
Man, Quo itur Deus, qua itur homo; God, as the end at which we aim, Man, as
the way by which we pass; This Christ God and Man. spoke first by the
Prophets, at length by himself, afterward by his Apostles, as much as he
thought to be sufficient; he made the Scripture also, which is called
Canonical, of most eminent authority, the which we do verily and firmly
believe, concerning those things whereof we may not be ignorant, neither are
we fit or able to know them of our selves: In which is declared that
inestimable benefit, which Christ performed for us. In dying as man for our
Sins, and rising up as God for our Justification; and he that believes so
far forth in Christ, cannot be damned; This is the sum of the Gospel, the
joyful message of man's Salvation.

All those who are ignorant hereof, must fail in the true Religion, by erring
either about the Object and Substance, when they worship not the true God; or
in the Manner, in not believing as they ought, and in not giving such worship
as he requires of mankind.

And to this purpose the Apostles (as some write) collected out of the holy
Scriptures, an Epitome or brief Sum of Christian Religion, consisting of
twelve Articles, containing in them, by way of Implication, all such things as
a Christian man is bound to know and believe, to his Souls health; wherein is
set forth, the Essence, Omnipotence, and Goodness of God, that man may know
how, and what worship to give unto God, and what to believe of him.

As that he believe, that God is three in Persons, and One in Substance and
Essence, and that he created all things, of Nothing in time; and that the
Son, being the Second Person in the Trinity, took our humanity, wherein he
gave the Gospel, suffered, was buried and did rise again from the dead, to
save man from eternal death.

And so Christian Religion presupposing such truth out of the Gospel, does
adore God, three Persons, and the same One Creator and Rede^mer, and gives him
thanks in the Eucharist, in rememberance of his Passion, and in Hymns, Psalms
and Prayers, public and private, gives him thanks for all his Benefits
received, desiring future glory, and that felicity which he promised unto man:
This is the Summ^ of Christian Faith, which except a man believe faithfully and
firm^ly he cannot be saved.

From hence I infer, that Jews, Mahumetans, and Infidels, do not worship
God aright, because they have not the true faith.

For first, they do not worship nor believe the true God; for they deny the
Trinity in Unity, they deny the Article of Man's Redemption, the Incarnation of
the Son of God, his Passion and Resurrection, and consequently they intend to
worship one God, who is not three in persons, nor Incarnate* But there is no
such God, therefore they worship no God. To this purpose Augustine spoke
properly; Quis. quis Qu^stio super (...) 6. Cap. 26.
talem cogitat Deum, qua^ts non est Deus, alienum Deu^ vtique and falsum in
cogitatione portat; whosoever thinks God to be such a one, as he is not,
carries in his thought, a strange and a false God.

The like Censure, may be justly passed against Heretics; for no man dying in
such Heresy, which is detractory from the glory of our Head Christ Jesus,
(such as are most of the learned Papists, (if their Faith be agreeable to their
Writings) can be saved.

This may seem rough doctrine to Men pleasers. They confess, the Jews,
because of their obstinate Incredulity; the Turks, because of their profane
Impiety; the Pagans, because of their absurd Idolatry, are out of all hope of
Salvation if so they persist.

But the Papists who confess, profess, and worship God^ and his Christ, are
in a far different state from the former; because they retain some worship
of Christ, though it be not so exact and perfect in truth, as Gods word
requires. I answer; All the Impiety that ever was among the Gentiles, was but
a Deprauation of the true worship of God; Saint Paul says of them, that, They
withheld the truth in unrighteousness; He said not (as one notes) that they had
not the Rom* (...) Sedulis. Ibid.
truth, but that they withheld the truth which they knew in unrighteousness;
for they detained the truth of the Name of God. in the unrighteousness of the
unworthy matter of Idols. And another does most plainly illustrate this point,
upon Theop^ylact.
the same words: saying; that the truth it self or the knowledge of God, were
from the beginning infused into men; The heathen withheld the truth and
knowledge in unrighteousness, that is, they depraved it as much as they could,
when they translated the glory of God to their Idols; neither did they
otherwise, then they who having received money to be spent on the honor of the
Emperor* consume it upon thieves, and Harlots, whom all men will confess to
deal injuriously with the Majesty of the Emperor.

Thus dealt the Pagans with God, as Origin does exemplify Lib. contra celsum.
in the Egyptians; who (says he) erected magnificent Temples, pleasant
groves, stately Porches and Galleries, admirable Chapels, curiously vaulted;
vbi v^ro ad penitralia ipsa ventum est, Crocodilum, Canem, Hircum, Simeam and
^uinsm^di adorare conspiciuntur; But when you were entered into the inmost parts
thereof, you should see there a Crocodile, ^ Dog, a Goat, an Ape, and such
things to be worshipped by them.

Thus have Romish Heretics dealt in the deprauation of religion; for testimony
whereof hear the Assertion of a Man of your own Synagogue, excellently
learned, and of authority among you, greater then all exception that may be
made against him by you; who in his Commentary upon the 27. Chapter of the
eighth Book of S. Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, Lodonic. (...).
(where the Father treats of the memory of Christian Martyrs, quitting the
Christians of his time, from Idolatry; and showing the Idolatrous abuse of the
Pagans in their Parentals) compares the Idolatry of his time, with that of the
Pagans, in these words: Multi Christiani in re bon^ plerumq* peccant, quod
diuos, di^asque non aliter venerantur quam deum; Nec video in multis, quod sit
descrimen inter little opinion^m de Sanctis, and id quod Gentiles putabant de
dijssuss. Many Christians do, for the most part, sin in a good thing, while
they worship men and women Saints; even as they worship God; Neither do I see
in many things what difference is between their opinion of the Saints, and
that which the Heathen thought of their Gods.

I could produce the testimony of Sundry other, of the mostlearned Writers of
your side; who have complained of diverse Idolatrous abuses, in present Romish
Religion, wishing reformation thereof, but I refer that, to another place,
time and Occasion.

In the mean time, know, O you simple s^duced Souls, that live Capti^^s in
Babil^^* and persuade your s^lu^s also* (if you have any spark of Charity)
that I do not propound these things unto you, as a Blasphemous inuectiue of
ma^ic^ against your persons, many of whom I am bound by nature to love, and by
the merit of their semblable affection toward my person do love; yea, the
wo^st^ I wish to any of yo^, is that Christ were fully formed in you; but these
things I do write unto you, of a Sincere affection, and Zealous lou^, which I
do bear unto your Souls; that you beholding the dangerous estate wherein you
insist, may slye from it, and become partakers of the same grace with us,
whereas otherwise there can be no salvation; while you intending the worship of
God never so sincerely; yet in your worship commit gross Idolatry, which Gods
Soul does hate and abhotre, That while you think your selves to be true
Worshippers, and Catholi^ke Christians; you should be found in the Trial,
foul Idolaters, and mere Antichristians* ^ That while you shall with false
confidence say unto Christ* These and these things have we done in thy name,
Christ should answer, I know you not, depart from me all ye that work
iniqu^ty, which God forbid for Jesus Christ his sake; and open your eyes, that
you may plainly behold, how you are blindfolded by that Man of Sins, to be^led
to the slaughter, and how under the color of serning the Almighty, he makes
you commit Idolatry.

For if you well consider it; Idolatry properly is an obse^uation of divine
worship, such as is not in sti^uted by God in his word, but invented by man in
his conceit, S^^h as was the worship of the Golden Calfe, and many other
sacred Rites among the I sraelites* and also among the Pagans, and also in your
Pop^sh Religion.

Again, it is Idolatry to observe that divine worship, which God himself has
instituted, if it be abused by an ^uill opinion, as when Man shall usurp it
to ano^^en end and use; then that unto which God has originaly appointed it,
such were the observations of the Sacrifioes, and Incense, among the I
sraelites, which though they were primarily instituted by God, yet because the
I sraelites performed them by an evil and pe^ve^se opinion, viz that they were
meritorious (ex opere operato) to expiato sins, they are judged Idolatry; So
the old Law, which in his own time and season gave long daie^ and life
eternal to the s^rict, perfect Gloss. Interlin. in cap. 4. ad Galat.
and severe obse^uer, if it should be now kept, is reputed Idolatry.

So many Substantial points of Religion among you, and some less principal
as they are abused by you, are openly blasphemous, maintain Idolatry, and
v^^e^ly subuer^ Christian R^l^gion, some of which, were they ^educed to their
primitive integrity, might tend to Gods honor, and effect your Salvation.
Which I will exemplify in two or three points, that you may beliold your error.

What else is your doctrine of Good-workes, unto which, as the Apostle says we
are created in Christ, Jesus, which God Ep^es. 2.
has ordained that we should wal^c on them; and they have likewise the promise
of eternal life, but of ^eroy, not of merit; yet as they are abused by you,
through a perverse in^ontion Conc. Trident. S^^. 6. Cap. 16. can. 32. and
Zekius Ench^^d. cap. 5. p^^pos. ^
of purchasing Salvation with them, ex mer^to condigni^ (which is a proud,
arrog^nc, presumptu^us, L^ciferian, diabolical adscription) first invented by
that Aduer^ury of Gods grace, Pelagius; They become not only unprofitable unto
you, but plainly damnable, yea and blasphemous, because they ruinate the very
foundation of our faith, and make frustrate the All and alone sufficient
Sacrifice of our Redemption, viz: the death and Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

What? Shall we believe that such men believe in Christ? Saint Ambrose was of
another opinion when he ^4. q. 1 a Cap. Adu^c^uit.
said; Non videtur ab his exhiberi fides Christo, a quibus euacuatur passio
eius, atque distrahitur. It seems not that such men do b^leeue in Christ,
who go about to frustrate and distract his Passion.

Your Mass* which is your God Mau^i^, whom you Dan* 11.
worship in stead of the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, which in respect
of his first Institution, is a Medicine of ^gnat. Epl^. Sphes.
Immortality, and an Antidote against death; Is now become such a Rhapsody
consaroinated by many Popes, such a rude, indigested monstrous Chaos, and as
the Poet speaks, (...), In all parts of it so monstrously altered, tha^ now
it is not known from a ridiculous propha^e, and blasphemous Stage*play,
invented by cosening Mates, to deceive your simple ignorant credulity.

So much is it abused in the use and application thereof, in making it a new
Oblation for all our actual Sins; That Christ his Sacrifice, (which says
Haymo) V^num fuit and semel In Cap. 7. ad Hebr.
oblatum, and sufficit in se^^piternum ad tollenda omnia peccata credentium;
Being one, and but once offered, suffices for everlasting to take away all the
sins of believers, is made to be of no sufficience; yea, so much is it
depraved, that from thence does flow; false Religion, Heathenish Superstition,
Idolatry, evil persuasions, wicked worship, infinite and intolerable errors,
most impious and insufferable Blasphemi^s against Christ, and against his
innocent blood, ignorance of God, In^oc^tion of the dead, Confection,
Consecration, Application, and Oblation of the Body* and Blood of Christ, for
the Salvation of the quick and the dead, Transubstantiation, Ado^ation,
Ostentation, Circumgestation, Inclusion and Reservation of the Eucharisticall
bread, Satisfaction for the wretched souls of the dead, that are pitifully
tormented in the false fire of Purgatory, and their deliverance from
punishment, the privation of the Cup from the People, the using of an
unknown tongue in the execution of Divine Offices, a profanation of those
sacred Mysteries, and a mere mockery of Christ's people.

So your Canonical hours for prayer, are turned into Idolatry; for although
reading of holy Scriptures, and Prayers and singing of Psalms, are commended
by God; yet Hypocrites abuse them, by a wicked opinion they have of them,
intending by the Merits of these works, to expiate their Sins.

So your In^ocation of the blessed Virgin, and of the Saints, is Blasphemy; for
though God will be honored in his Saints, yet he will not give his glory
unto them: now, the principal honor we do unto God, is in praying unto him;
for thereby we acknowledge all his Attributes, which we translate unto the
Saints, when we do invoke them by Prayer.

But you show your selves op^n Idolaters in worshipping your Images, with the
same worship where with you worship the Prototypon, as your schoolmen and
modern Aq. Part 3 q. 25. Art. ^. Cos^er, E^^^ind.
Divines mainetaine in their writings.

Right Faith, must make a just difference between the Creator, and the
Creature, and give unto either, that which belongs unto him, without
transfusing the propriety of the one, unto the other; So that we may not
ascribe the Majesty and power of the Creator to the Creature; nor attribute
the Infirmity of the Creature to the Creator: So that if Faith give unto every
one, his own, his oblation is right; if he does discern well between
either, he divides aright, and does not sin; The defect whereof causes
Heresy; for God will endure no Corriuall: for if the same honor be given
unto other, which is proper unto him, Ips^ Lactant* lib 1. de ^als sap. cap. 19.
omnino non col^tur, he is not worshipped at all, whose Religion is such, that
he only will be worshipped: for his glory will ^ee not give to another,
neither his praise to graue^ Esaias 42.
Images.

The precedent matters being duly considered, how can you avoid or acquit your
selves from the title of Heretics? or rather, how can you claim the title of
Christians? You will happily say, you profess Christ, which is the proper
foundation of Christians. But if we diligently consider those things which
concern Christ, I must apply the words of Augustine unto you for an answer;
N^mine E^ch^^d cap. 5.
tenus inu^nitur Christus apud quosl^bet Haereticos, qui se Christianos vocari
volunt, reipsa autem non esse apud (...) Christ is found commonly in the mouth
of all such Heretics who would have themselves called Christians, but in very
deed, he is not among them at all; you will pretend your assent to
Christianity, but falsely* seeing you fail in electing those things, by which
you may ass^n^ unto Christ; those you should choose, which Christ himself has
truly delivered to be believed; not such as your own erroneous mind
suggesteth* if so, though you profess the faith of Christ, but yet corrupt the
Principles thereof; you are no better then Infidels. Therefore the Schoole-man
says well, that In heretico discredente vnum articulum Aquin se^unda secund^.
^. 5. (...). 3.
fidei, non manet fides, Faith is extinct in that Heretic, that misbeleeueth
one Article of the faith; for faith depends on its proper Object, which is
the first Truth; therefore he that does not cleave to all the Articles of
faith, for this Medium, as it is propounded unto us in the H^ly Scriptures,
according to the Doctrine of the Church, understanding it soundly, is
altogether faithless, for such a one has not faith, but opinion suitable to
his own will.

If you object farther, that you believe the Creed, we answer Quoad sonum,
non quoad sensum, the letter you do, but not the true sense: But as the father
says, De Intellig^n^ia Hillar. lib. de (...).
fit Heresis, sensus and non sermo fit crimen; Heresy grows from perverse
understanding, the fault in the meaning, not in the Phrase.

The Creed must be kept Integra, says Athanasius, and In Symb^l^.
Inuiolata, whole without substraction of truth, and v^desiled without
admixtion of falsehood.

If any one be by Profession a Christian, but by perverse understanding an
Heretic, such a one being an Isra^l^t^ Origin ^o^il Super* Le^it.
by his Mother, but an Egiptian by his father, must be carried out of the
Host, and for his Blasphemy against God be stoned to death.

Linddnus terms us Semi-Christians, and says that we should more
cautelously be avoided: But I do^ advise all Lib. Concord. discord* i^ (...).
^t page Seq.
those that regard their own Salvation, to beware of them as Pseudo
Christians, which we have proved them to be; for as their Intention is to
seek after Semi-christians, who a they may deceive; So is it our purpose, to
show them to be Pseudo* Christians; that not only the more skillful Christians
may discover them, by conuicting them, but the more ignorant sort, may gain
knowledge by eschewing them.

To this end our Savior commanded us, to beware of false Prophets which come
unto us in Sheep clothing, but inwardly Math 7.
are ra^ening Wol^es.

Which words Chrysostom expounding, says, That we Homil. 19. in Cap. Math.
Tom. 7.
^ught above all things, know who are false Christians, There is nothing (says
he) does more ruinate Christians then this, that whomsoever men see to be
called Christians, they esteem them as if they were Christians indeed; But
what if it be certain, that they be false Christians? for, either he is a
false Christian, or thou; if thou be one, he is none; if h^e be one, why do
thou esteem him a Christian, whom Christ has judged to be no Christian? whom
God does not confess to be his Son, why do thou esteem to be thy
Brother? But thou will say, How can I say that he is no Christian, whom I
perceive to confess Christ, who has an Altar, who offers up the Sacrifice
of Bread and wine, who reads the writings of the Saints, who have all degrees
of holy Priesthood.

O wise man* if any man does not confess Christ, and that his Infidelity be
apparent unto thee, and that thou wast seduced by him, thou wast Mad to be
seduced by him; But now that he confesses Christ, but not so as Christ
commanded; Thy Negligence was the cause of thy Seduction; for he that falls
into a pit, which he did not foresee, may be termed Negligent, because he did
not warily forelooke: But he that falls into a pit which he beholds with
his eyes; Non negligens, sed Insanus dicitur, is not to be censured negligent,
but mad.

But as concerning the multitude of Ecclesiastical Ministers, take this
answer; An Ape has all the members of a Man, and does imitate a Man in most
things, and yet can never be called a Man; So Heretics do imitate all the
true Mysteries of the true Church, and yet are not the Church.

In which sense Augustine writing upon these words of the 54. Psalm,
according to the Translation of that time, In multis erant mecum, in many
things they were with me* says thus of Heretics, Baptismum habeamus, in eo
errat mecum, etc. We had Baptism common, in that they were with me; we did
read the Gospel, in that they were with me; They did celebrate the Festiuity
of Martyrs, they were there with me; they did solemnize Easter, there were
they with me; Sed non omnino mecum, but they were not wholly with me; in
Scisme they were not with me, in Heresy not with me; in many with me, in
few not with me: But in these few wherein they were not with me; there many
wherein they were with me, were unprofitable unto them, etc.

This is it which puffs up Heretics with a false conceit that they are
true Christians, because they hold some few points common with the Orthodoxall
Professors, and confess Christ in some sort, whereas indeed they neither
believe in Christ, nor confess him, but make an Idol unto themselves, in the
forge of their own imagination, which they worship as they please; neither do
they hold wholly of Christ, and yet they will claim the title of Christians,
but all in vain; and this is an Ancient practice among them.

Christum etiam Haeretici sibi habere videntur, says Super. cap. 9. Luc^.
Ambrose; Heretics, seem to themselves to have Christ; for none of them does
deny the Name of Christ; But he denies Christ, who does not confess all those
poin^s which concern Christ, vnum dogmatum si retraxeris, retraxisti salutem;
if thou retract one Article of the faith, thou do renounce thy salvation.

And S. John confirms this saying; If any (says Explan. 2.
he) transgresses or abides not in the doctrine of Christ, he has not God:
where the Greek Verb (...) signifies any violation of the faith, in whole or
part.

For this cause were Christians termed Catholics, ex obedientia omnium
mandatorum Dei, of their obedience to the whole faith of Christ in doctrine and
manners: Pacian Explan. prima ad Sympron. Nou^ti^^. 2. Cor. 2.
Hereby the Apostle proved the Corinthians, if they were obedient in all
things; and he shows the occasion of the first coming up of that name,
somewhat before, saying; when after the time of the Apostles, Heresies grew up,
and that they labored to rent a sunder, and cut in pieces Gods Dove, and
Queen; did not the people whom the Apostles had converted, require a proper
Name, which might distinguish the unity of that uncorrupted people, unless the
errors of some, should divide the members of that undefiled Virgin of God? and
somewhat after he says, Wherefore our people is distinguished from those that
are called Heretics, by the name of Catholic; therefore he that is a
Catholic, the same is obedient unto the whole faith, He that is obedient,
the same is a Christian, and so he is a Catholic Christian; and these two
must be inseparable, that we may worthily glory, and truly say with this
Father, Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus ver^ cognomen; I ^ud me
nuncupat, I stud ostendit; hoc probor* inde sig^ificor.

Christian is my Name, C^tholicke, my Surname, the first does name me, the
other does display me; by the first I am proved, by the other I am signified.

And so Christianity is t^armed Obedience unto the Romans 1. 655 ^^cob.
faith, (in all points no doubt) for of this it may b^e said; He that has
offended in one, is guilty of all.

Therefore whoso^uer shall through nepharious pride forsake, or contumelio^sly
reject, or profanely alter any point of the Orthodoxall faith, or audaciously
add any thing thereunto, are not to be reputed Christians, but rather
Antichrists; for even as the Adamant, which is the most precious of all Stones,
is of very great esteem, if so be it be perf^ct, sound, and whole; pure,
bright, and without spot or slaw; but if it be soyl^d, dark, or otherwise
d^formed, and b^oken, is of no regard.

So the Christian Faith, (if it be such as will save thy Soul) must be
whole* perfect, not contaminated with the impure filthin^sse of the leaven of
humane Doctrine; ^ot diminished, violated, and cu^talled, by rejecting the
chief heads of sound Doctrine, or by adding supe^fluities, or by lopping of
necessaries, or usurping strange Inue^tions: ^or as Augustine says, Lib. c^^^
Julian* P^lag. cap. 2.
speaking of the fundamental points of Faith; That if a man should in
disputation sub^ert but one of them, totum quod in Christum credimus, is
auferat necesse est, he must needs confound the whole faith of Christ.

Therefore Saint Paul thundereth out an Anathema Impartially, against him
whosoever he shall be, Galat. ^.
that shall preach any other Gospel, then he had preached; Licet Nos (says
he) Cur non potius sed l^cet ego? why not I, rather then we? he means, that
though Vincent. Lyrin. cont. Har* cap. ^^
Peter, though Andr^w, though John, though the whole society of the Apostles
should preach other Doctrine that he had done, let him or them be accursed:
Tremenda districtio, here is t^rrible s^uerity, propter adserendam primae fidei
tenacitat^m ne^ sibi, nec ^aeteris Apostolis pepercisse: That the first faith
may be maintained inuiolated he spares neither himselelfe, nor the rest of his
fellow Apostles: this is not all; but he mounteth up into Heaven, he dares
the heavenly Angels; and good reason to, says that worthy Orthodoxall Bishop
of Constant^nople; Ministrare namque praeceptum Proclus lib. ad A^^en contr^
Nesiorium.
est Angelo, non dogma componere; Angels are ordained for ministering Spirits,
not for to frame Articles of Belief.

The end is, that such a one shall be Anathema, that is, separated,
segregated, excluded from the Communion of God, his Christ, and his Church, he
is no member of that ^ody whereof Christ is the head, and consequently no
Christian.

And therefore the ancient holy Christian Emperors, Theodosius and
Valentinian, made a Law Ne C^ de (...) Manicb. cap. Damna^o.
Haeretici Christianorum appellatione abundantur, sed vt cuius Scelus sunt in
deserendo d^um Imitati, cius vocabulum iure videanter esse sortiti; that
Heretics should not abuse the title of Christians, by usurping of it unto
themselves, but that they should be called after his name, whose wickedness
they did imitate in forsaking God.

I conclude this point with the saying of that most glorious Martyr; as the
Devil (says he) is not Christ, though Cyptian tract. de Simply. proll^t.
he does deceive in the name of Christ; Ita nec Christianus videri potest, qui
non permanet in Euangelij ^ius, et fidei ^eritate; So, he cannot seem to be a
Christian, that does not abide in the truth of his Gospel and Faith* for to
Prophecy, to cast out Devils, and to do great wonders on the Earth, is surely
an high and admirable matter; But he that does all these things, does not
attain the Kingdom of Heaven, unless he walk in the right path of true
faith.

And we say with our Church, that They are to be Artic. 18.
had accursed that presume to say, that every man shall be saved by the Law, or
S^ct, which he professes; so that he be diligent to frame his life
according to that Law, and the light of Nature.

CHAP. 2. Proves, that Infidels and Heretics, by an Innocent life, and
virtuous actions, (if they could perform any) cannot be saved, unless they
be Orthodoxall Christians also; and the Error of Lodouicus Viues, is confuted.
NOw I will propound four Objections, which men make against the former
Doctrine unto themselves, to maintain their perseverance in any Religion,
though it be false and impions, to be safe; annexing several Answers
thereunto.

The First, is an Innocent life, and adorned with good works.

The Second, is a good Intention or meaning.

The Third, is the Obligation of Conscience, though Erroneous.

The Fourth, is the Phylanthrophy, or love of God to Mankind.

Let us therefore examine, whither the First will suffice, or the Second
excuse; or the Third Secure, or the Last assure them of Salvation.

The First Objection may thus be made.

What if I should not believe, that Christ is come in the flesh, with all other
Articles of the Christian faith? but should notwithstanding spend my life in
good works? Cannot I by these works, be numbered among the Godly and
Religious, and receive a reward for them?

This Objection is most Elegantly, and luculently answered, by Lactancius as
follows.

Sed putemus fieri posse, Vt aliquis naturali and ingenito Bono Lib. ^. de vero
cult^. cap. 9.
veras Virtutes Capiat; etc.

But grant, that some one man, by natural an^ innated benefit, should be able
to practice true virtues, as we read of Cimon of Athens, who gave a Stipe^d to
the needy, Invited the poor, and clothed the naked; yet seeing that one
thing, which is the greatest of all other, (that is) the knowledge of God was
wanting, Surely all those other good Virtues, Super vacua sunt, and ina^ia, are
Superfluous and serve to no purpose, that it were a needless labor spent in
attaining unto them; for all his Righteousness, is like to the body of a Man,
that has no head thereon; In which though all the Members stand in their due
places, in their apt form and proportion; yet because that which is the
principal of all, is away, it want^th life, and all Sense; Therefore those
Members, have the form only of Members, but not the use;

So is it likewise, where there is an Head without a Body; unto which, he is
like, who knows God, yet lives unrighteously, for he has that only which
is the Chief, but in vain, because he wants v^rtues in stead of Members.

Therefore that the Body may be living and sensible, both the knowledge of God
is necessary, as it were the head, and all Virtues, as it were the Body;

So there shall be a perfect and living man, yet the chief shall be in the head,
which though it cannot consist without all, yet it can with some members. Yet
it shall be a ce^taine vicious and weak creature, but so that it shall live,
even as he that knows God, and si^neth in some matters; Da^ enim veniam
peccatis Deus; for God does forgive sins* so that a man may live without some
of his members, but not possibly without his head.

Hence is it that the Philosophers, though they be good by nature, yet they
know naught, they understand naught; all their learning and virtue, is without
an head, because they know not God, who is the head of virtue and learning;
whom, whosoever does not know, though he do see, yet is he blind; though he
do hear, yet is he dea^e; though he do speak, yet is he dumb: but when
he knows the Creator and Parent of all things; then he shall hear, and
see, and speak, for he begins to have an head, in which all the senses are
placed, that is, Eyes, Ears and Tongue.

For verily he sees, who sees the truth in which God is, or God in whom the
truth is, with the eyes of his heart; ^e hears, who fasteneth the Word of God
and his lively Precepts to his breast; he speaks, who discoursing of
heavenly things, declares the power and Majesty of the most excellent God.

Wherefore, there is no doubt, but that he is ungodly, who has not the right
knowledge of God; and all those virtues which they think they have, are found
in that deadly way, which is altogether darkness: Therefore in vain does any
one slatter himself with the possession of those Idle Virtues; And he
concludes that Chapter a little after, in these word^s.

Ergo in dei agnitione, and culturerum summa versatur etc. Therefore the whole
matter consists, in the knowledge and worship of God; In him is the whole
hope and salvation of man. This is the first degree of wisdom, that we may
know who is our true Father; and that we worship him only as we ought; let
us obey him; let us serve him most devoutly; let all our p^actise, care and
actions be but to purchase his love and favor.

Hitherto Lactantius; whose Judicious Discourse I thought good to p^opound unto
you, rather then to ^aile or faulter in mine own poor, and barren Invention.

And this is confirmed by holy Writ, where it is said; that, Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin; upon which words Romans 13.
says Augustine, Where the knowledge of the eternal truth is a wanting, falsa
virtus est etiam in optimis moribus, the best virtues are but deceitful
shadows; yea, says another, The whole life of In^idels is sin, and wholly
v^acceptable unto God, Etiamsi ea quae agunt, sunt bona de se; though their
Bonauent. Super* 2. Sent. Dis^. 41.
Actions be good in themselves.

But say that there were all Moral Virtues in a Pagan yet there is not one
free from vices; but as one of them Crates T^^^. apud B^uso^. lib. 5. cap. 12.
said, It is impossible that that man should be found, who never ^ell; but
that one grain in him, as in a Pomegranade should be^ rotten: whence I argue
thus; if they expect a reward for Virtue, they must likewise be pleased to
receive punishment for their vices; Shall we receive good at the hand of ^ob 2
the Lord, and not receive evil? Justice requires no less; The reward thou
do expect, is beyond the merit of thy Virtues; and will thou murmurre if thy
punishment be proportionable to thy faults? Behold, thou that boastest of the
perfection of thy Virtues, do want Justice, the foundation of all, and
consequently art v^iust; we who are Christians, confess that we have very
few virtues which shall be rewarded above measure, innumerable vices to
receive their punishment; we say this is just; and yet through mercy are we
saved; which mercy, is content to accept another to undergo the punishment,
and to give us this person, his own Son out of the bosom of his Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation (...). Joh. pri^^a cap.
2.
for our sins, that we may truly say with the Kingly Prophet, In him Mercy
and Truth are met together, Righteousness Psalm.
and Peace have kissed each other.

We sinned, he suffered; we are acquitted; we know our want and our
relieuer also; our want makes us seek, his promise and our confidence makes
us obtain; that which thou can not because thou know not, nor do
acknowledge thy want, and therefore do not seek, nor know not where to
seek, or whom for an helper, and that because thou winkest, or stopp^st thine
ear, vnleast thou should see or hear him who cries unto thee, Come unto
me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you; Take my yoke on
you, and learn of me, that I am meek and Math. 11.
lowly in heart, and you shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is
easy and my burden is light. This is he unto whom we cleave, unto him have
we bound our selves and that worthily* for there is no other name under heaven
whereby we Acts. 4.
must be saved, but the name of Jesus.

Whosoever therefore does not wholly rely on him with the Christian, must
ineuitably perish.

Wherefore Viues, a man otherwise of excellent learning, and sound Judgment,
is as far beside the right mark, as is distance between Heaven and Hell, in
affirming, That Comment. in lib. 18, cap. 47. d^ Ciuit. Dei.
those who being borne in the most remote Territories, beyond the maine Ocean,
and never heard any thing af Christ, but if they keep those two great
cammandements, wherein consists the Law and the Prophets, viz. Loving God and
his Neighbor are as acceptable to God, as Baptized Christians; Quum Spiritum
Sanctum, non secus quam Apostoli meruerint and acceperint; Seeing they have
deserned and received the holy Ghost, as well as the Apostles, and that because
they sought out the righteousness of the Lord: So great a matter is it, says
he, to have a desire to be good, though thou can not find a man to teach
thee virtue; whereas our Sauioursaith, That he that believes not in him is
condemned already, even for this cause, that he has not believed in the name
of that only John 3.
begotten Son of God, whereas the knowledge of Christ is life 17.
eternal.

And whereas he pretends that they might perfectly perform the Law,
following nature for their Guide, their Conscience being their Law, and
consequently be saved by their virtuous life; as many Christians on the
contrary, having the knowledge of he Law, do notwithstanding transgress
against the law, and thereby incur damnation.

I answer; that there are many Christians wicked, but there are no Pagans to
be found good; for, though some of them were accounted to be good, yet they
performed all their Actions for* vainglory; But he that is good for vain
glory, and not for the love of Goodness it self, if opportunity second him,
he will follow evil desires; And therefore I say, that as daily slippes of
infirmity do not hinder the true penitent Christian from life ^ternall; for
without such no man can spend this wretched life: So some virtuous Actions, of
which the most impious man cannot be wholly destitute, cannot further the
infidel to everlasting Salvation; because he does them to a wrong end, as for
vain glory.

Neither can he say that God is unjust, if he do not give him life eternal,
for a reward of his virtues; for God does recompense them with temporal
blessings, at which they most aimed and looked not beyond; hear the mystery
revealed, by the Author of the imperfect work upon Saint Mathewes Gospel:
where he says, Si fidelis (...). 26.
fec^rit opus bonum, and hic ei prodest, etc.

If a Believing Christian does act a good work, it does profit him in this
life, to deliver him from evil; and in the next life to receive the Kingdom
of Heaven, but rather there then here.

But if an Infidel does a good work, his work does profit him here in this
life, and God will render him good things here, for his work, but it will not
profit him in the life to come; neither is he placed among the faithful
because of his work, and justly too; Quia naturali bono motus, fecit bonum,
non propter Deum; because he did act that good deed, by the mere motion of
nature, and not for the love of God.

And I say, though a man should perform true virtues, and yet be destitute of
the knowledge and faith of Christ, he could not be saved; for what good had it
been unto Saint Paul, to have kept the righteousness which is of the Law, if
he had not known Christ? Seeing our Savior says unto the Jews, Except ye
believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins: In consideration whereof,
Saint Paul ^enounceth Io^. 8.
all confidence in his righteousness which is in the Law, touching which, he
was unblameable, that he might gain the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus,
accounting all Philip. 3.
things to be dung that he might win^e Christ, that he might be found in him,
that is not, having his own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
faith.

But these works in a Believing Christian, are profitabl* because they are
done by them, of love toward God, i^ whom they believe, and that with great
hu^ility; o which love Infidels being destitute, their works are meer^ vanity;
for it may be, That some may believe ther^ is a God, and yet not love him, as
the Devils do, Who believe Jacob. Cap. 2.
and tr^mb^e* but it cannot be, that any one should love God, who does not
believe in him; because every one may believe a thing to be which he does not
love, but no man does love that which he does not believe to be; but the
Apostle says, that, All good works cannot pr^fit, if love of God be wanting;
yet though a man have a true knowle^ge 1 Cor. 19.
of God Historical, and that faith which could work miracles, and yet be
void of the true faith, which works by Charity, they could not profit.

If therefore those works which are acted by him, who has that faith of
working miracles, do not proceed from a love toward God, and to the end he
may be glorified in them, are unprofitable; how shall those works which are
acted by him who has no faith, be conducible to procure eternal life?

You are therefore danger^usly deceived, who presume that God regards not
what, or whether we believe, or not, misapylying to that purpose which the
Apostle Romans 2.
says, To every man that does good, he will give glory and honor and peace,
to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian, and that because there is no respect
of persons with God; For how can glory be to the unbelievers? which is not
given unto any, but unto those who are justified, for those whom God Romans 8.
has justified he has also glorified.

Or what honor shall be given to Infidels? When Saint Peter teaches, that it
is not given, but only to those that believe. Or how shall there be peace unto
him, who is not Ephe^. 1.
redeemed with the blood of Jesus Christ? In whom God has pacifiea the things
which are in Heaven, and in Earth; for he is our peace, who has made of both,
one.

But this peace cannot be poss^ssed, without the faith, and love of Christ,
for we being justified by faith, have peace Romans 5.
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have entrance by
faith into this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the
glory of God.

This hope does not make us ashamed, because the love of God is powered forth
into our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, who is given unto us; for we have received
the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

That therefore men may be made the Sons of God, they receive the only
begotten Son of God by faith, and by his gift, they receive this power from
the Lord, that they may believe in him, and appertain to the number of the
Sons of God; For as many as received him, to them he gave* power to be made
the Sons of God, even to those, John 1.
that believe in his name.

In their hearts he writes his Law: that is, the Law of Ierem. 31.
Faith, which being inspired, does Justify. This Law, God does write in the
hearts of his people, not by the Condition of Nature, but by the bounty of
Grace; not by the free will of Man, but by the Ministry of the preaching of
the Gospel; not in stone, by the Letter of the Old Testament, but, in the
heart, by the Spirit of the living God.

He writes therefore the Law of faith, by which God justifies the Gentiles,
that by giving grace, he might renew Nature. And for this cause he diffuseth
Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law, by his Spirit, that he may make men
labor to fulfill that which he commanndeth; and he bestows the grace of
Illumination, by the Spirit of faith, that therefore faith might work by love,
that which is pleasing unto God.

The which, as long as it is not in Man, whatsoever has remained in man
written by the Law of Nature, without the Law of Faith, does not possibly
save him that does thereafter; because God does justify no man without
Faith, neither can it purchase salvation unto the worker^, because that without
faith it is impossible to please God. Hebr. 11.


Wherefore the Law of Nature, by which a man preserneth the bond of humane
Society, without faith; if it be fulfilled, cannot suffice to save the Soul,
as Dives would prove. But that Law, by which a man knows, and loves God, by
believing in him; not by which a man grown proud, does challenge unto
himself good works, or faith it self; but by which he does with humble
subjection, ascribe both his Faith, and his Works, unto God, who does work
them mercifully in him; for this is the nature of true faith, so to compose and
direct a man's heart; That when a man hears the precepts of God, Iddonari sibi
quod praecipitur poscat; Et cum in fide operatur, Fulgent. lib. d^ ^^carn.
Christi. cap. 27.
gratia Dei se ^^giter adiuvari non ambigat; He prays unto God, to make him
able to do that which he commands; and when he does good works as a
believer, he acknowledges, that he is helped wholly to perform them by the
grace of God.

But we say farther, That he that does not believe, cannot have any true
virtues, as we have proved before in part, and we add besides, that as
faith without works, is no faith, so works without faith, are no works:
Saint Jerome saying, Sine Christo omnis Virtus in vitio In cap* 3. ad Galat.
est, Without the faith of Christ, no virtue is faultlesse; yea, were they
present, they could be of no continuance.

For if so be, the threatening of Hell, the promise of Heaven, the exemplary
lives of inuumerable Saints, and all other means, which we can use, can hardly
among us, who are Christians, prese^ue m^n in virtuous actions; what can we
think of those, who living in Infidelity, and are destitute of these
furtherances? But that they are so far from being preserved in the practice
of virtues, that it is not possible, but that they should become stark naught
and vicious.

Therefore I conclude, That an innocent life, and virtuous actions without the
faith of Christ, cannot suffice to salvation.

And I do add further, that good deeds being found in any one, who professes
Christ otherwise then the Scripture teaches, and the true Church believes,
are wholly unprofitable, and no better then the forenamed false virtues of
Infidels: for Vbi sana fides non est, non potest esse Institia; 24. q. 1. cap.
vbi Sana ex ^ugustin^.
there can be no true righteousness, where there is no sound faith.

Therefore let no man deceive himself by confidence in an innocent and
virtuous life, if h^e die in a damnable and heretical Religion, such as is
Popery; hear Saint Augustine for a Summary; Constituamus aliquem castum,
continentem, Lib. 4. de Baptis^^^.
non auarum, non Idolis seruientem, etc.

Say there is a man, who is chaste, continent, not covetous, no Idolater, given
to Hospitality, to Alms, no man's enemy, not contentious, patient, quiet,
hating no man, envying no man, sober, thriftie; but withal an Heretic; Nulli
vtique dubium est, propter hoc solum quod Haereticus est, regnum Dei non
possessurum; No man doubts, but for this cause only, for that he is an
heretic, he shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

CHAP. 3. Declares, that a good Intention or meaning toward God, auaile^h not
Heretics, to preserve them from damnation, without the right knowledge of the
true faith: where is proved, that Negligence and Ignorance, in matters of
Faith, is damnable, which ought to be expelled, and prevented by diligent
reading, and examining of the Scriptures; with a detection, and con^iction of
the Popish political tyranny, in prohibiting the Laity, from the reading of
the Scr^ptures: containing also an Apology for our Ancestors, of the Laity,
who, (for the most part) dyed true Christians, under the domination of
Antichrist, as is plainly proved at large; and that the estate of the Papists,
who live under Protestant Princes, is damnable, unless they renounce Popery.
THe Second Motive, whereby men are persuaded to persist in their Native
Religion, though false and impious; is the pretense of a good Intention.

They say; Whatsoever the religion be, whereof they are unable to judge, yet
their meaning toward God in respect of his Service, is good; and God respects
and accepts the mind, and the Intention, which is sufficient to excuse them,
rather then to entertain another, wherein they may be deceived also, because
they are not judicious, to discern between truth and falsehood, in matters of
faith, and subtilties of religion, and it is better to obey ignorantly, then to
change religion doubtfully, so they mean well toward God,

I do make this answer unto such senseless souls.

That it is one thing to have a Good Intention or meaning; another thing to
have a right Intention;

An Error may easily insert it self into a Good Intention, and so corrupt it,
and howsoever in respect of the End, the intention may be good, yet other
Circumstances may mar the matter. A right Intention, is the working of our
will, whereby it proceeds by d^e means unto a good end:

From whence it follows; That if the End in it self Good, ^e not rightly
intended, neither the End is good, nor the Intention right; As a work in it
self evil, is not made good, by the good End, for which it is intended; as if
one should steal, because h^e would relieve the necessity of the poor,
contrary to St. Paul's Romans 3.
rule; We may not do evil, that Good may come of it. So here, if the End be
Good, yet if the means be not good, the deed must be evil; for Error and
Ignorance spoyleth the matter, as the Lord speaks, Therefore my people are
gone into captivity, because they Esaias.
have no understanding: So we may say of Heretics; They are chained by the
Devil, with the strong band of Blasphemy, because they are without knowledge
and understanding of the law.

This is it which subuerteth Religion, when men are blinded in the choice, and
discerning the difference, between Truth and Falsehood, erring from the right
scope, to the infinite damage of their Conscience.

So the Jews were persuaded, that they had done God a singular piece of
Service, when they executed their woluish ferity against the Christians.

With the like ^ury was Paul enraged against the Christians, persecuting them
with menaces and threats, with a zeal of piety, but such as was erroneous, and
not according to knowledge; it was not done with judgment, and
preconsideration of the cause, not by the impulsion of Gods Spirit, which God
will have tried by his word, whither it be his or not.

And hence arises so many Errors in choice of Religion, because men are
destitute of Gods Spirit, which should secure and certi^ie our spirits of the
Truth; There is a way (says Solomon) that seems right to a man, but the
issues thereof are the ways of Proverb. 14.
death; Therefore ignorance of Gods law, is the ruin of true Religion; for,
Colere and amare, quem Ignoras, non potes; Thou August.
can not worship and love him, whom thou do not know: zeal without
knowledge, is a vehement cours^ in the wrong way; wherein the faster thou do
run, the farther thou go astray out of the way; And as the Father says,
Melior vel claudus in via, quam cursor praeter viam; It is better to halt in
the way, Sermon. 15. de verb. Ap^li.
then to run swiftly out of the way.

Though thou fire Iron never so hot in the Furnace, yet it will receive no
form without the Hammer; right judgment must guide the zeal of thy will, for
the Will is blind, and must be Directed by the understanding.

Wherefore the Intention is not made good by the E^d, which it propounds, but
as the Schooleman says, it must have Pedem Bonauent. Sup. 2. Sent. Did. 41.
Affectus, and oculum Intellectus, the foot of Affection, and the Eye of
understanding; the one in respect of the End; the other in respect of the
Means to be used to attain to this End; And either of these must have his
Director; the understanding must have Faith, the affection Charity.

Whereupon says Bernard; Two things concur to the singleness of the eye,
Love and Truth; The one will be Lumen illustrans, Lib. de praecept. and dispens.
A light to shine, and show him the way, the other will be Virtus adiuvans, a
power to strengthen and further him; for there are two things necessary for
him, that will attain to his iourni^s end; First a light, by which he may See;
Secondly right footing: for want of the first, the Blind loses his way: for
want of the Second, the Lame does not attain to his journies end.

Briefly, as Bernard says, How can the Eye of the Intention be single, with
Ignorance of the Truth? Yea though a man love God, Ibid.
and do evil Ignorantly: but he that wants neither good, has a true single
eye: Amorem boni, and cognitionem very, The love of that which is good, and the
knowledge of the truth: if one fail, the whole does fail, for Bonum ex causa
Integra causatur, malum ex particularibus consurgit defectibus; Good is
perfected by a complete Schola^^. ex Dio^is de diu. nom. ca^. 4.
cause, but Evil follows upon the defect of a particular. Hereupon Gerson
says, that in the description of a Right Intention, these two words, Debitum
and Debito modo, must be taken Coniunctim, Indiuisibly together: But in the
description of a perverse, or corrupt Intention, these two opposite words,
Indebitum and Indebito modo, may be taken, Diuisum, Apart; Seeing either of
them apart, is sufficient to cause a corrupt Intention; for more points are
Necessary to the constitution of virtue, then of vice; yea, the defect of one
of those points, which concur to the constit^^ion of virtue, is the change to
vice; for to make a good Intention is requisite, an int^grity in the End
propounded, and the means used.

But thou will say, my good Meaning proceeds from my faith, and how can I be
de^^iued therein? Say it proceeded of faith; But that faith is false, or r^ther
it is no faith at all, because false faith is not faith; for these words of the
Apostle; Whatsoe^er is not of Faith is sin: be spoken of true not of false
faith: ^om. 13.
Therefore it is not of true faith, that we belee^e that to be^ Good, which is
Evil, for it is false, and therefore a Sin.

Whither therefore, thou do think falsehood to be Truth, or Truth to be
falsehood, either is a sin; for neither comes of faith; therefore, that thou
may est not be deceived in thy well meaning, thou must have Charitatem in
Intention, Love in thy Intention, and Veritatem in Electione, Truth in the
choice of thy B^ru.
Religion.

For if thou do love God, and yet do not serve him according to the Truth
of his word; thou have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge;
therefore thou art not excused, by doing that which thou do believe, ought
to be done; for thy belief being evil, yea being no faith indeed, but a light
rash Credulity, makes thy purposes (like that wicked ones prayer) to be turned
into sin: and the devil does deceive thee, by making thee conceit it to be
faith; for as Pirates at Sea, are wont in the dark time of the night, to set up
lights, in places full of sandy shelues, and hidden Rocks, thereby to allure
Passengers (under hope of attaining to an haven of Safety,) to shipwra^ke and
destruction: Such is this light of false faith, kindled by the Spirits of the
Air, not whereby they may save the poor Sailers on the Sea of this world, and
the floods of this wretched life; but by which they may sink them into the
bottomless pit of hell and damnation.

In this respect, St. Paul says, that Satan transformeth himself into an
Angel of light, Therefore we that want on the floods of this life, must not
believe every light, unless we fall among Heresies which ruinate the soul,
while we purpose to reach the true Church, which is the pillar and ground of
Truth.

So in matters of Faith and case of Religion, a man may intend the true worship
of God, and yet commit Idolatry, as you Papists do^ in your (...), or
worshipping of the Sacramental Bread, which is mere Idolatry: therefore
Bonauentura says, ^^p. 3. Sent. did. 9.
that a man may be deceived in his worship, Nisi fiat secundum directionem, and
regulam fidei, If it be not done according to the direction and rule of Faith;
for one may De facto, adore the devil transformed into an Angel of light,
intending it unto God. Neither may his ignorance excuse him, for he has a
treble help assigned him to prevent error. First the prediction of the
Scripture, saying, Many shall come in my Name. Math. 24.


Secondly, prayer unto God for inward illumination.

Thirdly, suspention of his Credulity, For we must not believe 1 Ioh. 4.
every spirit, but try the Spirits which are of God; otherwise if he be an
Idolater, he may be justly taxed, for worshipping he knows Ioh. 4.
not what.

In vain do we believe to attain to the end of our Hope, if so be we are
ignorant of the right way which leads thereunto; how much greater is our
danger, if running a Contrary or Byway, we will not be reclaimed, but go
forward therein presumptuously, notwithstanding, admonition and direction of
cunning guides, whom we despise.

Which is as much, as if a man who is drunk, should think himself to be
sober, and do all as a drunken man does, and yet thinks himself to be sober,
and would be so accounted by other: Such are they, who being ignorant of the
Truth, have a seeming show or shadow of the same, and do evil as if it were
good, and run on to destruction, as if it were to salvation; yea, and bind
themselves by their supposed knowledge, to persist in their ignorance and
error, rejecting the means of Reformation, saying with the wicked, We will
none of the knowledge of thy ways. Job. ^1.


O bloody devotion, sprouting from that Hel-bred Ate, which made the Heathen to
sacrifice their sons and daughters to the devil, and causes the like in
you, that are devoted vassals to the Pope, in respect of your souls and your
children also, who may truly cry out against you, Parents sensimus p^rricidas,
we have (...).
found our Parents, the murderers of our Souls; for prevention whereof St.
John (as I have said) would have us try the spirits, whither they be of God; if
through negligence to examine, and find out the truth, thou art deceived, the
fault is in thy self, for as Chrysostom says; They cannot excuse themselves
from condemnation, Ho^^il. S^p. Math.
who had means to find the truth, if they had a desire to seek after it, for
if the truth be the salvation and life of them that know it, M^gis debet
quaeri, quam quaerere, It ought rather to be sought for by other, then that it
should seek after us.

And surely Negligence in learning the Grounds of Christian Faith, is the
chief cause that suffers Man to fall into error, when men are careless to
seek after Gods help, therefore they are worthily deprived thereof; is not he
worthy to have his house dark, that shuts up the doors thereof, and the
windows, against the bright beams of the Sun^e, which would enlighten it?

Such persons must know, that faith is not Natural, but proceeds ^phes.
from the Election of Gods goodness, and is Donum Dei, the Gift of God; for
were it Natural, all men would hold the selfsame Faith, nor should there be
so great dissension about it, as we see at this day; therefore it is to be
sought of God; and therefore as the Sun is not to be seen, but by his own
light; So the Sun of Righteousness, whereby the day spring from an high has
visited us, is not to be seen, but by the light of God^ grace; But because
many are rebellious against this light, therefore they are wilfully blind.

Another cause, is Auersion of the understanding from those things which are to
be believed, and from those which might induce them to believe them, and
conversion unto Error; for as he that has his eyes turned from those objects,
which he should behold, and turned unto other, in that Auersion cannot see what
he should; Such are those, who embrace false opinions, and damnable Sects,
with such contumacy, that they will not vouchsafe to think or hear of the
contrary, and stand out with so great an hatred against those, who hold the
truth, that they will not so much as give care to their Arguments; but resist
the holy Ghost, who speaks by their mouth; of which sort of men Solomon spoke
truly; A fool has no delight in understanding, unless thou do sooth him
in the conceits of his own heart; as the v^lgar translation Proverb. 18.
has it.

For as Vigilius says, Man's mind being before poisoned with Lib. 1. contra
Eutichen. fla^^^ sub. J^it.
the error of false opinion, is grown obstinate against the entertainment of
the truth, nor will yield to any testimony be it never so Authentical; for it
had rather maintain a false conceit, wherewith it is once infected; then
renounce it, though it be reputed with never so good authority.

Therefore St. Paul holds such Incorigible, and not to be de^lt withal, who
after the first and second admonition, persist obstmate, Tit. 3.
and censureth them condemned, even by the verdict of their own conscience. He
that sees an imminent danger, and runs upon it, is the cause of his own
destruction; or if a man would go unto a place, and knows not the way which
leads thereunto; but having a convenient guide to direct him at hand,
enquireth not the way, is not the cause of his going astray, to be imputed
unto himself? If thou see a Stranger or blind man, to go out of the way,
thou art bound to recall him, and direct him aright, and to deliver him from
danger, much more thy self.

Wherefore that Negligence in not seeking the way of truth and salvation, is
culpable and damnable, neither may you pretend Ignorance; For, God gave his
divine precepts to this end, Vt homo de Ignorantia excusationem non habeat,
that Man might not Aug. lib. d^ G^a. and lib. arb.
pretend Ignorance for an excuse.

But say that a man should fall among two Doctors of contrary profession; the
one, an Orthodoxall Christian, the other a Popish Heretic, and be not able
of himself, to judge whom he should believe, would God require at his hands,
that he should divine which is the true Faith?

I answer, that in this case, he must implore Gods help, as Augustine says,
and earnestly entreat him, that he would enlighten his heart and understanding,
to that part of the contradiction which is true and acceptable unto him; and we
may presume, that God in his mercy will open unto him that so knocks, and
that (if his negligence in seeking after the truth, or some other soul Sin
hinder not) God will so work in his heart, that he shall not give way unto
error, for God preserves them that love him. Extra de spons. cap. Iuvents.


Otherwise, if he fear to be perplexed, he must follow the counsel of the
Law; Semper in re dubia, securior and tutior pars est eligenda; in every
distress by scruple or doubt, we must cleave unto that part, which is most
secure and safe.

But the Religion of the Protestants is the most safe for the Soul, especially
in the fundamental point of Justification, as their best Divine after long
cauillation confesses in these words. Propter incertitudinem Iustitiae
propriae, and periculum in an is gloriae, tutissimum Bellarum. lib. 5* de
Iustisicat. Cap. 7.
est; fiduciam totam in sola Dei miscricordia, and benignitate reponere;
Because of the uncertainty of our own righteousness, and the danger of
vainglory; it is the safest way, to repose our whole trust in thealone mercy,
and love of God.

The which, when he proved to be true by many testimonies of the Fathers, he
concludes his Chapter with these words following; His accedit ratio manifesta,
etc.

And reason confirms the former position; for (says he) Either a man has
true merits, or else he has not; if he has not, he is dangerously deceived,
and seduceth himself by trusting in false Merits; for they are false Riches,
which hinder the true Riches; But if he has, he loses nothing thereby, in not
trusting in them but in God only; for God knows them well, and considers
them, and will not suffer them to be unrewarded.

To this purpose, and almost in the same words speaks Rosfensis in his Book
De fide and miserecord^a Dei. Ad Axie^^^ 12.


But above all, that we might be inexcusable, God has assigned unto us a
certain remedy to prevent error and heresy, whereinto we might be seduced by
false teachers; and that is, Confeience with the holy Scriptures.

Thus the Berrhaeans daily searched and examined the Scriptures, Act. 17.
to know whither that which Paul and Sylas preached were true or not;
Chrysostom expounding these words; When ye shall see the abomination of
desolation standing in the holy place, says, That Christians that would be
secured of the true faith, are commanded to flyeto no other thing, then unto
the Scriptures.

Our Lord said, that the Sadduces error sprang from their Ignorance of the
Scriptures; for which cause St. Jerome would have us In lib. 3. in Epla. ad I
phes. cap. 4.
read them diligently, that like cunning exchangers, we may be able to
discern good coin from counterfeit; for as another says, They who are
conversant in the Scriptures, cannot be deceived by T^co^^. Sup. cap. 15. Luc.
any means, for they are the Lantern, whereby the thief is discryed.

The abridging hereof from the people, has been in all ages, the cause of
ruin of Religion.

Our Savior charge the Lawyers, that they took away the Luke 17.
key of knowledge, they would not enter themselves, and hindered other who would
enter into the kingdom of heaven; On which words says Lyra, Similes sunt
Doctores Ecclesiae, speaking of his own time: Such are the Doctors of the
Church, who hinder the understanding of the truth, which is necessary unto
S^luation, with strange and curious words and opinions.

The Doctors and Teachers in the Romish Sinagogue, (where Satan dwells)
imitating the advice of Varro the Heathen Philosopher, preach unto the simple
credulous people mere falsehoods, and shut up the truth Inter par^etes
scholarum, within the precincts of their Schools to be disputed of, though by
their disputations, they never attain unto it; Neither will they suffer the
people to search any farther, or to seek for the truth, least they should
forsake their damnable falsehood^.

And this was an old policy of the Pagans, whereof says Lactantius, Hinc sida
silentia Sacris instituta sunt, vt nesciat Lib. 5. de Iustitia. cap. 20.
populus quid colat; Cunning fellows silenced Men from acquaintance with
sacred matters, that the multitude should not know what they worshipped.

In what a miserable case are such people? who believe they know not what; not
being able to give a reason why they should be persuaded, but fly only to
the Judgment of their Ancestors; that they were wise, and hang on the
opinions of their seducing teachers, that they approve, they know what is
best, and consequently bear aue themselves of their senses, and rob themselves
of reason, while they give credit to their errors, and thus being wrapped up in
ignorance, they know neither themselves, nor their Religion; But like the poor
seduced people in the time of Arr^anisme, Credunt, quod non credunt, Hillar. ad
Constant*
Intelligunt, quod non intelligunt; They believe without faith, they understand
without knowledge.

This is no faith, but Folly, not effectual to Salvation, but bringing
certain damnation; Constat fidem st^ltam non prodesse, Aug. in qu^st. ^et.
test. qu^st. 43.
sed pot^us obesse; It is certain, that foolish faith does not proffit, but
rather hurt; yet this is the thraldom of the poor people, who believe this
deceiptfull opinion, that, Minores saluantur in fide Maiorum; The ignorant
Lay People are saved B^ll^rm* lib. 1* de Justific. cap. 7.
by the faith of their learned Priests, be their faith mere falsehood, whereof
says the great Cardinal;

T^ per obedientiam, etc. Thou can not be deceived by thy obedience toward
thy Prelate, whom the Church does bear, Cusa. lib. 6* Exc^t^t*
yea, though he command other things, then he ought to do; unreasonable
obedience, is the most sound and perfect obedience, that is, when you obey
without asking a reason thereof, as a beast obeys his master.

From whence you may gather, that they repute you of the Lai^ie, to be no
better then brute beasts; and therefore say they, Pearls are not to be c^st
unto them, because they be sw^ne, nor holy things, because they be dogs.

But you will object and say, our Teachers are as learned and as judicious, as
yours who are Protestants; and therefore it is Ob^ect.
likely, that they should know the truth, and consequently they would not teach
us falsehood, contrary to their own knowledge; and if so they should do, and
we through simple credulity and obedience toward them as our Pastors, should
entertain and believe it, we are excused.

I answer, that I confess and know, that many of the most learned of your
Clergy, who have more curiously examined the Mysteries of Religion, then your
ordinary Scrible^s, have had the right knowledge, and true understanding in
many points of faith, and those fundamental, which is manifest, in that they
have held many contradictions, against the common Tenent of their Sinagogue,
their conscience urging them to no less, yet through fear they have reuersed
all, with submission to their Sinagogues censure, and partly for covetousness,
par^ly fearing they should lose the vain glory of the world, they have hidden
the truth, and labored by fraudulence, to pervert the ge^unie sense of the
Scriptures.

Thus dealt the Scribes and Phariseas, who did shut up* the kingdom of heaven
before men; upon which words says Chrysostom, Math. 23. Chrysostom. a^ud.
Al^xand* in des^r. vitiorum. lib. 6. cap. 79. Ex. homil. 41. ^^cris (...).
Christ would show that the Priests of the Jews did all for covetousness
sake; Who did certainly know the coming of Christ by the Scriptures: But they
considered that if Christ had been believed, the custom of offering
Sacrifices had been extinct, and the Sacrifice of righteousness had
pr^uailed, and therefore by peruer^e interpretation, they shut up the Gate of
the law and the Prophets against the people, who spoke manifestly of Christ his
coming, that they might separate men from the faith of Christ, fearing least
happily if Christ were believed, they should be defrauded of their Sacr^fices;
for they rather desired that the law continuing, their Sacrifices should be in
use, by which they were enriched; And not God; for when the law ceased, the
sacrifices of Righteousness should come in use, with which God is delighted,
and faithful men are magnified.

The holy Scriptures are called the kingdom of heaven, because the kingdom of
heaven is laid up in them; The Gate, is the faithful understanding of them;
the Preachers, are the Porters unto whose fidelity the word is committed, to
teach and expound the Scriptures, and it follows: How did the Priests shut up
the Scriptures, Aliud pro alio Interpretantes; by expounding one Sense for
another; as where Esaias says; Behold your God comes with vengeance, even God
with a recompense* he^ will come and save you; then shall the eyes of the
blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be opened, etc. These should be
the signs of the coming of Christ.

When as therefore afterward, Christ did heal the dumb, and the deaf, the
Jews out of a perverse excogitation said; This man casts out devils no
otherwise, but through Beelzebub Math. 12*
the Prince of Devils; That they might turn away the people from believing in
him, or else they did shut up the Gate of the truth, when they made this
Decree, That if any called him the Son of God, he should be cast out of their
Synag^gue.

Upon which words of St. Chrysostom, a right learned and zealous Divine, who
lived above 200. years since here in Alex. ^bisupra^*
England, makes this Inference of the like abuse, practiced by the Clergy of
his time, saying; Sic and modo Sacerdotes claudunt Ianuamveritatis, sciunt
enim, quoniam si manifesta fuisset veritas, little Ecclesia non esset; Thus do
the Priests in these days (says he) shut up the gate of the truth, for they
know that if the Truth were made manifest, their Church should have an end, and
they should fall from Priestly dignity to popular vility.

And this is the reason, why they keep the Laity in gross ignorance, least
they discerning the Truth, should relinquish their damnable politic heresies,
whereupon the ruin of Baal, and his Epicurish Priests must ineuitably ensue.

For most of the substantial and accidental parts of their Religion, is
naught else, but a fardell of blasphemous absurdities, invented by cousening
mates, to deceive the simple people of their money; as is manifest in those of
Purgatory and Pardons, of which says one of your own Writers; Videnou^ enim
in dies, quod ex spelunca indulgentiarum procedunt latr^res; Ioh. Rawlins. S^^.
quadrages^imal^. 94. A.
We see that thieves come out of the den of pardons daily, who preach false
things unto the people, to draw their money from them, wh^ with their cunning
w^t, make a net to take ^lyes, that is money; The like complaint is made by
their own Writers concerning the Mass, pecuniary satisfaction, Relics, etc.
as upon iustoccasion shall be de^lared. But in this hour of thei^s, and this
power of darkness, what shall the people do? If the blind shall follow these
blind guides, they must fall with them into the dit^h.

Therefore our Lord has forwarned, what is to be done to prevent thi^ danger;
where he speaks of that Abominatic^ of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, that should sit in Math* ^2.
the holy place; by which he means Antichrist and his H^resies, as the
Current of the Fathers expound it; he annexeth an admonition in the words
following; Then let them that are in Indaea, ^lye unto the mountains, says
our Sau^our; which words are thus expounded by the golden mo^thed Chrysostom;
Idest, q^^i in Christianitate sunt, sugiant ad Scripturas, Ho^^il. 49. in Math*
etc. That is, let those who live in Christ's Church, ^lye unto the Scriptures;
The Mountains signify the writings of the Prophets and Apostles?

Our Lord knowing the confusion that was to en^ue in the last days, therefore
commands, that Christian men that believe in him, and desire to be
established in the true faith, should be take themselves to nothing else, but
unto the Scriptures, otherwise if they have regard unto ought else, they shall
be offended and perish, not understanding what is the true Church; Therefore if
any one be deceived in his Religion, it comes to pass through his own
negligence in the faith, because he is careless to understand the faith, which
is made manifest in the Scriptures, and consequently is inexcusable, especially
those who live in such places, where Gods word is pres^nted unto them, but they
shut up their eyes against the light thereof. Neither can they pretend fear of
heresy; Seeing the Scriptures cannot deceive any one, nor never did, who did
read it to the end he might serve God the more truly, and demean himself
toward his neighbor the more charitably, and order his own person the more
soberly and chastely.

Therefore it is to be feared, that the State of those P^pists, who live in
this kingdom and other countries, where the Romish Inquisition is
exauthorized, is damnable; for here Christ speaks unto you, and you refuse to
be acquainted with the knowledge of his ways; and therefore your good meaning
cannot excuse and defend you, but your Wilful affected Ignorance will accuse
and condemn you, for no ignorance does excuse in those things which a man is
bound to believe and know.

But you will object; why should we doubt of our selves, living and dying in
the Romish Religion, seeing our Forefather^ Ob^ect.
who departed this life in the same, are (as we hope) saved, who had they
been Heretics must necessarily have perished; And you say the Romish
Religion is heresy.

For an answer; let us consider, that, not every one that ^eleeueth some points
of religion, whereunto they are bound in an heretical Church, is presently
censured to be an heretic* unless he do^ willingly assent, to such
particular Articles of their belee^e, which do derrogate from the virtue of
Christ his Cross, (which is the s^le hope of the Christian) either directly,
or by consequent; if he keep the Foundation whole, and hold no particular
error in matters of faith against the Truth, manifested to his conscience;
There is no doubt of him, but through Gods mercy he shall be safe; But such
were the farr^ greater part of the Laity in the time of Popery; of whom no more
was required to be known in matters of faith, but only the Lords Prayer, the
Creed* the Decalogue, the sal^uation of the blessed Virgin, and a general^
superficial knowledge of the Sa^rament of Baptism, and the Eucharist: and
that of Penance and obed^ence to the Church; Though they never knew what other
points the Church commanded, or belee^ed Explicit; they were prohibited from
Inquisition, into farther particula^ subtilties of Divinity, which were to be
deduced out of the precedent heads; which was a great means, through the
merciful providence of God, for the preservation of the people, who by the
knowledge and belief of these particulars, might have perished, as well as
their great Masters* So that it pleased Gods goodness, by that imposed
ignorance, to preserve them from fundamental errors, and by their simple
credulity, and implicit faith, in the principal of the forenamed points, to
give them salvation; Whereas their subtle Schoolmen, and learned Divines,
who disputed and broached many blasphemous absurdities, ran headlong to hell.

For as that Ancient said; Mel^us est ergo et vtilius, Idyot as ^t parum
scientes existere, et per char^atem proximum fieri Deo, ^^^us ^h. ^. (...) cap.
45
quam putare multum sc^re, et multa expertos in suum Deum blas^h^mos ^uentri:
It is better and more prositable to be No^ices, and have but a little
knowledge, if by love we become nigh unto God, then to think you know much,
and are expert in many things, if withal you be blasphemous against God.

Infinite such persons were saved in the primitive Church; They acknowledged
one God only, and the same their Creator, whom they were to worship, and that
they were redeemed by Id. ^. l^b. 3. cap. 4.
the blood of Jesus Christ, in whom alone they reposed all their hope, and
confidence, and renounced all that was against this doctrine.

Such was the faith of our forefathers in the days of Popery, they were not
acquainted with the heresies of their Doctors and Teachers, but died in this
confession. Viz.

That they rejoiced, that they dyed in the faith of Christ, that they confessed
that they did not lead their lives as they ought to have done, and that they
lived so wickedly, that they merited eternal death; that they were penitent
for the same, that they resolved to amend, if they did live any longer; that
they believed, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, was borne of the glorious
virgin Mary; That he dyed for them; and that they gave him thanks for these
benefits; and that they believed, that they could not be saved, by any other
means, but only by his death and passion; and in this confession, they
commended their souls into the hands of Almighty God, and died securely.

This Confession is annexed by a learned man, unto Roffensis his Book, De fide
et miserecordi^ Dei, with a preface prefixed Im^ressus est J^te liber Co^on
a^ud hared. Ar. no^. B^rckma^ni 1556.
by the publisher, wherein he does thus censure it:

Certe hanc formulam legenti, admiratio quaedam subijt diuinae bo^tatis, ex qua
sane perspicere licet, doctr^am de meritis et intercessione Christi quamui^
fortassis non nihil deformatam, et obsc^ratam (quod certe nenio inf^c^are
pote^t) non tamen penitus, quod nonnulls falso putant, oppressam atque
extinctam fuisse; cum diuina prouidentia fac^um sit, vt tempore maxim
necessario, nempe sub exitum hu^^s vitae, hoc exiguo interrogationum fasciculo,
totius Euangelicae et Aposto^cae doctrinae virtus et eff^catia, pura, sincera,
null^sque peregrinae doctrinae sordibus contam^ata proponerctur, atque
exhiberetur; quo factum esse non dubito, vt innumerae animae di^bolo creptae,
regno Dei sunt vindicatae.

In English thus.

Surely he that reads the form of Confession, must needs wonder at the
goodness of God; out of which we may plainly perceive, that though the
Doctrine of the Merits and Interce^sion of Christ, was happily much depraved
and obscured, (which surely no man can deny) yet it was not wholly extinct, and
oppressed, as many falsely imagine; whereas God did so provide, that in a most
necessary time, namely immediately before death, the virtue and essicacie of the
whole Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles should be propounded, and exhibited
pure, sincere, and void of the pollution of strange doctrine; whereby it came
to pass, I doubt not, that infinite souls were delivered from the devil, and
gained to the Kingdom of God. For father evidence hereof which may satisfy
the most curious; Read Sacerdotale Romanum Tract. 5. part. 1. cap. 13. in the
Title Visitatio Infirmorum.

For a Summary of this point, hear what John Wickleffe says hereof, in his
time, being the height of Popery.

Now (says he) a few poor men and Idiots in Introduct* scripturae cap. 10.
comparison of Clarkis of Schole, moune have the truth of holy Scripture,
ayens many Prelatis and religious, that been yeuen to worldly pride, and
couetis, simony, hypocrisy, and other fleshly sins, most sithen these poor
men desire only the truth and freedom of the holy Gospel, and holy
Scripture, and accepten man's law and ordinancis, only in as much as they been
grounded in holy Scripture, either good reason, and common profit of Christen
puple; and worldly praelatis, and feinid religious, grounden hem on sinful
men's statutis, that sownen pride, and couetise, and letten the truth and
fredome of goddis law^ to be known, and bringin Christen puple in endless
thraldom, and great cost.

Moreover, it is certain that they misliked, and complained against many
abuses in doctrine, and manners, then abounding in the Church of Rome; This is
plainly apparent, by the sundry complaints of di^ers Emperors, States, Kings,
Nations, and people, made for reformation in all ages since the first
Apostacy: No man can doubt hereof, who will converse with the Councels, and
Ecclesiastical Histories of those Ages.

Again, it is certain, that many of them labored to gain the knowledge of
Truth, by procuring unto them the use of the holy Scriptures, translated into
the Mother tongue, by reading whereof, they might find the right way unto
salvation.

This is plain by the words of John Wickleffe, who in a Book of his, called
the Introductory to the Scriptures, says; Impressus est iste liber Lon^i^i per
Robertum Crow^^y Jdio^^a^e Anglico, in quo et ab ^u^^ore co^s^ri^^us est. A^uto
Dom. 1550.
For though covetous Clarkis been wode by Simony, haeresie, and many other
sins, and despisen and stoppen Holy write, as much as they moune; ^et the
ignorant puple cries after holy writ, to ^un it with great cost, and perile of
here life, (and says) That he himself had translated the Bible into English
to save men's souls (and says) that Bid translated the Bible before him, and
King Alured the beginning of the Psalter.

But you will say; They might read long, but all in vain, seeing they did not
understand, wanting an ^nterpreter; which could not be had in those days, when
the Clergy detested that liberty in the Laity.

I answer, partly with St. Ieromes words, (who I th^nke foresaw your time of
the power of darkness) who speaking of Ieron in Nahum. cap. 3.
the Christian people deceived; says, That they should at length repair unto
the Mountains of the Scriptures, and if they shall find no man to teach them,
yet the good desire of the people, should be well accepted of God, and the
negligence of their Masters, should be openly reproved.

But thanks be unto God, he reserved Priest and people in no small number unto
himself, who never bowed their knee to Baal, to teach and believe the truth.

If I should name those of the Clergy, whose works I have read, not of the
ordinary rank, but such who were eminent for learning, i^dgement, ^anctity,
and Ecclesiastical dignity, who ever since the first Apostasy of Boniface,
from the ancient Apostolical humility and verity, to Antichristian pompous
pride, and heresy, impugned in their Writings, their foul blasphemous, and
Idolatrous unheard of fallacies; I should be teadious; But I refer the Reader
for breuity sake, to Illyricus his Catalogus Testium veritatis.

As for the Laity, there is no doubt, but they were many, because such famous
Masters, could not be without many Disciples; and Histories confirm so much
unto us; yea, a Popish Inqui^itor confesses, that there have been Waldenses,
even from the time of the Apostles. (He means such who professed those
Articles of Religion, which Valdus and his followers maintained:)

Which at this day the Protestants know, believe, and defend, maugre the malice
of Antichrist of Rome, his Locusts and Scorpions, which we hope shall in short
time be entertained by other noble Nations, who as yet sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death; which God grant for his mercy sake, that it may take
effect, to the advancement of the glory of Christ, the confusion of Antichrist,
and the salvation of their souls, who shall embrace the same.

Yet say, that there were infinite, who though they ^arnestly sought after such
Teachers, but could not find them, by reason of their rarity in those days;
yet we must not doubt, but that they might have saving knowledge abundantly by
Gods grace, and their industrious reading of the Scriptures; for as Chrys^stome
says; Fieri non potest vt is qui diuinis, etc* It is impossible, Hom^l. 36. in
Genes.
that he who does seriously, and zealously study the Scriptures, should be
always forsaken; for although we have not man's instruction, yet the Lord
himself descending into our hearts, enlighteneth our mind, infuseth his beam
into our understanding, discovers hidden mysteries, and teaches us those
things, which we know not, only if we will apply our sel^es diligently
thereunto also; our Savior confirms it unto us. Ask, and you shall have;
Seek and you shall find; Knock, and it shall be opened unto Math.
you.

But say; that such should err in some points which they held with their
Teachers; they must never the sooner be censured Heretics for that cause; for
as the ancient Canon says:

They are not to be reputed heretics, who are seduced not by their own, but
by others boldness into error; For, Qui sententiam suam quamuis falsam atque
peruersam, nulla pertinaci animositate 14. ^. 3. Dixi^ Aposto^us.
defendunt, etc.

They who do not stubbornely defend their opinion, though it be false, and
perverse; especially if it be such a one which themselves have not broached of
bold presumption, but such as they received from their seduced and deceived
Ancestors; If they seek after the truth with careful diligence, being ready
to subscribe thereunto, when they have found it: Nequaquam sunt inter
haereticos deputandi, are not to be censured as Heretics.

Out of the premises, I infer this conclusion. Viz.

That there was great difference between the State of our forefathers, who
lived in that time of blindness, and yours, who live in this age.

They sought after the Truth, when it was locked up from them.

You behold it presented unto you, and neglect it:

They were in darkness, and desired the light:

You live where it shines, and yet you shut up your ^y^s against it.

They were subject to the rack and torture, for seeking after it:

You have the peace of the Church, ready to receive you joyfully, and yet you
despise it.

They wanted ordinarily helps to further them in knowledge, and yet followed
after it.

You have all outward means, and opportunity to solicit, dispose, and direct
you thereunto, (Oh that you had Gods grace inwardly in your hearts also)
whereof as yet you are destitute, and yet you reject it.

And therefore they (as we do hope) have received from Gods mercy the
Kingdom of heaven, which they so earnestly sought and desired.

But you (as we fear) for your ^ngratefull obstinacy, (if you do not come
out of Babylon) cannot avoid the torments of hell, which you have justly
dese^ued.

Therefore if you will be secure of salvation, imitate your Ancestors in
diligent Inquisition of the truth, and pretend not a good intention to protect
your negligence; for you deceive your selves, you must know, that if you will
make your intention sufficient to salvation, you must extend it; for, Hoc est
ad Deum tendere, semper cum per desideri^m quaerere, et per cognitionem Hug* de
Sa^ct^ vict. lib. 1. de Archa Noe.
inuenire; If your intention be directed unto God, you must not cease to seek
him by desire, and you must not leave off, until you have ^ound him by
knowledge.

Our Sauio^r told the Jews, that the complement of true liberty, consisted in
abiding in his word, which would make them know the truth, and that truth
should set them free; For the Ioh. 8*
knowledge of the truth, is the knowledge of that, by which a thing is truly
that, which it is; And this is the Art and wisdom of God, propounded in the
word of God, it is the beginning of all truth, unto which, whatsoever is
squared, is certainly true; whatsoever declineth from this line, is falsehood,
and enthralleth unto Satan; Therefore we must apply our belief to this line,
if we would not be deceived; if we seek not the truth, so earnestly as we
ought, we are vnex cusable, because we did not use such diligence as God
requires.

Therefore that Man should not err, God has given him as well the
Understanding, as the Will: so that the Understanding is as much bound unto God
in his opperations, as the A^fection; but it is never lawful for the
Affection, to love the contrary unto God, or to those things which concern
God; Therefore in like manner; it shall not be lawful for the Understanding
not to believe in God, or believe in any other manner then he requires.

Nemo de Christo credat, nisi quod de se credi voluit Christus, Aug. Sermon. de
tempore. 145.
says Augustine: No man may believe other matters of Christ, then such as he
would have men believe of him: Thus much knew the Pagan; That every God would
be worshipped after his Socr^t. apud Aug. lib. ^. de c^nsens. Evangelist. Deuteronomy.
12.
own will, and not after the will of the worshipper; and God requires it; ye
shall not do every one what seems good in his own eyes, but that which
seems good in the eyes of the Lord.

Whence it appears, that the Understanding has a law given unto it, and
limits in his operations; and that it is limited what to believe; or what to
know, or to be ignorant of, and that Ignorance in some matters is damuable, as
Credulity in other, and that neither does excuse from damnation; and
consequently, That a good Intention is not sufficient unto salvation, Did. 37.
Cap. Non omnis ex ^^gust.
vnleast it be rectified by knowledge, and therefore is no protection for such,
who profess a false Religion.

And take this for a Corallary; Non omnis immunis est a pae^^ qui Ignorant, etc.

Every one that is ignorant, is not free from punishment, for happily that
ignorant man may be excused from punishment, who could not find what to
learn; But they cannot be pardoned, who having means to learn, did neglect
to employ their diligence to attain unto it.

CHAP. 4. Proves, that an erroneous Conscience is no sufficient bond, to
oblige a man to persist in a false Religion, as the Papists teach, but such a
conscience ought to be deposed, reformed or abandoned, and altered according to
the rule of Gods law; and therefore the case of those Papists who are trained
up in blindness, is miserable and lamentable.
TThe Third Motive obligatory to persist in a false Religion, unknown, is the
Conscience, which may not be contradicted.

Let us therefore consider, how far we are bound to follow the informations
thereof; and Whither an erroneous Conscience binds us, as the Papists Aquin.
Bel^arm. lib. ^. de gra. and lib. arb. cap. 10.
teach.

The Conscience therefore urges, to those things which are either Secundum
legem Dei, agreeable to Gods law; or praeter legem, different from the Law, or
Contralegem, contrary to the law of God.

In the First sort, which are agreeable to the law of God; Questionless the
Conscience binds, Simply and Universally, because that with it, a man is
bound by the law of God, and the Conscience which agrees with this law,
shows it is bound.

In the Second sort, the Conscience does bind, as long as it urges a thing of
that kind to be done; so that a man is bound either to depose his Conscience,
or else to fulfill what it commands to be done.

As for example; my Conscience tells me, that I must use the Ceremonies of
the Church, in the execution of my Ministerial function, not only because they
are enjoined by the Church; but because my Conscience enformeth me, that they
^ught to be used, in as much as they are not contrary to Gods word, but also
edisicatory to the simple; knowing also that so the case stands with man
through the providence of God, that no humane Actions can be rightly and
orderly performed, without a kind of Ceremony; that is, that they be done in
their due place, time, and form; for otherwise they do bind my Conscience
unto them under penalty, not only of Schism, but of Heresy also, for the
Churches authority makes them Necessary, in respect of my obedience, in which
sense the Schoolemans rule is true; Consciencia ^abet virtutem ligand^,
Bon^vent. sup. 2. sent. ^^st. 39.
in his quae possunt aliquo modo been ^ieri; The Conscience has power to bind
in those things, which may any way be done well.

In the Third, which are Contrary to Gods law; Conscience does not bind, to
do, or leave undone; but it is bound to depose it self; for in as much as it
erreth against Gods law, it puts a man out of the estate of Salvation; and
therefore it must be deposed, or abandoned. For whither a man does what it
commands, or not, he sins; First, if he follow his Conscience, in that
which is against Gods law, he Sins; But if he do against his Conscience, he
sins likewise, not in respect of the Act, but of the manner of it, for his
Conscience tells him, that he does against Gods law, though indeed it be
pleasing unto God; for All that is not of Faith is sin; for though it be good
which is done, yet let the Actor constantly persuade himself, that it is
evil, he sins, because God respects the mind of the Doer, more then the
deed.

Neither can you say, that such a one is simply perplexed, because he had a way
to avoid it, By deposing his erroneous Conscience; which if he does not, he is
perplexed by his own fault: and if he be not able to judge of such things by
himself, because of his ignorance, he must consult with the learned and godly:
So that, An erroneous Conscience binds, but not as a right Conscience; for it
binds not to do that, which it informs contrary to Gods law, though it
believe it does all according to the law, for then it should bind against the
law, and consequently a man should be bound to do against the law, when as the
law binds to the performance of it; So that a man should be bound at the
self same time, Ad opposita incompossibilia, two contraries, which cannot
stand together, which is a gross absurdity.

Therefore an Erroneous Conscience is bound to depose his error, not by the
bond of Conscience, which does imitate this, because it is thought not to err,
but by the bond of Gods Praecept, which says; Ne demoreris in errore; Abide
not thou in Eccluss. 17.
thine error.

Neither does God accept the Obligation made by an ^rroneous Conscience; for as
the Schooleman says, Nullus debet ^acere Durand. 2. sent. did. 39. q. 5.
quod illicitum est fieri; No man ought to do that which is unlawful to be
done, therefore that which is unlawful cannot abide; But an erroneous
Conscience, does intimate that to be Bonav. vbi supra.
done which is unlawful; therefore it cannot bind; But in such, Conscientia
ipsa peccatum est; Such a Conscience it self is Sin.

For who doubts, that a man is not bound to follow his Conscience, when it
urges to that, which is against Gods law; and howsoever it be true, that
Conscientia est lex Intellectus ^ostri, the Conscience is the law of the
understanding, yet it is not the Supreme law, for there is an other law above
it, viz. The law of God, and therefore when it is said, The law binds us unto
all, whereof it does inform us; it is true, as long as this Inferior law
informs us nothing, that is contrary to the Superior law; which the
Conscience often does; but indeed such is no Conscience, but a mere error of
fantasy.

Rightly said Augustine; Inferioris potestatis praeceptum non obligat, si
contrarium sit praecepto potestatis Super^ores, etc. De verb. Dom. S^r. 6.
The command of an inferior power does not bind, if it be contrary to the
command of an higher power, as if the Deputy should command something, which
the Emperor should control. When therefore the Conscience erring, does
intimate any thing contrary to the Precepts of God, whose power is principal,
and above all; that information of the Conscience so erring, cannot bind a
man; neither is it any Obligation; which I prove thus:

The true knowledge only of a thing, does not take away the obligation, but
does rather strengthen and con^irm it; but the true knowledge of that, which an
erroneous conscience does intimate, does take away the obligation; therefore
there was no ob^^gation by an ^rronious Conscience; you may see it plainly in
this subsequent example.

God commanded Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac, Genesis 2^.
But when he obediently stretched out his hand to offer him up, God commanded
the contrary; and so the second Commandment repealed the former; But the
Conscience does not bind more firmly then the Commandment of God; therefore
the commandment of God does make void the conscience, that is against the
same; and consequently a man in such a case, is not bound to follow an
erroneous conscience.

For Conscience does not bind by its own immediate power, but In virtute
praecepti divini, by the strength of Gods Aquin. 2. Sent. did. 39.
law, for it propounds not any thing to be performed, or no^ performed,
because it approves, or improueth it, but as it is commanded, or prohibited by
God; and therefore one calls it aptly Praeconem legis, the proclaimer of the
Law, which ^^el. Sup. 2. Sent did. 39.
shows unto us Dictamina legis, the Prescripts of the Law; and so it binds
by the Authority of the Law, which it does insinuate unto us.

As the Judges officer does bind him, unto whom he does declare the Mandate of
the Judge; not by his own power, but by virtue of the Judges Mandate, but no
man is bound by any precept any farther, then by the knowledge of that precept;
unless he be bound to know the Precept, unto which every man is bound without
excuse.

And therefore says one; As a Lamp is placed in the midst Alv. Pelag. de
planctu. Eccl^s.
of the house, that those things may be seen, which are in the house, and that
the Inhabitants may discern whither to go, and what to do; So God placed the
Conscience, in the midst of the reasonable Soul, as a light, by which he may
discern what he ought to do, or leave undone; And so the bond of Gods Law,
and of the Conscience, is the selfsame: Seeing the Law binds but by the
Mediation of Knowledge, and Knowledge binds but by the strength of the Law.

So that seeing Conscience, is but the application of knowledge unto an Act, it
follows, that Conscience does bind by the virtue of Gods Law; and
consequently, whosoever does make profession of such a Religion, whereof he is
wholly ignor^nt, is destitute of conscience therein; for the Subject of
Conscience is (...), a thing known; He therefore that will not be deceived by
his Conscience, must rectify the same to the Square of Gods word, which is the
Truth, whereof he must not be ignorant, for, Vbi non est Scientia, nec
conscientia; Hug. de Sanct. vict. in ^nnot. Elucid. ad cap. ^ ad Romans
And for this cause they delude themselves, who stand so much on their
Conscience, in professing such a Religion, whereof they are wholly ignorant;
for Conscience must be conformable to the law of God, and therefore to make
Conscience of such a Religion, which is contrary to the Law, is to use his
Conscience as a Seal of his own condemnation.

I approve the judgment of Aquinas; who says, that a conscience that does
err, does not excuse in those things, Quae secundum se mala sunt, etc. which
in themselves are evil, and Quod lib. 3. quaest. 6. art. 5.
undoubtedly against the law of God; neither does it excuse in those things
which a man might know, Faciendo debitam diligentiam; if he did use requisite
diligence; which if he would do by prayer unto God, by examining his
Conscience, and by consulting with the Godly, learned, and judicious, we may
believe that God would enlighten him.

Therefore the case of many of our English Papists, is to be lamented, and
especially of those, who from their infancy, have been trained up by their
friends in Idolatry; for by reason of their long continuance therein, they will
believe none, that reveal their danger unto them, but are like unto those who
often feed on poison, and feel not the offense of it; So they having been the
time of their whole life brought up in heresy, think all is safe, until they
be prevented with destruction; and they think that howsoever the Religion be
false, yet their conscience is a sufficient warrant unto them, against all
danger thereby ensuing, which if it were true; then the Infidels should never
be judged for their unbelief, nor the Jews for crucifying Christ our Savior;
but they wanted remorce of conscience, and yet were not without sin; no more
are the Papists; In the person of whom Paul speaks, saying, I know nothing 1
Cor. ^*
by my self, and yet am I not thereby justified; Neither is it to any purpose
that they say; My Conscience does not judge me to be culpable, but contrarily
does judge me to be in the right way; for I say, this judgment is erroneous,
and therefore is condemned by the highest Judge: and if their conscience be
their chief book, wherein they learn that, which they will retain without
instability; they must know, that they are bound to correct the Book of their
Conscience, if it be corrupted, by comparing it, and correcting it, by the true
Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, which is the word of God; The neglect
whereof, is the chief cause of the retardation from conversion, of our
Pseudo-Catholiques, who having studied their whole time, in the false and
uncorrected book of their own conscience, wherein they find nothing but
falsehoods, yet refuse to try and examine their Religion by the word of God,
but make ignorance their devotion, like those Heretics called Gnosimachi;
Damascen. lib. d^ 100. h^r^s. 88.
Who prohibiting all knowledge in Christianity, taught; That they who sought
after knowledge in the holy Scriptures, Suparfluum quid faciunt, took in hand
a needless labor, for they said, that God required nothing but good deeds of
Christians, and that therefore it is best for Christians to walk plainly, and
not to search after the knowledge of any articles of Religion; But if you do
object, that it is dangerous for you being an ignorant Layman, to look into
the Mysteries of Faith, whereof you are not able to judge; but that it is more
safe for you, to believe in general as the Church does, though you do not
know any of the particulars.

I say unto you with the Father; you are deceived in your opinion; for, Tutior
est Affectus vera quaerendi, quam Incognita procognitis praesumend^; The desire
to seek the Truth is more safe, then that a man should presume o^ things
unknown, instead of things which he is bound to know.

And farther I say, with the golden Father; If thou would Ho^il. 44. ^ap.
23. Nath.
go unto any place, unto which thou did not know the right way, to gain
some great and necessary commodity; thou would not neglect thy journey,
because of thy ignorance of thy way; but thou would enquire after cunning
guides, and learn the direct path of them; So if thou will learn the way to
heaven, thou must pray unto God, thou must read the Scriptures, thou must
enquire of those Priests, who are the Porters unto the Scriptures.

But if thou wilfully refuse this means, thy case is desperate; because thou
love darkness more then light; for as he that plucketh out his own eyes,
can never recover his sight; so he that hates the known truth, Ex malitia,
cannot possibly repent; for the Spirit of truth is the light of our soul; but
if our eye be evil, the whole body must needs be dark.

If thou say thou do not hate the truth, but art not able to discern it;
I answer, this argues natural blindness of thy soul; for the light
discovers the differenc^s of objects unto him that can see; which is wholly
unprofitable unto the blind; pray therefore unto God, that he would bring
thee out of that darkness of Egypt, and that he would open thine eyes, that
thou may behold the wonderful things of his Laws; and that he would give
thee a wise and understanding heart; Then should thou behold the slavery of
Egypt, and tyranny of Pharaoh, which in that time of palpable darkness thou
could not Exodus 10. Prou. 2.
see; But when wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge delights thy
soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee;
and deliver thee from the evil way, and from the man that speaks froward
things, that is Antichrist; and from them that leau^ the ways of
righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness.

CHAP. 5. Answers Objections made from the divine Philanthropy or love of
God, unto mankind, who (say they) will not condemn unto everlasting death,
such infinite multitudes of people, who die in infidelity, and Heresy, and
save but only a few true believing Christians: where is plainly proved also,
that very few, (in respect of those, who are to be^ damned) shall be saved.
ANother Reason, which is the last and of greatest moment, is a certain blind
kind of pity; whereby such persons become impious against God; and while they
think otherwise of God, then the truth is, they offend against the Truth; and
this is drawn from the Divine Philanthropy, or love of God unto man; they
demand how Gods mercy should elect so few unto Salvation, and forsake so many
unto damnation, especially seeing he is more prone to save, then to condemn,
or that his Mercy is not less, to take pity, and to pardon, then his Justice,
to revenge and punish?

They say, it stands not with the goodness of God, to be cruel against his
creatures, and that he should suffer any of those whom he has made, to
perish; And thus while they think, They honor his goodness, they offend his
Truth.

From whence they conclude, that the immensity of Gods mercy and goodness is
such, that he will save every man in his own faith, law, sect, or religion, if
so be he believe the same to be good and pleasing unto God.

They argue farther; That it is a great presumption to suppose, that a few
Christians, should think themselves only to be saved, the whole remaining
multitude of evil Christians, which far exceed the good in number, beside
Jews, Saracens, and Pagans, being cast off to destruction; Does it stand with
Gods Majesty who is Lord of heaven and earth, to have more slaves then freemen;
more adjudged to torments, then faithful Subjects? Why should the merciful
God create so great a multitude of those to be damned, and not rather save
them? I would have these men to know, that; Qui puis fuit vt non existentia
crearet, Iustus est vt errantia et Hugo de Sancto Vict. lib. 1. de Sacram.
part. 8. cap. 5.
delinquentia Indice^; As God is merciful in creating those who before had no
being: So he is just, to punish them that e^re, and offend against him.

It is certain, that he created them out of the riches of his goodness, and
bestowed many great gifts on them freely; But he never punished any without
their most just desert: Whence it appears, that the Justice of God, is the
efficient cause of their damnation; but their own evil deserts are (as it
were) the material and meritorious cause of their perdition.

But that there are so many damned, and so few which are, and shall be saved;
is caused partly by the Justice of God, partly through want of disposition in
Man, to receive and entertain Gods mercy.

Therefore whereas some do reason, from the inclination of Gods Nature unto
mercy, and that therefore he should save all, or at the least, more then h^e
does condemn;

I do answer: That Gods nature is not different, So that he should have more
mercy then Justice; for whatsoever is in God is infinite; he is in^initely
just, as he is merciful, though in this world he does exercise his mercy, more
then his Justice. And true it is that God would save all men, if they were
disposed accordingly; which because they are not, therefore they are not saved;
For Actus Actiuarum, sunt in patiente Arist* ^. de A^ima.
been disposito.

We see it true by experience; Meat does naturally nourish, but not him who
wants digestion; fire does naturally heat, but not him who does not come
near unto it; Honey yields sweetness; but not unto him that does not taste
it: A Medicine heals, but not him whose Malady is deadly, and refuses to
admit the application of it; The fault is not in the Agent, but the defect is
in the Patient.

So Gods nature in it self, is inclined to have mercy on all men; yet he has
not mercy on all men, because all men are not disposed to receive it; nay, no
man is by nature disposed to receive it, but contrarily to reject it when it is
offered, and many wilfully shut up the door of their heart against it; least
the light of the world should enter into their black souls.

If an earthly King, seeing his people detayned in captivity by his Enemies,
should pay their Ransom, and offer to set them free, and to bring them back
into their own Country; and some of those should ungratefully despise this
benefit, and refuse to go home: The King were not to be blamed, that they were
not freed; seeing that he was ready to deliver them: But it was their own
fault; who chose rather to abide in bondage, then to be restored unto liberty;
It is a rule in the law, and it holds good in this case between God and Man;
Inuito non datur beneficium: So Christ paid the price of Man's redemption, ^^d*
reg. Iuris.
who lived before under the thraldom of the devil. Yet many most perverse
men, will not come out of his slavery; neither is the fault in God, for his
revealed will is to save all men; But he will have all those who despise him,
punished:

As a good King, who loves his Subjects, and wishes them all safety and
prosperity, yet for the maintenance of Justice, and preservation of the common
good, he will punish and cut of^ the wicked; for Justice requires, that every
one be rewarded according to his deserts; therefore as he defends his
faithful Subjects, so he destroys his Enemies, Traitors, and Rebels.

Again, every thing (as the Philosopher says) is more naturally inclined, and
moved unto that, which is in it self, Ab intrinseco, then unto that, which is
in him from another; As a stone does rather move downward, then upward, and
that because of his inward heaviness, which enclineth downward: So man's
nature, being corrupted by Original sin, is inclined unto evil at all
times: but if there be any good in him, it comes from another, viz. from God:

Therefore it follows, that from this inward corrupt inclination, more men,
or rather all men without special grace consent unto sin rather then unto
goodness; and follow after sensual pleasures, more then spiritual works;
because the soul joined to the body, does follow the passions of the body; Ad
mores Natura recurrit damnatas, fixa et mutari nescia, and therefore no wonder
if so many troop unto Hell. (...).


Moreover, consider the great multitude of the damned, and you shall see how
they run headlong unto death; And therefore it is not strange that men should
come unto that end, unto which they labor to attain by all might and maine;
and that which carries them thereunto, is their own peruersity; And
therefore, in that God created a great multitude of men, whom he fore* knew
should pe^ish, thou may admire the riches of his goodness, in giving so
great a multitude, so many and great benefits, when he did foresee that they
would prove ungrateful; yea, and wonder at the peruersity of these men, who
with Gods gifts did impugn and dishonor the bountiful Giver of them.

And so consider Gods mercy, that thou remember his Justice also, that those
whom his mercy created, nourished, governed, and preserved; If he find them
ungrateful for these benefits received, he does worthily condemn them.

No wonder that a man should reap those things, which he has sowed; Though
all men desire to live in health, yet all men do not use the true medicine; So
likewise though all men generally desire eternal felicity, yet all men do not
walk the right way to attain unto it; for we may say with the Poet^ (...).
Quis enim non vicus ab under tristibus obscaenis? The least Village is full of
lamentable filthiness.

But that there are many that shall be damned, and few that shall be saved, we
find it expressed by way of similitude, Natural and Moral, by divine
testimonies also and examples.

In Natural things, we see there is more dregs of Corn, Wine, and Oil,
then Fruit; more leaves then Apples; more barren earth, then good land; more
salt water, then fresh; more base stones, then precious; so there are more
Reprobates then Elect.

We see it is more easy to destroy, then to build; to loose, then to find, to
kill, then to raise unto life; Many years pass, before Man can be brought
unto perfection of body; but he dies in a moment.

We find this figured also, by many Examples in holy Scripture.

Eight persons only saved in Noah's Arc, the whole world, Genesis 7. 8.
beside destroyed in the flood.

Lot, and his two daughters only, preserved in the destruction 19.
of the five Cities, by fire and brimstone.

Joseph only, is found just among the Egiptians. 40.


Moses among the Madianites. Exodus 3.


Samuel among the Sons of Leui. 1. Sam. 3.


Daniel, and the three Children, among the Chaldees. Dan* 3.


Gamaliel, among the Pharisees. Act. 5.


The fourth part only of the Seed brought forth fruit.

Ten Lepers cleansed, one alone gives thanks for the benefit received. Luc. 8.
17.


Rari quippe Roni numero, vix sunt totidem quot Thebarum Portae, vel diuitis
ostia Nili. Good men are but few in number, Iuuenal.
hardly seven to be found in a City; and for a certain resolution, our
Savior says; Many are called, but few are chosen; Math. 20. August. lib. de
side ad Pe^rum.
multi ad fidem, says Augustine, pauci ad r^gnum; Many to the faith, few to
the Kingdom. And again, he bids us hold this for a sure, and undoubted
truth, that all that are baptized within the Catholic Church, shall not
receive eternal life, but those only, who having been baptized, lead a
godly life, for as Heretics, Jews, Infidels, and Schismatickes, shall not
have the Kingdom of Heaven, no more can sinful Catholics possess it.

He (says Anselme) who will be of the number of the Elect, let him labor to
be of the number of the fewest: Saint Augustine speaking of such, who were
Baptized, and after dyed in mortal sin, says, That they were of the great
multitude of those Lib. de corrept. ^t Gram.
who were called, but they were not of the few of the Elect.

And now what say thou ^oolish man? would thou have me to say, that All
are, and shall be saved? I cannot bless where God has cursed: Hear Augustine.

Before the Incarnation of Christ, 4000. years of the world passed away; In
which time all were damned, except a few of the Lib. de vero cult^^.
children of Israel; See what an infinite multitude went to Hell.

Saint Peter says, The righteous scarcely shall be saved, where 1. Pet. 4.
then shall: be ungodly and sinner appear?

If this will not satisfy thee; hear the infallible truth: Our Lord Jesus
Christ, confirming this conclusion; one says unto him, Lord are there few that
shall be saved? Our Lord answered him and his fellows; Luc. 13.


Strive to enter by the narrow gate, for I say unto you, many shall seek to
enter, and cannot.

Seeing therefore the answer ought to be understood, and expounded,
according to the tenor of the praecedent Interrogation, we may conclude, and
undoubtedly hold, that by this answer, the Lord determines nothing else, but
that, few should be saved; And therefore Augustine expounding these words,
says; The Lord confirmed that Lib. de ver^. Dom.
which he spoke; that is, that there are few who are to be saved, because
few enter by the narrow gate; For in another place he says the same: The way
which leads unto life, is narrow, and few^ there are that enter by it; Upon
which words says Ambrose; Flendum magis quam proferendum, plure^ damnari,
quam saluari; We may rather weep then utter it, that more shall be damned,
then saved; for that which is affirmed by the truth, can be reproved by no
man's contradiction.

But what need I cumber you with authorities, seeing our conclusion is
expressly preached by our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, Many are called, few are
chosen.

Therefore Augustine, showing the small number of those that shall be saved,
says: Arbitror tres mundipartes fore damnand^s, Lib. de ver^. Cu^tu.
etc. I suppose three parts of the world shall be damned, because among them
Infidels, or Heretics do reign, but of the fourth part, what shall I say,
but with Saint John, Totus mundus in maligno positus est; The whole world is
set on mischief: For what are the men of our time for the most part; proud,
co^etous, luxnrious, gluttons, drunkards, murderers, fornicatours, adulterers,
and worse, wrathful, en^ious, negligent in good works, and plunged in all
manner of sins and wickedness, and therefore they must needs p^rish.

Now that no man despair; I say notwithstanding the praecedent position; That
the Elect, who shall all be saved, are infinite* if you consider them
absolutely in themselves; God said unto Abraham, I will make thee a mighty
Nation: and again, I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, then shall
thy seed be Genesis 13.
^umbred.

The Angel S^al^^h the servants of God, in their forehead, Ap^calips 7.
whose number was 144000. of all the Tribes of the children of Israel, beside a
great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and
people, and tongues stood before the Thron^, and before the Lamb, clothed
with long white Ro^bes, and palms in their hands.

But if you speak respectively, and compare them with the damned, I say they
are very few; The drops of water that are in a Well, or River, are infinite,
but if you compare them to the number of the drops of water, that are in the
Ocean, they are very few; And this is approved by Augustine, who says; Lib.
deverb. D^m.
Non contrarius est sibi dominus, etc.

Our Lord does not speak contraries, who says: That there are few, that
enter by the narrow gate: and in another place he says; Many shall come from
the East, and the West; and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaccb, in the
Kingdom of heaven: for they are few in comparison of the damned, but many in
the society of the Angels; The Corn is hardly seen, when the floor is
threshed; but the Mass which shall come out of this floor, will be so great,
that it will fill the Barn of heaven.

For this cause our Savior terms the Elect, pusillum gregem, a little
Flock; in respect of the multitude of the Reprobate; Luc. 12.
Wherefore though they be few, in respect of the damned, yet let no Christian
despair, but rather labor to keep the profession of our hope without
wavering, and make sure his salvation by good works in Christ Jesus, and so
shall he be sure, that he is one of those few that shall be saved.

Now I will answer in a word or two, the principal objections, which are made
against this position, omitting many idle absurdities, whose very rehearsal,
were a sufficient c^nfutation of them; as that of Origin, who being over
merciful, said, That the devil himself, and his Angels, should in process
of time, after they had suffered long and grievous ^pip^am. Epist. ad I^b.
Hierosol
torments, proportionable to the Merits of their sins, be delivered out of
their torments, and be joined with the holy Angels, and return to their first
state and dignity in the Kingdom of heaven.

Of which opinion Augustine speaking, says; Sed illum et propter hoc, et
propter alia nonnulla, etc. Non Immerito reproba^it Lib. 21 de ci^^^* Dei. cap.
17.
Ecclesia; But the Church did worthily condemn him for this, and sundry other
errors, for by seeming to be too merciful, he lost mercy.

As also that, which said, that All mankind should be saved, by the
intercession of the Saints, in the day of Judgment, confuted by Augustine in
the same Book; and now Cap. 18.
I come to the chief objections: The first, is made from the Apostles words;
God would have all men to be saved; They argue from the will of God, and the
universality of the Term, All; Gods will is immutable; the Term universal,
and as the law says; Qui totum dicit, nihil excludit, he that says All,
excepteth nothing; First, for the will of God; I answer with Saint Augustine;
When we hear and read in the holy Scriptures, that God would have All men to
be saved, Enchirid. Cap. 6.^.
though we are sure, that all men are not saved; We must not therefore
derrogate any thing from the most omnipotent will of God, but so understand
that which is written; who would have all men to be saved; as if he should
say, that there could no man be saved, but he whom he would have saved; Not
that there is no man, but that he would have him saved, but that there is none
saved, but he, whom he would have saved.

And Fulgentius accords; All those whom God would have Lib. de Inc^^n. Chri.
cap. 31.
saved, are doubtless saved, neither can any be saved, but those whom God
would have saved; Neither is there any whom God would have saved, who is not
saved, because our God has done whatsoever he would; Ipsi omnes vtique salui
sunt, quos ^mnes vult saluos fieri, etc. Those All, therefore are saved, which
All, God would have saved; because this salvation comes unto them, not by the
will of Man, but is given them by the good will of God; and presently after he
says, In these All men whom God would have saved; Non totum omnino genus
significatur hominum, sed o^nium vniuersitas saluandorum; All mankind in
general is not signified; but the whole number only of those, that are to be
saved; who are therefore called All, because among all mankind, Gods goodness
saves those all; that is, some of ^uery Nation, condition, age, language, and
Province.

In which last words, he answers the objections made form the Generality of
the Term, All men; unto which we will annex the common distinction of the
Schoolmen, for farther explanation of the obscurity.

We must therefore consider the manner of distribution, according as the
Universal term imports, which must not be D^rand. Super. 2. Sent. did.
46. q. 1.
understood, pro singulis generum, for every singular, and individual person,
of every Nation, sex, and condition, but pro generibus singulorum, with
restraint of distribution, for all sorts of people, some of every kind; Kings,
and private men; noble and base, high and low, learned and unlearned; strong
and weak: witty and dull: wise and foolish: rich and poor: men and women:
Infants and children, youth, manhood, declining age, old age: some of all
languages, manners, wills, consciences: and if there be any other difference of
men.

This phrase is familiar to the holy Scriptures, often to name All, and yet not
to understand All mankind: As in that speech of Peter, unto the Jews: For the
promise is made unto you, and Act. 2.
to your children, and unto all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord
our God shall call: He names All: But those All, are but as many, as the Lord
shall call.

In another place we find a plain distinction of All; where the Apostle
naming all men without exception, presently after, does intimate, a certain
kind of All men, excepting others; for Romans 5. 18.
he says: At by the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation;
So by the justifying of one, the be^efit abounded toward all men, to the
justification of life.

Because therefore the Apostle says, the fault came on all men, to
condemnation, and the benefit toward all men to justification;

Shall we believe, that therefore all, and every one of those men, were
justified by Christ, who were certainly in the state of damnation, by Adam^
sin, whereas the death of innumerable Infidels do disprove it, who have
passed out of this life, without the grace of Justification, and being
destitute of the Sacrament of Baptism, are carried to the Seat of death and
endless torments.

It follows therefore, that we should not think, that all those whom the
Apostle places in condemnation, should pass unto the Grace of Justification;
but Some of those all* So that all those (All) who by Adam came unto
condemnation, are the children of wrath; and of them, Some, by Christ are All
made, the children of Grace; neither does the Generality of the former, exclude
the place of the other, because of those (All) who Generally dyed in Adam,
Christ quickened Some, even whom he pleased; which (All) in the next verse, are
said to be Many.

Another Objection is made out of these words; God has Romans 11. Lib. 21. de
Ci^it. dei. cap. 21.
shut up all in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all: St, Augustine
answers it thus; Quid est omnium? What means the Apostle by saying, that he
might have mercy on all men? That is, that God will not condemn any one of
those, either of the Gentiles, or of the Iew^s, whom ^e had predestined,
called, justified, glorified; not meaning all men in general.

So that there is an Ambiguity in the Term, (All) which being understood, as
above is declared, discovers the error* Others say, that howsoever the Devil
and his Angels, Infidels, Turks and Jews, be damned; yet whosoever have
participated of the Sacraments of Christianity, let them live how they please,
in any heresy or impiety, yet they shall be saved, which is plainly
contradicted by the Apostle; who sends them together empty away, saying; The
works of the flesh Gal. 5.
are manifest, which are, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Wantonness,
Idolatry, W^tchcraft, hatred, debate, Emulations, Wrath, Contentions,
Seditions, Heresies, Envy, Murders, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and such like*
whereof I tell you before, as I also have told you before, that they which do
such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

Either the Apostles saying is false, or else such shall not inherit the
kingdom of heaven; but because it is not false, surely they shall not possess
the kingdom of God; if they shall not possess the kingdom of God, they shall
go into everlasting torments.

The Church makes a difference between the Heretic, and the Orthodoxall
Christian who lives wickedly.

The first depart out of the Church; the other live wickedly in the Church; The
first oppugn the Doctrine of the Church; the other the discipline; The first
are compared to Tares; the second to chafe; the first to ravening Wolves, the
other to diseased Sheep; The one disputes against the faith, the other lives
against the faith; and both are deceived with a vain hope, and are separated
from spiritual charity, and strangers from the Body of Christ.

From whence I gather, that their hope is confounded, who living in a false
Religion, presume nevertheless that they shall be saved, because such is the
love of God to his creatures, that he will not destroy such infinite number of
people, who die in the same.

Let not therefore the Infidel deceive himself with confidence in his Moral
virtues; Nor the Heretic trust to his good Meaning and erroneous conscience;
nor the Newter, or Time-seruer, presume on the Philanthropy of God, to run
for company to Hell with multitudes: But let them know and believe, that both
themselves, and those also who shall soothe them with that vain hope, Huma^a
quadam Beneuolentia falluntur, are deceived by a kind of humane favor toward
Mankind.

CHAP. 6. Proves from the Nature, and Attributes of God; that Atheists,
Hypoctites, Epicures, Heretics, Pagans, Idolaters, Libertines, are in a
damnable case; and contains an Inuectiue, against an admonition unto all
Newters, who con^orme themselves externally only, unto diverse and contrary
Religions: as is Popery, and the Orthodoxall faith professed by the
Protestants, proving them to be traitors to Christ, and no better then
Atheists, who communicate outwardly with the Papists in their Religious Rites,
and seem also to be Protestants in heart and affection, with St. Augustine
his Censure, of the forenamed, for a conclusion.
THere is a God, and the same is the most Omnipotent Lord of heaven and earth,
and all things therein contained, and therefore he will be worshipped by man,
though Atheists deny him.

He is a Spirit, and therefore he requires true and unfeigned devotion, though
Hipocrites dissemble it.

He is holy, and requir^th Sanct^ty in his servants, though Epicures neglect
it.

He is Truth; and therefore he will be Worshipped in truth, though Hereti^ks
deprave it.

He only is God, and there is No other God beside him, though Pagans do
multiply.

And therefore he claims all worship to be done unto him alone, though
Idolaters translate it.

He is the Lawgiver; and has prescribed what worship he requires of us, From
which he will not have us to decline, either to the right hand, or to the left;
though Libertines, Newters, or (to give them their proper denomination,
Nullisidians) do diuersty vary; who think God is satisfied with any kind of
worship; and that man for this cause is safe, in what Religion soever he lives
or dies, and might shape himself unto several Religions, though never so
different, if they did not directly deny God.

The which damnable opinion, proceeds from palpable and gross ignorance in
the true faith, and is like unto that error of the Pagans, who by Symachus
their Ambassador, required of Valeatinian the Emperor, that their Idolatry
might be restored and maintained, as well as Christ^anity; for that worshipping
of many Gods (says he) is the best means to find out the true God; Thus he
speaks in the Christian Poet;

Secretum sed grande nequit rationis opertae
Prudent. lib. 2. contra Symachi^n.
Qu^ri aliter, quam si sparsis via multiplicetur
Tramitibus, and centenos terat orbita calls
Qu^ situra deum variata indage latentem.
The great secret of the hidden Mystery of the truth, cannot be otherwise
sought out, then by dividing the way into diverse paths, and without wheeling
about several courses; thus is God best sought, who lies hidden, in variety
of Mazes.

For as those Pagans, not knowing the only true God, did therefore addict
themselves, to worship many Gods; that thereby they might attain to the
knowledge of the great secret Mystery, of the true Religion; (as they
supposed.) So Newters being ignorant of the true says, betake themselves to
sundry Sects and Religions, and think that to be the safest means, to become
secure of Salvation. But as the prudent Poet says;

Long aliud verum est, etc. The contrary is true; for diversity of ways has
diverse creckes, and causes to go astray more dangerously; the plain way only
is without error, being without turnings, and doubtful unknown by-ways; for
as there is but one Maker and Governor of this world, which is God, and but
one Truth; So there can be but one simple Religion; because whatsoever is true
and good, cannot be perfect, unless it be singular.

And in vain do Newters hope by their various practice to be saved; for
Dubious in fide, Infidelis est; Vacillation argues Extrade Haeret. cap. Dubi^s
Symbol.
Infidelity; Whosoever does not believe the Catholic faith, Fir^iter
fideliterque, (says Athanasius) faithfully and constantly, he cannot be saved.

The state of such persons, who through doubt being perplexed in case of
Religion, and therefore embrace all* and consequently are void of any faith, is
most elegantly described by Vinc^ntiu^ Lyrineusis, as follows, Et rev^r^ cum
quaequ^ Nouita^ ebullit, statim cernitur frumentorum gravitas, and Leuita^
palearum, etc. Lib. cont. h^r^. cap. 25.


And in very deed, when any Nouelty arises, the solid weighty corn, is
presently discerned from the light Chafe; then that is cast from the floor,
without any great labor; which had no weighty substance, to keep it within
the floor; for some fly away wholly out of hand; some are shook off only,
and fear to perish, and are ashamed to return, being wounded, half dead, and
half alive; like those who have drank such a quantity of poison, which does
neither kill, nor will be digested, nor cause death, nor suffer to live; O
miserable condition* with how great and furious storms of cares, are they
touzed? Sometimes they are rapt by an headlong error, whither the wind will
drive them; sometime returning unto themselves, they slide back again, like
contrary waves; one while through rash presumption, they approve things
uncertain; another while through foolish fear, they are afraid at those
things which are certain; They doubting which way to go, whither to return,
what to desire, what to shun, what to hold, what to let go. Hitherto
Vincentius. Such as these; are too many, who carry the Title of Christians in
most Churches; they will not approve the Religion of the Reformed Church, nor
that of the Papists, neither will they reject them; but as a learned, and
religious Divine of our Church Mr. White. Epla. dedica^. ad lib.
said, They being ignorant, and understanding nothing; but living void of the
knowledge, and conscience of all Relgion, are possible of his mind that
Turonensis writes of; who said that it was best of all, if both the one, and
the other were followed, neither were it any hurt; Si inter Gentilium aras, and
Dei Ecclesiam quis transiens, vtraque veneretur; if going between the Alters
of the Pagans, and the Church of God, a man should give honor unto both.

Whereas the saying of an Ancient is most true, concluding the contrary, in
these words (...) Theoder. Pr^sbi^er lib. de Incar^^^. Do^.
(...), etc.

For it is not possible, that a mean between Truth and falsehood, should be
found or conceipted, for the truth is always in the midst, and never
declineth from thence, and therefore is firm and even on all sides, and
strait, and does not suffer any thing that is diverse, which may make it
crooked, or thrust it out of its own state or constancy.

Such wauexers, are no Bel^euers; for Faith is, Certitudo quaedam H^go de
Sarcto Vict lib. 1. de Sa^r^^^. art 8. ca^. 1.
an^m, etc. A kind of certainty of the mind of things ab^ent, about Opinion,
and b^neath Knowledge; it is called a Certainty, Quia vbi est adbuc d^bitatio,
sides non est; Because where doubting remains, there is no faith; for Faith
consists in two things, Knowledge and Affection, or Constancy or stability of
belief: The Substance o^ Faith, is in the Affection; the matter is in
Knowledge; which knowledge may be wholly without Faith; But ^aith cannot be
without some Knowledge, because he that hears any thing, and does not
understand, does not always believe, but he that does understand nothing, does
believe nothing, although he may sometime b^l^eue that, which he does not
understand; therefore there must always be Knowledge with Faith, which may
direct faith in her Intention.

But yet that faith is safest, and most lawdable, which is greater in
affection, then knowledge, as our Lord plainly shows; where he compares
Faith, to a Grain of Mustardseed, M^t. 13.
which is very small in quantity, but mighty in heat; hereupon he said to the
woman of Canaan, who then knew little, but believed much; O^woman, great is thy
faith. 1^.


If one of these be awanting, but especially the latter, there is no faith; but
every one that will be a Christian, must be able truly to say; Nos credimus
and cognouimus, etc. W^ believe Ioh. 6.
and know.

One spark of Gods grace, moucth us to seek after the truth; the which when
we have found, we do cleave unto it unseperably; when we have once tasted
How sweet 1 Pet. 2.
the Lord is; th^n nothing is able to separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord: whereas Ignot^ nu^^s c^spido; where there is no
knowledge, there can be Romans 8.
no Affection.

Faith and Knowledge are inseperable in every true believer; i^ one of these be
awanting in a man, such a one is* no^ a Christian; if thou did believe, it
is impossible that thou should be negligent to attain to the knowledge of
the Reasons of that thou do believe, unless thou should entertain
Opinion for Truth; which how dangerous it is in case of Salvation or damnation,
I refer me to those who have hope of the life to come; of which hope, they
are wholly destitute, who are careless to understand the mysteries of Faith,
which are so full of unspeakable comfort unto man; At the best, they are but
like to the Samaritanes, who worshipped they knew not what.

But in whomsoever there is a true knowledge, of Christ and Ioh. 4.
his Gospel, there must follow incredible zeal, in cleaving unto him and his
truth.

We see in the Primitive Church; how when they once knew Christ, they ran after
him; they forsook kingdoms, treasures, pleasures, parents, wives, children,
kindred, and their lives also, they left and forsook all, for the love of
Christ; Emperors and Kings, Philosophers and Orators, Noble, and Ignoble,
young men and maidens, old men and children, and cleave so fast unto Christ,
that the presence of the greatest honor, state and riches, could not withdraw
them from Christ.

Iouianus being elected Emperor by the Soldiers, after the death of Julian
the Apostata refused it, until they cried out, Socrat. lib. 3. Eccle. hist.
cap* 19.
that they would be Christians also.

Valens and Valentinian with the same Iouian, being commanded, Cap. 11.
to sacrifice unto Idols, and to leave Christ or their offices; put off their
belts, and resigned their Offices; protesting that they would undergo all
torments, rather then deny Christ. Torments could not amaze them, but that they
insulted over their tortures; The terror of death could not affright them, nor
any other means whatsoever, draw them from Christ; yea so zealous were they,
that they would not bear the defacing of the faith, so much as in the adding
of one letter, no not in the altering of one letter; They would not suffer (^)
to be added, to their (...), to gratify that monster A^rius, Russia. lib. 1.
Eccl. hist cap. 5. Conci^. 1* phes. Exem^^a. Ci^il. ad. Yestor.
nor change (t) into (*) to please blasphemous Nestorius in his (...).

The defect of the like zeal in the Newters of this age, shows them to be
none of Christ's Disciples.

Tepidum Discipulum non ama^ Christus. Nature has as it were sowed this
i^stinct into all men, that children if they be good, cannot dissemble the
injuries done unto their parents; and so likewise faithful s^ruants cannot but
defend the causes of their Lords; So is it common; that every one, who has
received a benefit from another man, should use all means to requite, unless
he would incur the title of Ingratitude.

With how much greater debt, and more just law then that of Nature, are we
bound to maintain the honor of our Savior, not only in words, but if need so
require, with the effusion of our blood? And seeing the honor he requires at
our hands, consists in our true and reasonable service of him, according to
his prescript; what shall we think of such, who are so fair from serving him,
that they mock him? for what else do all dissemblers?

He is not Christ's servant (says Augustine) Sed subsannator and Irrisor, qui
eius se servum dicit, cui servire dissimulat; But a scoff^r, and mocker, that
says he is his servant, whom he does dissemblingly serve.

Do they not mock him, who profess Christianity with the Protestants, and
yet are as ready to entertain Popish Id^latry, and approve likewise every
heresy? and yet are so impudent, to say that there is no evil in such
abomination? These men well deserve, that their servants should persuade them
to believe, that they have an carnest desire to do them service, whereas they
spend their whole time in sleeping, drunkenness and sporting, and do not move
so much as one finger, to perform any kind of work or business.

Though the mighty God does not stand in need of our thankfulness, (for what
Patronage can this mortal tongue of ours) undertake for the eternal glory of
our Creator? what can the small drops of our praises, add unto the boundles
bottomless sea of that infinite Majesty? what will it hurt God, if the
sacrilegious mouths of impious Atheists, shall blaspheme him, and conspire as
the Giants did, at the building of the tower of Babel, to tumble him out of
heaven? yet is it a matter most beseeming every Christian, and most acceptable
unto God to show a token of love and reverence toward his Majesty, and to
oppose our tongues against their tongues, who blaspheme God; to persecute false
Religion, with word, writ, and sword, to defend the Gospel against Papisme,
and so to profess the true faith, that we openly renounce all kind of heresy.

God requires, that we love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and
with all our mind; for God will not have Aluim quenquam s^cium amoris in anima
hominis; Any corriuall Upon. lib. 1* ^n Cauti^.
of love in the soul of man; he desires to rule alone in his whole strength,
in all his heart, and in all his bowels: he requires thee to love him with
thy understanding; So that thou do give no way unto error in the confession
of his name: thou must will nothing contrary thereunto, nor give way unto any
such thought, which may alienate thy affection, from this truth.

Then do thou love God truly; wherein consists the perfection of thy
faith, which vn^teth thee unto God, without which thou can not truly say,
that thou do believe in God.

Now if thou did love God, thou could not keep silence, when thou
did hear, or see thy Beloved dishonored, but with strong zeal, thou
would rise up in the spirit of Elias, against Baal^ false Prophets, thou
would be delighted to hear him speak unto thee, and likewise to speak
thy self unto him: for by this mutual con^^rence, Lovers do usually take
experiment of their affections one toward another, which love cannot keep
silent: Mos enim amantium est, vt amorem suum silentio tegere non queant: If
thou do delight Ch^yso^t.
in reading, or hearing Gods word, and in holy prayer, the conference is acted,
then is it impossible, that thou should be seduced or alienated: if thou
once art gone out to Gods Enemies, thou did never truly love him, neither
did thou ever converse with him, otherwise then did Judas, that child of
perdition.

And if thou did love God truly, thou would express thy love, in
performing all manner of Offices to himself, and Greg. ho^nil. s^per haec
verba. Si quis diligit ^e.
his servants, which he requires: for love is never idle, if it be true, it
acts great things, if it refuse to work^, it is no love, Probati^
dilectionis, exhibitio est operis; The trial of love, is performance of
needful Offices. But no Newter has any love unto GOD, and consequently
abides in death; they regard only the present temporal things of this life,
and never contemplate those things, which are to come in the next life; and
though they do by custom, receive the Sacraments of Christianity with the
rest of the faithful, yet they never consider, why a man is a Christian, or
what hope a Christian has, in expectation of future blessedness: These men
though they have the name and title of faithful Believers, yet indeed and
truth, they are void of ^aith; and may be called Christians rather
Consuet^dine viuendi, quam virtute credendi, from their outward conformity,
then from any inward H^g^ lib. 1. de Sac^am. ^a^t. 8. cap. 3.
faith that is in them, as an Ancient says: If they did verily believe in
Christ, they would never join themselves with Heretics.

But they will say; howsoever they do make show outwardly to the Papists, that
they are of their Religion, and d^test the Protestants; yet in heart and
affection, they persist in the reformed Church; and God desires to be
worshipped in spirit.

I answer, that God does condemn as much the dissimulation, as the
Adoration, and thou do as much abuse God in the one, as in the other: Hear
what the ancient Canon says; He does not deny Christ only; that says he is
not Christ; Sed ^^. q. 3. cap. Nonsolum.
^lle etiam, qui (cum sit) negat se esse Christianum; but he denies Christ
also, who being a Christian, denies himself to be a Christian.

Such are injurious to God and man; as Vstazanes the E^nuch confessed unto
Sapores King of Persia; who having (to Sozom^^. l^b. ^. ^ccl^s. ^ist. cap. 3.
please the King) adored the Sun; being bitterly reproved by Symeones Bishop
of Sileucia, as he passed by him unto prison, for his instability; lamented his
hypocrisy, and acknowledged to the King, that he worshipped the Sun, but in
show only, to gratify him; So that he deserved death for either caus^; Tum
quod Christi proditorem, tum quod veteratorem erga te meipsum oste^derim; both
because I have played the Traitor with Christ, and the dissembler with thee.

It is a mere moc^ery of God, contrary to the confession of his name and
faith; which he so earnestly enioyneth, and exacteth of all his Disciples and
followers, that they confess him, that they be not ashamed of his words; you
shall be witnesses unto me, in Jerusalem, and in all Jury, and Samaria, and
unto the ends of the world.

Art thou not ashamed of Christ and his word, when that thou may retain
their favor, without which, (happily thou say) thou can not live for want
of temporal maintenance, thou will associate them by verbal approbation, and
corporail conformation, in acting those things which are idolatrous?

If thou art a Christian, maintain the Truth of Christ, if thou art ashamed of
him, thou have forsaken him; Thou seem to believe in heart, unto
righteousness; and yet notwithstanding thou may est hau^ l^st Christ, for with
the mouth we confess Romans 10.
him unto salvation; If therefore thou will be a Christian, confess Christ's
truth in the sight of men; be not ashamed of thy hope; as Christ lives in thy
heart, so let him dwell in thy mouth; And for this cause (says Augustine)
would Christ have his sign fixed in our for^heads, as it were in the seat of
shamefastness; Ne Christi opprobrio Christianus ^rubescat: That the Christian
should never be ashamed of Christ crucified. Sup. ^sa^. 31.
And that God exacteth this outward confession, it is plainly evident, by the
practice of Saints in all ages.

In the old Testament; the example of Sydrach, Misach, and Ab^dnego makes it
manifest; who refused to give so much, Dan. 3.
as an external assent, to that superstition which Nabuchodonozer had erected,
declaring that by no means they would worship his Idols.

In the new Testament; No man will deny, but that the Apostle Peter, had one
thing in his heart, and another thing in his mouth, when he denied his Master;
In which denial he kept the tr^th inwa^dly, and uttered a lie outwardly.

Now if it had been sufficient to his soluation, to hau^ believed in heart,
why did he with te^^es, wash away that denial with his mouth? was it not,
because he saw, he had brought himself into great danger of d^struction,
because that as he believed, with the heart unto ^ighteousnesse, he did not
likewise confess with the mo^th unto Salvation? And yet thou say it is
sufficient to worship God in heart and mind.

But say we should grant so much; yea, we deny it not, if so be the heart be
not double; for where there is true integrity of mind, the body will never be
drawn to the contrary part.

I demand therefore of such persons, who externally communicate with their
Lords in the Rites of Popery; are they not carried thereunto, by an inward
motion of the mind? which stirs up their body to present it self in those
places, where such exec^able blasphemy is committed; whereby it is plain, that
they have an inward desire to commit Idolatry; and that chiefly for this cause,
that they may shape themselves to their will and opinion, who are enemies unto
the truth; To the end, that herein they may gratify them, preferring their
favor, and their own private maintenance, before the honor and love of God:
whereas, Melius est, pro veritat^ pati supplicium, quam pro Adulatione
beneficium, It is better to suffer 11. q. 3. cap. N^mo.
punishment for defense of the Truth, then to receive a reward for flattery.

Many detest Judas his villainy for selling his Lord and Master, for money, and
yet fear not to practice the same action; and therefore they are culpable of
the same sin; Profecto qui veritatem pro pecunia negant, Deum pro pecunia
vendunt: Surely they who deny the truth for money, do sell GOD for ^o^l. cap.
Ab^^t.
money.

If a man should through infirmity deny the truth as did Peter, upon such
repentance he might receive pardon; (though God does sildome grant repentance
unto such wretches;) But if any one shall with Judas, and Balaam, be seduced by
cou^tousnesse, to betray the truth; let him expect no other reward then befell
those unhappy Caitiues; Vaevictis. Woe unto them that are overcome by riches,
which perish; who through fear shall deny the truth; Timendo mortem car^i^
tuae; mortem dabis animae tuae; by fearing thy flesh, thou slayest August.
thy soul; In which case, our Savior commands his Disciples, not to fear
those, who can kill the body; upon which words Chrysost^^^ thus excellently
reaso^eth; Ne forte propter ^imor^m mortis, non libere dicatis quod audistis,
least happily, for Homil. 25. i^ Math.
fear of death, you should not utter that freely which you have heard, nor
boldly preach unto all men* that which you heard in secret; for as it is showed
by these words:

He only is not a Traitor to the truth, who transgressing against the truth,
does speak a lie openly in stead of the truth; But he also, who does not
utter the truth freely, which he ought to utter freely, or does not defend the
truth freely, which he ought to defend freely: Such a one is a Traitor unto the
truth; for as the Priest is bound to preach freely, that truth which he heard
of God; So the Layman is bound, faithfully to defend that truth, which he has
heard of the Priests proved out of the Scriptures; which if he neglects to
perform, he betrayeth the truth; for with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, and with the mouth we confess unto Salvation.

And I do add this; that every dissembler in Religion, is an offense unto
man; and woe be unto that man, by whom the offense comes in this kind; The
Apostle says, we must abstain from all appearance of evil; And it is the
duty of every good man, so to order his actions, that they breed no scandal to
those who are without, or to those who are apt to fall away: But they who
communicate with any Sect in the Sacraments of their Religion, by that very
action, seem to confirm their Religion, and to draw other thereunto, as much
as in them lies; whereas they should rather cry out against all heresy, and
seek to bring them to the truth, and thou by thy hypocrisy, make them to
persist more obstinately in their errors, and consequently thou art no
Christian.

Hear what that holy Orthodoxall Bishop of Alexandria says, in his Epistle
unto the Clergy: (...), Act. Council. Nic. part. 1. ap^d Cyzicen.
It is fit that we who are Christians, should avoid all those who speak against
Christ, and hate him, as the ^nemies of God, and corrupter of souls; and not
to say so much as God speed unto such kind of men, as St. John has commanded
us, vnlest we should in so doing* communicate with them in their sins: yea, by
so doing we should confirm them therein, for they will say; Why should we
forsake that Religion, which the Protestants embrace with us? Whereas we are
obliged to labor for their reformation, and to win them unto the truth,
which happily may be effected, when they shall behold us to detest their sacred
solemnities, and to despise them as profane trisles; and then though they
should not consent unto our truth, yet they may be ashamed of their own
falsehood.

Some there are, whose Religion consists herein, that they do not contradict
the faith which is established, be it never so false and blasphemous* and are
slexible to all forms, that are imposed on them, because they have not laid
any foundation of the truth in themselves, and this is the cause why they are
so apt with Leon^das, Mutari pro temporum ratione to change with the time.
Plutarch. in Lacon.


The holy Ghost terms such persons lukewarm, whom he speweth out of his
mouth; who with the Parasite in the Poet, Apocalvps. 3.
Cry Ats, Aio; Negas, Nego, play Protestant with one, and Papist with another:
Saint Paul calls them Men-pleasers, Terent.
which cannot please Christ. Galat 1.


These make Religion a matter of indifference, and hold the Academicks (...) to
be the best wisdom, especially when in an Interregnum, Religion hangs Inter
malleum et Incude^^ (as they say) upon the pleasure of the Prince, and his
Peers, as yet unknown to the party whether truth or falsehood shall prevail;
the loss of whose favor they will not adventure for conscience sake.

But let these wretches consider their just censure by St. Augustine; There are
some (says he) that are Christians, for this cause only, that they may thereby
purchase the favor of those Lib^ de Catechis. ^ud. cap. 17.
persons, of whom they expect temporal riches; or because they will not offend
those, whom they do fear; Sed istireprob^ su^t, but such as are R^probates.

But whereunto may I liken this vain generation? They are like unto the
Reare-mouse in the Fabler; which are most base and odious creatures; It is
doubtful, whether they be Gressible, or volatle, of whom it is reco^ded* That
dis^^rd being betwee^e the flying creatures, and the ^ou^e footed beasts, and
the day of Battle assigned; The Rearemouse absented himself thereon, of
policy to observe on what side the victory would betide, that he might join
with the Conqueror.

The Battle being finished, and many slain, and wounded on both parts, the
foure-footed beasts, met with the Rearemouse, and cried out to apprehend him,
and to slay their Enemy; The Rearemouse answered; what say you my friends? I
am of your side; and he showed them his feet, and so escaped: And in like
manner, meeting with the Birds, he showed them his wings, and escaped
accordingly: Let these Ancipites temporum palpatores, (as Cyprian speaks)
These doubtful Lib. 2. Exempla. 2. ad Donas.
Time-seruers, and Dalliers in sundry Religions, behold their baseness in this
creature, and let them know, that Facti sunt vespertiliones, neque in muribus
plane, neque, in volucribus sunt; Varro in Ag^thone.
They are become Monsters in Religion, seeing they are of any, and consequently
of no Religion.

But let them know withal; That God is not like unto man, that he will be
mocked, though man's eyes may be blinded, his judgment deceived: There is but
one God, one faith, one truth, and one Religion; which is to be performed in
Spirit, and in truth, Ephesians. 4. Ioh. 4.
and such God requires: And all men are either members of Christ, and such
believe in heart, and confess with the mouth his Gospel; or the members of
Satan, and such either openly impugn, or secretly dissemble the Doctrine of
the Gospel; Between these two, there is no verb Newter, or Nowne of the
Chytrae. super cap. 3. Apocal.
Newter Gender, as Luther said; for God is icalous, and will endure no
Corriuall; Therefore he cries to his people the Israelites by his Prophet; How
long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; But if
Baal be he, then go after 1. Reg. 18.
him; He will not suffer us to be unequally yoaked with Infidels; 2. Corinthians. 6.
for there can be no fellowship between light and darkness, no communion
between Christ and Beliall; but whosoever is not with Math. 12. 6.
him, is against him, and whosoever gathers not wi^h him, seattereth; for no
man can serve two Masters.

Therefore they are enemies unto Christ, who intend to make a religious
Communion between Protestant and Papist, knowing that they can no more agree
together, then light and darkness; and that the only means to ruinate a
Kingdom, and to dispose it for forraigue Invasion; is to nourish faction
between the Subjects; which is sown and maintained by diverse of Religions.

And now I say unto you lukewarm Nullifidians, who conform your selves to
the several Religions of those great personage^s, with whom you live, not of
any affection to God intended; but because ye seek thereby to please men,
being none of the Servants of Jesus Christ.

Deal with God truly, as you deal with your Lords safely, and you shall cease
to be the servants of men any longer; and the Son will make you free, and
coheires with himself of his Fathers Kingdom.

Remember how devoted you counterfeit your selves to be toward your Lords, of
whom you expect some benefit.

You go forth to meet them, at their approaching; when they are in any
public assembly, you honor them with pompous salutations; when they walk
abroad, you prepare their way for them, you command other to give place; you
proclaim their coming; you set them Chaires, lay them Cushions, and embrace
their very feet; you record the famous Acts of their Progenitors out of
ancient stories; and if you find nothing laudable in themselves, you retort
the noble deeds of their predecessors to their praise; you do not only say,
but swear also, that you are devoted unto them, and that with sure fidelity;
and you labor with all possible diligence, to seem to be that, which you
would not be*

Think you that you might be justly rebuked, if you were that which ye are
not, but that which you faigne your selves to be? If this were evil, that ye
should be such; why should you study so much to seem to be such? Yea, were ye
such, as ye feign your selves to be, but are not, you deserved just praise;
And for this cause, are you often cast off by your Lords, for that you are
known not to be such, as you feign your selves to be* If therefore you be
justly cast off, because you be known not to be such, as you dissemble your
selves to be; I do say unto you*

That you may for ever be retained in Gods favor, and live his servants, under
his safe protection; be careful to show your selves truly unto God, such as
you counterfeite your selves to be to your Lords.

Show your selves outwardly in words, to have inwardly the affection of
devotion toward God in your hearts; and do not only show it, but have that
within you, which you show, vnleast if ye do only show it, ye be no true
lovers, but slatterers and mo^kers, and consequently, because ye cannot deceive
God with ostentation, ye rather deceive your selves, and for your mockery be
laughed to scorn, by him that sits in heaven.

Therefore as you are accustomed, first to offer your dissembled l^ue, thereby
to purchase their favor, whom you entreat; So you must present unto the most
high God, your hearts inflamed with the fire of true zeal, and ardent desire,
to become servants unto his divine Maiesti^, and that with an unfeigned
affection, and when you find by the inward comfort and illumination of your
soul, that God has heard your request, you must go forth to meet him, and
with Zachaeus his devotion and alacrity, receive him joyfully into the house of
your heart; thou must come before his presence with thanke^-giuing for this
great benefit, that he has made thee partaker of the knowledge of his truth,
whereby thy soul may be saved; and tell forth his praise in the Congregation;
and that his Gospel may be propagated, thou must prepare the way thereunto, by
suppressing profane deceiptfull heresies, and eradicating to the utmost of thy
power, all execrable Superstitions; thou must proclaim the same unto all those
with whom thou do live, and bless the feet of those, who bring the glad
tidings of Salvation unto Sinners; thou must resist all the enemies of the
Evangelical truth; we must account them to be our enemies, that contradict it;
we must hate them that hate the Gospel; and rather choose to suffer the hatred
of Heretics for the truths sake, then enjoy their peace, with hatred of the
truth.

And this I say moreover unto all Church Papists, who like certain Donatists
in the time of St. Augustine, yield only their bodily presence to the Reformed
Church, and remain Papists, Lib. de ges^. Emer. cap. 1.
in heart and affection, being Carna intus, Spiritu foris; they are not
partakers of the Body of Christ, but are mere Atheists, and are void of all
Religion, and do infringe the very law of Nature; for seeing Religion, as
Pomponius says, Maxim sit secundum naturam, is most agreeable unto Nature;
do not they In ^^b. 2. T. de Justit. and Iure.
impugn God and Nature, who despise the same, seeing it is infused into all
men, yea into certain brute beasts also by Nature?

For the very Elephants adore the Sun, and all Nations, be Cic. de Lag.
Jacob. 2.
they never so barbarous, maintain some Religion; yea, the Devils believe God
and tremble; and yet these vain variable excrements of mankind, scoff at all
Religion; for were they religious, they would persist firmly therein, for
thence has Religion his denomination, which because they neglect, they Religio
a religando. Lact. lib. ^. cap. 28.
show themselves altogether irreligious.

The Turks, Jews and Pagaus, observe their Religion most constantly, but
these light reeds, are carried hither and thither, as every wind changes.

Those also who in mind and understanding are Protestants, if they shall
communicate with Papists in their religious Rites, though it be only to outward
conformity, are plain Idolaters; for though they give no worship to their
blasphemous Sacrifice, because, as they say, God will be worshipped in spirit,
and they inwardly deride the Popish fatuity; yet this cannot excuse them;
because God does prohibit us to serve Idols, with any corporal obsequy;
unless they do deny with the Manicheas, that God did create the whole man,
which is Epiphan. lib. 2. to^n. 2. haer. 66. In Catalago. dogm. Manich^i.
most absurd; Sure we are, that our bodies are his Temple wherein he dwells;
and he hsth promised to raise them up again to glory in the last day, if we
do glorify him in them, in these days of our flesh; but such dishonor him
with them, who with patience can behold him blasphemed in the Mass, and bow
their knees to their Wafer Idol.

And again, I do say unto you Pseudo Catholics, who entertain such Pseudo
Proselites, and draw them with temporal earthly rewards, to lose eternal
Celestial blessings; you are strangely deceived in them; for they are
apparently dissemblers; and respect neither your persons, nor your Religion,
but your money, and maintenance, and consequently deride you, and as a
Philosopher said of such; Non deum, sed Themis^i. a^ud Socrat. lib. 3. Eccles.
hist. cap. 21.
purpuram colunt; and that they were like unto a stream, raised by a great
rain, which sometime run one way, sometime another way.

Before they went out from us, they were as chafe among Corn; as evil
humors in the body, which pressed the breast; they were not of us; their
departure has cased the Church of a loathsome burden, and it is fit that the
chafe and the Tares should have one society here, seeing their end shall be
the same hereafter, they shall be burned in unquenchable fire.

I do wish that all Christian Princes would practice, what Theuderichus the
Affrican Prince did before them; The Act was la^dable, though himself an
Arrian.

He had a certain Deacon, who professed the Orthodoxall Theodorus Lect.
Collectan. lib. 2.
faith, whom he loved and cherished entirely, who to gratify the Prince, (as
he pretended) forsook the H^mousian faith, and embraced Arrianisme; which
being known to Theuderichus, he forgate his love, and presently after beheaded
him, saying; Si Deo sidem non seruast^, quomodo homini sinceram Conscientiam
seruabis; If thou have not been faithful to God, how can thou carry a good
Conscience toward man?

If the like course were used against all Counterfeite Church-Papists,
Christian Princes might live in more security, the number of Athiests would
decrease, and the doubtful would be more firmly established in the truth.

And I say unto both sorts, what Augustine did unto the Manicheas; In vobis,
and qui Papistae ficti sunt, mali sunt; and Lib. 6. Contra Faust. cap. 11.
qui ficti non sunt, vani sunt, etc.

Among you, those who are counterfeit. Papists, are evil, and they who are not
counterfeite are vain: for where the faith it self is feigned, both he that
lives in it, (though a Counterfeite) does deceive, and they who embrace it as
true are deceived.

To conclude, I do exhort and advise all those, who are entangled with popish
heresies, and deceived with erro^s of any other false Religion, if they be
careful of their own Salvation; if they do not prefer blindness before
the light; if they will not destroy their own souls, by wandering ouerlong
from the light of the truth, in the palpable darkness of vain opinions; if
they desire to benefit themselves by being Christians; let them lay aside all
childish shamefastness, and forsaking the dangerous imaginations of humane
error, in which they falsely supposed themselves to have found the truth; and
in which, under the pretext of the name of Christian, they were far distant
from the confession of Christ; that they hasten with all convenient speed, with
all their might, and with the strongest endeavors of their faith, to find out
the true and strait way of the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith; which
is now by the mercy of God, professed in this Church of England, and when they
have found the true way of Salvation; let them proclaim with bold liberty of
voice, (...), (...), we have found the truth; let us rejoice together;
otherwise believe most firmly, and that without all doubting; that not only
all Pagans, but also Jews, Heretics, and Schismatics, who depart this life
out of the Catholic August. lib. d^* (...) cd Pct.
Church, shall go into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and
his Angels.

FINIS.

