THE MASS DISPLAYED.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH by Mr JOHN BID, advocate to the Parliament of Paris, and
now translated into English.

Tertull. de Oration. Cap. 12. Huiusmodi non religioni, sed superstitioni
deputantur, affectata and coacta, and curiosi potius quam rationalis officij,
certe vel eo coexcenda quod Gentilibus adaequent.

printer's device of John Lichfield and James Short, McKerrow 336: "The arms of
the University of Oxford" AC: OX



AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT, Printers to the famous
University. 1619.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SUch has ever been the opinion of the Church of God concerning Liturgies,
that the wise and provident establishers of religion in all places, have judged
it impertinent to plant knowledge in the pulpit, unless they founded also
devotion in the assembly, and supplied it with a due furniture of prayers and
thanksgiuings suitable to all occurrences that might befall. I need not search
other records for confirmation and proof hereof, then those remnants of
Liturgies, and ruins, rather then perfect images of primative zeal, which
antiquity has bequeathed unto us; whereof some passing through the mists of
ignorance have lost their names, and been adopted into wrong families, others
sliding through the chanails of superstition, have enterlarded their first
materials with much slime. Amongst the former, I rank those Liturgies falsely
attributed to S. Peter, Vide Mornay. l. 1. de Missa. c. 2. Rivet. critic. sacri
specimen. l. 1. c. 3. Coc. censur ve^.
S. James, S. Matthew, and S. Mark, amongst the later Basil's entertained by
the Syrians, Chrysostomes used in Constantinople, Isodores, received in Spain,
as also Ambroses in Millayne, Gregory's in Rome, besides other which are
recounted to have taken place in France, Germany, and other countries. Which
later sort, I style not by the names of these fathers, Bell. l. 2. de Missa c.
19.. Voi illud etiam notandum etc.
as if I acknowledged them to be their natural children, since our adversaries
themselves will not so far make them legitimate, but that whereas impregnable
reasons may be alleged to prove those Missalls which ware the Apostles
liueries to be the brood of an after age; these which shelter themselves under
the patronage of the Fathers may probably have received either some approbation
or reformation from them, though not in the same sort and fashion as time and
blindness has since deformed them.

But to speak more particularly of the Roman Liturgy, of which the succeding
tract may require something to be delivered, we must understand, that it was
not of one man's composing, but by sundry persons, partly augmented, partly
changed, partly corrupted. Bellarmine allows a sufficient portion of time,
even 800 years for the perfecting of this building, Bell. l. 2. de Missa c. 20.
etc. 17.
and raising it as high as the roof, and yet in another place he confesses
five prayers to have been added within the space of these last 500 years,
which were taken out of the French Missals and inserted into the Roman: I need
not rehearse in order how and by whom each part of this Liturgy took its
beginning, seeing my author has throughout his work eased me of that labor,
one thing notwithstanding we may take notice of by the way, that howsoever the
allowance of the Bishops of Rome might be required (so far as their proper
diocese did extend) for inserting of Canons into the body of the Liturgy, yet
that they were not the only authors or penners thereof, Council. Trident. Plat.
in vita Xisti 1. Greg epist. l 2. ep. 54. and lib. 9. ep. 14.
(as the Tridentine Council seems to intimate) for Platina attributes the
Gospel and Epistles to Hierom, the Alleluia to the Church of Jerusalem, the
symboll to the Nicen Council, as likewise Gregory allows a good part to one
Scholasticus, Bell. l. 2. de Mis. c. 20.
neither can Bellarmine otherwise defend the antiquity of it, then by saying
that many parts thereof may be found in the writings of the ancient fathers.

Touching the often changes to which this Canon has been subject, Bellarmine
notes three maine ones; Bell. l. 2. de Mis. c. 19. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 73.
The first of Gregory the Great, who abbridged the Gelasian canon as himself
confesses, saying, that he restored some things, and took other things away.
This reformed canon for a long time contained it self within the narrow bounds
of Saint Peter's Patrimony in Italy, Greg. decret. ad interrogat. Aug.
and was not imposed upon foreign countries as a rule to which they ought to
conform themselves, as may appear by the question moved by Austen the Monk
unto Gregory, viz. why Masses were celebrated in one manner in France, and in
another in Rome; Cassand. praefat. ad ord. Romans
But when Charles the Great was lifted up into the imperial throne by Pope Leo
the third, in requital of that good service done him, he compelled not only
the French (which his father Pepin had begun) but also all the Clergy
subject to him, partly by threats, and partly by punishments to embrace and
admit of the Gregorian office. France it seems soon yielded, and not long
after Germany; But the Spaniards as they are ever obstinate in a custom once
entertained, continued for many years most resolutely their ancient Lyturgie,
Hist. genesis Hist. and Roderic. Tolet.
which was termed by them the Mosorabique office, because the Christians mixed
with Arabians (which in those days possessed a good part of Spain, had observed
it from the time of Isodore Archbishop of Seuill, and of Hildefonse Archbishop
of Tolledo. At the length, Gregory the 7, being Pope, Alphonsus the 6, who
recovered Tolledo from the Saracens, at the earnest request of the French
queen, constrained his Clergy, after many debatings of the matter, to
condescend to the Roman rites, yet could he not so far prevail against an
inveterate custom, as wholly to extirpate it, but that at this day the
Mosorabique office is used in some Churches and Chapels upon certain
festiuals. Neither is this done without the consent and allowance of the Pope
himself, Bell. l. 2. de Mis. c. 18.
who permits (as Bellarmine confesses) not only the Moserabique Missall in
Tolledo, but also the Ambrosian in honor of Saint Ambrose, in Millaine where he
was bishop, Basils and Chrysostomes in Rome, and other parts of Italy, in
favor of the Grecians, Roccha in bibl. Vatican. p. 162.
which reside there; and another supposed to be Hieromes in Dalmatia, as being
of opinion, that the Roman Missall is not absolutely necessary to consecrate
the Eucharist. Thus did the Gregorian Missall get ground wheresoever the Pope
did intermeddle; for as touching England, howsoever Gregory gave Austen the
Monk liberty to use his own judgment in establishing divine service in that
Island, yet one may guess how easy a matter it was for the Roman Liturgy to
find welcome entertainment there, when such a trusty servant of the Popes, and
one so affected to the Roman ceremonies as was this Austen, (though withstood
by the British clergy) was received by many of the kings of the land, with
such applause.

The second reformation noted by Bellarmine, was of Gregory the 7, De consec.
did. 5. can. In die.
who lived about the year 1200, and as himself confesses reformed, or rather
deformed the Church offices. For he which shall with an equal eye compare the
Missals which from his time have reigned in the Church, with those which sure
registers do certify us to have been used in the days of Gregory the 1, may
perhaps see these later to resemble them somewhat in the outward gestures, and
form of words, but to be destitute both of their simplicity, (wherein neither
Masses for the dead, nor rubicks the directions for the superfluous ceremonies
now used, are to be found) as also deprived of the soul and reason which they
had, which was, that the people did pray with the Pastor, Greg. lib. 7. epist.
56. and l. 11. ep. 56.
nor only pray together, but communicate too, as out of Gregory himself may
be gathered. Nay how many things were then used to a quite contrary purpose
then they were afterward, which if my Preface might not seem to swell with
bills of accusation, I could easily recount. Page 52.
For what could that phrase imply sacrificiu^ laudis, this sacrifice of praise,
etc: but an Eucharistical sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for the
redemption of our souls purchased by the cross of Christ, which is now
wrested by the Priest to a propitiatory sacrifice for sin, meriting a
Iayle-deliuery out of Purgatory? To what end was that which follows, Page 53.
Aug. de ciuit dei lib. 22. c. 10.
memoriam venerantes, honoring the memory, etc: instituted, but to commemorate
the Saints (says Austen) as men of God which in their confessions overcame the
world, and not to invocate them, which now is directed by new additions, wholly
to their merits? In what sense could the Priest, Pap. 55.
speaking of the oblation in the Supper, say, vt nobis corpus and sanguis fiat,
that it may be made unto us the body and blood, etc: if opus operatum, (which
is the only string now harp'd upon by the Jesuits) were then thought security
enough for a Christian, Page 57. (...), Arist. de Memor. and Reminisc. c. 1.
Page 79.
and no farther seal of the Spirit required to make it good? why was vnde
memores, wherefore being mindful, etc: placed after the consecration, if Christ
were in those days thought to be locally present in the Sacrament, seeing
memory is a faculty busied about things absent and not present? How could
supra quae etc: respicere digneris ac accepta habere, upon which things let it
please thee to look with a propitious and favorable countenance, etc: be
applied to the sacrifice of Christ, seeing the Priest is no more ambitious then
to procure it as good acceptatio^ with God as the sacrifice of Abel had,
Cassand. Liturg. cap 8.
and Saint Basils Liturgy referres it only to the offerings to the poor?
Lastly in what congruity of speech could Gregory or any other have inserted
these Phrases into the Missall, Page 80. and. 96.
Quotquot su^pserimus, all we which shall take, etc: or Quod ore sumpsimus,
that we have taken, etc: if the Priest alone had communicated in those days,
whereas now the Priest forgetting himself what he is, usurps the Phrase of an
Emperor or King, and says We in the plural, as if he without more associates
were in saying a private Mass in danger to make a riot.

^ius 5. praefat. Romans breuiar. reformat. Praefat. offic. B. Mar. Virg.
The third correction of the Roman Missall mentioned by Bellarmine, is that of
Pius Quintus, who finding the Roman service books so fraught with things
uncertain and inconvenient (as he terms them) that almost all Primmers, yea
the Latin too were stuffed full with vain errors of superstitions, he set the
Tridentine Council on work, to reform both the Breviarie and Missall. Decret
Pii 5. ad Missal. Trid.
But how these new Missalls of the Tridentine correction were accepted of in
the world, may be questioned. For to omit those parts which either had shaken
off, or did never undergo the papal yoke, Ierem. Patriare. constant. Resp. 1.
ad Germanos c 13. Verse. a Grid. Fabritio. Posse^in. in Apparat. sacr. verb.
Maronitae c. 11. 12, 13, 14, 15.
al which have proper Liturgies of their own, as the Grecians which on common
days use the ancient Liturgy of Chrysostom, on festivalls that of Basil, the
Cophti in Egypt which use the Liturgy of Seuerus Patriarch of Alexandria. The
Maronites in Syria, which stick to the Liturgies of Peter, James, and Sixtus,
the Habassines, Armenians, Moscovians, all which have their proper and distinct
offices as Geographers do relate, Thevet. Cosmog.
the inhabitants within the hemisphere of Popery, though they had long before
given passage to the Gregorian Liturgy, and swallowed down most of the
errors, which in process of time crept into it without difficulty, yet when
the Pope called their old copies into the inquisition, and would with an high
Mandamus force new editions upon them, they began to start somewhat at the
motion. Italy, and Germany indeed, made no resistance the Clergy of the one
being a professed servant to the Pope, the other through opposition to the
Protestant more plyant, the maine repugnancies were in Spain and France, and
those upon several grounds. The Spaniards having intermixed the use of the
Gregorian office with the Mosorabique in some places, and generally almost
throughout made a medly of them both, were much discontented that such showers
of innovations (as they conceau'd them) should pour down on a sudden upon
their land and wash away those stepps which they had been accustomed in their
blind devotion to trace. Philip therefore, the father of him that now reigns,
receiving sundry complaints of this matter from his subjects, deputed certain
to consider of the business, and in the end solicited Pius 5, by Ludovicus de
Torres a clearke of the Apostolical sea to mitigate somewhat that rigorous
decree of the Council, Vide Decret. Pij 5. and Greg. 13. init. Missall.
Trident.
which forced a new Missall upon his Clergy. Which request the Pope forthwith
yielded unto, dispensing, that for a great part, they should follow the use of
the Church of Tolledo; and this grant his successor Gregory the 13, enlarged
not only with sundry additions touching the holydaies, but also with an
exposition, that whereas the Provinces of Spain singly were nominated in the
former decree, his intent and meaning was that the benefit of this dispensation
should extend also to the Islands and Indies subject to the King of Spain. As
for France, it renouncing the authority of the Tridentine Council as being
neither lawfully summoned nor justly proceeding, but manifestly violating the
liberties of the French Church, See Les libertes de l'eglise Gallicane.
could never be induced to receive formally the Missall corrected by it. But
how much the more resolutly the eight Parlements of the kingdom and the
Sorbone school (which are the propps and pillars of the French liberty) did
keep this Council from being incorporated amongst the edicts of the land, by
so much the more eagerly, did the Prelates solicit the Princes in the behalf
of it. And at length, perceauing that they prevailed little in their suit,
being resisted with no less reason then authority, they invented a new plot to
effect their enterprise. B^chel. prefat. ad decret. Eccles. Gallican.
For having procured Congye to call Synods in every particular diocese, they
by a wile effected that in each Province by it self, which in an united
assembly of the three estates they could not do. Each of these Synods was
begun with this profession. Also all other things delivered, defined, and
declared by the sacred Canons, and Oecumenicall Council, especially the holy
Tridentine Synod I do undoubtedly receive and profess etc. In these moreover
they did establish the Missall and Brevearies corrected by the Council of
Trent, Bochel. lib. 1. tit. 9.
as may appear by the Council of Rhemes, celebrated in the year 1583. That
of Burges, 1584. That of Rouen, 1581. That of Bordeaux, 1582. That of Aix,
1585. Yet are not these Provincial decrees touching the Missall, of such
validity, that they are field authenticke farther then the Clergy out of a
voluntary subscription or particular respects to their Bishop shall condescend
to admit them, as is evident by a suit commenced by the Canons of the Church of
the holy Trinity in Angiers, against the Bishop of the same place, for
changing by his decree the Breviary used formerly in that city, and
introducing the corrected Tridentine, where they procured of the Parliament of
Paris an inhibition against the Bishop, Ex curiae Paris. Regestis. an. M.DCIII.
whereby he was forbidden to alter any thing in the celebration of divine
service, without the special authority of the King. As also may be gathered
by comparing the Missall which my author follows, with the Tridentine,
wherein we may discern some differences which notwithstanding being not very
material, I thought good to insert into my translation only the Tridentine,
both for that it is most generally received by our adversaries; as also least
in transporting my author out of his native lists (where the Goliath he is to
provoke appearing in his French habit is not alike vallued as at home) I should
be thought to make him encounter an enemy already slain in the censure of his
spectators, or to gain the spoils where there is made no resistance.

Out of that which has been already delivered touching the beginning and
progress of the Roman Liturgy, may an answer be drawn to satisfy those
which conceive a dislike in our common prayer book, because they find many
things the same in them both, persuading themselves that this conclusion might
from thence be deduced, that our service book is nothing else but the popish
Liturgy translated. An Apolog. of Brownists. p. 38.
For the Missall was not (as I have showed) brought in at once, both in respect
of the parts and of the abuses annexed to them. The parts some of them are taken
out of the Scriptures, and introduced by the Fathers in the purer age of the
Church, others crept in with their abuses in after times. Now whatsoever is
found in this Missall which we also have admitted into our Church book, being
as it is now cleared from all superstition, may evidently be demonstrated, both
to have his foundation in the Scriptures, and to have been used also by the
primative Church, and that within the space of 600 years after our Savior.
That Gal. 5. 2. Tim. 4.18. Heb. 13.21. Theod. hist. l. 2 c. 24. Soz. lib. 3. c.
19. where they relate how, when at the ending of Psalms the Orthodoxe
Christians did say, Gloria patri and filio and sp sancto, the Arians turned it
thus, Gloria patri, per filium, in sp. sancto.
Gloria patri and filio, Glory be to the Father, is of this condition, the
Scripture phrase iustifies it on the one part, and Sozomen, Theodoret, and
Basil on the other. That It is taken partly from the form of saluting amongst
the Jews, Ruth. 2 4. Iud. 6. as Aust^n on the 132. Psalm. says religious men
in his days used, Deo gratias, and S. Hierome in the li^e of Paulina, that in
call ng together the Virgins, she used this word Alleluia: and Bellarmine, l.
2. de Miss. c. 16. that Nuns in saluting one another in their Nunneries say
Ave Maria. Pa^tly from the 2. Tim. 4.22. as Cassander thinks. Liturg. p. 42.
Chrysostom. Vbi nos c^^pimus lo^ui, cum sp^t^o^pl^bs respondet. in 1. Cor. hom.
36.
Dominus vobiscum, the Lord be with you, etc. is the same, the Bible witnesses
for the first, and Chrysostom for the second. That Luke 2.14. Bell. de Miss. l.
2 c. 16. Innoc. l. 2. de Mist. Miss, c. 20.
Gloria in excelsis: Glory to God on high, etc. is no less, we have the Angels
song at the birth of our Savior, the Hierosolymitan Liturgy, and Innocent the
third to testify. For Coloss. 3.2. Chrysostom. Quid sacis o homo, no promisisti
sacerdoti qui dixit sursum corda, and dixisti habemus ad dominum? Homil. de
^ucharist. Aug. Quod in sacramentis fidelium. dicitur, vt sursu^ corda habeamus
ad dominum, munus est domini, de quo munere ipsi domino Deo nostro gratias a
Sacerdote, post h^nc vocem quibus hoc dicitur, admonemur and dignum and iustum
esse respondet. de bono persev. c. 13.
Sursum corda: Let us lift up our hearts on high, etc. We have Paul,
Chrysostom, and Austin. For Sanct^^ sanctus etc. the Angels hymn, the Jews
canticle, and the Liturgies of Basil, and Chrysostom. For 1. Cor. 11.23.
Chemnit. exam. Conc. Trid. part. 2. c. 4.
Qui pri die quam pateretur: The day before he suffered, etc. The Apostles own
words, and Chemnitius opinion, that it was inserted into the Canon in the year
110. Lastly, for the Es. 6.3 Theodoret attributes the beginning of this custom
to Diodorus and Flavianus. lib. 2. hist. c. 24. where he says, Hi primi in
duas parts divisi coetibus psalmos accinentium, instituerunt alternis
Davidicam melodiam decantare, quod Antiochiae fieri coeptum pervagatum vsque,
quaque est, and ad fines orbis terrarum pervenit. And Basil. ad cler. Neoces.
Et nunc quidem in duas parts divisialternis succinentes psallunt. To which may
be joined, Corpus Domini nostri Ie^u etc. which besides the congruity which it
has with sundry phrases of the Scriptures, Phil. Mornay acknowledges it to
have been used in Gregory the greats time. lib. 1. de Miss. c. 5.
manner of singing the verses of the Psalms interchangeably we may allege the
Angelical melody in Esaias, and also the testimony of Theodoret and Basil.
These are the principal parts which so far as I have observed. (besides the
creed and the Lords Prayer, of whose antiquity there is no doubt) are found
both in our English Lyturgie, and this Roman Missall, here examined, which
being not intended by the orderers of our Service book to be a translation of
the Mass book, but only inserted as prayers used by the Fathers, and derived
out of holy writ, and being by reason of their paucity, as also for that they
are now deprived of the Arist. l. 2. phys. text. 11. vnde collig. Forma dat
nomen and esse.
form of Popery, which is superstition, insufficient to denominate, I see no
reason why we Es. 6.3. Mat. 21.9. Liturg. Basil. Chrysos.
should be branded to have a Mass book translated. Nor could the reformers of
our Religion be herein justly taxed, though they rejected not all things
which they found practiced in Popery; Solemn e mundo tollere videtur, qui vsum
propter abusum tollit Cic.
For first they did but what Christian liberty warranted them to do, which
ties us not to abrogate a good or indifferent thing for the abuse, but rather
to preserve the substance, a^ to pare off the corruption. Secondly, they did no
(...) but what necessity in a manner constrained them to do. For seeing it is
agreed by all parties, that the Church of God is termed Catholic or
universal, not in respect of place only, but of time also; and that there is
no one argument more buz'd into the ears of men by the Papists, then that we
profess a new and vpstart Religion whereof there are no prints extant in
antiquity, why should we deprive our selves of such a medium, to prove the
co^formity of our discipline to that of the Primative Church, as is the form
and manner of serving God in public, established amongst us, because the
Papists in many of the same things are the Fathers Apes. Neither does this any
way help the Papists, or may they therefore boast that their Missall is the
same Liturgy as was anciently in use, because many of the words and sentences
are the same, any more then he, which taking the Image of Jupiter wrought by
the hand of a cunning artificer, Sim. Iren.
and dissoluing it, makes thereof the image of a dog, can brag that in his
custody he has the excellent portraicture of Jupiter, because he has the
matter or stuff of which that supposed deity was formerly composed.

E. C.

THE MASS DISPLAYED.
CHAP. I. Of the Supper, or Communion.
FORASMVCH as names are imposed on things to be signs and marks of what they
are, Nomina sunt rerum notae.
it will suit well to our purpose in hand, if we take our beginning from the
explicating of certain terms, least a jealousy which some might conceive
from the words, should breed a controversy in things already accorded on, or
sundry acceptions should lead one to an erroneous confession of that which he
no ways believes. Let us begin therefore with expounding of this word
supper.

Supper is the english of the latin word Coena, which as Isodore Bishop of
Sevill in Spain in his book of Etymologies tells us, is so called, quasi koin
common, and from thence is derived the word, Communicants. Wherefore the
Communion which Christians have of the body and blood of Christ, eating of the
same bread, and participating of the same cup, is most properly called by that
name. Contrariwise, at these tables where there is but one only which
receives, we cannot justly affirm that there is a Communion, but rather a
true Excommunication, Can. peracta de consecrat. did. 1.
as says Pope Calixtus in the canon Peracta, St Paul likewise in the same
sense calls it depnon a supper. Tertull. de resurrec. idem in Apologet. c.
39. Jdem ad vxor. l 2 c. 6.

Thom. 1. Cor. 11. Hier. eodem cap. August. ad Januar. epist. 118.


And Tertullian more then two hundred years after him said, We cannot eat
the Supper of the Lord, and the Supper of Devils. Which Thomas thus
interprets, to eat the Supper of the Lord, is to take the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; and Hierome says, the Supper is so called because our Lord at
Supper did ordain that Sacrament. And St Augustine interprets it, the taking
of the Eucharist. See the usage of this word for the space of 400 years, mark
now the 400. Beda 1. Cor. 11.
following which make up 800. Beda says, that the taking of the Eucharist was
the supper of the Lord. Whence it follows that the most ancient and most
proper term to express that holy action, was the word of the Supper: as also
the prose of the Mass of the five wounds imports, which begins, Coenam cum
discipulis Christ celebrasti, thou have celebrated, O Christ, the Supper with
thy Disciples.

CHAP. II. Of the Eucharist.
EVcharist, signifies in Greek, a thanksgiving, for if ever a sufficient
subject offers it self, to stir us up to give thanks unto God, it is then
when he communicats unto us our salvation in Jesus Christ, and makes us
partakers of all his benefits, making him our wisdom, justice, sanctification,
1. Cor. 1. v. 30.
and redemption. Now as in the word of Communion, is properly designed that
which God bestows on us, by a part understanding the whole: so this term
which in its proper and native signification, signifies prayers and
thankesgiuings, proceeding from us and offered up unto God, comprehends
notwithstanding all the action: for the thanksgiving presupposes that the
faithful have received some benefit. And the Canons of the Mass run most
commonly in the plural number, Nou. 7. Justin. and ibi Cuiacius. See Rhenan.
Communicantes: Quod ore sumpsimus: that is to say, that which we have
received into our mouth: which gives us to understand, that in the primative
Church there was no single participating of the Pastor alone, but a true
communicating of all the faithful, otherwise it should never have been called
a thanksgiving, if they had presupposed but one receiver: for they which
receive nothing have no occasion to say God a mercy.

CHAP. III. Of the Liturgy.
THis term likewise is Greek, L. semper. 5.. demonstratus. and seqq. De iure
immunit.

Dion de Eccles. Hierarch. Philip. 2. v. 25.


and signifies in general whatsoever belongs to any public administration,
be it sacred or profane, for Suidas interprets it (...), and in this sense
it is taken in the law, (...), to withdraw ones self from public
employments: also we say (...), quasi (...), administering a public office,
though the Apostle says of the particular offices done unto him by
Epaphroditus, (...), who ministered unto me such things as I wanted. Now when
some have used this term, they have understood by it, not only the
administering of the Sacraments, but also the preaching of the word, in which
two things consist the office and charge of the Pastor. In the like manner does
Justinian the Emperor interpret it, and Cuias also Novel. 7. Justin. Nov. 7.
c. 11. de Ecclesiasticis bonis and ibi Cuiac. tom 3. p. 549. (...). etc.
signifying that besides the reading of the holy Scriptures, the litourgy was
performed, tradita populo sancta communione, by administering to the people the
holy communion. Whence we ought to conclude that in the time of Justinian,
being 530 years after Christ, the people stood not by only as mere spectators
in a theater, but to taste as at a feast: Act. 13.
and so must we understand that passage in the Acts, (...), that is, preaching
the Gospel, and administering to the people the Holy Communion. From which two
passages one may clearly collect that the Church in those days used not the
term of the Mass, and that Justinian retained this word as being used in his
time.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Sacrament.
AFter the three Greek words, we will explain three Latin, and begin
backwadrs, to the end that one may derive the one from the other. The first
therefore shall be the Sacrament, marvelous agreeable to this actio^. For Festus
witnesses that the ancients usurped it in actions which they performed with an
oath. For when they entered Soldiers into their Roll, they exacted an oath
either of every one in particular, or of the whole band in gross; this they
styled a conjuration, because they swear altogether, or particularly, and these
oaths they termed, military Sacraments, (...), Serui. 8. Aeneid. L. 8. c. de.
leg. 2. miles de his qui notantur. l. v. de re militari.
inde sacramento liberati. From hence it comes, that Christian Soldiers
which are the truly faithful, presenting themselves in Baptism to be
enrowled, and at the Supper, to muster and receive presse-money in the militant
Church, have termed these actions Sacraments: and because it is sufficient to
be once enrowled, Baptism is not to be reiterated, but in as much as Soldiers
are often to muster, to make open profession, to bear the colors, and to take
the bread of munition during this spiritual warfare, thereupon it is, that
this Sacrament of the Supper is often to be reiterated; in which on Gods
behalf we are assured by the truth of his Word, by the exhibiting of his
pledge, by the character of his Seal, by the efficacy of his Spirit, that he
loves us in his Son, will be favorable unto us through his obedience, will
exalt us in his favor through the humility of his Lamb sacrificed upon the
Cross. And again on our parts, we accept that grace, we protest that we will
abide constant, we swear that we will serve so good an Head, that we will
love and honor such a Father, and that we will renounce satan and his
promises, the world and its delights. Now if you consider it in its matter, it
will be double, to wit in signs; and in that which they signify, which is
called the matter of the Sacrament. The sign in Baptism is the water, the
thing which is signified is Blood; the sign in the Supper is Bread and Wine,
the thing signified is the Body and Blood; nevertheless in regard of the
Sacramental union, which the sign and the thing signified have one with
another, they borrow one another name in this action; sometimes the Body is
called the Bread, sometimes the Bread, the Body. For Saint Augustine says, Aug.
ep. 166. Idem cont. advers. leg. and prophet. lib. 2. c. 9. Id. de civ. dei. l.
10. c. 5. Idem in Ioh. tract. 26. idem n Leuit. l. 3. q. 57.

Amb. de iis qui mysterii init. tit. 4 c. 9.

Theod. dial. con. quosdam haeret.


the thing which signifies, is used to be honored with the name of that thing
which it signifies: and Saint Ambrose, before the benediction of those
heavenly words, one kind is named, (to wit the Bread and Wine) after the
consecration, the Body is signified. And Theodoret, Our Savior has honored
the signs and Symboles which we see, with the name of his Body and Blood, not
in changing their nature, but in adjoining his grace: add that is the reason
why every part of the Sacrament is opposed the one unto the other, the one
corruptible, the other incorruptible; the one the figure, the other the thing;
the one earth, the other Heaven; the one visible, the other invisible; the one
taken by the body, the other taken by the soul; the one presented by the
Pastor, the other by the Spirit of God. Maxim. schol. Dionysii.
So Maximine opposes the signs or symboles to the verity of the thing: smbola
tuta, ka ok ltheia. Following this truth, there is no Sacrament to be found in
the Mass: for before the consecration, there is no more but simple Bread and
Wine; and after the consecration (according to their saying) there is no more
Bread, yet notwithstanding, Cyril. l. 4. in Ioh. c. 19. August. tract. in Ioh.
59. Innocent. de sacrament. altar. c. 4. 13. and 14.
the Sacraments ought to have two parts, (to wit) the sign, and the thing
signified of the Bread of our Lord, and the Bread which is the Lord.

CHAP. V. Of Sacrifice.
SAcrifice is a Latin term, and signifies in general, Plaut. Poen. si hercle
istud vnquam factum est, tum me Jupiter faciat semper sacrificem, neque vnqua^
lite^.
to perform any holy thing, and particularly to make prayers and oblations to
God, although one obtain not that which he requires: in which sense it is
opposed to the Verb Lito, to appease. More specially this word has been in
use amongst the Jews and Pagans, signifying to offer to God fruits, beasts,
incense, bread or wine, and molam, a round loaf, from whence comes the Verb
Immolo. As for the sacrifices of the Heathens, the Church both ancient and
modern has always condemned them, as being abominable before God. The Jewish
consisting in material things, in types and figures of that only and eternal
sacrifice of our Savior, were accomplished in that sacrifice upon the Cross,
and now there remain none but sacrifices of thanksgiuings and praises: of the
which, David in the Psalms often speaks. For as concerning our Lord Jesus,
he can not be offered up again after his passion, for then, (says Saint Paul)
must he often have suffered. Heb. 9. v. 26.
Whence it follows, that as he can suffer no more, so can he no more be
offered up. Besides, to reiterate his sacrifice, is to argue it of
insufficiency, and to match it with the Jewish sacrifices of which it is
written, He. 10. v. 11. etc
Every high Priest stands daily ministering, and offering diverse times the
same sacrifices which can never take away sins; but this man after he had
offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God.
Heb. 9. v. 25.
Again, Not that he should offer himself often, as the high Priest enters
into the holy place every year, with the blood of others, etc. but now once in
the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself. Again, Ib. v. 12. Heb. 10. v. 14.
he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for
us. Again, for by one oblation he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. Finally, if Jesus were often offered up, by himself or by another,
then God should often make him pay the punishment of sin, (for satisfaction
is a necessary effect of oblation) which is a blasphemy against his Majesty.
Moreover he then ought often to shed his Blood; Heb. 9. v. 22.
for without shedding of blood is no remission: the which shedding is to be
understood of that which causes death, of which speaks the Prophet Esaias, He
has powered out his Soul unto death, Es. 53.
and made his Soul an offering for sin. So that the oblation and sacrifice of
the Cross is sufficient to appease God, and sanctify the Elect; and moreover
it neither ought nor can be reiterated. Besides if it ought to be performed
again, there cannot be found in the world a sacrificer which has the
qualities required unto such a work, but only our Savior Christ, who has
neither successor nor companion in his sacrifice; Thou art a Priest for ever
according to the order of Melchisedeck. Again, Heb. 6.20. and 7.21. and 27.28.
For the Law makes men high Priests which have infirmity, but the word of the
oath which was since the Law, makes the son which is consecrated for
evermore. Again, he is entered into heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us. Heb. 9.24.
Now as for these qualities specified, may they be found in our Pastors, be
they who they will? holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sins, Heb. 7.
v. 26.
and made higher then the heavens. We may conclude therefore, that we are not
only destitute of such Priests, but also that such a sacrifice is not
possible, for Jesus can not dye any more, Heb. 9. v. 25. Heb. 10. v. 11. etc.
Heb. 9. v. 12. and 28. etc. 8. v. 12.
not reiterable, for Jesus by one only oblation has consecrated us for ever,
not necessary, for God is appeased, and sin is destroyed. And if we read in
any passages, that there were sacrifices and sacrificers after the death of
Christ, we must understand that the matter of those sacrifices was not the body
and blood of our Savior. Let us hear Saint Paul, that I should be the
sacrificer of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, Romans 15. v. 16. Orig. ad Romans c 15.
l. 10.
sacrificing the Gospel of God. And Origin says, that the Greeks speak in
more magnificent terms (...), that which the Latins render sacrificing: from
whence one may gather, that to preach the Gospel is a work of sacrificing: as
Gregory says, I have offered you up to God as a beast in sacrifice: Greg.
Nazian. ad plebem. Epist. ad Romans c. 15.
and Chrysostom, My sacrifice is to preach the Gospel: he says not, to say
Mass, much less to offer Jesus Christ to God for the sins of the living and
the dead. Now as the Pastors have one sacrifice separated from the people in
that sense, so have they an other commune with them in another sense, whereof
the Apostle speaks, Romans 12. v. 1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.
Again, Philip. 8.17.
If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy and
rejoice with you all. And in another place, Heb. 13. v. 15.
By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his Name: Psalm. 50. v. 14. Tertul.
apolog. c. 30.
and David, Offer or sacrifice unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vow unto the
most high. Tertullian, I offer unto God the most fat oblation that I can, even
Prayer which he has commanded. This is far from teaching that none but
Priests do sacrifice under the Gospel, seeing that Prayer is a sacrifice, and
that we offer even our bodies unto him, by dedicating our selves unto the
service of God. That which we cannot do availably, if first we be not
reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, who having made our peace, troubles not
himself any more to treat of it again; but persues the effect, and obtaines
a discharge for our souls that we may enter into an absolute possession of
salvation.

CHAP. VI. Of the word Oblation.
THe interpretation of this word is a commentary to those which went before,
first in regard that in the Supper mention is made both of the sacrifice and of
the oblation performed upon the cross, for that Supper is called (but yet by a
figure) oftentimes an oblation and sacrifice. Amb. upon the Epist. to the Heb.
c. 10. Heb. 13.15.
And to this purpose, says Ambrose, that which we do is a Commemoration of
that sacrifice which has been done. Secondly, because it is taken sometimes
for a thanksgiving offered in sacrifice. Thirdly, because elsewhere it
signifies an offering up of our selves unto God. In this sense, Canon. Memento
domine.
Sacrificium laudis, is an oblation in the Canon of the Mass, See the
oblations which we make directly unto God through Jesus Christ. There are
other oblations which are not made unto God, but for so much as we make them to
those to whom he has ordained them, he esteems them as tendered to his own
person, Philip. c. 14. v. 18,
of which St Paul speaks, tearming them an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable well pleasing to God. Concerning which likewise speaks
our Savior in S. Matthew, Math. 25.40.
and Ireneus says, as God has no need of that which is ours, so we had need
to offer unto God something, according to that which Solomon says, Iren. l. 4.
c. 34.
he that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord. Let us use this
word Oblation soberly, not as the price of our redemption, but as an homage due
for those goods which we possess which were purchased without us, before us,
and for us, but not by us: paid for at once, and not at several recknings, by
one which was just, and not by many culpable. In this sense said Saint Cyprian
to a rich but ungrateful woman, Cypr. 1. sermon. de Eccles.
Come thou to the Table of the Lord without sacrifice, and yet partakest of
that sacrifice which the poor offer? For we must observe that all the
faithful brought to the Temple the Bread and Wine which was distributed in the
Supper. And from thence are derived those abuses which now-a-dayes do appear
in offerings, Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
for now they offer them not to God for the remission of their sins, but to
the Priest, where as then they were not offered to the Priest to abide with
him, but to be distributed to the people: and this distribution is yet termed
an offering: and we need not doubt that those three significations of the
word Oblation, are no way liable to that abuse which is current now-a-dayes. In
which sense Saint Hierome reprehended the vanity which long since crept into
the Church, Hierom. in Ezech. l. 1. c. 18.
but especially then when the Deacons began to publish by way of boast, what
any one had either offered or promised. Canon. cum omnes de consecrat. did. 2.
The Canons of the Popes themselves correct that abuse which is committed at
this time with applause, ordaining that it should not be lawful for any man
to offer in divine service any other thing then that which was agreeable to the
ordinances of the ancient Council, to wit, Bread and Wine mingled with water.
See in what sense were taken the six words above specified, three Greek, and
three Latin, lets now examine the seventh, a word aduouched by no good
Author, but entertained through much ignorance.

CHAP. VII. Of the Mass.
DOctor Cuia. ad Non. q. de bonis Eccl. tom. 3. p. 549. vetus est verbu quo and
Ambrosius, vtitur, and alij quidam qui tamen omnes dicunt Missas agere vel
facere, vel tenere, vel complere; non dicere, non canere, non audire. Saint
Ambr. was Bishop of Milan, about the year 380. Funct. Chron.
Cuias writing upon the seventh Novel, says that neither S. Ambrose, nor any
other of the Fathers ever used these phrases, to say Mass, to sing Mass, to
hear Mass. Now if in the time of Justinian himself, who lived about 530.
years after Christ, they were not used, it must needs follow, that those
which affirm that S. James at Jerusalem, and S. Peter at Rome sang Mass, be
fowly deceived. And indeed Socrates, Sozomene, and Theoderet, which wrote the
Ecclesiastical hystory in Greek, 400 years after the nativity of our Savior,
never used this term of the Mass, but simply of a Synaxis or Synagogue. Now
in as much as Christian Religion was derived from Jerusalem, passed through
Greece, and from thence to Rome, if this manner of speech had been used by the
faithful, it would certainly have continued for some tract of time in those
parts. Epiphanius, he which made the tripartite hystory, that is, composed a
rapsody of three Greek Authors, as often as he translates synaxis, he
expounds it Mass: but this is contrary to the true signification of the word,
and besides 500 years after our Savior. Some would derive it from the Hebrew
word Maozam, which I hold to dissent more in regard of the analogy, 2 Kings 11.
then the truth; being contrary to that in the 16 of Deuteronomy. or rather in the 2.
of Kings, in which place Messa signifies destruction or abandoning. The
Mahumetan Arabians instructed by Sergius the Monk, have retained it as being
most proper to their Idolatries, Ioh. Leo Assi^can in his book of the
description of Africa.
deriuing it from the word Messa three cities, where they expect their Messiah
Mahomet, Their Priests they call Messen, and their Temples Messit or Meschit.
Others deduce the word either from the Greek mo, mso, I shut, or obscure, I
teach obscurely; from whence comes (...), a Priest, and a mystery; which word
is written in the forehead of the great whore of Babylon, Apocal. 17. v. 6
the mother of harlots; or else from the word mzo, which signifies to mutter
in the teeth without being understood, or to chaw something and suck it. The
third etymology is from a Latin word which is barbarous enough, Missa for
Missio, which takes its original from a fashion observed by the ancient
Idolaters, as witnesses Apuleius, whose Priests were wont to speak with a
loud voice in Greek, loi phesi, that is, the people may depart: and in Latin,
Ite missa est. Wherefore the Romans applying themselves more then any other
Christian Church to Jews and Idolaters, have retained many of their customs,
and may well be observed in their habits, temples, altars, numbers, turns,
words, shauings, holy water, tapers, processions, poppets of wax, and a
thousand other things, which shall be handled in an other place, amongst which
this word likewise encroached, but in a contrary sense, for there it was a
token of their separation, and here it signifies an assembly. Moreover, after
the confession of faith, the reading of the lessons, preaching and prayer, the
Priest or Deacon used to say with a loud voice, Ite missa est, to the end that
those which were excommunicated, or might not be admitted to receive, should
withdraw themselves, and that first part of the action was called Missa
catechumenorum. After which the Bread and Wine was set forth, blessed, broken,
and distributed to all the assistants, and the communion being ended, See Rhen.
Spiegl. Greg lib dial. 3. c. 3.
they said again, Ite missa est; and this second part was called Missa
fidelium, the Mass of the faithful: because none were then to be present at
it but those which communicated. And from thence it comes, that some have used
the Mass in the plural number, whence it appears that particular Masses, are
the Masses of the excommunicated, nay rather worse, for there is not joined to
them as there ought, either lecture or expounding of the holy Scriptures. Thom.
4. sent. did. 12. q. 2. Bie^ did. 1. q. 3. lib. 1 4 Albert. magan C. 6. Ioh.
apud Mnisingerum, etc.
This conge therefore in bad Latin, has chased away the word of assembly, with
the effect of the Supper or communion, translated from a sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, to a sacrifice of the real body of Christ; and finally in
opere operato, is applied not only to those which are capable to examine
themselves, but to those likewise which neither have nor can have any
disposition to such a matter, as being dead creatures, deprived of reason or
insensible. Wherefore as for the word in Hebrew, to go to Mass signifies to
go to an abandoning, or a destruction; in Greek, to mutter between the
teeth, and to suck; in Latin, to separate or depart from the house of assembly;
and therefore it is impertinent in Latin, unprofitable in Greek, and a bad
presage in Hebrew.

CHAP. VIII. Tho ancient form of celebrating the Supper, practiced at this day
in the reformed Church.
BY understanding the several names of the Supper, one might well apprehend
the substance of it, to wit, that it is a divine institution, proceeding from
our Savior, who in the Sacrament of a common Supper, celebrated by the Church,
has disposed of the matter, form, and end thereof. The matter is double, the
one visible and corruptible, which is received with the hand, and enters into
the body by the mouth of the faithful, to wit, the Bread and Wine. The other
invisible and incorruptible, to wit, the body broken, and the Blood of Jesus
shed upon the Cross, which is applied to the soul of the faithful, for their
sanctification and redemption. As for the form, it is prescribed in the
Gospel, on the pastors part to take the bread into his hands to bless it,
break it, and distribute it to the people, likewise to take the Wine, to
bless it, and give it to all the Church to drink thereof, which are capable
of it, and to signify unto them the benefit of that Sacrament. On the part of
the faithful, Math. 26. Mar. 14. Luke 22.1. Cor. 11.
having examined themselves, they ought to present themselves to that holy
communion, take it, eat and drink that visible element with the mourh of
their body, and by faith to participate of the body and blood of our Savior,
apprehend the merit of his death, the effect of his resurrection, and the
efficacy of his ascension. As for the End, it is to magnify the bounty of
God, to render him thanks, to accept his accordment made in the new Testament,
to receive there the pledge and assurance of a better life, to protest our
fidelity to his service, from the union which we have with him, then with his
mystical body the Church, receiving from him our spiritual nourishment, and
so participating of that quickening bread, to wit, all his benefits, his
wisdom, his justice, his sanctification and redemption. So then the union
which we have with our Savior is real, but that is as much to say as reipsa,
for in regard of the verity of it, we are united unto him, and it is likewise
spiritual in respect of the means whereby it is wrought, which is the spirit
and faith. With this truth and this simplicity the faithful of the first ages
contented themselves, and if they used the terms of sacrifice and oblation, it
was not either to play the Pagans or Jews, much less to crucify again our
Savior, as it has been proved before. But as falsehood is an ape of the
truth, the spirit of error has falsified this testament, struck of her
seals, turned the things bequeathed to other uses, deprived the legataries of
their legacies, inserted diverse clauses to their own profit, and to be brief
has so disguised and adulterated the coppies, that from thence one can no more
expect aid for his salvation. Wherefore the truly faithful, do charge that
instrument with falsehood, have recourse to the first draught of it in the
Gospel, and take no less care of the salvation of their souls, then of the
keeping of an heritage, fearing as much false doctrine as to receive false
coin, and righting themselves from the confessions of the forgers themselves,
do find great light for the discovery of these falsehoods. To this purpose
confessed an ancient Abbot, Rupert. Tuit. l. 2. cap. 21.
that the Mass was not celebrated in times past with such apparel as it is
now adays, and that it was not polisht by one alone in such sort as it is now.
etc. and that it is not a whit the holyer for that, considering that heretofore
it was consecrated only with the words of our Lord, and joining of the Lords
prayer. And a Bishop of Rome says, Greg. epist. ex reg. lib. 7. c. 63. Platin.
in Xisto.
the Lords prayer is said incontinently after the other prayers, because the
Apostles were accustomed to consecrate the oblation of the host, in saying only
the Lords prayer. Whence it appears, that the body of the Mass which is the
Canon, is not at all essential unto it, and that the soul of it which is
transubstantiation, was not infused into that body, until by the Council of
Lateran, in the year 1205. We must therefore here resume the first paths, we
must take away the hay, dirt, and straw from this building, and join our
selves to the foundation of the Apostles: doing like those which go astray and
return by their own steps to find the true way. We shall find Justin Martyr
writing about an hundred and sixty years after the birth of Christ, and we
shall note in reading him, that water was mingled with the wine about 40 years
before, Justin. Apolog. 2.
by Pope Xistus, or Alexander. See how he describes the celebration of divine
service in his time. The day (says he) which is called Sunday, an assembly is
made of all those which abide in the fields or cities, into one place, and
there are read the Commentaries of the Apostles, and the writings of the
Prophets, so long as the time will permit. Afterward the reader having left
off to read, he which is president in the assembly makes an exhortation to the
people in a Sermon, admonishing them to imitate those good things; after that
is finished, all do rise up together, and make our prayers unto God (he says
not to any Saint) and as we said before, that prayer being done, the bread, the
wine, and the water are brought forth, and he that performs that action,
pronounces with all his might, prayers and thanksgiuings, the people there
join their voices, their affections and their blessing, saying Amen. Then a
distribution is made to every one, and a communication of those things which
were blessed with thanksgiving. The people were not then excommunicated.
I ask, let any man speak in conscience, if that form be not practiced in
the reformed Churches? and why will not they follow it: is it not the ambition
of Prelates which hinders them from acknowledging their fault; and avarice
which retains them in a commodious error, whilst in the mean time the simple
drink the folly of their conductors, great ones contributing their authority,
the people their violence, and the ignorant their fury. O Lord, order proceeds
from thee, thou have the hearts of kings in thine own hands, deliver us from
popular seditions. Let us think, that not the sacrament alone has been
liable to abuse, for even the tree of life, the sacrifices of Moses, the brazen
Serpent which was a firgure of our Lord, and many other divine institutions
have been subject to reformation, after 900, yea after 1000 years of abuse,
and idolatry. And as for the supper, we see how that that has been casheerd
by the Mass, the tables of wood by the tables of stone, the Churches
simplicity by Jewish and heathenish superstition, although some of these
things might at the first have been introduced with a good intention. Harken
therefore to the advice of a good Cordelier named Ferus, speaking of the
idolatry which befell in Israel. There was (says he) a double sin in Gedeon,
Ioh. Ferus in annot. in lib. Iud. c. 8.
both in that he made an Ephod contrary to the word of God, and in that he
seeing the abuse of it, took it not away. Now who sees not that the like
happens in the Church? how many things have the Saints ordained with a good
intent, which we see at this day changed, partly through abuse, partly through
superstition? for example sake, the Feasts, Ceremonies, Images, Mass,
Monasteries etc. None of these were instituted in that sort at the first, as
now they are used etc. and yet we Gedeons hold our peaces, they take not away
the abuse, they take not away the superstition. Poor Cordelier, when thou
wrotest this at Ments, had thou preached it at Rome, thou would have hardly
escaped the faggot. Now that we have represented that which was proclaimed and
practiced anciently, let us see what at this present is acted in the Church of
Rome: and afterward, we will make a brief comparison of them both.

CHAP. IX. An Index of the abuses of the Roman Mass.
THe Mass in one word is (...), that is to say, a worshipping of bread, of the
dead, of relics and images. In brief it is the mystery of iniquity, and an
abiuration of Christ. For it is properly a public protestation to renounce
the only sacrifice, and only sacrificer Christ Jesus. If you would have a more
ample description of it, you must know that this mystery was for a long time
concealed, detaining the truth in iniquity and injustice, and contains 15
heads, which likewise have many branches.

1 The first is the invention of Roman Priests, which co^sists in strange
tongues, in the composition of the Canon or body of the Mass, in
transubstantiation which is its soul, in elevation, adoration, processions,
feast of the sacrament, in prayer for the dead, in the anointing and
consecrating of of the Priests fingers, and in the standing of the Angel
Gabriel at the right corner of the alter.

2 The second is Paganism, which appears in the shauings of the Priests, in
their abstaining from marrying, in their situating of the Temple toward the
East, in burning of tapers and their smoke, in images and their consecration,
and lastly in offering of dowe and bread for the remission of sins.

3 The third is Iudaisme, which lies in their alters, Priests, and Levites, for
Cardinal Baronius, and Pope Innocent the third do both agree, that they
borrowed these ceremonies from Jews and Pagans.

4 The fourth is Magic, which consists in uneven numbers, in prayers, signs,
and words consecrating the host: also in turns and whirles, intentions and
respirations of the Priest, in reciteals and repetitions of Kyrieelison, of
agnus, and mea culpa,, of prayers to gain 164 years of pardon, with so many
more days ordained by Gregory, Nicolas, and Leo the 10, joining 7
paternosters, and 7 Avemaria's, where we may conceive that either the day of
judgment will not come yet this good while, or if it do, we may wonder what
will become of all their provision of Indulgences? Magic besides is to be
found in their salted water, and in the virtue of the fumes of their incense,
effectual even against the devil, and lastly, in that the Priests hold, that
if there be more water then wine, if the wine be naught, if the bread be not
of wheat, or if it has been steeped in any other liquor besides water that
then they will not transubstantiate.

5 The fifth is the corruption of the Matter, in as much as in the whole Mass
there is found no sacrament: for besides that they put water into the wine
contrary to the decree of a council, and abridge the people of the wine, they
make of it another matter, to wit, Christ's person visible and invisible
enclosed in a wafercake.

6 The sixth, is the Form changed and perverted, there being a low voice during
the most part of the action, where as Justinian ordained a loud: then many
little wafers instead of a large loaf, consecration without a Communion, many
alters in liew of one table, blessed bread instead of the Communion, purifying
wine instead of the wine to the layicke, not touching nor breaking the bread
given to the people, kissing a piece of plate as it it were equipollent to the
supper, and in brief, using the people worse then leapers were heretofore.

7. The seventh is, the End perverted, for the Supper is a Communion, and the
Mass is an excommunication of the people, a work worked by the Priest, by
declyning Missa, and applying his work to whom it pleases him, to man, beast,
wood, corn, etc. and instead of commemorating only our Savior, the Mass is
a commemoration of men, nails, cross, and the robe without seame.

8 The eighth consists in the Sacrifice of the Bread and Wine, before they be
consecrated, and that for remission of sins.

9 The ninth is the reiterating of the Expiatory sacrifice and subrogation of a
Priest for Jesus Christ the eternal sacrificer.

10 The tenth consists in Blasphemies, by profaning the titles proper to God,
and our Savior, and applying of them to creatures in the entrances, and other
pieces of the Masses of Saints.

11 The eleventh is a renouncing of the only mediator, and the employing of a
piece of his death, without certain knowledge whether it be meant of him or
of some other Saint, whether it be meritorious, and whether the oil of his
lamp will profit us any more the^ it did the foolish Virgins.

Can. comperimus de consecrat. list. 2.
12 The twelfe consists in the Sacriledges, which are committed in the Mass, by
deviding the Mystery, taking the Cup and rauishing it from the people: for so
the pope calls that action. Again in the Priest elevating of himself above
his sacrifice after the consecration, interceding for the consecrated host
pretended to be deifyed, requesting of God that it may be as acceptable as the
sacrifice of Abel, and of Melchizedecke applying that wholly to the Virgin Mary
which appertains to none but God. Breaking according to their doctrine the
bones of Christ, and making him to feel corruption, and be subject even to
beasts, deifying of spiders, slyes, etc,

13 The thirteenth is in Forgeries, adding and diminishing the testament of our
Savior, and changing his intention to the end that they may qualify the
sacrificer and his sacrifices, and also in falsifying of the canon of S.
Ambrose.

14 The fourteenth head is Symony, or an imitation of Giezi and Simon Magus, in
raising commodity, and traffiquing for sacred things, as namely the sacrament,
enterrements, marriages, prayers, pardons, confessions, and through
covetousness making marchandice of poor Christians, as S. Peter foretold. ^.
Pet. 2. v. 3.


15 The fifteenth head is, Horrible and abominable Idolatry, above that of the
Pagans. For there is an express book for the worship of Angels and Saints,
to thwart God, who expressly forbids that kind of worship in the 2. chap.
of the Colos. and 18. verse. Let no man begiule you of you reward in a
voluntary humility and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things
which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. To this they have
joined the adoration of the Bread and Wine, the adoration of men, of nails, of
wood, of Christ's garment at Argenteuil: the adoration of relics, making of
images, their consecrations, and dedications, which are Idolatryes according to
the saying of Tertullian and some Popes. Their vows, pilgrimages, Agnus Dei,
blessed graynes, shirts of Chartres, kissings of the alters, breviaries,
confessions to the dead and bruit beasts, and a thousand other superstitions
which the poor people commit, going barefoot, or creeping on their knees, and
bearing candles and presents before the alter.

CHAP. X. The beginning of the Mass.
THe Priest being attired according to the usual manner, approaches to the
alter, and bowing his head, signeth himself with the sign of the Cross,
saying.

In the name of the Father and of the son and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

In nomine Patris and Flij and Spiritus Sanctus. Amen.

Afterward he unfolds the corporal, which is of fine linen, or tafaty
wherein the Sacrament is put, vncouers the Chalice, and at the right side of
the alter poures the wine into the Chalice, saying.

From the side of our Lord Jesus Christ issued our blood at the time of his
most blesblessed passion.

De latere Domini nostri Jesus Christi, exiuit sanguis tempore sacratissimae
passionis suae.

then he puts upon the alter both the Plate and the Host, which he covers with
a little corporal folded, and mingles not the water with the wine until after
the oblation of the Host.

The first sin which is here committed against the law of God, is, that the
name of God is taken in vain, V. Officium proprium sanct.
and shamefully profaned, for the most part of the Mass after is said in the
name and commemoration of Saints and relics, to wit, of the Nails, the
Lance, the Robe without seame, and Joseph's breeches: Is not this a taking of
Gods name in vain and an interesting of him in such idolatries?

The second error is general and diffuseth it self through the whole action,
which is the celebrating of the Mass in an unknown tongue, contrary to the
practice of the ancient Church. O^ig lib. 8. cont. Celsum.
For Origin says, The Greeks call upon God in Greek, the Romans in Latin,
and every one in his own tongue prays unto God and prayseth him. And to this
end the Apostles had the gift of tongues, that men might understand them what
they said; whereas the greater part of Priests now adays do chiefly labor
that they may not be understood: which is a token of reprobation to a Church,
where such service is celebrated. For it is written, I will speak unto this
people by men of other tongues and other lips, Esa. 28.11.
that they may not understand me: 1. Cor. 14.21.
and S. Paul says, tongues are a sign not unto those that believe, but unto
those that believe not.

Ir follows in the Missall, the Priest joining his hands before his breast,
and I will enter unto thy alter. Answ. Unto God which rejoices my youth.

and introibo ad altar tuum. R. Ad Deum quilaetificat iuventutem meam.



The ancient Christians had no alters in their Churches of any fashion soever,
but called it their table dressed for the Communion: Arn. lib. 6.
as for the name of alter, an hundred years after the nativitie of our
Savior, Arnobius witnesses saying, Orig cont. Celsi^ lib. 8. p 934. and
Minutius felix in Octavio p. 20
We make neither alters of wood, nor alters of stone. And Origin: I would have
you conceive, that we conceal that which we serve under a shadow, and that
we have neither Temples nor Alters, but that we shun their dedications. Yet
nevertheless the Roman Church suffering her self to slide into Jewish and
Paganish superstitions, has erected not one altar only; Hos. 8.11.
but many, according to that which is written, because Ephraim has made many
altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin, and has ordained that they
should be of stone. Secondly Can. altaria de consecr. did. 1.
it has decreed that the altar should be consecrated with chrisme, and that
men should be prohibited to communicate any-where else, Can. novalij.
then it ordained that there should remain underneath it a piece of a dead
body, Can. placuit. c^n. sunt nov^lij de conscer. d^st. 1. Orat. ad sec.
caetum. c 12. v. 4. fast.
an heathnish custom, ( Ovid. 4. Fast.) and besides to have burning tapers and
lamps there, and to turn toward the East. Most of which are contrary to the
ancient custom of Christians, as witnesses Constantine in Eusebius. No
incense, no burning taper; but a pure light to clear the spirits of those
which pray: and Tertullian, Tertul. and vigil. c. 3.
We light not tapers in the open day as thou calumniatest us, but we employ the
light to dispell the darkness, that so we may watch until break of day. The
first Christians assembling themselves in the night, had need of lights, which
ought not to be any pretense for the superstition which is at this day used:
yet nevertheless Durand with other aduocats of these inventions, Dur l 4.
rubr. de muta.
do feine mysteries to be in them; for they prefigure in them both the light
of faith, and our Lord which consumes our rustinesse. There was then one Table
only, and that of wood in the middle of the Temple which served for the
communion. Concerning which, says Albert Krantzius, Albert. Krant. in metrop.
lib. 1. c. 9.
But after that thou have been at the Table which is in the middle of the
Temple, I have perceived a visage so joyful, etc. Furthermore, the Pastors
which served at the Supper, turned not their backs to the people as now-a-dayes
they do, all which evidently argues this conclusion to be true, that the
Christians for more then the space of 300 years, had neither altars nor
burning tapers, much less esteemed them to be of the essence of the Sacrament.
And if any of the Fathers mentioned at any time the altars of Christians, they
explained themselves as did Saint Paul, We have (says he) an altar whereof
they have no right which serve the Tabernacle, Heb. 13. v. 10.
meaning by the altar, the Cross, upon which our Savior was stretched forth.
And Thomas upon that passage says, Our altar is Jesus Christ, in whom and by
whom we offer up our prayers, and he is that altar of gold of which is spoken
in the Apocalyp. ca. 8. and Clement Alexandrinus says, Strom. lib. 7.
that we have no other altar then one holy soul: and Saint Austin says, the
altar of the faithful is their own heart.

After follows a Psalm which is recited by Antiphones, for the Priest says
one verse, and the Clerk another; it is the 42. or 43.

Judge me O Lord, and plead my cause.

Iudica me Deus, Psalm. 43.
and discern causam, etc.

This is far from the nature of this action; for whereas the Supper tends
to crave pardon of God, to confess ones self to be a sinner, to have recourse
to his mercy, to entreat him not to enter into judgment with us, imitating the
poor Publican; the Priest quite contrariwise alleges the justice of his
cause, makes a comparison of his own holiness, with the sanctity of others,
takes the place of the Pharisie, and applies that Psalm to such an end as it
was never before applied, to wit, to call God to an account. He ought rather to
say, Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Besides, if all these passages were to the purpose,
yet neither are they, nor ever shall they be able to sweeten the pill which
they would have the ignorant to swallow with them. Lets pass on forwards.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: [and the
Clerk answereth] As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world
without end, Amen.

P. Our aid is in the Name of the Lord.

R. Who made heaven and earth.

Gloria Patri and Filio, and Spiritui sancto: Sicut erat in principio, and
nunc, and semper, and in secula seculorum. Amen

P. Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.

R. Qui fecit coelum and terram.

Here is to be noted that in the Masses for the dead, or de tempore from the
Passion Sunday unto holy Sunday exclusiuely, is omitted the Psalm Iudica me
Deus, etc.
That being said and answered, the Priest joins his hands, makes this
confession following, bows himself, and so continues until it be answered
him Misereatur. Now the confession which he makes is this.

And I a guilty and unworthy Priest, do confess to Almighty God, to the
blessed Virgin Mary, to S. Michael the Archangell, to S. John Baptist, to the
holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to S. N. to all the Saints, and to you brethren;
that I have too much offended, by thought, word and deed, [Heere he strikes
his brest] by mine own fault, by mine own fault, by my most greiuous fault.
Therefore I most earnestly desire the blessed Virgin Mary, S. Michael the
Archangel, S. John the Baptist, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, S. N. and all
the Saints, and you my brethren, to pray for me to our Lord God.

Et ego reus and indignus sacerdos confiteor Deo omnipotenti, beata Mariae
Virgini, beato Michaeli Archangelo, beato Ioanni Baptistae, sanctis Apostolis
Petro and Paulo, beato N. omnibus sanctis, and vobis fratres, quia peccaui
nimis, cogitatione, verbo and opere, mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.
Ideo precor beata^ Mariam semper virginem, Where is Christ? Vbi Christus.
B. Michaelem Archa^gelum, B. Ioannem Baptista^, Sanctos Apostolos Petrum and
Paulum, B. N. omnes sanctos, and vos fratres, orate pro me ad Dominum Deum
nostrum.

After which they answer.

God Almighty have pity on thee, and remitting thy sins, bring thee to life
everlasting. To which the Priest says Amen.

Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus, and dimissis peccatis tuis, perducat te ad
vitam aeternam. Amen.

Afterward the rest of the Quire having made the same confession, changing
only vobis fratres into tibi pater, and vis fratres into te pater, in the name
of the people, the Priest joining his hands, absolueth them, saying, God
almighty have mercy on you, and pardoning your sins, bring you unto eternal
life. R. Amen.

Misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, and dimissis peccatis vestris, perducat vos
ad vita^ aeternam. R. Amen.



Then signing himself with the sign of the Cross, he says.

The almighty and merciful Lord give us pardon, absolution, and remission of
all our sins. Amen.

Indulgentiam, In quibusdam and inueni, Amen fratres.
absolutionem, and remissionem omnium peccatorum nostrorum tribuaet nobis
omnipotens and misericors Dominus. Amen.

After the peoples confiteor, there is found in some Authors, this form
pronounced by the Priest.

Amen, brethren and sisters, by the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the aid
and sign of the holy Cross, by the intercession of the blessed, glorious, and
ever Virgin Mary, and by the merits of the blessed Apostles, and all the
Saints, almighty God have mercy on you.

Amen, fratres and sorores, per misericordiam domini nostri Jesus Christi, per
auxilium and signum sanctae crucis, per intercessionem beatae gloriosae semper
Virginis Mariae, ac per merita beatorum Apostoloru^, and omnium sanctorum and
sanctarum misereatur vestri omnipotens Deus, etc.

The confession of sins to God is of two sorts, the one general, and has
been practiced in all ages by the Church of God; By it is condemned the
doctrine of merits and works of supererogation, for this form of confession
appertains to all the Church, even to Priests themselves which acknowledge
that they sin by thought, Fagius in paraph. Chald. leu. c. 16.
word and deed. For so was the chief Sacrificer wont to say, We have sinned O
Lord, we have done wickedly, we repent our selves of it, etc. The other kind
of confession is particular, and is performed by every Christian, either unto
God, or to some other; concerning that which is made to God, Psalm. 51. Dan. 9.
v. 3. 1. Sam. 7.6. luke 23.
we have many examples in the Psalms, and in Daniel. The other kind of
particular confession is made by one Christian to an other, whether it be when
one has offended the other, or when one would be reconciled unto an other, or
when one communicates his afflictions to an other, or lastly when one asks
counsel and desires an other to join in prayers to God with him, to implore
his mercy; Iam. 5.16. Aug. lib. confess. 10. c. 22.
and this is that of which S. James speaks, Confess your sins one unto
another: and of which S. Matthew makes mention, Chap. 5. v. 23. As for the
other kinds of confession we must say with S. Austin, What have I to do with
men, who hear my confessions, as if they ought to cure my griefs. This
confession, be it general or particular, is corrupted in the Mass; for as
concerning the general, is it not made only to God, but also to the absent,
and to the dead: and as for the living which be present, they understand it
not; besides, this confession is as implicit as the faith which they preach,
and contrary to their own doctrine, Works of supererogation, contrary to the
confession of the Priest.
which makes men believe, that Priests who here confess themselves to be
sinners in thought, word and deed, do accomplish not only the commandments
of God, but also do more then they ought to do, especially if they be
Fucillans, Capucins, Jesuits, etc. so that instead of craving pardon of God,
they make him to owe them the rest. Now if those which be present understand
not that which the Priest says with a low voice, and in a strange tongue,
hardly will the absent understand it. For the Pope teaches in his Canons, Can.
satend. cause. 13. q. 2.
that the dead know not that which is done here below by the Priest, but only
by the dead which go to Paradise. Now if those dead in their way toward
Heaven, chance to pass through purgatory, or to soiourne there, the Saints
above will be something of the latest advertised of their necessities. It is
true, that since this canon was made, the Jesuits have devised a mirror in
Paradise, in the which are represented all the actions of this world as it were
in one of our perspectiue glasses: but there remains an Echo yet to be found
out to convey the sound of men's words unto them, and a Momus to be raised up,
who should open the stomach, and sound the thoughts of men, whilst their
schoolmen prepare answers to that which God said to good King Josias, being
to take him out of this world, 2. Kings 22. 2. Chron. 6.30. Es. 63.16. Eccles.
9.6. Auricular confession. Decret. titul. 38. Can. omni^ vtriusque. Iuvenal.
thou shall not see these things, and to that of Job, who speaking of the dead,
says his sons come to honor and he knows it not, and they are brought
low, but he perceives it not of them. Chap. 14.

As for auricular confession, brought into the Church by Innocent the third,
about the year 1200, it is used now according to the saying of the Poet, Scire
volunt domini secreta, atque inde timeri: to make men stand in aw of them,
having diued into their secrets. And indeed here is committed first a
sacrilege against our Lord, from whom they take away the office of interceding
for us, and give it to any other; for he is no ways employed here, Heb. 9.15.
and 12.24. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Ioh. 2.1.
although he be the Mediator of the New testament, and as there is but one God
(so there is but) one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
August. in Psalm. 108.
to which purpose Saint Austin says, that the prayer which is not made through
Jesus Christ does not only not blot out our sins, but that it is a sin it
self. The second impiety, Romans 10. v. 14.
is the invocation of Saints: for first we ought not to call on him in whom we
believe not: now we are not to believe in any man (be he never so holy) save
only in Jesus who is man and God; Ier. 17.
for it is written, Cursed be the man that trusts in man. Secondly, it is
proper to Jesus Christ, the Angel, the great Counselor, Apoc. 8.4.
to present up unto God the invocations of the faithful, and to make ascend up
before him the odor of such incense, as God reserues unto himself, which
ought not to be presented unto creatures, according to that which is figured in
the Law, Ezech. 30.
Whosoever shall make such a perfume to receive the odor thereof, shall perish
from among the people. Whence it follows, Es. 42.8. Ps 50.15. Ier. 17.5.
Tert. Apol. 2. c. 30. Mart. quipingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus, Non facit
ille deos; qui rogat, ille facit. 1. Ioh. 2. v. 1. Romans 8. v. 25. Heb. 7. v. 25.
that invocation as well as belief is due to God only: for seeing that our
prayers are sacrifices, as says Tertullian in his apology, it follows that
as we ought not to sacrifise but to God alone, we ought likewise to invocate
none but him only. For well said an Heathen Poet, The Painter or Caruer makes
not a god, but he which prays unto him. It is an infidelity to call upon other
intercessours then our Savior, whether they be the Virgin Mary, or the Saints;
for of Christ it is said, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Again, He makes intercession for the
Saints unto God, wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that
come unto God by by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.
Where he says by him, to exclude the Saints, which have need of him
themselves. And although we be taught that our Savior makes requests for us,
yet in the Church of Rome they never say, Christ pray for us, that so they may
take from him his office of being intercessour, and attribute it unto
creatures. Biel lect. 80. and Bernard in Mariali.
Nay they do far worse, for they not only make the Virgin Mary to intercede
for us, but also make her part stakes with God, and say that we are to appeal
from the Court of Gods justice, Prosa Mariae praeconio.
unto the Court of Mary's mercy, and from thence comes that Hymn, Rogapatrem,
iube natum, iure matris impera Redemptori: that is, command thy Son by the
right of a mother. This is far differing from that which we find written,
Ioh. 2.4.
Woman what have I to do with thee, when Jesus spoke unto his mother in a
point concerning the execution of his charge? Besides to these intercessions of
Saints, they add the aid of the sign of the cross, and that to such a
purpose as the Primative Church never applied it which acknowledged in it an
use of signification, Bell lib. 2. de sacr. c. 29.
but not of adoration, much less of producing supernatural effects, as
casting out of devils, curing diseases, etc. Now we find in the Mass of the
commemoration of the Cross, Per signum crucis de inimicis nostris libera nos,
Deus noster. As if the merit: of our Savior were not sufficient, without the
aid of that sign; in which as in many other gestures, respirations, intentions
and words, consists most part of that action, according to the cautels, magna
latent in signis, etc: so that there is nothing so perfect in our Saviors
institution, which is not here pruned, amplified, corrected, and turned from
its true use. The Priest bowing himself, goes on.

God, thou being converted, wilt quicken us. R. And thy people shall rejoice in
thee. P. Show us thy mercy O Lord. R. And give us thy health. P. Lord hear my
prayer. R. And let my cry come unto thee. P. The Lord be with you. R. And with
thy spirit.

Deus, tu conversus vivificabis nos. R. Et plebs tua laetabitur in te. P.
Ostende nobis domine misericordiam tuam. R. Et salutare tuum da nobis. P.
Domine exaudi orationem meam. R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. P. Dominus
vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

It is not only requisite that a thing be good in it self, but it ought also
to be to the purpose. See here four diverse passages, which are not one whit
agreeable to the present subject, neither can one tell wherefore they are
extracted out of several Psalms, neither to what end it is that they say no
more of any piece then a fragment. Mounting to the Altar, he says.

Take from us, O Lord we beseech thee all our iniquities, to the end that we
may merit to enter unto the Holy of Holiest with pure minds, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Aufer a nobis quae sumus domine, cunctas iniquitates nostras, vt ad Sancta
Sanctorum puris mereamur mentibus introire, per Christum dominum nostrum. Amen.

In this place the Priest plays the Jew, speaking of the Holy of Holiest,
which was only in the Temple of the Jews, and into which entered the
High Priest.

After he has bowed himself very low, and joined his hands, he says this
prayer.

We beseech thee Lord by the merits of thy Saints, Here he kisseth the
Altar: whose Relics are here, and of all the Saints, that thou would
vouchsafe to forgive me all my sins.

Oramus te domine per merita omnium sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliquiae hic
sunt, and omnium sanctorum, vt indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea. Amen.

There is good cause, wherefore to pronounce that prayer with so low a voice,
for he speaks not there of the intercession of our Savior, neither comes he
in his name; and therefore by a consequence is a thief: Ioh. 10.
for S. John says, No man comes unto the Father but by me. I am the door, he
that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but climeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber. Now imagine a man be reconciled unto
God only by one that is a sinner, it is not doubtful whether such a one shall be
saved or no? and yet the Priest is capable to be a Mediator and Sacrificer for
us toward God, though he employ no other means of purgation then a dead man's
arm, or a Spider bathed in the Sacrament, and laid up to be a Relic, as
the cautells import.

Psalm. 2.
This being done, the Priest kisseth the Altar, which is a kind of adoration;
for it is written in the second Psalm, Kiss the son, that is, adore him.
Also Biel and Titleman interpret this kissing to be a figure of the nuptials
between Christ and his Church, Now if it were so, it would suffice to kiss it
once, but the good Sr John, returns often to it, and makes men believe, that
there is in it a kind of spiritual strumpery, for he counts nine kisses as
well of the altar as of the breviary, as if there were certain quarters
prescribed him whereon to bestow his kisses. For before the placing and after
the receiving of his services, they are applied to the middle of the altar,
after the placing, and before the receaving, they are acted on the left hand of
the Chalice near the host, and as for the book, that must wait for his kiss
until the Gospel be read.

We may not omit in this place, that if it be a solemn Mass, and a double
feast, that then the Priest blesses the incense, saying, Be thou blessed by
him in whose honor thou shall be burnt.

Ab illo benedicaris in cuius honor cremaberis. Amen



Then taking the censer at the hands of the Deacon, This prayer is repeated
afterward.
he censeth the altar, saying. Dirigatur Domine oration mea, sicut incensum
etc. which being ended, the Deacon receaueth again the censer of the Priest,
and censeth him only. Afterward the Priest signing himself with the sign of
the cross begins the entrance, that is to say, some passages wickedly profaned
in the Masses of Saints, of the Nails, of the iron Head, of the Lance, of the
Robe without seame, etc. As for example sake.

The entrance to Christmas is, To us a child is borne, and to us a child is
given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be
called wonderful, counselor, etc. Let us sing unto God a new song, for he
has done marveilous things. Glory be to the father and to the son, etc.

Puer nobis natus est, etc. The entrance for the dedication of a Church.
Terribilis est locus iste; Hic domus est Dei and porta coeli. The entrance for
the beginning of a Mass for a Martyr, Gloria and honor coronasti eum, and
constituisti eum super opera manuum tuarum. etc.

After that entrance the Priest joining his hands, comes to the middle of the
altar, and beyond all reason, repeateth interchangeably with the Quire, or his
Cleark this following.

Lord have mercy upon us.

L.

L.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Chapter

Chapter

Lord have mercy upon us.

L.

L.

Kyrie eleyson.

K.

K.

Christ eleyson.

Chapter

Chapter

Kyrie eleyson.

K.

K.

That numerous repetition of the words not understood by the people, Capit. li.
6. c. 170
is attended by Gloria in excelsis, which was brought in by Pope Steven the
successor of Gregory, and inserted before the canon by the ordinance of
Charlemaine. But before the Priest begins it, he first extends his hands,
then ioynes them, and bows his head a little, saying, Glory be to God in the
highest, and in earth peace, and toward men good will; we bless thee, we
worship thee, we give thanks unto thee, Lord, God, heavenly King, father
Almighty, Lord the only begotten son Jesus Christ, Lord God, Lamb of God,
son of the Father, thou which take away the sins of the world, receive
our prayers, thou which sit at the right hand of God have mercy on us, for
thou only art holy, thou only art Lord, thou only art most high, Jesus
Christ, with thy holy spirit [here he crosses himselfe] in the glory of God
the father, Amen.

Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis. Laudamus
te, benedicimus te, adoramus te, glorificamus te, gratias agimus tibi propter
magnam gloriam tuam. Domine Deus, rex coelestis, Deus pater omnipotens, Domine
fili vnigenite Jesus Christ, Domine Deus, agnus Dei, Filius Patris qui tollis
peccata mundi miserere nobis qui tollis peccata mundi suscipe deprecationem
nostram: qui seeds ad dextram patris miserere nobis, quoniam tu solus sanctus,
tu solus Dominus, tu solus altissimus, Jesus Christ, cum sancto spiritu, in
gloria Dei Patris, Amen.



Afterward he kisses the alter, and casting down his eyes he turns toward
the people and says, The Lord be with you.

A. and with thy spirit.

Dominus vobiscum.

R. Et cum spiritu tuo,



That being done, the Priest says, Oremus, let us pray: and then says one or
more prayers, which being ended, there is read according to the circumstance of
the time, or the Saint in whose honor the Mass is celebrated, an Epistle, a
graduell, or alleluia, tract or sequency, which done, the Deacon sets down the
Gospel upon the altar, and having blessed the incense as before, he bows
before the altar, and ioining his hands says, Cleanse my heart and my lips,
Almighty God, thou which purifiedst the lips of the Prophet Esaias with a
burning stone, so vouchsafe to cleanse me with thy gracious mercy, that I may
worthily preach thy Gospel, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

Munda cormeum ac labia mea, omnipotens Deus, qui labia Isaiae Prophetae
calculo mundasti ignito, ita me tua grata miseratione dignare mundare, vt
sanctum Evangelium tuum digne valeam nunciare, per Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.



The^ the Deacon takes the book, and bows himself before the Priest, and
says unto him.

Lord command thou to bless.

Iube Domine benedicere.

And the Priest says.

The Lord be in thine heart and in thy lips, that thou may worthily and
fitly preach the Gospel in the name of the father Son and holy Ghost. And
makes a sign of the cross.

Dominus sit in cord tuo, and in labiis tuis, vt digne and competenter
annuncies Eva^gelium suum in nomine patris and filij, etc.

Note that if the Priest have no Clearke, as commonly he has not when he says
particular Masses, yet he omits not to say the same things, as to command
himself to bless himself, and to speak to himself with as much reason as
he does in that which follows; afterward the Deacon kisseth the Priests
hand, and if it be a solemn Mass, then with the rest which do there
minister, coming to the place where the Gospel lies with lights and incense,
he stands at the left side of the altar, and turns himself toward the
people, and then joining both his hands, says, The Lord be with you.

A. and with thy spirit.

Dominus vobiscum.

R. and cum spiritu tuo.



Men say, nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus. This prayer made by the
Deacon, is most agreeable to him which would expound the Gospel, and apply the
doctrine; but here where there is but the bare reading of one verse, to what
end is all this quoile? unless it be done because the Priest dares not read
the Scriptures without the permission of the Bishop. Leaving therefore the
other, it were more to the purpose if he prayed for some more skill in reading,
for such creatures as these, are oftentimes very defective in that behalf.
After this the Deacon with his right thumb makes the sign of the cross upon
his forehead, his mouth, his breast, and his book, and whilst the rest of the
Quire answer, Gloria tibi Domine, he thrice censeth the book, then joining
his hands, reads a piece of the Gospel, and that being done the Clearke or
subdeacon, if there be one, says, By the words of the Gospel, let our sins
be wiped away.

Per evangelica dicta deleantur nostra delicta.



That being done, the subdeacon carries the book to the Priest who kisseth
it, which is flat idolatry in them, as before we showed. As for the words, if
they be referred to the merits of our Savior mentioned in the Gospel, I can
find no abuse in them: but for so much as the Priest intends to join this
reading with the aid of the sign of the cross, and that there is not a
turn, sign, word, or intention which yields not some profit to their title of
good works. I doubt much to allow of this action. Afterward follows the
Nicen creed, and confession of faith, which notwithstanding is not throughout
repeated.

I believe in one God the father Almighty. etc.

Credo in vnum Deum patrem omnipotentem: etc.

In the midst of this confession, speaking of our Savior, who for our sakes
and for our salvation came down from heaven, the Priest falls upon his knees,
as if he had not been sent when he said, I believe in God, nor when he said, I
believe in Jesus Christ, which makes one conceive, that the Priests intention
is to make the people believe, that he euokes the humanity of our Savior, and
makes it descend every day, although it be in heaven, Act. 3.
and there remains until the coming to judge the world. This being done, he
kisseth the altar, and turns himself unto the people saying: The Lord be with
you.

A. and with thy spirit.

Dominus vobiscum.

R. Et cum spiritu tuo.



Afterward turning himself to the right side of the altar says, Oremus, and
reads a piece which is called an offertory, which differs according to the
diverse Masses which are celebrated. See here an example.

The heavens and the earth are thine, thou have founded the earth and the
fulness thereof; justice and judgment are the preparation of thy seat.

Tui sunt coeli and tua est terra, orbem terrarum and plenitudinem eius tu
fundasti. Iustitia and iudicium praeparatio sedis tuae.

I leave it to men to consider, whether the action following be any thing to
the purpose of this offertory: for although he says that the heavens are the
Lords, notwithstanding he offers a crumme of bread for the redemption of the
living and of the dead, the which bread is not yet consecrated. And to observe
this form of Oblation, the Priest takes from the hands of the Deacon, if the
Mass be solemn the Plate and the Oblation, and lifts them up with both his
hands, which makes me to remember the homage which some tenants in France
perform unto their Landlords, who are bound to bring unto them a Wrenne
carried in a waine drawn with Oxen. In the mean time he leaves the little
corporal upon the chalice and says, Holy father, omnipotent eternal God,
receive this immaculate host, which I thy unworthy servant do offer unto thee
my living and true God, for mine innumerable sins and offenses and
negligences, and for all the standers by; and likewise for all faithful
Christians, whether alive or dead, to the end that it may profit me and the^
unto salvation, into life ever lasting. Amen.

Suscipe sancte pater, omnipotens, aeterne Deus, hanc immaculatam hostiam, quam
ego indignus famulus tuus offero tibi Deo meo viuo and vero, pro
innumerabilibus peccatis and offensionibus and negligentijs meis, and pro
omnibus circumstantibus: sed and pro omnibus fidelibus Christianis vivis ac
defunctis, vt mihi and illis proficiat ad salutem, in vitam aeternam. Amen.



This offertory was brought in by Leo the 13, as well as the incense, about the
year 800. For we read in an Epistle of Gregory to Boniface a Bishop of
Germany, Greg. 2. epist. ad. Bonis. tom. 2. consil. p. 434.
a great observer of the Roman ceremonies, that he demanded of Gregory if it
were lawful to offer for the dead? Whence it follows, that this suscipe was
not as yet inserted. For this question never would have been moved, if the
case had been before resolved. Secondly, the Priest acknowledging himself to
be a sinner, confesses by a consequence, that he is incapable to be a
sacrificer under the new Testament. For it is written Such an high Priest
became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled etc. Heb. 7.^6.
Who needs not daily as those high Priests to offer up sacrifice, first for
his own sins, and then for the peoples. But those Jewish ceremonies have
ceased; look above in the chapter of sacrifice, where you shall see that our
Lord Jesus Christ is the only sacrifice and eternal sacrificer under the
Gospel. Exodus 12.15. Lev. 3.6.
In the third place they reassume the shadows and figures of the law, by
presenting of immaculate hosts, where as Jesus Christ, being prefigured by them
under the law, as says S. Peter, 1. Pet. 1.19.
and having consummated all that kind of sacrifice, it were an impiety to
revoke it again into practice. Lastly, it is an execrable abomination to offer
bread unto God for the remission of sins, considering that even under the law
it self, Heb. 9.22.
without shedding of blood there was no remission. Yet the Priest offers one
oblation to that end concerning which, I demand of him if it has taken flesh
for our sakes? If it be the son of God? If it has suffered? If we be
baptized in its name? If that bread be yet consecrated? If the Priest has yet
pronounced these words, hoc est corpus meum? Wherefore by thine own doctrine,
thou offerest that which the Jew would be ashamed to present for his sin, and
which never any used save only the Magician Numa, who did immolate, that is to
say, offer Molam, Cypr. de sacr. calicis, Epist. 63. and 68.
a little round loaf to his Gods. You that are deaf, hear, you that are
blind, see, and deceive not your selves any more. For if we ought to do that
only in the supper which God has commanded us to do, and that which he
commanded us, is that which he did with his Apostles the day before he
suffered, as says the Canon of the Mass, pridie quam pateretur, we ought not
to offer up bread unto God for the remission of sins. For Jesus did it not,
neither commanded it, neither purchased our salvation by the oblation of a cake
not blessed, but with his own body, and that not at the table, but on the
cross, not by elevation of bread, but by the effusion of his blood, and
separation of his soul. Es. 53.
For he poured out his soul unto death, and made his soul an offering for
sin, says Esaias, this oblation therefore is insufficient in it self, without
commandment, and without example.

Neither do the two objections avail which commonly are here produced. The
first whereof is taken out of Genesis 14. Genesis 14
where it is said that Abraham returning from the defeating of his enemies, the
king of Sodom went out to meet him, as also did Melchisedeck the king of
Salem, who brought forth bread and wine and blessed him. For the bread and the
wine were brought forth to refresh him and his men which returned from the
war, and not to be sacrificed unto God, much less unto Abraham. For
although it be there added, that Melchisedecke was the Priest of the most high
God yet that was only to show the reason why he received tithes of him, and
why he blessed him, and not to cause us to imagine a sacrifice. First because
there was none such under the law, and therefore Melchisedecke in so doing had
enterprised to forge a new one: secondly, the words will not bear it, for the
translation of the Septuagint has it, (...) he set before him bread and wine:
and it is not said for he was a Priest, but now or and he was a Priest, which
was the cause wherefore he blessed Abraham, and not wherefore he presented him
with bread and wine, also the whole text runs, that Melchisedecke brought
forth bread, to whom? to Abraham, and blessed, whom? Abraham, and that
comparison which S. Paul makes between our high Priest, Heb. 7.
Christ Jesus, and Melchisedecke, consists not in the offering of bread and
wine, but in that he is eternal without father in regard of his humanity, and
without mother in respect of his divinity. Neither is the other objection of
any force, which is taken out of Malachy, that amongst the Gentiles shall be
offered, Malac. 1.
Muctar and Mincha, that is incense and a pure offering. For this Mincha,
kneaded with flower and oil, is ceremonial, and abolished, neither is the
bread which the Roman Priests do offer up at this day tempred in that sort.
But that same prophecy is allegorical, as is that of Micah, Micah. 4.1.
who prophesied that men should ascend to Jerusalem, to the mountain of the
Lord: seeing the Church is catholic, and not enclosed within Jury. So likewise
that incense which ascends in the presence of God signifies the prayers of the
faithful, as we may observe in the Revelation, where it is said, that another
Angel (to wit our Savior) stood at the altar having a golden censer, Apoc.
8.3.
the smoke whereof, which was the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God
out of the Angels hand. Finally, if our Savior had offered bread and wine for
the remission of sins, it would follow that our Lord Jesus had offered twice,
and by a consequence had twice satisfied God his father, and paid twice the
same debt, contrary to that which says S. Paul, By one oblation he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Heb. 9.12. and 10. v. 14.
Otherwise the offering on the cross had served to small purpose, for it is
certain that God had heard his well beloved the first time, with out exposing
him to the cross, if the offering of bread had been sufficient, as it would
have been, if he had offered it. And from hence we may conclude that the
Priests make two oblations, the first of bread and wine not blessed, not
broken, not taken, not distributed; and the second they pretend to make of the
very body of our Savior; which error proceeded from hence, that in the
Primative Church they used the word Oblation, giving the bread not immediately
to God, but to the Priest, who did take thereof for the communion, and
distributed the rest to the members of our Savior, which are the poor. Thus
the equivocal acceptions of the word, caused this horrible sacrilege. See
what more appertains to this point in the Chapters of oblation and of
sacrifice. Besides, to offer, was taken for as much as to give to the people
which communicated: and in that sense some of the ancients took it, as amongst
the rest Saint Cyprian, who writing against the minglers of water with wine in
the cup, which they offered unto the people, contrary to the practice of the
Primative Church, says, Cypr. contra Aquarios, and epist. 68. ad Cecilium.
seeing that neither Angel nor Apostle can preach otherwise then that which
Jesus Christ has once taught, etc: One may here demand of them whom they
follow: for if in the sacrifice which Christ has offered we are to follow none
but Christ, certainly we are then to obey, and to do that which Christ has
done, and commanded to be done. Now these words of sacrifice ought to be
understood of those of thanksgiving; Can. Memento.
for the Mass it self terms it, hoc sacrificium laudis, and the word to
offer, according to that which we have said signifies to offer and to present
by the Pastor unto the people. The Priest puts his hoaste upon the corporal,
where if it be a solemn Mass, the Deacon powers in the wine, and the
Subdeacon the water into the chalice, but if it be only a private Mass, the
Priest powers in both, and blesses the water to be mingled with the wine,
saying.

O God which have wonderfully created the dignity of humane substance, and more
admirably have reformed it, grant us by the mystery of this wine and water to
be partakers of his divinity, who vouchsafed to partake of our humanity, Jesus
Christ thy Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of
the holy Ghost, God, for ever and ever, Amen.

Deus qui humanae substantiae dignitatem mirabiliter condidisti, and mirabilius
reformasti, da nobis per huius aquae and vini mysterium, eius diuinitatis esse
consortes, qui humanitatis nostrae dignatus est fieri particeps, Jesus
Christus, Filius tuus, Dominus noster, qui tecum viuit and regnat, in vnitate
Spiritus sancti, Deus per omnia secula seculorum, Amen.

This mingling of wine with water was one of the first errors that was brought
into the Supper, about the year of our Lord 120, against which one might apply
the words of Cyprian above mentioned, who would have us to keep our selves in
that which our Savior instituted; See Justin in his 2. Apol. who recites how
the idolaters consecrated bread, wine and water to their gods. And now the
Greek Church resisted that mixture, In. lib. 4 c. 5. de off. missa.
as witnesses Innocent, and Scotus misliketh it giving this reason, for that
it will not, being so te^pered transubstantiate. Moreover, if the Priest be
partaker of the divinity of Christ, as Christ himself of the humanity, it
would follow that he should be true God, seeing that Jesus is truly man.
Thirdly, with what assurance can he demand to be heard by the virtue of that
mystery, and that mixture of wine and water, considering that it is a thing
which God has not only not commanded, but also has been condemned by many
Councels, 4 Council of Ort. in the time of Pelagius.
in these words. That no man presume to offer any thing for the oblation of
the blessed Cup, but that only which he believes to be of the fruit of the
Vine, and that without being mingled with water. For it is judged sacrilege to
offer any other thing, Plat. and habe. l. can. in sacramento did. 2. de
consecrat. and in the catechism of the Council of France.
then that which our Savior has commanded in his most holy Commandments. Is
it not then a mocking of God to demand of him to be made partaker of his
divinity, by virtue of this commixture of wine and water: as if by a sin and
a transgression we were ambitious to be made gods? Of this Xistus or Alexander
in the year 120 was the Author, and since it is passed for a Law; for the
Pope commands under pain of a mortal sin, that no man fail to perform it.
Now if for omitting of this humane invention, men do sin mortally, what
condemnation ought to attend these, which do wholly take away the cup from the
Laity? We may not here omit the perplexities which the Doctors of
transubstantiation through the mingling of this water do fall into. Can. in
sanctis. eccles. v. calix de consec. did. 2. and can. cum Matho.. quaesisti de
celebr. Missarum.
For some say that this water is turned into wine, others say into blood, and
the last tell us, that it is not converted at all. See the canons and the
glosses. From that above arises an other blasphemy, to call that wine and that
water being not yet consecrated, the cup of salvation, which the Priest would
have to mount up to Heaven, in eleuating it, for the salvation of all the
world, and yet presently he makes it to descend much lower, when he says,
adhaereat visceribus meis, praying that it may be fixed unto his entralles.
Note that in Masses for the dead this prayer is said, but the water is not then
consecrated at all: afterward the Priest offers the chalice, holding it
reasonable high with both his hands, saying, Lord, we offer unto thee the cup
of salvation, craving thy clemency, that it may ascend with the odor of
sweetness in the presence of thy divine Majesty, for the salvation of us and
the whole world. Amen.

Offerimus tibi, domine, calicem salutaris, tuam deprecantes clementiam, vt in
conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae, pro nostra and pro totius mundi salute, cum
odore suauitatis ascendat. Amen.



Afterward he places the cup upon the corporal, and having covered it, joines
his hands, and then bowing himself a little, says that which follows, In
the spirit of humility, and in a contrite heart, let us be received by thee O
Lord, that our sacrifice may be done in thy presence to day, in such sort as
it may please thee, O Lord God.

In spiritu humilitatis, and in animo contrito, suscipiamur a te, Domine; and
sic fiat sacrificium nostrum in conspectu tuo hodie, vt placeat tibi domine
Deus.



Of what sacrifice intends the Priest to speak, would he make two? for once
before did he eleuate and offer up the bread and the wine; it must needs be
therefore that the prayer was an introduction to the second offertory, whereby
the bread shall be no more bread, but body, if one would believe it, nor shall
need to mount into Heaven; for to save its journey, Jesus Christ will descend
from thence to be fastened to the entralls of the Priest, for he requires it
so. Now if he would learn the means by which that sacrifice shall be performed
in such sort as it shall please God, he must observe that which Christ has
commanded, saying, Do this, which is thus interpreted by Alexander a martyr,
and the fifth Bishop of Rome after the Apostles, As often as ye shall do this,
that is to say, that ye shall bless, break, distribute, you shall do it in
remembrance of me. Cardinal Humbert, who wrote against the Monk Nicholas,
learned it of this Pope, and so wrote, where it evidently does appear, that in
those times, by this word do, the least part of their thought was to sacrifice
Jesus Christ. Then standing upright, he spreades abroad his hands, and so
lifting them up on high, joyneth them again, and casting his eyes upwards
toward Heaven, and by and by downwards, says.

Come thou Almighty sanctifier, eternal God, bless this sacrifice prepared for
thy holy Name.

Veni sanctificator omnipotens, aeterne Deus, benedic hoc sacrificium tuo
Sancto nomine praeparatum.

Innocen. Papa. de off. missae. lib. 2. c. 53.
Saying these words he makes a sign of the cross, of which the first part is
made down right upon the host only; but the other mounting, trauerseth the
host and the chalice, all founded upon mysteries.

If the Mass be solemn, the Priest blesses the incense in this manner.

By the intercession of S. Michael the Arch-angell, which stands at the right
side of the burning Altar, and of all his Elect; the Lord vouchsafe to bless
this incense, and to receive it as sweet odor, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

Per intercessionem beati Michaelis Archangelistantis a dextris altaris
incensi, and omnium electorum suorum, incensum istud dignetur dominus
benedicere, and in odorem suauitatis accipere, per Christum dominum nostrum.
Amen.

Afterward taking the censer, he censeth the oblations, saying.

Let this incense which is blessed by thee, ascend up unto thee, and let thy
mercy descend down upon us.

Incensum istud a te benedictum ascendat ad te, domine, and descendat super nos
miscricordia tua.

Then he censeth the Altar, saying, Let my prayer be directed as incense in
thy sight, and the lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice; put O Lord
a watch unto my mouth, and a door of circumstances unto my lips, that my
heart decline not to words of malice, to excuse excuses in sin.

Dirigatur domine oration mea sicut incensum in conspectu tuo; eleuatio manuum
mearum sacrificium vespertinu^. Pone domine custodiam ori meo, and ostium
circumstantiae labijs meis, vt non declinet cor meum in verba malitiae, ad
excusandas excusationes in peccatis.



In restoring back the censer, he says, The Lord kindle in us the fire of his
love, and the flame of eternal charity. Amen.

Accendat in nobis dominus ignem sui amoris, and flammam aeternae charitatis.
Amen.



Or otherwise, We beseech thee almighty and everlasting God, to vouchsafe to
bless and sanctify with the right hand of thine infinite Majesty, this
creature the incense, to the end that in the virtue of thy holy name, it may
miraculously chase away all fantastique assaults of unclean spirits, and heal
all diseases, restoring health wheresoever the smoke shall wave, and yield
unto thee almighty God, a fragrant odor with a perpetual sweetness, thorough
our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

Tua quae sumus omnipotens, I have seen an other form of blessing the incense,
wh^^h was founded upon Innoc. 3. lib. 2. c. 17. who brought it in to chase away
the malignity of devils.
sempiterne Deus, immensae maiestatis tuae dextra hanc creaturam incensi
benedicere and sanctificare digneris: vt in virtute sancti nominis tui, omnes
immundorum spirituum fantasticos inausus effugare, omnesque morbos reddita
sanitate expellere, vbicunque fumus eius afflauerit, mirabiliter possit, atque
tibi omnipotenti Deo odore fragrantissimo perpetua suauitate redolere, Per
dominum, etc.



Afterward is the Priest censed, and then others in order.

Leo the third brought in this censing, which was a thing much practiced
amongst the Gentiles, Thure Deum placa, the canon says, appease God with
incense, and spare the calfe. Thus 800 years after the banishing of this
creature the incense, Plat. c. 171. in vita Xisti.
out of the Church, the Priest reuiues it again, and alleges Psalms of
David, who substituted his prayer in the place of incense, having reference
through his propheticke spirit, to that which ought to be practiced in the
Gospel, whereas the Priest does take the shadow and the smoke for the
substance and the truth. Like to this is the standing of Michael at the right
corner of the Altar, who if he take up that place, he seems to take part with
the Jews; for Durand says, that by the right corner of the Altar the Jews
are prefigured, and by the left the Gentiles. Now note, Blond. lib. 1. Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 4. c. 17. Lib. Pontif. in Sergio. Theod. l. 3. c. 15.
that in the sacrifice of Ianus, there was a little vessel named Canora, with
which they censed the Altar, the images and the host; and to imitate this,
Sergius the Pope gave a golden censer for the perfuming of Masses, to the end
that he might Iudaize, Paganize, and imitate Julian the Apostata, who brought
in incense to despite the Christians, which never used it in their Churches.
Now that incense is one of those ceremonies which ought to be abrogated, it
appears by that which S. Paul says, Heb. 9. v. 8. Heb. 9. v. 8.
for there are some things which are constituted for a time only, and are for
that time, because they take their virtue and efficacy from their institution,
and not from their own nature, as the dirt wherewith our Savior anointed the
eyes of the blind, the which ought still to be put in practice, by the same
reason that incense is now to be used, for now it is grown to be a kind of
charm, to chase away the devil with smoke, and to heal bodyly diseases:
neither (to say the truth) appertains it to any but such as sell smoke, to
publish it, and to such as Chamelion-like feed upon the air, to believe it.
The devils are put to flight by prayers, Math. 17.21. 1. Pet. 9.
fastings and orisons, and there are none but bleare eyes and foxes, which may
be chased out of their holes with this engine. We are to fear lest that
befall us, Leu. 10.
which happened to Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron, who were st^ffled with
that fire which they kindled, because it was other then that which God
appointed them: so much are we to regard that we serve God with no other
thing, neither in any other manner then he has prescribed us, for he is
zealous and strong. A good intention excused not Vzzah which touched the Arc,
2. Sam. 6. Iosu. 7.
nor Achan which retained that which was forbidden; And now that incense was
banished the Temple of Christians, Eusch. orat. ad S. coctum. Arnob. l. 6. Aug.
Psalm. 49.
it appears by the testimony of the Emperor Constantine, such (says he) is
the sacrifice of the Eucharist, without blood, without any violence, and there
is not required any odor of incense, neither any burning fire: and S. Austine
says, See how we are without care, Leu. 5. v. 11.
we need not go any more to fetch incense in Arabia etc. Finally; the Jews
themselves, never burned incense at such sacrifices as were made for sin, but
only at mere thanksgiuings; wherefore this action is contrary to the
invention of the Priest, who pretends to sacrifize in the Mass an oblation
for the sins of the living and of the dead.

In washing his hands the Priest says, I will wash my hands amongst the
innocent, and will compass about thine Altar, O Lord: that I may hear the
voice of praise, and tell of all thy marvelous things.

Lord I have loved the beauty of thine house, and the place of the habitation
of thy glory. O God destroy not my soul with the ungodly, and my life with
bloody men, in whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is filled with
gifts. But I am entered in in mine innocence. Redeem me and have mercy on me;
My foot stood in the right, in the Churches will I bless thee O Lord. Glory be
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; as it was in the
beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Lauabo inter innocents manus meas, This verse is ill translated out of
Hebrew, for it should rather be in innocence, then amongst the innocent.
and circundabo altar tuum Domine, vt audiam vocem laudis, and enarrem
vniuersa mirabilia tua.

Domine dilexi decorem domus tuae, and locum habitationis gloriae tuae. Ne
pendas cum impijs, Deus, animam meam, and cum viris sanguinum vitam meam, in
quorum manibus iniquitates sunt, dextera eorum repleta est muneribus. Ego autem
in innocentiae mea ingressus sum. Redime me, and miserere mei. Pes meus stetit
in directo, in ecclesiis benedicam te Domine. Gloria Patri and Filio and
Spiritui sancto. Sicut erat in principio, and nunc, and in secula seculorum.
Amen.



Three abuses may be found in this place; the first is the retayning of
Altars, which being a Jewish ceremony, ought to be abolished. The second is the
taking of the Prophets words in a wrong sense, Psalm. 143.
who intended not to justify himself before God; for in that sense, no man
living shall be justified: and that is the reason wherefore he prays, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant O Lord; but he made a comparison between his
own cause, and that of his enemies. As when in the like case he said, if I
have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me, etc. We must therefore
distinguish between the innocence of a man toward God, which can nowhere be
found, Psalm. 7.
and the innocence of a man in regard of his persecuters, which may well be
granted. The third abuse is, that whereas the receiving of this Sacrament is a
medicine to those which feel their disease, acknowledge their sins, and
crave pardon of God for them, Math. 18.
as did the poor Publican: the Priest here teaches the people the quite
contrary, and practices the doctrine of the Pharisee, protesting his own
innocence and theirs which compass him about, and which fill both his hands
and his kitchen with gifts, whereof speaks that verse: otherwise it seems
that he would not say Mass at all, and in that he imitateth Geheza, and Simon
Magus. We may not here omit, that Gloria patri, is not said in Masses for the
dead nor in that of the passion. You may guess wherefore. This being said, the
Priest goes with his hands joined, to the middle of the altar, and there bows
himself low, saying, Holy Trinity, receive this oblation which we offer unto
thee in memory of the incarnation, nativity, circumcision, passion,
resurrection, and ascensio^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in honor of the ever
blessed virgin Mary, and of S. John Baptist, and the holy Apostles Peter and
Paul, and all the Saints, who have pleased thee from the beginning of the
world, that it may be for their honor, and for our salvation, and that they
would vouchsafe to intercede for us in heaven, of whom we make mention here on
earth; through the same Christ our Lord.

Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam tibi offerimus ob memoriam
incarnationis, nativitatis, circumcisionis, passionis, resurrectionis,
ascensionis, Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and in honorem beatae Mariae semper
Virginis, and beati Iohannis Baptistae, and S. Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and
omnium sanctorum qui a mundi initio tibi placuerunt, vt illis proficiat ad
honorem: nobis autem ad salutem: and illi pro nobis intercedere dignentur in
coelis, quorum memoriam facimus in terris. Per eu^dem Christum Dominum nostrum.
Amen.



After this, the Priest stands upright, kisseth the incense, bows his head,
and turning himself toward the people with his hands joined, says, Pray for
me my brethren that mine and your sacrifice may be acceptable with God the
father Almighty.

Orate pro me fratres, vt meum and vestrum sacrificium acceptabile fiat apud
Deum patrem omnipotentem,



Then the people, or else himself adds.

The Lord receive the sacrifice of thine hands, to the praise and glory of his
name and to the profit of our selves, and his most holy Church, Amen.

Suscipiat Dominus sacrificium de manibus tuis, ad laudem and gloriam nominis
sui, ad vtilitatem quoque nostram, totiusque Ecclesiae suae sanctae, Amen.

Then the Priest stretching forth his hands, says a prayer as it were in
secret, differing according to the season, and the scope of the Mass, as for
example, on Christmas day is said, Sanctify, O Lord, the gifts which are
presented unto to thee through the nativity of thine only begotten, and cleanse
us from the spots of our sins: through the same Jesus Christ our Lord, thy
Son, who lives and reigns with thee God in the unity of the holy Ghost.

Oblata, Domine, munera nova vnigeniti tui nativitate sanctifica, nosque a
peccatis nostrorum maculis emenda. Per eundem Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
filium tuum, qui tecum vivit and regnat in vnitate Spiritus sancti Deus.



The Priest must here have regard to transubstantiation, by which he makes of
bread a new Jesus, and will make him a new entrance anon saying Hozanna, and
afterward will sacrifize and break him, whereas Jesus of the substance of the
virgin is not on earth, neither can he any more either suffer or dye. The
second error, is going beyond the commandment of Jesus, which was simply to
declare his death, without speaking of his nativitie, circumcision, etc. to the
end to represent unto us in the supper, 1. Cor. 11. Can. quia morte ca.
sanctorum. Can. in Christo de con. did. 2. Bern. Cant. sermon. 33. Spec.
sacerdotum cant. in ta^gendo ibi continentia divinitatis.
not a Jesus triumphing in his ascension, but a Jesus broken for our sins. As
often as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, you shall declare
the Lords death until his coming. The Canons of the Pope teach us no other
thing. Thirdly, his remembrance is to know his corporal absence, for
according to S. Bernard, remembrance is opposed to presence, and faith and hope
to that which one sees with his eyes. Nevertheless the Priest tells us that he
holds in his hands the humanity, and the divinity of our Savior contained in
that oblation. Fourthly, how ca^ the bread being not consecrated, be the price
of our redemption? yet it is offered to that end by the Priest. Fifthly, if the
Priest intends to speak of the body which he purposes to make, ought he to
offer it in honor of creatures, and especially him to whom all honor and
homage is due, and who would have this action to be done in the remembrance of
him? Yet the Priest most profanely sacrifices in the honor of Saints,
contrary to that which is written, Exodus 23. v. 13.
You shall make no mention of the names of other Gods, neither let it be heard
out of thy mouth. Sixthly, the administration of the Sacraments, is it not to
nourish our faith in the hope of a blessed life? to what end therefore offers
he this oblation for the Saints, which are already in a full possession of the
same? Finally, as we have said, by this they do deprive our Savior of his
Mediatorship, 1. Tim. 2.5.
ioyn assistants unto him in renewing our peace with God, and do impiously
besides, both invocate and adore creatures. Concerning which, Epiphanius Bishop
of Salamine, who lived long time after S. Ambrose, used these words: Epiphan.
cont. Antidicomarianitas. heresi. 78.
That the error of the seducers cease, for Mary is not God, etc, that none
may offer in her name, for he loses his soul. It was far from him to
dedicate temples, dress altars, cloth statues, bear candles, ordain feasts,
sacrifice, or ordain Masses to her. Poor Bishops, men would call you
Hugonites if you were now in France. That secret being pronounced in secret,
the Priest cries out, per omnia secula seculorum, and that is a preamble to
the Canon. Now observe that in this profaneness there is great variety,
according to the season and the end of the Mass, whether of the nativitie, the
purification, of the cross, the nails, the garment, or of the Mass of
requiem etc: the which are begun with both the hands laid upon the altar on
one side and the other, which he lifts up a little when he says sursum corda,
and saying, gratias agamus, he ioynes his hands, and bows his head, and then
disioynes them until he says, sanctus: then he says, World without end. An.
Amen. The Lord be with you. A. And with thy spirit. Let us lift up our hearts.
A. We lift them up unto the Lord. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. A. It
is worthy, just, meet, and wholesome, that always, and in all places we give
thanks unto thee holy Lord, Father Almighty, eternal God, because by the
mystery of thy word which was made flesh, the light of thy brightness has
shined to the eyes of our renewed understandings, that whilst we do visibly
know God, we may by him be rauish't to the love of things invisible, and
therefore with Angels and Archangels, with thrones and dominations, and with
all the warfare of the heavenly army, we sing a hymn to thy glory, saying,
holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Saboth, heaven and earth are full of thy glory;
These last words the Priest utters in somewhat a lower voice then before.
Hozanna in the most high,* blessed is he which comes in the name of the
Lord, Hozanna in the most high.

Per omnia secula seculoru^. R. Amen. Dominus vobiscu^. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.
Sursum corda. R. Habemus ad Dominum. Gratias agimus Domino deo nostro. R.
Dignum est and iustum and salutare, nos tibi semper and vbique gratias agere,
Domine sancte, pater omnipotens, aeterne Deus, quia per incarnati verbi
mysterium nova mentis nostrae oculis, lux tuae claritatis refulsit, vt dum
visibiliter Deum cognoscimus per hunc in invisibilium amorem rapiamur, and ideo
cum Angelis and Archangelis, cum throuis and dominationionibus, cumque omni
militia coelestis exercitus, hymnum gloriae tuae canimus, sine fine dicentes,
sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus saboth, pleni sunt coeli and terrae
gloria tua. Hozanna in excelsis, * benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini.
Hozanna in excelsis.



We saw before the new nativitie, here is his new entry, where he shall be
seen visibly, as this preface imports, and afterward carnally broken with the
hands and teeth of the Priest, if one would believe Pope Nicholas in the Canon
Ego Berengarius; 1. De consecr. did, 2.
but the gloss says that it is a dangerous heresy to believe that doctrine,
and the gloss of another Canon says, that Berengarius spoke by an hyperboly,
and that he lied when he spoke of the sensual and carnal eating of Christ's
body. Can. alterum. gl. in verbo vocari.
Thus the spirit of error has entangled it self. And indeed these two words,
sursum corda, do witness that we must lift up our selves by faith to the right
hand of the father, and not descend thither, whether he will not come until the
day of judgment; and they intimate besides that Christ's body is but in one
place only, though his truth be diffused through all places. Can. prima
haeresis de consecr. did. 2.
S. Augustine says that it is the prime heresy of the world to imagine or
believe a carnal eating, which opinion the Popes have canonised. And St
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 24. 1. ad Cor. vbi cadaver.
he which approaches to this body ought to mount on high, and to have no
communion with the earth, our country which is below, but to soar always on
high, and to have regard to the son of justice, and to have the eye of the
spirit most acute, for this table is a table for eagles, and not for iayes or
crows. After this short skirmish, look upon the Canon which begins Te
igitur, which was composed, about the year 800, but not by one Pope alone: for
Platina makes it to be compiled by Alexander, Gelasius, Syricius, and Pelagius.
To say the truth, it is not found in the impression of the breviary of Almagny,
in the year 700, wherefore the Index expurgatorius ordaines that that Missall
shall be no more reprinted: and not that only, Index expurg. Belgicus, p. 75.
but also the Liturgye of Ambrose was suppressed by the commandment of Charles
the great, who would therein gratify the Popes, which much advantaged his
predecessors in the obtaining of the crown of France; Durand. ration. lib. 4.
and so the Gregorian service was brought in by force, and through the
punishments of those Churchmen which opposed it. Iocob. de Voragine in v. 16.
Gregor.
And seeing they demand of us where our Church was in those times, they may see
how it stood in opposition so far as not to suffer Ambrose Mass to be
changed, or to have these words which do abate the efficacy of the Mass to be
taken away, to wit, Ambr. l. 4. de sacramento. c. 5.
Quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri, that the supper is a
figure of the body, and not the body it self: and the Popes employed the
Emperor, as well as their prisons and punishments to produce their
transubstantiation, which notwithstanding was more then 400 years debated, as
witnesses the consultation of Bertran a Priest to Charles the bald, who
writing to the Clergy of Ravenna, Car. Calvus ep. ad Clerum Raven. in Tillu
Chron. an. 756.
says these words: Until the time of our great grandfather Pepin, the
Churches of France celebrated their divine service otherwise then the Church of
Rome, Neither did those of England order themselves according to that of the
Roman. For the Pope himself praised a Bishop for having chosen that which was
the best, were it in Gaul or at Rome, for the place (says he) makes not a
thing the more holy. Honorius in ge^ma animae. lib. 1. c. 103.
Wherefore at the end of Te igitur, it is simply said, Catholic obseruers of
the Apostolic faith, without adding, Roman; for that difference being
specificall, was not known at that time to be a mark of orthodoxe believers,
whose faith is personal and not local, or tied to a corner of Italy. Let us
set fire to the powder. The Priest bows himself low, and joining his hands
before the altar, says, We pray thee therefore, most merciful father, and
humbly request thee through Jesus Christ thy son and our Lord, that thou
would accept and bless these gifts, these presents, these holy sacrifices
without spots, which we offer unto thee for thy holy catholic Church, the
which vouchsafe to keep reunite, and govern through out the whole earth,
together with thy servant Pope N. our Bishop and our king, and all the
orthodoxall obseruers of the Catholic and Apostolical faith.

Te igitur, clementissime pater, per Iesum Christum filium tuum Dominum nostrum
supplices rogamus, ac petimus, vti accepta habeas and benedicas haec dona,
munera haec sancta sacrificia illibata, imprimis quae tibi offerimus pro
Ecclesia tua sancta Catholica, quam pacificatione custodire adunare and regere
digneris toto orb terrarum, vna cum famulo tuo Papa nostro N. and antistite
nostro M. and rege nostro, and omnibus orthodoxis atque Catholicae and
Apostolicae fidei cultoribus.



He speaks not a word of the Roman faith, although the Canon be of Gelasius
making, who ordained that the Priest should begin upon his knees, having his
hands joined: then before these words haec dona, he should lift up himself,
kiss the altar, make three signs of the cross upon the host, and the
chalice, afterward open wide his hands, and lift the^ up a little in saying,
tibi offerimus, in the plural number, and therefore he is not the sole
sacrificer but the people also, as indeed he said before, my sacrifice and
yours. Likewise from these words, these gifts, these presents, may be gathered,
that in the time which this Canon was made (what corruption soever reigned)
they intended not to offer up Jesus unto God his Father. For then they would
not have spoken in the plural number, having but one Jesus. Thirdly, wherefore
does he term it a spotless sacrifice or incorruptible, whereas both
experience and the cautells of the Mass before mentioned have taught us, Cant.
item si corpus.
that the consecrated host does putrify, that it is eaten sometimes of rats,
and sometimes breeds worms, which cannot proceed from an accident without a
substance, neither from a glorified body. Another impiety is committed there,
in that it is said, that this oblation of bread is made for the pacification of
the church, as if it were as yet divorced from God, contrary to that which the
Apostle says, By one sole oblation he has consecrated for ever those which
are sanctified. Heb. 10.11.
Whence it follows that there remains nothing but only the applying unto
our selves of that sacrifice by faith, and not to reiterate it as if it were
insufficient. Fifthly, with what boldness dares the Priest make the Pope Gods
companion in the government of the Church, which has no head but Jesus Christ
her Spowse, nor other conductor but the holy Ghost? For seeing that the Church
is a body Catholic and universal, being in heaven and in earth, and composed
both of dead and living, what other head then Christ is capable to sway such an
Empire, and to inspire every member of the visible and invisible Church. The
last abuse is politic, in that the Priest places the Pope and his Bishop
before Kings, it being the doctrine of these kind of men, that principalities
lie under his pantable, and that scepters are held by way of homage from the
perforated chair, which notwithstanding is not practiced throughout. As for
the reformed Churches, although they have kings now and then which govern not
so well; yet their practice is always to make prayers first for kings and
superior powers: afterward for the Church and every member thereof, that it
may be delivered from this papal tyranny. Then follows the Memento, where
we must observe, that ordinarily the first and second are said with the hands
joined, until the Priest says, and omnium circumstantium.

The first memento.
Remember O Lord, thy servants, N. N. and all those which be here present,
whose faith and devotion is known unto thee, or who offer unto thee this
sacrifice of praise, for themselves and all theirs, for the redemption of their
souls, for the hope of their health and safety, and do render their vows
unto thee the eternal living and true God.

Memento domine famulorum famularumque tuarum N. N. and omnium circumstantium,
quorum tibi fides cognita and nota deuotio: pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui
tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis pro se suisque omnibus, pro redemptione
animarum suarum, pro spe salutis and incolumitatis suae, sibique reddunt vota
sua, aeterno Deo viuo and vero.

Plat. in Xislo. Martin. in. Chr.
In the year 580, as Platina and Martin affirm, Pelagus invented this
commemoration of those dead which had lived well, which though it be very
ancient, yet is it contrary to that which is practiced at this day. For the
dead were not then invocated by the Church, Dionys. Hier. c. 3.
neither were they prayed for, but were named in the Church, partly to incite
the people to imitate them, and partly to show that they were not dead, but
living a more excellent life. Secondly, these words pro quibus tibi offerimus,
Capitu. l. 6. c. 173
for whom we offer, were added since Charlemaines time, so by little and little,
abuses crept into the Church: and these words quorum tibi fides cognita, whose
faith is known unto thee, do argue of falsehood that which is preached at this
day, to wit, that the knowledge of the Curat is sufficient, and that there
needs no other belief in a Christian, then an infolded or implicit faith.
For if it were so, they would have said, the faith of the Parson or Curate is
known unto thee. Who if he were a Magician or Sorcerer, as he was which not
long since was burned in the Grieve at Paris, the Parishioners would be full
ill assured of their salvation. Fourthly, hoc sacrificium laudis. this
sacrifice of praise, witnesses, that it was not made to purchase remission of
sins, but to render thanks unto God for that purchase, which Jesus Christ
his Son has made for us. Moreover it is not possible to reiterate such a
sacrifice; and if it were, yet this here cannot be sufficient, Heb. 9.22. and
25.
for without shedding of blood, even unto death, there was never made any
sinne-offering. But there are diverse fractions interlarded usually in this
prayer; Afterward follows the canon, We communicating and honoring the
memory, first of the euer-glorious Virgin Mary, mother of God, and of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs, Peter, Paul, Andrew,
James, John, Thomas, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon, Thaddeus, Linus,
Cletus, Clement, Sixtus, Cornelius, Cyprian, Laurentius, Chrysogonus, John and
Paul, Cosma and Damian, and all thy Saints; for whose merits and prayers grant
that in all things we may be fortified by the aid of thy protection, through
the same Christ our Lord, Amen.

Communicantes and memomoriam venerantes imprimis gloriosae semper Virginis
Mariae, genitricis Dei, and Domini nostri Jesus Christi, sed and beatorum
Apostolorum ac Martyrum, Petri, Pauli, Andreae, Iacobi, Iohannis, Thomae,
Philippi, Bartholomaei, Mathei, Simonis, Thaddei, Lini, Cleti, Clementis,
Sixti, Cornelii, Cypriani, Laurentii, Chrysogoni, Iohannis and Pauli, Cosmae
and Damiani, and omnium sanctorum tuoru^, quorum meritis precihusque concedas,
vt in omnibus protectionis tuae muniamur auxilio, per eundem Christum Dominum
nostrum, Amen.



Durand. in rational. l. 4. ad 3. part. c. 38.
Durand attributes this piece to Pope Syricius, In the Primative Church mention
was made of Saints, simply for the reasons before mentioned, but they were not
therefore invocated (says Saint Augustine) but were named to teach us, Aug. de
ciu dei lib. 22 c. 10. Dionys. hierarch. c. 3.
that they were not dead, but translated unto life. For Dionysius says in the
place above quoted, that they are not dead at all. Now here they go much
beyond the ancient limits: for the Communion which ought to be celebrated in
remembrance of Christ is now performed in remembrance of men, such as it has
pleased the Pope to register, as Cosma, Damian, Chrysogonus, etc. Secondly, the
Canon is false in all particular Masses, for there the people communicate not
at all, and therefore they are excommunicated as often as they assist at such
Masses, following the doctrine of the Pope in the Canons. Can. peracta de
consecrat. did. 2.
Thirdly, through whose virtue is it that the Priest implores the aid of God?
Is it not through the virtue of Cletus and Chrysogonus, etc. And how well
agrees this with a canon following, which begins, Nobis quoque, where he
beseeches God not to poyse at all their merits, but to grant them his pardon;
where we may observe, that after they have once stood upon their merits in this
canon, they renounce them in a canon following, see what strange contradictions
be here throughout. Holding his hands extended over the oblations, he says.

We pray thee therefore, thou being pacified, that thou would receive this
our oblation of servitude of all thy family, and that thou would dispose our
days in thy peace, and deliver us from eternal damnation, and enrole us
amongst the flock of thine elect. (Here he ioynes his hands.) through Christ
our Lord, Amen.

Which oblation we beseech thee O God in all things to make blessed, ascribed,
ratified, reasonable, and acceptable, to the end that it may be made unto us
the body and blood of thy most beloved Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hanc igitur oblationem seruitutis nostrae, sed and cunctae familiae tuae,
quaesumus domine vt placatus accipias, diesque nostros in tua pace disponas,
atque ab aeterna damnatione nos eripias, and in electorum tuorum iubeas grege
numerari, per Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Quam oblationem, tu Deus in omnibus quasumus benedictam, ascriptam, ratam,
rationabilem, acceptabilemque facere digneris, vt corpus and sanguis fiat
dilectissimi Filii tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi.

Here the Priest plays the fencer, and redoubles the battery, for he makes
five crosses, the three first upon the hoaste and the chalice, the fourth upon
the hoaste alone, and the fifth upon the chalice only, saying, sanguis fiat, if
it be not made before. But here you may note a notable forgery; for the
Priest pruneth Saint Ambrose words, Ambr. lib. 4. de sacr. c. 5.
and instead of saying after acceptable, which oblation is the figure of the
body and blood of our Lord, he changes and substituteth in their room these
words, that it may be made unto us the body and blood of our Lord, and from
thence they take the foundation of transubstantiation, to forge an idol
instead of the Sacrament. It follows afterward, Who the day before he
suffered, took bread into his holy and venerable hands, and lifting up his
eyes unto Heaven, to thee God his Almighty Father, giving thanks unto thee he
blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take and eat you
all of this, for this is my body.

Qui pridie quam pateretur accepit panem in sanctas ac venerabiles manus suas,
and eleuatis oculis in coelum ad te Deum, patrem suum omnipotentem, tibi
gratias agens benedixit, fregit, deditque discipulis suis, dicens, accipite and
manducate ex hoc omnes, hoc enim est corpus meum.



Note that in saying he took bread, he takes the hoaste with his fore finger
and his thumb, and saying eleuatis, he liftes up his eyes; and saying, he
blessed it, he makes a sign of the cross, as if that had been the form of
the benediction which our Savior used, before his cross was made. Then saying
hoc, he holds the hoaste with his two fore-fingers, and his two thumbes, and
with one breath pronounces these words distinctly, attentively, and with a low
voice, Justin. Nou. 123.
This is my body, contrary to the use of the Primative Church, which raised her
voice in pronouncing these words, Tertia cautela.
and that in the vulgar tongue. And if the Priest stays, or makes a comma at
any word, the cautell says that the consecration is to no purpose. So that all
lies at the mercy of the Priest who speaks low, and whom it much concerns
according to that cautell that he be not pursye or short-winded. That word
being spoken, the Priest falls upon his knees, adores the hoaste, then lifts
himself up, and holding the hoaste on high, makes the people adore it; then
lays it upon the corporal, and adores again; and you are to remember, that
from this, until he wash the four first fingers of both his hands, he
disioynes them not at all, unless he touch the hoaste, but they are clasped
two and two, so that when he would beat his breast to play the Publican, he
does it with his three hinder fingers, and if he would take the plate, he uses
the middle finger, which he ioynes with the forefinger in form of a pair of
pinsers, for the other fingers are destinated to the consecration. Lets see
what follows.

Likewise after supper here he takes the chalice with both his hands] taking
this excellent Chalice into his venerable and holy hands, and here holding the
Chalice in in his left hand, he crosses it with his right] giving thanks unto
thee, he blessed it and gave it to his Disciples, saying, take and drink all
of you of this [these words of the consecration he pronounces over the
Chalice, eleuating it a little] this is the Chalice of my blood of the new and
eternal testament, the mystery of faith, which shall be shed for you and many
to the remission of sins, as often as you shall do this, do it in
remembrance of me.

Simili modo post quam coenatum est, accipiens and hunc praeclarum calicem in
sanctas and venerabiles manus suas, item tibi gratias agens, benedixit deditque
Discipulis suis, dicens, accipite and bibite ex eo omnes: hic est enim calix
sanguinis mei novi and aeterni testamenti, mysterium fidei, qui pro vobis and
pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Haec quotiescunque feceritis,
in mei memoriam facietis.

Before the Priest says, as often, he puts the Chalice upon the corporal,
adores it, then rises up, and makes it to be adored in showing it and saying,
Haec quotiescunque, afterward lays it down again, couers it, adores it, and
disioynes his hands to say.

Wherefore we thy servants O Lord, and all thine holy people being mindful of
the blessed passion of thy Son, as also of his resurrection from hell and his
glorious ascension into Heaven, do offer unto thy excellent Majesty of thine
own gifts, a pure hoaste, an holy hoaste, an immaculate hoaste, the holy bread
of eternal life, and the cup of perpetual salvation.

Vnde and memores domine, nos serui tui, sed and plebs tua sancta, eiusdem
Christi filij tui Domini nostri, tum beatae passionis, nec non ab inferis
resurrectionis, sed and in coelos gloriosae ascensionis, offerimus praeclarae
Maiestati tuae de tuis donis ac datis hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam
immaculatam, panem sanctum vitae aeternae, and calicem salutis perpetuae.

Pronouncing this canon, the Priest makes five crosses, out of season, for the
consecration was performed when he said hoc est corpus meum; and because the
hoaste is then deified the Priest makes himself greater then it, when he
blesses it: for S Paul says, Heb. 7. v. c.
without contradiction the lesser is blessed of the greater. There was no need
therefore of making crosses, considering that crosses are equipollent to
blessings, and that the Priest can not be greater then God, unless we should
say with the quodlibet, qui fecit me sine me, Stella cle^i^.
creatur mediante me, he which made me without me, is created by me. A
blasphemy worthy of the book wherein it is written. Now inasmuch as creation
is understood properly, and the gloss of the canon Timorem, Can. timorem. gl.
v. corpus de (...). did. ^.
says, that by this word hoc, nothing is signified, it follows by the Popes
doctrine, that this is my body, is as much to say, as nothing is my body. Now
before we speak of pretended transubstantiation, you must observe, that this
hoaste is round, and is given unbroken unto the people, who may not touch it
with their hands, but are enjoined to gape, and let the Priest put it into
their mouths, whenever they receive the communion. Where the first error
which here discryes it self is the round form of the bread, it being from
the institution of Numa King of Rome a Pagan and a Magician, (...) O^o^^. 1.
(...).
who sacrificed unto his gods a round cake which he called Mola, and from
thence comes the Verb Immolo, as before was showed.

The second abuse is, in that the bread in the Mass is not one loaf in common
to represent the whole Church, and the communion of Saints, but consists of
several cakes to represent a schism in it. ^. Cor. 10.17. Au^ust. ep. 59.
(...) P^^^a nomen.
For it is written that we are one bread and one body; and S. Austin says,
that we come to be united to the body of Christ, in that we being many, are
yet one loaf and one body. Whence it follows, that we are to communicate
with one loaf, seeing that the union of the body of Christ which is the
Church, is represented by that unity. The third abuse is, in that the people
are forbidden to touch the Sacrament with their hands, contrary to that which
is commanded by our Savior, Take, eat this, etc: and which a Bishop of
Jerusalem has written, (...). ca te^^^^nyst. 5. (...) 8. Sexta^ra. in Trulla
c. 102.
He approached to the Table, and stretched forth his hand to take the holy
food. And in the year 681, the Synod condemned those which would take the
Sacrament with a little vessel of gold, preferring a thing without life before
a humane creature made after the Image of God. The fourth is, in that the bread
is not broken, which is a great default, for by that mystery, the breaking of
the Body of Christ for us is deciphered. Which was the cause that S. Paul
says, The bread which we break, it is the communion of the body of Christ, so
that contrariwise we are to say, that the bread which we break not, is not
the communion of the body of Christ, but a mark rather of division, every man
having his own part. Humbertus Episc. sil^^ ca 5. d ^^e c^^tra libell. Ni ce^.
M^nachi.
Wherefore a good Bishop of Rome, the fifth after the Apostles, says, as often
as you do this, that is, bless, break, distribute, you shall do it in
remembrance of me, because he which does the one without the other, the
benediction without the fraction or distribution, he represents not a perfect
memory of Christ, as likewise the benediction is nothing without the fraction.
For in those days they had but one great loaf broken unto all, Can. N^^.
(...) de co^^^. d^^t.
as the canon does import; The greatest wickedness is in the adoration of the
Sacrament; for if (to do this) as has been said, does signify only to
bless, break and distribute, and that we are not to do any thing but that
which Christ has commanded in his word, we ought not to adore it, for it
appears not that either Christ or his Disciples did ever adore the Sacrament.
Moreover it being that we are to worship that only which is eternal, Dam^sc.
lib. ^. orthod fide^^.
the humanity of Christ is not to be worshipped, if the divinity be not joined
thereunto. For Damascene distinguishes totus Christus, all Christ, from totum
Christi, all that which is in Christ. All Christ is perfect God, and perfect
man; but all that which is in Christ is not God, neither yet is it man. We
must distinguish and not separate his divinity from his humanity, which being
joined, do make one hypostasis and one Person. As for example, all man is one
soul and one body, but all that which is in man is not soul, neither is it
body, but both together.

Now we may say according to the doctrine of the Pope, who would tie himself
to the letter: the Priest makes not all Christ, neither all that which is in
Christ, he creates but a body broken upon the Cross, and but blood shed forth;
and consequently an humanity dead and separated from its soul. And the gloss
of the canon Comperimus says, Can. sic in s^^ctificando. gl. Verb. Call g de
consec. did. 2.
that if a Priest should have consecrated the bread whilst our Savior was in
the sepulcher, that the substance of the wheat would have been simply a dead
body. Now when one has yielded to the Priest, that he can make a body and
blood of the substance of the bread and wine (which notwithstanding is false)
yet cannot that which he makes be wholly Christ, for his soul and his
divinity shall not be made, and consequently we ought not to adore that which
he makes. For we adore the humanity of Christ, nor considered apart, ^ren. de
incar. c. 25.
but as being united to the divinity; So says an ancient father, Christ has
adored with us: and if it so be that we must adore him, for to him must every
knee bow, yet this is to be done only in respect of one of his natures. And
Saint Augustine gives us an example thereof, If (says he) any of us should
find a purple Robe or a Crown lying on the ground, Aug. de ^erbo (...) 58.
would we worship it? But when the King is clothed therewith, he makes
himself liable to great punishment, who through contempt adores it not with
the King. In the same manner shall he be culpable of eternal death, which will
not adore the humanity of Christ our Lord, not as it is considered nakedly
alone, but as being united to his divinity, he being the only Son of God,
true God and true man. This passage shows that Saint Augustine was far from
preaching the adoration of the Cross, Lance, Nails, or Robe without seame,
which are not united unto our Savior, neither make one person. If he should
come to Argenteuill the Priest without all question would call him an Heretic.

Another abomination is committed in that the Priest pretends to sacrifice
Jesus Christ in the Mass, which Christ himself did not in the supper; for if
he had done it, he verily would not have reiterated the next day his oblation,
for that had not been necessary. Now Jesus sacrificing himself upon the
cross, said not, do this, for he had no other worthy sacrificer of such a
sacrifice but himself, whose effect is eternal, and that which we are to
do, is to bless, break, and distribute in remembrance of that sacrifice upon
the cross. Chrysostom. in hom. ad Corinth.
In this sense S. Chrysostom says, If Jesus Christ be not dead, whereof shall
this sacrifice be a sign or figure? But this is more amply treated of in the
chapter of Sacrifice, and of the Sacrament; where you shall see that the action
of the supper differs from that of the cross, in respect of the time place,
form, end, matter, etc. and therefore cannot be the same action. But seeing
that the essence and soul of the Mass consists in transubstatiation, we
must examine it more particularly.

Of the pretended transubstantiation.
Twelve hundred years after the institution of the supper, the Popes brought
in this transubstantiation, In the council of Lateran.
as new for the name as the effect; the Devil having by little and little, at
the length gained the top of the mystery of iniquity. Lets set down therefore
that which we are to believe in this communion, and then by way of opposition
we shall know the abuses. It was instituted in general for the commemoration
of the death of Christ, to celebrate the graces which he purchased for us, to
ratify his alliance, to receive the pledge, seal, and assurance of a better
life, to make protestation of that obedience which we owe unto God; and of the
union which we have with all the Saints, particularly, to receive the
nourishment of our souls, to feel that we are united to our head and Lord,
Jesus Christ, that we are one with him, as he is with God the Father: and that
we are bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh: that we enjoy him entirely,
and all his benefits, to wit, his wisdom, Justice, sanctification and
redemption. So the union which we have with him is termed substantial in
regard of the things united, real, in regard of the truth of the union, and
its effect, and spiritual in regard of the means by which this union is made,
which are the spirit and faith: but as for the form, that is incomprehensible
unto us: thus far we must go, that we prescribe not unto God an
impanation, concomitancy, transubstantiation, or other chimeraes which favor
of impiety and idolatry.

First let us consider the words of our Lord, Fagius in Deuteronomy. c. 8. Joseph.
Scal. de emend. temp. lib. 6.
who ordayning the celebration of the Passover, and the commemoration of his
death; used in a manner the same terms which were used in the ancient
passover, where they said: this is th bread of misery which our fathers have
eaten in Egypt, which is as much as to say, this bread which you now eat, does
represent that bread which our fathers did eat in Egypt: it is 1500 years
since you were delivered from that captivity. The Jews in blessing of bread
and wine, used these words, Blessed be thou, In lib. Vnisnaioth.
O God, which have given us bread, and the fruit of the vine of the earth. And
so we are to take these terms, not according to the letter, but
sacramentally, as those which were added after them, this is my body, this
cup is my blood of the new Testament, which we must thus interpret, this
wine which is in the cup, does represent and present unto you the new alliance
which I have made with you by the shedding of my blood, for the remission of
sins. So that if one would demand how the bread is the body of Christ, we are
to answer, that it is in the same manner as the cup is his blood, without
changing of the substance. This bread is the body of Christ, as circumcision
was the covenant, for it is added, Genesis 17.10.
and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. So then the sign
takes the name of the thing signified as when it is said, Exodus 11.12. 1. Cor.
10 4. Tit. 3.5. Ioh. 3.6. Numb. 10. 1. Cor. 5.
that the lamb was the Passover, that the rock was Christ, that baptism is
the washing of regeneration: and Moses when the Arc set forwards, said, Rise
up Lord, and when it rested, Return O Lord: and the Arc is called the king of
glory, Ps. 24.7 and 8. All which manner of speeches although they be in
sacramental matters, yet are they not literally to be understood, but do
receive a sacramental interpretation. Which is the cause why the Doctors and
Pastors of the Church have called the sacraments, types, antitypes, figures,
similitudes, significations, images, and representations. You shall see
hereafter more variety of the Doctors testimonies. At this time note only
this, that according to the sacramental phrase, and according to the names
given to the sacraments, it may be verified, that this is my body, imports no
changing of the substance, for they should be neither types nor figures, if
they were of the same nature that the things themselves are which they
represent, figurae non sunt rerum homogencarum.

Another Classis of arguments against this pretended change, is taken from
diverse concluding reasons. The first is this. This manner of speech, this is my
body, sounds not, let this be, or this shall be my body; for these are not
imperative or operative terms of a new creature, no more then when it was
said, this is my well-beloved son, Mat. 3.17.
which was but a simple notification of that which he was before the
pronouncing of them. It is another matter when it is said, Genesis 1.
Let there be light, increase and multiply, for these are not mere
enuntiations of things which are, but powerful terms to create that which
was not.

The second reason is drawn from the order which our Savior used, in taking,
blessing, and breaking, before he declared in words that which he presented;
for to what end took he it but to bless it? and to what end blessed he it,
but to sanctify it? Now if that blessing had his force, it is false to say
that by the pronouncing of the last word Meum, the consecration is made; for if
it were so he should not have said, this is, but this shall be my body. For
when he would do a miracle, he said Lazarus come forth, Ioh. 11.44.
and not Lazarus is come forth. For that was a term to do, and not to
declare what was done.

The third reason is taken from the terms themselves, for this is my body, is
not as much as this is my body and blood, which necessarily they must
acknowledge, if the bread be transubstantiated into Jesus, and so they shall
have good store of rhetorical figures: which notwithstanding the Priests
reject in these words. In the same manner one might say as much of this cup is
the new Testament, for in it there be many degrees of figurative
interpretations, first a metonymie for by the Cup, they understand the wine
which is within it, and by the wine the blood: then a Synecdoche, for by the
blood they understand all Christ, both his body and soul, and notwithstanding
it is contrary to that which our Savior would present and represent, for by
the bread is represented only the communion of the body, and by the cup the
communion of the blood of our Lord: and this is that which we learn of S.
Paul, ^. Cor. 10.16.
who says, the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body (not
of the blood) of Christ, and the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? Whereupon one of the first Schoolmen says,
^^trus de palu^e 4. sent. d. 11. q. 3. (...). 44.
That the Sacraments do effect that which they prefigure, and that the effect
of this Sacrament is the perfect refection of the soul, which is nothing else
but to eat it and drink it: and therefore concludes, that it ought to have a
double matter in it, to wit, matter to eat, and matter to drink. Now this
Doctor wrote about the year 1300, and yet speaks not one word of
transubstantiation, but only of the figure

The fourth reason is, that if this transubstantiation of bread and wine had
place, there would be three bodies of Jesus Christ at the same time, differing
in matter and form, that which is visible at the right hand of God in heaven,
consisting of flesh and bone, and other two, the one made of the substance of
bread, and the other of water and wine, both of them in form of bread and
wine, so that they worship not Jesus which was borne of the virgin, but Jesus
which is made of wheat and wine.

V^de gl. verb. con^erturtur. can. quia corpies did. 2. de consec. which
denies true substantiation.
The fifth reason is, that the perfect body of Christ should receive every day as
many additions as there be consecrated hoastes, or else the substance of this
hoaste does vanish away, and gives place to her first body, which if it were
so, there would be no changing, but only a displacing of the substance and
changing of the place. Nevertheless it will be hard to believe, that of the
substance of a glorified body, worms may be engendered, or that it is at the
mercy of a fly: and it is blasphemous, and contrary to natural knowledge, to
believe that accidents may subsist without a subject, or can corrupt without a
substance.

The sixth is, that the bones of our Savior be broken, which were not even in
his type, Exodus 12.46. Ioh. 19.36.
you shall not break the bones: and therefore they were preserved upon the
cross, although it were the custom to break their bones which died in that
manner upon the cross. Now if his bones were not broken in his humility,
wherefore do they teach that they can break them in his glory? Psalm. 16.
The seventh is taken from that it is said, that his body shall not take
corruption: Now if he be chewed by the teeth of the Priest, Can 7. caveat
execrationes.
goes down into his stomach, passes into his guts (for to that purpose they
abstain to eat for some time, if he does that which the cautells specify) it
is certain that he corrupts, which being impossible, it follows that this
eating of Christ is not carnal, but to believe is to drink, Ioh 6.35. Ier.
15.16.
and to come to Christ is to eat, as says S. John: So in Jeremy, I have eaten
the word, is to say, I have believed it, and in the revelation, to eat the
book, Apoc. 10.9. Can. ^t quid putas. de consec. did. 2 Cass. in liturg.
whereof he spoke, is to believe it, as says S. Augustine in the Canon,
believe and thou have eaten, and the Liturgy of the Armenians, Lord Jesus, I
eat by faith thine holy quickening and saving body.

The eighth is, August. ed Dardan. item tra^^. 30. in Joh. V^gil l. 4 con ^^^^.
qui vbi^ h^^^rat. nusquam habitat.
that such transubstantiation destroys the nature of the body of our Lord,
making it to be no body. Take from bodies their space, and they are no more
bodies. The body of Christ is raised from the dead, and it must needs be in one
certain place; for as Vigilius an ancient Bishop of Trent, says, how comes it
about that the word being every where, the flesh is not every where? For when
it was on earth, it was not in heaven, and now it is in heaven, it is not upon
earth. In the Canons themselves this carnal eating is called by S. Augustine
the first heresy, where it is said, Can. prima quidem haeresis. de consec. d
st. 2.
That until the end of the world, the Lord will be on high, but the truth of
the Lord is here with us; for the body wherewith he was raised up must needs
be in one certain place, but his truth is diffused throughout. And in the Acts
of the Apostles it is written, whom the heaven must receive until the times of
restitution of all things. Act. 3.21.


The ninth is, Vide gl. can. Quia corpus. v. convertuntur. de consec did. 2.
where the glosser is much troubled Ioh. 2.9. Exodus 7.10.
that this doctrine of transubstantiation is contrary to it self, because the
corruption of the first matter ought to be the generation of the second, as
when the substance of the water was altered and turned into the substance of
wine in the marriage of Cana, or when the rod of Aaron was turned into a
serpent. Now in this sacrament the substance of bread is not altered, and the
substance of the body of Christ was before, there is therefore only a change
of place and not of substance, and the body which is in heaven comes but either
to mingle it self, or to take the room of the bread, contrary to that which
has been proved here before.

The tenth reason is, that the body which Christ presents unto us is a
crucified body, the memory whereof he enjoined us to celebrate: wherefore it is
said, This is my body which is broken, Mat. 26, 26. 1. Cor. 1.
and my blood which is shed forth, and not that which shall be, or which has
been: for this lamb slain before the creation of the world, was present to
Abraham upon the cross through faith, which is the substance of things hoped
for, Heb. 11.1.
and whose effect was present before and since the passion in regard of the
faithful, which are called not to the participation of a glorious body, but of
a body crucified, not a body which cannot suffer but of him which makes his
soul an oblation for sin, Esaias. 53.11.
as Esaias says.

Durand. de remed. penit. can. vt quid. de consecr. did. 2. c. non iste. Amb.
lib. 6. de sacramento. Idem lib. 2. c. 5. de Isaac and anima. Aug. in. Joh.
tract. 5.
The eleventh reason is, that the body of our Lord being spiritual food, ought
to be received spiritually, and to that purpose S. Augustine says, To what end
preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten. And S.
Ambrose. As the bread is the proper food of our body, and is eaten corporally,
so the body of Christ is the food of the spirit and is eaten spiritually. And
the same brings in our Savior speaking, Those are present with me whose
faith is with me, and whose portion I am: and S. Augustine, Some will question
how I shall enjoy it being absent? how I shall stretch forth my hand thither
where he sits, and hold him there? send thither thy faith, and thou take hold
of him, thy forefathers enjoyed him in the flesh, enjoy thou him by faith. Our
Savior himself interprets to drink and eat by the same terms, to come
and believe.

The twelfth reason is taken from the nature of the body, and from the manner
of the phrase, to be in a place. For if the natural body borne of the Virgin
be in the Sacrament, it is then either definitiuely, as the Angels be in a
place, and so it will have no true body, which ought to fill a place, or else
it will be there repletiuely, and so in as much as it is a natural body, it
should be there visibly and palpably. For by being raised again, and glorified
it loses not the nature of a true body, for Christ said himself, Touch and
see, Luke 24.29.
for a spirit has not flesh nor bones, as I have. It remains therefore that
Christ is there by the virtue of his divinity, which is every where (as says
S. Augustine) although his flesh be in heaven, and no otherwise then as we say
the sun to be present with us when the light thereof comes through the
windows, although the body thereof be fixed in the heavens.

The thirteenth reason is, that if the eating of the body of Christ be carnal,
all the faithful which lived before the coming of our Savior be damned,
because they be dead before they eat the body of Christ. For it is written, If
you eat not the flesh of the son of man, and drink not his blood, there is
no life in you. But we are assured that they were saved, by the words of our
Savior concerning the bosom of Abraham, and by other testimonies and examples
of Moses, Enoch, Elias, Elizeus etc: from whence we must conclude that they
eat Jesus Christ, it being written in express terms, that all our Fathers did
eat the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10.4.
and did all drink of the same spiritual drink, and that the rock whereof
they drank was Christ. Now before his nativitie they drank him not carnally,
and therefore it follows that they did eat it by faith, and that such a kind
of eating is sufficient unto salvation, considering that by it alone they were
saved, being bound notwithstanding to eat it.

The fourteenth is taken from the effect of transubstantion, for if the bread
be made flesh by virtue of those words which are pronounced by the Priest, it
continues to be flesh unless either by contrary words one dissubstantiats it,
whereof we have no example, or the incredulity of the wicked receauer does
disanull that which the consecration had created: For otherwise the wicked
which receive the sacrament should be infallibly saved, and none of them
receive condemnation, in regard that the promise is general, whosouer eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, Ioh. 6.56. Aug. de verbo dom. and tract. in
Johan. 26. Cyrill. lib. 4. in Ioh. c. 19.
the same has life everlasting, and that of S. Augustine, when Christ is
eaten, life is eaten. Again, The sacrament is life unto every man, and is
death unto none, whosoever he be which receaueth it. For if it might be (says
Origin upon the 15 chap, of Mat.) that the wicked should eat the word which is
made flesh, it had never been written, whosoever shall eat this bread shall
live eternally. The reason hereof is evident; for seeing that the flesh and
blood are eaten only by the faithful, and are received only by faith, this body
cannot be eaten unworthily. For as S. Augustine says, Lib. 5. cont.
Donatistas. tract. in Johan. 26.
We are not to conceive that the wicked do eat the body of Christ; although
he carnally and visibly do break with his teeth the signs of the body and
blood. Note that he says signs, for S. Paul says not, whosoever eats this
body unworthily, but whosoever eats of this bread, and drinks of this cup.
Which eating of the mere sign, is sufficient, to make any man culpable which
approaches unworthily, and rejects the grace which his prince offers him,
trampling under foot his arms, and iniuring his ambassador; Heb. 10.26.28.
which are no less then crimes of high nature offered to his sacred majesty.
So the contempt of circumcision was a cause of Gods forsaking his people; see
more in the punishment of the Bethsamites for prying within the Arc of the
covenant, Genesis 17. 1. Sam. 7, 36. and 6.19.
and of the Philistians, who placed it in the temple of their Idol.

Inn. de sacram. altaris. c. 4 13. and 14. p^nem domini non panem dominum.
The fifteenth reason is taken from the words which S. Paul uses, that he is
culpable, and receives his own damnaon, eating unworthily the bread of the
Lord. So Judas eat the bread of the Lord, but not the bread which is the Lord,
says Innocent. Whence it follows that there is no transubstantiation,
considering that after the consecration he speaks of two breades, the one
Panis domini, the bread of the Lord, which is the wheaten loaf, the other
Panis Dominus, the bread which is the Lord, to wit, the true body of Jesus
Christ: the one in Heaven, the other on earth; the one received with the hand
and the mouth of the body, the other with faith, which is the hand and mouth of
the soul, the one offered by the minister of the Church, the other by Jesus
Christ himself. Wherefore S, Paul says, that he which eats and drinks
unworthily, discerns not the Lords body. Where to discern, diakrnein, is as
much as to separate the one from the other, and to have a diverse respect of
either: for if there be but one, there can be neither discerning nor
distinguishing.

The sixteenth reason is taken from hence, that the pretended change made by
the pronouncing of words, will accuse them, in that they have not the power to
change as well the accidents as the substance, nor to convert the form as well
as the matter. And they must needs interpret these words this is my body, in
this manner; this substance with his accidents, is changed into an other
substance without accidents.

The seventeenth is taken from that which the Apostle says, You shall declare
the Lords death until his coming. 1. Cor. 11.26.
For if we are not to celebrate this action but until his coming, by a
consequent there ought not to be any more Masses said; for according to the
Priests doctrine Christ has often descended already unto us.

The eightenth is, that we are not to celebrat the memory of things present,
but of those which are absent; and therefore seeing that this is a
commemoration of Jesus Christ, it follows that he is not there carnally
present.

The nineteenth is taken from the letter, to which the Priests so much stick;
for this is my body, makes not whole Christ, and consequently the Priest in
pronouncing those words, understands him not wholly; and therefore ought not to
adore him as is before said, Numb. 23.

The twentieth reason is taken from the testimony of Cyrill, before cited, that
the Sacrament is life unto every man, Cyrill. lib. 4. in Ioh. c. 19.
and is death unto none, whosoever he be that receives it. So that if there
were a true transubstantiation of the bread, Pope Victor the 3. and the
Emperor Henry the 7. would not have been poisoned with the bread and wine
transubstantiated, for neither the body nor blood glorified is capable of
poison.

Exodus 16.15. and 78.25. Joseph. Angles in storibus. 4. quaest. de susc.
diffic. 2. Alexand. Hales. part. 4. q. 45. m. 1. etc.
The one and twentieth reason (for it is behoofull to have just furniture) is
taken from Manna a figure of this Sacrament, which though it were not
transubstantiated, yet was it styled the bread of Angels, and Heavenly bread,
and that which was reserved thereof in the Arc putrified not, wherefore the
bread which is in the Mass is not the natural and carnal body of our Lord;
For if it were, it would have no less virtue in it to guard it, then its
legal figure had to preserve it self from worms, mice, and other creatures,
with which the Priests stand at mortal enmity this day.

The last reason is taken from hence, that our Savior ought to be adored with
one only kind of adoration, before and after his incarnation; for the
incarnation cannot be a cause of a new worship, such as is in the Mass, which
endures no longer then the species do subsist without putrefying: whereas the
only and true adoration due to our Lord, is due only to the Person of Christ,
wherein two natures are inseparably united. Wherefore the Ephesian Creed made
against Paulus Damasetanus, and translated out of Greek into Latin by Peltanus
the Jesuit, says, We confess that Jesus Christ our Lord ought to be entirely
adored, with his body, but not according to his body. For this reason the
Arrians have been called idolaters by Athanasius, Cyrill and Theodoret,
because they adored a god, which they said, was created.. Nobis quoque verse.
per quem.
The same say the Priests in the Mass in these words, by whom thou createst
unto us these daily goods. And these goods after the words of pretended
consecration are called pure Sacraments in temporal gifts; and therefore they
cannot be inseparably and hypostatically united to the person of our Savior,
Corpus tuum. Inspec. sacer. versican tangendo Corpus Christi, and propter
continentiam tuam excellentissimae diuinitatis Christi.
who is neither a Sacrament, nor in their sense a temporal gift. Likewise
Nestorius believing our Savior to be man sustaining the Godhead, has been
condemned as an Heretic: much more reason is there to brand with such a title
those which believe the simple accidents do sustain a body and a soul, even
the whole entire divinity, and who ordain an adoration of Sacraments, and
things visible and temporal, which are not God invisible, eternal, infinite,
neither our Savior in his natural existence, who is at the right hand of God,
far differing from a sacramental existence, which the Council of Trent
confesses cannot be expressed, in which regard one may say unto them, You know
not that which you adore, but we know that which we worship, even Jesus which
is God invisible, made man like unto us in all things, sin only excepted,
Now this new adoration was instituted by Honorius the 3. about the year 1225,
and the prayer unto it is prescribed in the gloss, Salve lux mundi, etc. God
save thee thou light of the world, word of the Father, true hoaste, living
flesh, Placeat tibi.
entire deity, true man, etc. And although this adoration be addressed
directly to the hoaste, yet the Priest knows well that it is differing from
Jesus Christ, not only in regard of the terms above mentioned, to wit, that
he is called a pure Sacrament, and a temporal gift, but also in respect of the
prayer which he makes, Let the office of my servitude please thee, holy
Trinity, etc. and grant that the sacrifice offered by me, be agreeable unto
thee, etc: through Jesus Christ. Now I say that if this hoaste were Jesus
Christ himself, we ought not to say, let Jesus be agreeable through Jesus; for
men employ not the intercession of a thing, to the thing it self. Moreover
Jesus Christ was not Mediator for himself to God, for between the Persons of
the Trinity there is no mediation; but between the hoaste and him to whom it
is offered, a kind of mediation is suggested; for in the same moment, the
Priest throws himself below the hoaste to adore it, and above it, intercedes
for it to God, that it may be acceptable unto him, so that he makes two
Christ's, the one at the right hand of the Father inuocated and prayed unto, and
the other in the hands of the Priest, supplicating and attending to find
grace, the one unto whom the sacrifice is offered, and the other which is
sacrificed. Whence appears a manifest idolatry; for there is but one only
adoration of the same essence, which receives neither more nor less, neither
differs from it self either in substance or accident.

The next order of arguing against this pretended transubstantiation, is taken
from the analogy of the Sacraments, which are visible signs and seals of the
invisible grace of God, so that the sign is a thing differing in his own
nature from that which it signifies, as the water in Baptism, which although
it be a Sacrament of blood, yet is it not transubstantiated. Can. quia passus
in fine de consec. did. 2.
And the Popes themselves herein agree with us, saying, We are not to doubt
that every faithful man is made partaker of the body and of the cup, when he
is baptized, although he dye before he receive the Eucharist, and mark the
reason added thereunto, because he has in himself that which this Sacrament
signifies. The same may be said of the Sacraments, of the Passover, the
Rock, the Arc, in which the Lamb was not changed into the Passover, nor the
Rock into Christ, nor the Arc into the Covenant, notwithstanding they
contained the truth of that which they prefigured, and they which were
partakers of them, did really enjoy that which was represented by them. Ibid.
Omnis res in sese illarum rerum continet naturam and veritatem, ex quibus
conficitur.
And this is the reason why the Canon, hoc est, shows that every Sacrament
has two parts, and sets down this Maxim, that every thing contains in it
self the nature and the verity of those things whereof it is composed. From
whence it is easy to conclude, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist being
amongst other things composed of bread and wine, the bread and the wine retain
the nature and verity of bread and wine. And more plainly in the same canon is
said, that the bread is called a body, Gl. verb. coelestis.
suo modo, after its own manner, not in truth, but in signifying it in a
mystery. And the reason why they continue in their proper nature is evident;
Nullum simile est idem.
for otherwise there would be no resemblance between the thing signifying and
the thing signified; and we should with blasphemy say, that as the accidents
without the substance cannot nourish the body, so likewise that which they
prefigure, can yield no nourishment to the soul. Hear St Augustine, If the
Sacraments had no agreement with the things whereof they be Sacraments, Aug.
ep. 23.
they would be no more Sacraments, because they would not signify them at all.

Wherefore after the blessing, Math. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
even our Savior himself called the Sacrament, the fruit of the Vine; and
Saint Paul says, the bread which we break, etc. Again, whosoever shall eat
of this bread, and drink of this wine unworthily, etc. he says not of his
body. Lastly, our Savior having said, that he would drink of this fruit in
the kingdom of his Father, it is certain, Luke 24.
that he meant not that he would drink himself after the resurrection, but
foretold only the repast, which after it, he would take with his Disciples,
and though he spoke there only of eating, yet drinking is well enough
understood, for men use not to eat without drinking.

Finally, besides arguments drawn from reason, certain it is that by
testimonies and inartificiall proofs it may be verifyed, that twelve hundred
years after our Savior until Innocent the third, the Church received not that
transubstantiation; which is set down in the canon Ego Berengarius, De
consecr. did. 2. and ^an. quia corpus and gl. and can. firmiter ardeum, and de
suam Trinit in decretales. Ca^. Vtrum sub figura. v. Vorard. veritatem egressus
and hyperbolica loquutus est. Theod. 1. dial. contra quosdam haeret tom. 2.
where Nicholas caused it to be said, that not only the Sacrament, but also
the true body and blood of our Lord is sensually handled and broken by the
hands of the Priest, and chewed with his teeth. Which belief being full of
impiety the canons themselves, do derogate from it, and the gloss of the
canon Vtrum, even in the same title of consecration, where the gloss says,
that Berengarius, lied, and spoke by an hyperbole. What credit shall we give to
these forgers of traditions? let us have recourse unto antiquity, Our Savior
has changed the names in the Sacraments, and has given to his body the name
of the sign, and to the sign also has he given the name of his body, and in
the same manner as he was called an hedge, he called the wine his blood.
Afterward he concludes, So the visible signs are honored with the name of
body and blood, not in changing nature, but in adding grace unto nature. And in
the second Dialogue: For even after the benediction, the mystical Symboles
leave not their own nature, for they abide in their proper substance, and
visible form and shape, and to be touched in such sort as they were before.
And Macarius, Macar. hom. 27
When in the Church the bread and the wine are brought forth, being antitypes
of the body and blood of him, those which partake of the visible bread, do
eat his body and his blood spiritually. And that which the Priest says, after
he has taken the Eucharist, shows that there is no transubstantiation; for
after the consecration he says, quod ore sumpsimus etc: de munere temporali
fiat etc: also the prose, sub diuersis speciebus signis tantum and non rebus
latent res eximiae: the Sacraments are termed signs and not things. Chrysostom. ad
Caesar. mon.
And S. Chrysostom says, that the bread is called by the name of our Lord,
although the nature of bread do yet continue. The same said Pope Gelasius,
writing 1000 years after our Savior, Gelas. contra Eutich. Car. lib. de
divine. eff. page 85. Tertull. lib 4. cont. Marcion. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. c. 10. Amb.
de iis qui init. mist. c. 9. Can. ante benedict. did. 2. de consec. Dionys. de
eccles. Hierarch. c 3. Aug. in Psalm. 3. Aug. contra Adim. manich. c. 12.
and Charlemaine writing to Alcuinus his Master, has these words, In supping
with his disciples, he brake the the bread and gave it unto them, and likewise
the cup, as figures of his body and blood. And Tertullian, Christ having taken
the bread, and distributed it to his disciples, he made it his body in saying,
this is my body, that is to say, the figure of my body. And Chrysostom, What
is that which the bread signifies? the body of Christ. And Ambrose, Before the
blessing of those heavenly words, another kind was named, but after the
consecration, the body of Christ is signified. And Saint Denis, By the
venerable signs of the Sacrament, Jesus Christ is signified and received. And
S. Augustine says, that he eats Christ which eats him within and not
without, which eats him in his heart, and not he which feeds on him with
his teeth. In his 26 tract upon Saint John: The patience of Jesus Christ was
admirable, in that he admitted Judas to the banquet, in the which he instituted
and gave to his disciples the figure of his body and of his blood, The Lord
made no difficulty to say, this is my body when he gave them the figure of his
body and his blood. And in the canon taken out of Saint Hierome, upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians, it is said, that the body of Jesus Christ is two
ways understood, the first, carnally, when it is said that it is crucified,
Eusebius. de vita constable. lib 10. c. 3 Maldonat. Jesuit in Ioh. c. 6 v. 55.
the other spiritually, when is is called bread. So are the Sacraments called
by Eusebius, secret Symboles of the passion of our Savior. Again, he calls
his flesh true food, and blood true drink, because it does truly nourish our
souls, and gives unto them life everlasting. As in the 32 verse, he calls
himself true bread, yet certainly not of nature: for if one regard nature, he
is not true and proper bread, but only in respect of the effect, because he
truly does do that which bread uses to do. And Saint Augustine, The Apostle
says, Aug. ad Bonifac. epist. 23.
we are buried with Christ through Baptism into his death, he says not that
we signify his burying, but he says absolutely that we are buried.
Wherefore he called not the Sacrament of so great a thing, otherwise then by
the name of the thing it self. And the same puts down this rule, Aug. quaest.
super Leuit. 67.
the thing which signifies, has been used to be called by the name of that
which it signifies: as it is written, the seven ears of corn are seven
years, he says not that they signify seven years: so likewise the seven
kine are seven years, and many others. From thence it comes, that it was
said the rock was Christ; for it is not said, the rock signifies Christ,
but as if it had been that which it was not in substance, but in signification.

Now that which has brought in this error, is, that they think that faith
cannot produce any real effect; Heb. 11.
and nevertheless we have the Scriptures full of contrary examples, by faith
Enoch was translated that he should not see death; through faith Sara
conceived, by faith the Israelites passed through the red sea, by faith the
walls of Jericho fell down. And as for corporal manners of speaking
attribubuted to the soul, as when it is said, that faith eats and drinks,
they enforce not any communication of the proprieties of the body, any more
then when it is said, that the soul hears and sees, although it have
neither ears nor eyes. The effects therefore of the spirit are real and true,
although the means and causes be spiritual, for otherwise the Angels which
killed the first borne in Egypt, and defeated the Army of Senacherib, because
they had not bodies, could not have done that real execution: whereas indeed
it was so much the more real, by how much the instrument was the more agile,
and disburdned of that corporal Mass, which is an impediment to our actions.

Tropes, and those cease not, for the Gospel is full of them; as for example,
Jesus is called the Lamb, the Hedge, the way, by a Metaphore, and even in this
place the cup is taken for the wine by a Metonomie. Sometimes figures are
taken for the ceremonies of the Law, which prefigured Christ and his sacrifice.
These indeed cease in the reformed Churches, but not in the Roman. For if we
may believe Biell, Titleman and others, there were never more figures under the
old Law, then are now under the new. See the significations of the Altar, the
kissing of it, the right hand, and the left, the turnings of the Priest, the
signs, and a thousand significations and inventions, which we know
notwithstanding to have ceased. We answer therefore that figures do not
cease in the former signification, but the later.

The second objection is taken from the omnipotency of God, who is able to make
a body to be every where, to be invisible, and existe without its accidents.
To this we must answer, that by this argument Mahumet and his abominations may
be maintained, for God is able to do any thing. But before we employ this
omnipotency, we ought to examine, if such be his will, and then we may boldly
conclude that he can do it; for the proposition is not convertible, God can
do all that he will, Aug. Euchirid. c. 96.
and God will do all that he can. This is taught us by S. Augustine, God is
not called omnipotent for any other reason, then for that he is able to do
all that which he is willing to do, and that the effect of his will can not be
hindered by the will and effect of any other creature. And Tertullian, Tert. ad
verse. praxeam.
He could have given feathers to men as well as to birds, but though he could
yet it follows not that he would etc for the power of God is his will.
According to this Orthodoxe doctrine, we say, that there be some things
impossible to God, as first those things which are repugnant to his nature, as
when it is said that he cannot lie, for he is truth, Heb. 6.1^. Iam. 1.13. 2.
Tim. 2.13. Aug. 5. de ^iv. c. 10. idem de symb. l. 1. Hier. ad Eustac. L^mb.
lib. 1. d. 40. c.
he cannot be tempted with evil, he cannot deny himself. And to this purpose,
says S, Augustine, That God cannot do some things although he be omnipotent.
Secondly, we say that God cannot do those things which are contradictory to
the order which he has established: as to make darkness to give light, or a
triangle not to contain in it three angles. Wherefore we say that in regard
that our Lord has a true and natural body, he has always the essential
qualities belonging thereunto, so that having said that it was expedient for
him to go to heaven, that he might send us the comforter which is the holy
Ghost, Ioh. 16. Act. 3. Can. prim. quide^.
that we shall not always have him with us, and that he will not come again
until the day of judgment, it follows that it is false that the Priests do
make him descend at every Mass which they say, considering that we neither see
him nor touch him, 1. Pet. 2.
whereas he is like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.

The third objection is that this transubstantiation is made by a miracle,
which S. Augustine denies, who says, Aug. de trinit. lib. 3. c. 10. Exodus
7.10. Ioh. 2.9.
These things may he honored as being religious, but they cannot challenge
admiration or astonishment, as if they were miraculous. The reason is, because
that which is miraculous, may be seen and be apprehended by the senses, as
when Aarons rod, or the water of Cana were changed; but men admire not that
which they perceive not, and therefore if one would speak properly, it cannot
be termed a miracle.

The fourth objection, is that the body of Christ is glorified, and therefore
is spiritual and like unto Angels. This makes not that it has not flesh and
bones: for after that he was raised up from the dead, he said himself, Luke
24.9. Damas. de fide orthodoxa. lib. ^. c. 3.
a spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have. And Damascen, Neither of
Christ's natures is capable to receive contrary differences. Now if it were
invisible in the sacrament and visible in heaven, his humanity would receive
contrary differences, which it cannot do. And S. Augustine, if this be my
body, Aug ad Dard^num.
(says he) it is then in a certain place etc. As for that which some object,
that the body of our Savior is spiritual, S. Augustine interprets it, Aug.
ad Conscent
as the sensitive body is not soul but body, so the spiritual body is not a
spirit but a body. For says Theodoret, Theod. dialog. confusus.
the nature of a true body continued with our Lord after his resurrection, and
was not changed at all: only that which was corruptible and mortal in him,
was changed into immortality and incorruption. And as for that which is said
that we shall be like unto Angels, the word like, shows that we shall not be
altogether the same. Tertull. de resur Hier. cant. Ioh. hyerosol. and ad Eust.
So says Tertullian, Jesus Christ said not, that they shall be Angels, to deny
they shall be men, but that they shall be like Angels, to show that they shall
be men. And in another place he says, by these words they shall be like unto
Angels, nature is not taken from us, but the likeness of Angels is promised
unto us. Aug. retract. l. 1 c. 13. and 26.
S. Augustine teaches us the same. And seeing that this resembling, is not
only in the humanity of Jesus, but also in all the faithful, we ought for
the same reason to nullify the humanity of all the Saints. The resemblance
therefore consists in incorruption, in obedience to God, and in the holiness
of life, and not in the privatio^ of a true humane body. For though the humane
body should be throughout Angelical, yet could it not be any whit the more
visible in one place, and invisible in another, or in two places at the same
time: to this purpose says Didimus, Didimus tractatu de spir. etc. Basil
tract. de spirit. etc c. 22.
The spirit is every where, and therefore is God, which cannot be said of
Angels. And Basil the great, All other powers are circumscribed for the Angel
which visited Cornelius, was not in the same place where it accompanied Philip.
As for his transfiguration, his walking upon the waters, his entering in the
doors being shut, these were effects of his divinity, and not abrogatings of
his humanity: not changings of his body, but making of the creature to give
place to his creator, and consolidating the waters: for even in the like
manner, the Apostles have come out of prison the door being shut, and their
chains have fallen off, and S. Peter if he had faith enough might walk upon
the water, yet was there no necessity to change his humane nature by that
means to make him the more capable of that action. It follows afterward,
that the Priest stretching forth his hand says, Upon which things let it
please thee to look with a propitious and a favorable countenance, and to
accept them, as thou did vouchsafe to accept the gifts of thy just son
Abel, and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and as the holy sacrifice and
immaculat host which thy high Priest Melchisedeck^ offered unto thee.

Supra quae, propitio ac sereno vultu respicere dignoris, and accepta habere,
sicuti accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti Abel, and sacrificium
Patriarcha nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus
Melchisedech, sanctum sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam.



Of what oblation speaks he? If it be of the oblation of bread, that subsists
no more, for he has said already, hoc est corpus meum; it is therefore of
Jesus Christ, and does he doubt, that it will not be acceptable to God as
the flock of Abel; o impiety; the Priest did before offer up bread not
consecrated for the remission of sins, and here offering up Jesus whom he
has adored and made the people to adore, does abate his price and pray God
that it may be in the same rank that was the bread of Melchisedecke? Ephesians.
2.18. Ioh. 14.6. Heb. 14.15.
Where is the knowledge, the conscience, the zeal of the house of God? Come
Lord Jesus, we believe and know that we are acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ, by his merits, and through the favor of his intercession. The Priest
quite contrary, does here intercede for him, that he may be acceptable unto
God. Secondly, him which is the holy one of God. and on whom all sanctification
does depend, the Priest would make as holy as the goats of Abel; whereas
contrariwise it is written, The blood of Jesus speaks better things then that
of Abel. Heb. 12.24. And what a presumption is it to enterprise the sacrificing
of Jesus, by that means making ones self more worthy then him, for the
sacrifice is not acceptable in it self, Heb. 11.4. leen. l. 4. co^ntra haeres.
valent. c. 34.
but in consideration of him which offers it, and that is the reason which S.
Paul alleges, why God regarded the sacrifice of Abel, and not of Cain,
because his person pleased him not. And S. Ireneus gives the same reason.
Afterward the Priest falls upon his knees and says, We humbly beseech thee
Almighty God, that thou will command these things to be carried by the hands
of thine holy Angel unto thine holy altar, in the sight of thy divine majesty.

Supplices te rogamus, omnipote^s Deus, iube haec perferri, per manus sancti
angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, in co^spectu divinae Maiestatis tuae.



It it be Jesus Christ, he needs not the ministry of Angels to ascend into
heaven, he ascended thither once by his own virtue: and if he be once ascended,
by virtue of what words may men make him redescend? and when? for if the Priest
be to devour him, and make him pass into his entralles, as is before said, he
had need to pray that he might descend, and not ascend. And if it be only to
present himself unto God, he needs not ascend, for God is every where; but how
will this ascension agree with his descent into the stomach? and how the one
and the other with that which the gloss says? That this one thing is
certain, Gl.V. miscere. can. quibus gradibus 2. did. de consecrat. per
aqualicales digestus in secessunt diffunditur.
that as soon as the species of bread and wine are broken with the teeth,
straight ways the body of Christ is wrapped up into heaven, whereas the text
forbids the Priest to eat six hours after, for fear least he should mingle a
part of that body with the meat which passes through. What impiety? what
blasphemy is this? The Priest raises himself up, and saying, participatione,
kisseth the altar.

To the end that all we which shall take by participating of this altar the
body [crossing the hoast] and the blood [crossing the chalice] of thy son,
may be filled with all benediction, and [crossing himselfe] celestial grace,
through the same Christ our Lord, Amen.

Vt quot quot ex hac altaris participatione, sacrosanctum filij tus corpus and
sanguinem sumpserimus, omni benedictictione coelesti and gratia repleamur, per
eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

The Priest shows what participation he intends to speak of by kissing the
altar, and saying this prayer, which is an idolatry reiterated, as above is
showed, for if he intended to speak by a rhetorical figure, and to take the
altar for that which is upon the altar, to wit the Sacrament, he ought to show
the Sacrament and not the altar. So that this participation is but the kiss
which he bestows at this time. Secondly is not this to mock the people, to
say, We shall take? For if the people participate not at all, this prayer
cannot be made for them. We may not forget the three signs of the cross
which are made upon the host, the Chalice and the Priest himself, to every
one one, by which he exalts himself above that which he blesses, as is said
before. The second memento.


Remember also, O Lord, thy servants N. who went before us with the sign of
faith, and sleep in the sleep of peace.

Memento etiam Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum N. qui nos praecesserunt
cum signo fidei and dormiunt in somne pacis.

This second memento, is said ordinarily with the hands joined, and coming to
these words, who sleep in the sleep of peace, the Priest seems to sleep,
but in the mean time he must forsooth insert those which are recommended unto
him, and which have furnished him with matter of remembrance. Afterward he
rouseth himself, and cries ipsis domine etc. I demand therefore, what that
prayer is profitable for, after he has once prayed for those which sleep in
the sleep of peace? are there two peaces in the other world? But hence arises
the profit of the Priest, who persuades the ignorant people that he is the
clearke of the signet for their deceased friends. Now if they sleep in peace,
tell me, why take thou my money? why preachest thou not unto me that which is
written, Ioh. 3.36. and 5.24. Luke 23.43.
He which believes on the son has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life? Why proposest thou not
the example of the thief, who the same day of his death went with our Savior
into Paradise? Wherefore take thou not away the terrors of Purgatories fire,
which proceeded from Tophet, and were too soon kindled for the peoples profit?
Lastly, Ioh. 1.1.7.
why tellest thou not, that The blood of Jesus cleanses us from all our sins?
Alas, we being washed therewith need not fear to be reputed any more polluted,
seeing that Jesus Christ has by himself purged our sins; where note, that
he says, by himself, and not by imaginary fire. And teaching this for the
consolation of the faithful, turn but the leaf for the wicked, and you shall
read in capital letters, He which believes not is already condemned, Ioh.
3.36.
he that believes not the son shall not see life, Can. maiores extat. de
baptismo.
but the wrath of God abides on him. Wherefore then do they invent half
pardons, penal graces, pardons without mercy, when as even the decretall
glosses do teach us the contrary. ^ 1. fi. C. de sententiam passis
Larga dei pietas etc: The great bounty of God, will not pardon thee by halfes,
but if thou weepest, it will give thee all or none. And the Lawyers hold, that
all restitution does remit that which the sentence of condemnation had taken
away. Neither does the distinction of venial and mortal sins any whit serve
their turns, for where the law distinguishes not, all distinctions are but
extinctions of the law. Now it is written, the wages of sin is death. Romans
6.13. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
That is eternal. Also, the soul which sins shall die and cursed is every
one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law
to do them. Wherefore let us thus conclude, all sins merit death: but
venial sins are sins, and therefore venial sins do merit death. Hear
what S. Augustine says, Aug cont. Peligium. l. 5.
and you shall see that Purgatory purges but the purse. First (says he) the
Catholic faith believes that there is the kingdom of heaven: secondly, that
there is hell, in the which every Apostata and stranger to the faith of Christ
shall suffer torments, as for a third place we neither seek for it, neither
do we find it mentioned in the Scriptures. Cyp. cont. Don. l. 4. ep. 4.
And S. Cyprian, When one departs from hence, he shall find no place for
repentance or satisfaction, here is life either lost or kept. In brief we
believe this faithful testimony, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
from henceforth, yea (says the spirit) that they may rest from their labors,
Apoc. 14.13.
and their works do follow them. Likewise, I even I am he that blotteth out
thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
Again, Es. 43.13. Psalm 32.2. Aug. de verbis dom. Ser. 37.
blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Lastly, S.
Augustine concludes with us, Christ taking upon him the punishment and not the
fault, has washed away the fault and the punishment. Afterward he continues
with his hands disioynd and stretched forth.

To them, O Lord, and to all those which do rest in Christ, we pray thee to
give a place of refreshing, of light and peace through the same Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Ipsis Domine and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus, locum refrigerij, lucis and
pacis vt indulgeas deprecamur, per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

Then the Priest beats his breast to represent the Publican and thumps it
something harder then before, and then pronounces the rest softly.

And to us sinners thy servants, which hope in the multitude of thy mercies,
vouchsafe to give some part and society with thine holy Apostles, and
Martyrs, John, Stephen, Matthias, Barnabas Ignatius, Alexandrinus,
Marcellinus, Peter, Felicity, Perpetual, Agatha, Lucia, Agnes, Cecilia,
Anastasia, and all the Saints, into whose number we beseech thee to receive us,
not as a valuer of our merits, but of our pardoning, through Christ thy son our
Lord. Here you must note that Amen may not be said.

Nobis quoque peccatoribus famulis tuis de multitudine miserationum tuarum
spera^tibus, partem aliquam and societatem donare digneris, cum tuis sanctis
Apostolis and Martyribus, cum Iohanne, Stephano, Matthia, Barnaba, Ignatio,
Alexandrino, Marcellino, Petro, Felicitate, Perpetua, Agatha, Lucia, Agnete,
Cicilia, Anastasia, and omnibus sanctis tuis, intra quorum nos consortium, non
aestimator meriti sed veniae, quaesumus largiter admit, per Christum filium
tuum, Dominum nostrum.

Let us consider how the spirit of lying is contrary to it self; all the
doctrine of the Mass is founded upon the merits of Saints, of the Priests, and
such like, and yet by an oversight, they have inserted one word which
destroys all their merits and establishes Gods mercy. Can. quia corpus gl.
v. meruisti. de consecr. did. 2.
For the Gloss of that Canon which alleges S. Augustine says, Mercy
supposes not merit, for to give for merit sake, is justice and not mercy. We
ought therefore to acknowledge our misery, not by hypocrisy, as when we cover
it with the name of humility, but in truth, as the Publican did, without
building upon the works of the Pharisee: for before one can establish a merit,
he must ascend four degrees: first he must give that which is his own:
secondly, he must do that which he is not bound or obliged to do. Thirdly,
the gift must be equivalent: and fourthly, it must profit him to whom it is
given. As for the first, Philip. 2.13.
what can we give to God, which we have not received of him? and therefore S.
Augustine says, that When God gives us our reward, he crowns in us his own
gifts and not our merits. As for the second, when we have fulfilled all the
law, yet have we done but that which we ought to do, and therefore according
to that of our Savior, We are but unprofitable servants, Psalm. 32. Romans 4.6.
and that of David and S. Paul, the felicity of a man consists in this, that
God approves of a justice without works. In the third place, what proportion
is there between our works and eternal life, that they should be able to
merit it? considering that even martyrdom it self, Rom 8.18. Aug. de praes.
sanctitate.
and the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us. Wherefore S. Augustine says, that the grace of God is
none at all, if it be given for merits. Id. psalm. 31.
If thou would estrange thy self from grace, make boast of thy merits.
Whatsoever thou imputest to merits, detracteth from grace. And as for the
fourth, what can we give to God that can profit him, who finds no content but
in himself, to whom the whole world appertains and all that therein is,
Psalm. 50. Job. 4. and. 18.
who has found no stedfastnes in his servants and laid folly upon his Angels.
Job. 4.18.

Neither do those passages any thing avail which are produced to convince this
doctrine: for we must distinguish of the justice which the faithful have
alleged to God, and must consider that they spoke not of any absolute justice,
such as might merit with God, but only of justice in comparison of their
enemies: as an ounce may be said to be weighty in regard of a grain, though
it be but light when it is compared to a pound. Wherefore in respect of God we
have no merits, as it is said, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant. O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
living man (he excepts not the Jesuits) be justified, And the Apostle makes a
general Maxim, Romans 3.27.
We conclude therefore that a man is justified by faith without the works of
the Law. But speaking of the justice of his cause against his adversary Saul,
David says, Give sentence with me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, Psalm.
7.8.
and according to the innocence that is in me: and in the like manner he said
to Saul, Let the Lord reward every man according to his righteousness and
faithfulness. To be brief when the Lord has respect to our works, it is
not for their worth and their dignity, for they are but as filthy cloutes. Esaias
64.6.
But he has respect to his covenant, ex pacto agitur non autem ex merito; and
to the condition which he has put in his contract, which notwithstanding we
cannot perfectly accomplish. As when the husbandman gave to him whom he had
hired at the last hour, as much as to those which sustained the heat of the
day. Let us imitate the Publican in this confession, and fly such Pharisaicall
pride as is now renewed by the Jesuits. Then follows the great battery of
the whole Canon, for he makes seven crosses.

By whom, O Lord, thou createst all these good things, thou sanctifiest,
quicknest, blessest, and give them unto us, by him, and with him, and in him.
To him, and to thee God almighty Father in the unity of the Holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory.

Per quem haec omnia domine, semper bona creas, sanctificas, viuificas,
benedicis, and praestas nobis, per ipsum, and cum ipso. ipsi and tibi Deo patri
omnipotentiin vnitate Spiritus sancti, omnis honor and gloria.

Note that the three first crosses are made upon the host and the bread in
common; and when the Priest says, and praestas nobis, he somewhat prostrates
himself, joining his hands: afterward he vncouers the chalice, and taking the
hoaste in his right hand, and the chalice in his leaft, he makes with the
hoaste, three signs of the cross upon the chalice, from one side to the
other, saying Per ipsum. Then lifting up his fingers, he makes two crosses
between his breast and the chalice, beginning from the side of the chalice,
saying, and tibi. This being done, he holds the hoaste above the chalice, and
lifting it a little with both his hands, he says, Omnis honor and gloria.
Then he lays down the hoaste, couers the chalice, adores it, lifts himself
up again, and says, World without end. Amen. Let us pray, being advertised by
wholesome precepts, and being informed by divine institution, we dare say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc: And lead us not into temptation. (The Clerk
answers) But deliver us from evil. (Then the Priest ought to say with a low
voice, Amen.

Per omnia secula seculorum. R. Amen. Oremus. Praeceptis salutaribus moniti,
and diuina institutione formati, audemus dicere, Pater noster qui es in coelis
etc. Et ne inducas nos in tentationem. R. Sed libera nos a malo. Amen.



Seeing the Priest acknowledges here, that the boldness which he takes to say
Our Father, does proceed from the ordinance of God which has prescribed this
form, is it not an impudency to interlace both before and after, prayers which
are not only not commanded, but even contrary unto it? and seeing that the
Priest in this place addresseth himself directly unto God, calling him Our
Father, wherefore preaches he the contrary, saying, that it is a presumption
and a rashness to go immediately to God, and that we ought to employ the
Saints in presenting our petitions unto him, never saying throughout the whole
Mass, Lord Jesus intercede for us, reconcile us unto God thy Father, thou art
our Advocate, our Mediator, our propitiation. So much is man given to his own
inventions, to dig stinking cesternes, and to leave the water of life.
Afterward the Priest takes the plate, but it is only with the middle and the
forefinger, for the thumb and the other side of the forefinger has touched
the hoaste, and is not yet washed, neither the wash thereof drunk by the
Priest, He says then, Deliver us we beseech thee O Lord, from all evil past,
present, and to come, by the intercession of the blessed and euer-glorious
Virgin Mary the Mother of God, and thy blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and
Andrew with all thy Saints.

Libera nos quaesumus, domine, ab omnibus malis praeteritis, praesentibus and
futuris, intercedente beata and gloriosa semper Virgin Dei genitrice Maria,
and beatis Apostolis tuis Petro and Paulo, atque Andraea, cum omnibus sanctis.



To each day is sufficient the evil thereof; but here the Priest conformeth
not himself to beg his daily bread, and so much as his present necessities
do require, but he besides makes provision for evils to come, which
notwithstanding is not so bad as to pray to be delivered from evils past: for
if priuations do presuppose habits, it will be something hard to cure a disease
whereof one is already recovered. But the worst is that he rejects the
remedy, for he imployes not the intercession of our Savior, but of Saints,
which he is forbidden to invoke, and which have no charge to intercede, as
before is showed. Now above we have observed three kinds of signs, the one
with the hand, the second with the hoaste, the third with the chalice held with
both hands; in this place the sign is made with the plate, to the end that
every one may contribute something. He says then, Thou being propitious, give
peace in our days, to the end that being aided with the aid of thy mercy, we
may be always delivered from our sins, and secure from all perturbation.

Da propitius pacem in diebus nostris, vt open misericordiae tuae adiuti, and a
peccatis simus semper liberi, and ab omni perturbatione securi.



He puts the plate under the hoaste, vncouers the chalice, falls upon his
knees, rises up again, takes the hoaste, and breaks it in the middle over
the Chalice, saying, Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son.

Per eundem dominum nostrum Iesum Christum filium tuum.



Saying, by the same Jesus Christ, he breaks it, pretending that he is the
same which he holds, and which he breaks. But how does this agree with that
which is written, You shall not break his bones. Exodus 12.46. Ioh. 19.33.
For S. John interprets those words of our Savior, whose bones should be
broken if this bread were so transubstantiated that every crumme should
contain an entire body, such an one as was upon the cross, whose feet and
nose should consequently be joined together, as you shall find this question
moved, and lamentably decided in the gloss of the canon, Can. vbi pars gl. in
v. vbi de consecratione, did. 2.
Vbi pars. For no accident can be broken. And besides, accidents are not made
to represent a body, for they are not of the same nature: like as we say that
it is impious to represent God which is a spirit by wood, stone or mettaile;
now they instead of saying with Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. Act. 2.42. and 20.7.
The bread which we break is the communion of the body of Christ, must
necessarily say, the flesh and bones which we break are not Jesus Christ, for
they ought not to be broken, especially after his glorification. Or even as
the accidents without substance, are not the nourishment of the body, even so
that which we break does not feed the soul. Let us therefore thus argue with
them, The Priest does corporally eat that only which he breaks, but the
Priest does break only the accidents, therefore the Priest eats corporally
only the accidents. The Popes interpretation of this fraction, is as
abominable as the other, who has ordained that one piece should be put into
the chalice, Pars vino intincta, pro viuis sanctificatur. Altera pro sanctis,
pars tertia pro redimendi^.
and that to represent three things. That which is in the wine is for the
living, the other for the Saints which are in Paradise, the third for those
which are in Purgatory. Who ever without horror did hear of such a division?
the soldiers would not divide the coat without seame, and here the Pope
finds a means to divide the humanity of Christ. There is another monstrous
and Gerion-like interpretation in the canon Triforme, which says, Can.
triform. de consecr. did. 2.
that the body of our Savior has three forms in the Mass, which decipher
unto us the body walking upon earth, lying in the grave, and raised from the
dead. All these Chimera's were forged in the year 700 or there abouts by Pope
Sergius. The Priest puts half the host which he held in his right hand upon
the plate, and the other half which he held in his leaft hand, he breaks
again, saying, Who lives and reigns with thee, God, in the unity of the
Holy Ghost.

Qui tecum viuit and regnat in vnitate spiritus sancti Deus.



Afterward he ioynes the portion which he held in the leaft hand, with the
half which is upon the plate, and so behold three parts.

And as for the part which continues in the right hand, the Priest holds it
with two fingers, the forefinger and the thumb over the chalice, which he
lifts up a little, saying, World without end, Amen.

Per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.



Then with that part which he holds in his right hand, he makes three signs of
the cross upon the chalice, which he puts upon the Altar, saying, The peace of
the Lord be always with you. Answ. And with thy spirit.

Pax Domini sit semper vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.



That being done, he puts that piece into the cup, saying softly, This mixture
and consecration of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, be to us which
receive it unto eternal life. Amen.

Haec commixtio and consecratio corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus
Christi, fiat accipientibus nobis in vitam aeternam. Amen.



How can the Priest demand eternal life for that mixture which is not at all
commanded? for faith comes by hearing the word of God, and is founded upon
the promise. But what will all their Priests answer to the Epistle of Pope
Julius, Can cumomne ^r^mea de consecr. did. 2.
who writing to the Bishops, blamed the custom of those which steeped the
bread in the wine, and said that it was contrary to the Gospel, which has
commanded the participation of the body, to be by it self, and the cup by it
self; and that our Lord never gave the b ead dipped, save to Judas only,
which was not to institute the manner of so doing, but to design the Traitor.
Wherefore then will the Priest needs communicate like Judas, and not like
other of the Apostles? Is it not because he sels the hoaste, though he deliver
it nor, and therein plays the cunninger Merchant of the two? This being done,
he couers the chalice, adores it, lifts himself up again, bows himself over
the hoaste, ioynes his hands, thrice beats his breast, and says to his hoaste.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.
O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. O
Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant us thy peace,
(And if the Mass be said for the dead, they change the words and say,) O Lamb
of God, which take away the sins of the world, grant them eternal rest.

Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis, Agnus Dei, etc. Agnus Dei
qui tollis peccata mundi, da nobis pacem.

Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, dona eis requiem sempiternam.

Plat. in Sergio. Sigibert. in Chron.
Sergius the Pope ordained, that in breaking the bread, some should sing Agnus.
Now if it be an incongruity in Latin to say in the nominative case that which
ought to be said in the Vocative, as well as that which follows, yet is it
greater absurdity in the application of it, to call a morsel of bread, the
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, for the Priest bows
himself over the bread, adores it, and points out his Lamb which he
inuocates. It follows afterward, that bowing himself, and joining his hands
he says, Lord Jesus, which saidest to thy Apostles, My peace I give unto you,
look not upon my sins, but on the faith of thy Church; and vouchsafe to
pacify and unite it according to thy will, who live and raignest God world
without end. Amen.

Domine Jesus Christ, qui dixisti Apostolis tuis, pacem meam do vobis, ne
respicias peccata mea; sed fidem Ecclesiae tuae, camque secundum voluntatem
tuam pacificare and adunare digneris, qui viuis and regnas Deus, per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen.



Then he gives a thin piece of plate, of silver or other mettaile, which he
calls the Pax, unto his Clerk, and that, after he has kissed the Altar,
saying, Peace be with thee. Ans. And with thy spirit.

Pax tecum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.



The Clerk has good reason to wish that he may be in peace, for a good time
was spent in nothing but turning, whirling, hoysting, kissing, crossing,
standing, kneeling, etc. And we must note, that in Masses for the dead, neither
the Pax is given, neither the precedent prayer said. But I pray you, is this
silver Pax any Apostolical tradition? was it any of S. Peter's moueables? was
it a Legacy bequeathed by our Savior, as the Priest in this prayer would make
us believe? We know that in the Primative Church reconciliations were made
before the communion, and as a token thereof the parties reconciled did kiss
one another, Rabau. de instit. cleric. lib. 1. c. 33. Sabell. Tom. 2. Enead. 8.
lib. 6.
and that kiss was called pacis osculum, the kiss of peace. But what a
combat has the Clerk with this peace? which has been brought in by Pope
Leo, contrary to the ancient form of the Church as Sabellicus writes. Let us
go on.

Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, who by the will of thy Father, the
Holy Ghost cooperating, have quickened the world by thy death, deliver me by
this thy sacred body and blood from all my sins, and all evils, and make me
abide in thy commandments, and never suffer me to separate my self from
thee, who with the same God, Father and Holy Ghost, live and raignest, world
without end. Amen.

Domine Jesus Christ, Fili Dei viui, qui ex voluntate patris, cooperante
spiritu sancto, per mortem tuam mundum vivificasti, libera me per hoc sacrum
corpus and sanguinem tuum ab omnibus iniquitatibus meis, and vniuersis malis,
and fac me tuis inhaerere mandatis, and a te nunquam separaripermittas, qui cum
eodem Deo Patre and spiritu sancto viuis and regnas in secula seculorum. Amen.

If this prayer had been made to God, it had been good, but the Priest
applies it to the bread and wine, saying, Per hoc sacrum, and afterward he
adores it, and his hands being joined, says, Let not Lord Jesus Christ the
receiving of thy body, which I unworthy do presume to take, judge and condemn
me, but for thy piety let it be unto me a defense both of body and mind, and
also a medicine, who live and raignest with God the Father.

Perceptio corporis tui Domine Jesus Christ, quem ego indignus sumere praesumo,
non mihi perueniat in iudicium and condemnationem, sed pro tua pietate profit
mihi ad tutamentum mentis and corporis, and ad medelam percipiendam, qui vivis
and regnas cum Deo Patre.



We have showed here above, that the body of Christ cannot be taken
unworthily, though the bread may, which represents it: but the Priest here
deceiues himself, as he does in many other places concerning
transubstantiation. Afterward, he lifts up himself again, I will take the
heavenly bread, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

Panem coelestem accipiam, and nomen Domini inuocabo.



He takes the two pieces of the hoaste which were upon the plate, between the
thumb and the forefinger of the leaft hand, and in manner of a paite of
pinsers, takes with the same hand the plate between the forefinger and the
middle, and beats his breast with the right hand, saying thrice, Lord I am not
worthy that thou should enter under my roof, only speak the word and my
soul shall be healed.

Domine non sum dignus vt intres subiectum meum, sed tantum dic verbum and
sanabitur anima mea.



Then he takes the host, and makes a sign of the cross upon himself with
his body above the plate, and says, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep my
soul unto eternal life. Amen.

Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi, custodiat animam meam in vitam aeternam.
Amen.



Then he takes the two pieces of the host, either with his tongue upon the
plate, or else makes the sign of the cross with the plate. That being done,
he ioynes his hands, and reposeth himself for a little time, afterward he
vncovers the chalice, adores it, if any crumme remain in the plate, puts it
into the cup, and says, What shall I give unto the Lord for all the benefits
which he has done unto me?

Quid retribuam Domine, pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi?



Then he takes the cup with both his hands, and makes therewith a sign of the
cross upon himself, and says, I will receive the cup of salvation and call
upon the name of the Lord. Praising, I will call upon the Lord, and I shall be
safe from mine enemies.

Calicem salutaris accipiam, and nomen Domini invocabo. Laudans invocabo
Dominum, and ab inimicis meis salvus ero.



This verse is taken out of the 116 Psalm, in which David being delivered from
Saul, promises to give thanks unto God, and not to be any longer ungrateful,
but to sacrifice unto him praise, and as it is in the Greek, thusan ainseo.
That which is contained in these verses is nothing to this purpose, for David
having been delivered, says not, I will oblige my self once more unto God,
in making me to be delivered the second time, as the Priest does; for the
Priest having taken the bread, says, what requitance shall I make unto the
Lord for this present? and answers himself, I will moreover take the wine,
and having drank it, by the same reason, he ought once more to say, what
reward shall I give? and answer, I will take the bread, and so never make an
end. For at every receiving he ought to retribute. But it happens unto them
which is written, Let their table be made a snare and a net, and a stumbling
block even for a recompense unto them. Consider without passion, if all this be
to any purpose, or if the Priest have quitted himself of his first receaving,
by the second; then it follows, The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ keep my
soul unto eternal life, Amen.

Sanguis Domini nostri Jesus Christi custodiat animam mea^ in vitam aeternam.
Amen.



Saying this, he takes all the wine with the morsel steeped in it, and then
gives to those which are to communicate if it be a day that the people are to
receive on. For you must note that the people do not ordinarily receive, which
is contrary to the institution and commandment of Christ. And from this error
proceeded, first, the prohibition to touch the bread: secondly, to drink at
all: and lastly, neither to eat or drink above once in the year, and that by
those which are privileged. What impudency is this to maintain that the
primative Church communicated not under both kinds, (...). d^ com (...) sp^^^e.
and that the cup was denied unto the people? Hear the Doctors. I do not
think (says Cassander) that for a thousand years and more in any part of the
Catholic Church this Sacrament was administered any other ways then under both
kinds. ^^to^. 3. lib 4. (...).
And Innocent, The blood is not drunk under the species of bread, neither is
the body eaten under the species of wine. And Hales. A^^x. H t^^s 4 se^^. q 53
m^^th 1. A^^^ l. 4 (...). d^^. q 3. apud Cass.
All Christ is not contained under either kind sacramentally (much less
essentially) but the flesh only under bread, and the blood only under wine.
And Albertus Magnus, The unity of the mystical body of Christ is not
perfectly represented but under a double sign, and therefore through the
virtue of the Sacrament, we ought to have both the one and the other. Amb.
^^^d. Cor cap. 1^.
And Ambrose, He is unworthy of the Lord which celebrateth this mystery
otherwise then the Lord has ordained. And Pope Julius says, Can. cum omne. de
consec. did. 2. and can. compe^^mus. Sermon. 44. p. 79. tom. 1.
that our Lord did severally recommend the taking of the bread and wine. Also
Pope Gelasius in another Canon says, that one may not abstain from receiving
the cup, or divide this mystery without sacrilege. And Leo in his sermons
calls those which do otherwise sacrilegious, and on oynes to excommunicate
them. Why therefore do they use the Church worse at this day, Greg 3. ep. ad
Bonif tom. 2. con^il. p. 441. Con^ co^^t. (...). 13 to^. ^2.
then the leapers in times past were used, for Boniface writes in these words,
If the leapers be faithful Christians, let them be admitted to the
participation of the body and blood of our Lord. But Pope Martin brought in the
quite contrary, as witnesses Kalteysen Bishop of Midrosia against the
Bohemians: Can. Epis. opus. de consec. d^^t. 1. hae^ sup. Can. enim archidiac.
and Can. Episc. 2. de pa^attentis. Can. peracta. de consec. di^t. 2. Alex. v.
1. epist. de mysterio corp. and sang. Council. Constable. less. 1^ tom. 2
and lastly the council of Constance passes for a law, and declares those
heretics, which would communicate under both kinds. Pope Galixtus, and
before him Pope Anacletus, say, the consecration being ended, all ought to
communicate, if they would not be excommunicated: for the Apostles have so
ordained, and the holy Roman Church maintains it. Also Alexander, he which
takes the bread, blesses it, breaks it, and distribute that not to the
assistants, he does not that which Jesus Christ did, neither celebrateth he the
memory of his death. Whereby we may see, that these two kinds, although they
were in the Primative Church, (for so says the Article) yet were they
wittingly reversed by the council, and poor John Husse in the year 1400
amongst other things objected unto him by the council, was burned for
maintaining them, contrary to the public faith and troth given unto him. By
which action the world may know that those which demand reformation, are no
more to trust to the public troth of the Roman Church, then to the faith and
honesty of a common strumpet. Nevertheless one thing we may not omit, that as
the Pope has provided a Vicar for the true body which ascended up into heaven,
Durand rat, divin. oss. l. 4. c. 53. Titleman. cap. 56 and 57. Ale. l. 2. sacr.
cerem eccl. Romans sect. 2. c. 1.
so he has in liew of the transubstantiated body substituted hollowed bread,
which Durand calls the Vicar of the holy communion, and says that the very
kissing of the plate, is equipollent to the communion. There is likewise a
Vicar ordained for the sacramental wine, which is the wine held by the Deacon
or Clearke, and taken by the communicants upon Easter day; but that is only
(says the text) to cleanse the mouth, as if they had eaten a piece of
horse-dunge before they came thither. It follows.

Lord, that which we have taken with the mouth, let us receive with a pure
mind, and of a temporal gift, let it be unto us an everlasting remedy.

Quod ore sumpsimus, Domine, pura mente capiamus, and de munere temporali, fiat
nobis remedium sempiternum.

The error of this verse, consists in that the Priest would take the temporal
gift, which is the bread, with a pure spirit. For the bread is not taken with
the spirit, but with the mouth, and we ought not to confound the sign with the
thing signified, but ought to say, as the mouth takes this bread, so grant
that the spirit may partake of thy body. The second point is decisiue, against
the pretended transubstantiation; for although this prayer be made after the
consecration, and after the reception, yet the Priest confesses that that
which before he adored was but a temporal gift, and craves that it may be
unto him an everlasting remedy: for if it were the body of Christ, what needs
he demand that it might become a remedy? and if the consecration did make it
to be such in substance, should it not be a spiritual remedy? This alone
suffices to reverse the whole Mass, and God (no doubt) has permitted it here
to abide, to convince idolatry by it self. Now that which is above, is said,
taking the first ablution and washing the chalice, which he presents again
to the Deacon, who pours a little wine to wash it and to drink again. And
then he says, Thy body, O Lord, which I have taken, and thy blood which I have
drunk, let it cleave unto my entralls; and grant that there abide in me no
spot of wickedness, whom thy pure and holy Sacrament have refreshed, who live
and raignest with God the Father in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without
end, Amen.

Corpus tuum, domine quod sumpsi, and sanguis quem potaui, adhaereat visceribus
meis, and praesta vt in me non remaneat scelerum macula, quem pura and sancta
refecerunt sacramenta, qui viuis and regnac cum Deo patre in vnitate spiritus
sancti Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.



There is one piece which I have taken out of Jacques d'Hilaire, in his French
Mass, which is inserted in this place; it qualifieth the communion, and is
conceived in these words.

All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

Viderunt omnes fines terrae salutare dei nostri.

He takes in this place, to see, for to communicate, being agreeable to most
Masses, which consist only in seeing, and not in eating, for none but the
Priest alone do eat and drink.

This being done, he washes with wine and water his fingers, and drinks up
the wash, then turning the chalice vpside down upon the plate, he wipes it,
and having folded the corporal, he takes the chalice again, to see if any
thing remain in it; then he kisseth the middle of the Altar, and turning
toward the people, says, The Lord be with you. Ans. And with thy spirit.

Dominus vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.



In the mean time joining his hands, and turning himself toward his
breuiary, he says, Let us pray.

Oremus.



Here he interlaceth certain prayers, as before the Epistle, which being said,
he turns himself to the people about the midst of the Altar, and says, The
Lord be with you. Answ. And with thy spirit.

Dominus vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.



Then he says, Go, the separation is.

Ite missa est.



And the people thank God for that dismission, saying, Thanks be to God.

Deo gratias.



Then follows a prayer differing according to the season, or the Saints,
nails, or other relics for whom the Mass is celebrated, whereof see one
example.

Let the obedience of my service please thee, holy Trinity, and grant that the
sacrifice which I unworthy have offered to the eyes of thy Majesty, may be
acceptable unto thee, and through thy mercy propitiatory for me and for all
those for whom I have offered it, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Placeat tibi sancta Trinitas, obsequium seruitutis meae, and praesta vt
sacrificium quod oculis tuae Maiestatis in dignus obtuli, sit tibi acceptabile,
mihique and omnibus pro quibus illud obtuli, fit te miserante propitiabile, per
Christum dominum nostrum. Amen.

Note that in the Masses for the dead, instead of, ite missa est, is said
requiescant in pace, and in private Masses without turning himself, he
blesses the people. And if moreover the Priest and the Deacon do say, Ite,
they ought to turn toward the people, and saying benedicamus, turn toward
the Altar.

The Almighty and merciful God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, bless you,
Amen.

Benedicat vos omnipotens and misericors Deus, Pater and Filius, and Spiritus
sanctus. Amen.

CHAP. XI. An extract of pieces of Masses to Creatures.
HE which would insert in this place all sorts of Masses, together with their
tunes and songs belonging thereunto, had need to prescribe a breuiary little
less then the Bible, wherein he may see as many several Masses, as Saints
canonized by the Pope, besides those of the nails, the head of the Lance, the
Robe without seame, and a thousand other inventions, which the poor ignorant
people observe not; for thinking to serve God, they serve a piece of wood, a
nail, a thing which never was, concerning which Saint Paul admonishes us,
Col. 2.18.
Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you, by the humblenes of mind, and
worshipping of Angels. Now not some of those Masses only are for Angels and
Archangels, but there is an express book which prescribes the form of such
idolatries, entitled Officium proprium sanctorum. I find in the Missall out
of which I drew that which I put into French, printed at Paris by Didier Maheu,
in the street of Saint Jacques, at the sign of Saint Nicholas, in the year
1546. fol. 7. and of the said office, concerning the benediction of tapers,
that the song of Simeon which speaks of our Savior, and calls him, the
light of the Gentiles, and glory of Israel, is applied to the candles, as if
that Paganism had been approved of by Simeon. Fol. 3. in sacris stigmat.
Francisci.
I find a prayer in the Mass of Saint Francis in these words, Deus qui mira
crucis mysteria, etc. God which have showed diverse ways the marvelous
mysteries of the cross in Saint Francis thy Confessor, grant that we may
always follow the examples of his devotion, and may be fortified with the
assiduous meditation of his cross, etc: and in a secret and a post communion
is said, in whose flesh through an admirable prerogative thou have renewed the
wounds of thine holy passion. What blasphemy is this, as if the passion of
Jesus stood in need to be renewed, and that such an idol had been capable of
such a suffering. And in the Mass of Catherin, Fol. 43. Catharinae virginis
verse.
Membris virgineis olei fluit vndae salubris: that is, from the members of the
virgin, flows a wholesome water of oil. And in the Alleluja Catherine is
called the flower of roses, and comforter of souls, and in the secret, Munera
domine, etc. Sumptis domine salutis. Fol. 36. verse. in exaltatione sanctae
crucis. Dulce lignum, dulces clauos. tit. orationes communes. fol. 22.
pronauigantibus.
he offers up the host in her honor, saying, The gifts O Lord, of this
present sacrifice, which we offer up unto thee in honor of Saint Catherine,
etc: and in the post communion, Having taken O Lord, the mysteries of eternal
salvation, we humbly beseech thee, that as the liquor which flows
continually from the members of Saint Catherin virgin and martyr, does heal
the maladies of the body, even so her prayers may chase from us all iniquities.
In the Mass of the exaltation, in incongruities both Latin and Theological is
said an Allelu-ja, two woods, two nails, bearing a sweet burden, who only
were worthy to sustain the King and Lord of heaven. I could not find any
Mass for the Ass which carried our Savior into Jerusalem, although there be
as much or more reason for that then for the other. fol. 22. is found a
post-communion, where are these words, by the wood of the holy cross, draw us
out of our sins, and through pity draw us out of danger. Would they not
here have a Mediator of wood? The last Mass of this title serves for one
which is damned, Missa pro cuius anima dubitatur.
in which there is this prayer, Omnipotens etc: because we doubt of the manner
of his life, we are comforted through abundance of pity; and if his soul
cannot obtain an absolute pardon, yet at the least, amongst the torments which
perhaps he endures, let him feel a refreshing, through the abundance of thy
mercies. How can one ask with faith that which is forbidden? What strange
people are these, who deal as at a smyths forge, sprinkling the blood of
Christ upon a firebrand of hell. Moreover, not only the wood of the cross, In
Missis voti^^. fol. 28.
but according to their account, even the sign of it, does deliver and
preserve those which make it. In the commemoration of the cross there are
these words, Fol. 37. v.
by the sign of the cross deliver us from our enemies, O Lord God: what is
this but Idolatry? for of a creature to make a God, and to attribute power unto
it, is it any thing else besides idolatry? and in a prose to the Virgin Untie
our bonds, Fol. 71. de natiuit. beatae prosa. All: coeleste, nec non et
perenni prosa. Aue Virgo.
for thou can do all as Queen of the world, and with thy Son ordainest
all Laws: and in another, give succor to us miserable, thou which art the
only hope of mortals, and by thee is made venial in whatsoever we sin, and
in that which follows, thou art the hope of offenders, Mary, the end of
death, the way of life, the triple hierarchy, and the holy Empire do give
unto thee worthy praise: Ib. in exaltatione Sanctae crucis (prosa) Lauds
crucis. Fol. 75. v. (prosa) concinat ecclesia. Fol 79. Aue mundi gloria.
and afterward, save those which trust in thee, etc: sighing to thee, we weep
and invoke thee, that thou would govern our spirits, etc: salvation of
the world and matron, and to the wood, O cross triumphant wood, true salvation
of the world, farewell, etc: In the Mass of Elizabeth, Blot out our sins,
and direct our feet on high unto heaven, and in a prose for the Virgin, The
Lord preserve thee thou salvation of men, etc: Empress of the world, our
mediator, the easing of the world our glory, Fol. 81 (prosa) Aue summo. Fol.
80. (prosa) Mariae praeconi^.
now and forevermore etc. I salute thee, thou which sit above the pole,
Mary, whom it behooves to worship, as being the hope of believers: etc: O happy
woman brought abed, which expiatest our misdeeds command by right of a mother
the redeemer. That is far from saying as she did, I am the servant of the
Lord: or as Jesus, woman what have I to do with thee? And as for the robe
without seame, Missa de de tunica inconsutili Christi. Alleluiae.
which they adore at Argentueil near Paris, see one piece of that service. Let
us sound harmoniously the praises of iubilations to thy only divinity. In the
day of the translation of the robe without seame, we read, It is (condimentum)
the sauce of salvation, and way of health, it gives augmentation of
brightness, and was companion of the cross. And in its prose, O marveilous
vestment, Prosa. plebi pistica.
to whom age gave increase of his infancy, etc. this veil gives voluntary
aid etc. none are to doubt that it is a friend unto our prayers. Which adoring
etc. S. Paul forbad the serving of Angels which are about us, and whom God
imployes for our safety and here they serve Angels, dead men, wood, nails,
iron, apparel, and substitute them in the place of God, and of the merits of
Christ. O God, how long shall the adversary do thee this dishonor? Psalm. 74.
how long shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever?

CHAP. XII. Of the name of the supper of the Mass.
IT is time to come to the matter whereof we treat, in which we will consider
diverse things which are there distinguished, as 1. The differing names and
diverse terms, 2. The place where this mystery is celebrated. 3. Things
belonging to the garnishing of the place. 4. The person of the Priest, his
habits, actions etc: all which pertain to the Mass as accidents inseparable.
We need not repeat that which has been said before, concerning the original
of either word, for this action is called Coena, a supper, because it was
instituted as a common repast by our Savior at supper: it is called likewise,
Sacrament, by reason of the vow which is made by the Communicants; and named
the Eucharist for the thanksgiving which is rendered there unto God. This has
been amply treated of before, where we spoke likewise somewhat of the word
Mass in general; but we shall never be able to give sufficient reasons for
the special appellations of each part thereof, as Entrance, Post-communion,
Lessons, Verse, Responsories, Gospel, offering, consecration, Antheam, Litany,
Liturgy, Corpus, Corporal, Plate, Kyrie eleyson, Allelu-ia, Albe, Cope,
Girdle, Maniple, Stole, Miter, Incense, Absolution, Canticle, Complyne, Matins,
Nons, Vespers, Infraction, Graduels, Offertories, Oblation, Sacrament,
Sacrifice, Altar, Image, Taper, Relic, Bell, Font, Holy water Pixe,
Sprinkling, Chrisme, Collect, Pax, Office, Secret, Prayer, Epistle, Tract,
Sequence, Prose. Note that by the word prose they understand not a loose manner
of speech, but Latin rithmes. Votiue Masses, Masses of grace, of requiem, dry,
great, short, particular, of the nails, of the Robe without seame, high, low,
of the holy Ghost, of Job, of St Anthony, etc.

CHAP. XIII. Of the place where the Mass is celebrated.
Hier. in Psalm. 33.
THe Church consists not in walls, but in the truenes of doctrine, says
Hierome, and where true doctrine is there is the true Church. For the Apostles
assembled themselves but in a chamber, Act. 1. whence it appears that
building is rather belonging to the well being then to the being of the service
of God: so far is it from being necessary to have the place consecrated or
adorned with relics, Conc. Nic. 2. and 7
as the second Nicene Council did ordain in the year 790, or thereabouts.
Secondly, when the ancient Christians builded Churches, they dedicated them to
none save to God only. So says the Emperor Constantine, Whence it is that
the Temples which were dedicated unto him, Eusebius. de laudibus Constant.
were called by the name of the Lord, and on them was imposed the name, not of
men, but of God, which is the cause that they are called (...). The reason is
because that, Temples, Altars, and Sacrifices cannot be erected, save to the
great and true God alone. S. Augustine says We institute no altars, temples,
Priests, or sacrifices to Martyrs, Aug. Psalm. 44. Jd. de civit. Dei l. 22. c.
10. to. 5. Inn. 3. de mist. missae. lib. 3.
because they are not Gods, but have the same God that we have. The Pope
himself says, that Temples, and Alters pertain to Latria, or divine worship,
and if one erect them to Saints, it is idolatry. Nevertheless, see here the
practice of such consecration, brought in in the year 800, it being made a
Sacrament like baptism, to which they compare it, and afterward in the year
1000 having the whole form of it made complete. Epist. Zach. ad Bonif. 2.
council. tom. 2. p. 451.
The Bishop being assured of the revenue of a new built Church, makes a short
prayer, besprinkles the walls without with holy water, with a nosegay of
hysope, profaning the words of the 51 Psalm, Purge me with hysopp and I
shall be clean, and applying to a stone the washing of the blood of Christ,
which is proper to the faithful. In the dedicating of a temple, a Mass
likewise is to be said, whose entrance is Terribilis est locus iste.
Then he beats the door with his staff, saying, at tollite portas thrice and
being entered in, he painteth the Greek and Latin Alphabet upon the walls,
exercises the salt, wine, water, ashes, makes thereof a mixture, into which he
dippeth his thumb, and after certain ends of prayers pronounced by him, he
says these words, This Temple be sanctified in the name of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, in the honor of God, and of the glorious Virgin Mary, and of
all the Saints, and in memory of such a Saint. See how of an indifferent place
to pray in, they make thereof a place essential: of a place dedicated to God
alone, a place dedicated to a creature, of a simple destination, a sacramental
consecration.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the garnishing of their Churches.
IN these Temples appear, first the lighted tapers, which are not necessary in
the day time. Wherefore Constantine in Eusebius says, Eusebius. ad sanct. coetum.
Hieron. contra Vigil. c. 5.
that the Christians have neither incense nor burning. And Hierome, We light no
taper in the open day, as thou calumniatest us, but we employ the light to
temper the darkness, that we may watch until break of day. Alas what would
this good pastor have said if he had seen the benedictions of the tapers in
the day of the purification, where they sing the song of Simeon, and profane
that which is said of our Lord Jesus, That he is the light of the Gentiles,
applying it to a corruptible and a needless taper. See the prayers which they
said in the Mass of the purification, and benedictione cereorum. Of Altars we
spoke before: as for Images, they are expressly forbidden to be made, which is
the cause that the Church of Rome has razed out the second commandment which
condemns them, which was done by the Council of Auspurg in the year 1548.
And Damascene, though otherwise a favorer of Images, says, That it is a great
folly and impiety to paint the divinity. Orthod. fid. l. 4. c. 17. Tertul. l.
de idol.
And Tertullian, The consecration of images is idolatry. Now what may we guess
he would have said, if he had seen their consecration, clothing, adoration,
presenting of Candles: also of arms, and legs of wax unto them? But see the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, Thom. 3. part. q. 83. art. 3.
The things without life which are consecrated, do get a certain spiritual
virtue, by which they are made proper to the service of God, to the end that
from them men may receive some devotion. Bell. de imag. c. 21
And Bellarmine would have that the Images of Christ and of the Saints should
be worshipped, not only by accident, or improperly, but also of themselves and
properly, etc. So likewise the bell sounding has this effect, Durand. ration.
lib. 1. c. 1.
says Durand, that by the sound thereof, the faithful are invited to the
eternal price, the devotion of faith increases in them, the fruits, the
souls and the bodies of believers are saved, the enemies weapons are kept off,
the thunderclaps, etc. And as for the Agnus Dei composed of chrisme and wax,
Ceremon. del egli. de Romans tit. 7. Can. placuit. and can. ficut. de con sec.
did. 1. Calvin. de reliq.
consecrated with balm, it draws the lightning from above, and dissolueth
all sin. As for relics, as Joseph's breeches, the nails, the wood of the
cross, the robe without seame, the lantern of Judas at S. Denis, the sword
and buckler where with the Archangell S. Michaell fought with the devil at
Toures, a piece of the dead body of some saint canonized by the Pope (who would
have them to be near the altars) processions, adorations, kissings, touchings,
and such like customs do well discover the abuses which are committed about
the^. Holy water takes its beginning from the Paga^s, Just. in Apolog.
Hippocr. de morbo sacro. Proclus de sacrif. and magia. Can. Aquam sale de
consec. did. 2. Theod. lib. 3. c. 15. and 16.
who sprinkled themselves with water as they entered into the Church, and that
for the purging of their sins. For men think that sulpher purges by reason of
the strong smell, and salted water, by reason of the part of fire contained in
it: and of this powdered virtue the Pope makes great account, joining unto it
other superstitions. Incense also is come from the Gentiles ( thure Deum placa,
appease God with frankincense) and it was used by Julian the Apostata to
despite the Christians. Let us therefore conclude that all these ceremonies
were taken from Paga^s and Jews, and are not to be practiced by the Christians.
Jn cap. 13. ep. ad Hebr.
The reason is given by Nicholas de Lyra, Those which observe the Law with the
Gospel, have no part of the effect of the passion of Chirst, Gal. 5.
according to that which is said to the Galathians, if you be circumcised,
Christ will profit you nothing. Thus the Christians contenting not themselves
with the simplicity of the Gospel, applied themselves to the Jews and Pagans,
in hope to co^vert the^, whereas they were in the mean time perverted, according
to the threatening pronounced against such temporisers, Es. 29.13.
Because their fear toward me is taught by the precept of me^, the wisdom of
their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be
hidden. Now that the Christians have taken from Pagans these ceremonies, Bar.
Annal. tom 1. ann. Christ. 44 Sect. 88.
Cardinal Baronius confesses, saying, Thou have aniversary vigils in Suetonius
in the life of Vespasia^, Chapter 7. Lustral waters and sprinkling of the
sepulchers in Iuvenal, Sat. 6 Lights in the said Sepulchers in Suetonius his
Octavius, Ch 98. lamps lighted on saturday in Seneca ep. 96. The distribution
of tapers amongst the people, in Macrobius his Saturnals, etc. Whence it
follows, that all the prayers, co^secrations, and benedictions borrowed from
superstition, are but so many sins and prophanations of the word of God: For
our prayers ought to be founded upon the promise that we shall be heard. Now we
have no evangelical text which tells us that God will give virtue to a piece of
wood to be a wholesome remedy to mankind, a redemption of souls, an
advanceme^t to good works; whereas the Priest prays in making of a new
cross, that God would be pleased to give it that virtue. For he shows that
it is that which he aymeth at, saying, Lib. Pontif. de benedictione novae
crucis. p. 172 Romans 10.
Vouchsafe to bless this wood of the cross. The same prayer makes he for the
tapers, water, incense, bells, agnus Dei etc. Now faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God, and not by the fantasy of me^. Wherefore God says
to the inve^ters of such sacrifices, 1. King. 15. Mich. 3. Es. 66.
Who has required this at your hands? obedience is better then sacrifice, and
the inventer of worship shall not be heard. And he which kills a lamb
(otherwise then is commanded) is as if he sacrificed a dog. Be you the
sheep of the true shepherd, hear his voice, and not a strangers. Seeing that
he has declared that he is honored in vain by the service founded upon the
commandment of men. Mat. 15.
And seeing that he is the Lord, we ought to worship him as he himself has
commanded, and not otherwise.

CHAP. XV. Of the Priest and his qualities.
Our Savior sending abroad his Disciples which had the gift of tongues,
enjoined the^ to preach the Gospel, and to publish it to all nations, and
commanded them to baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
Now the Bishop which ordaines Priests, greaseth the end of their fingers, and
says these words only. Receive the power to celebrate Masses, Jn vet. agenda
circa ann. 1000
and to offer up sacrifice for the living and for the dead. There is nothing
spoken here concerning baptising or preaching, no more the^ in the Canon
Generaliter 16. q. 1. where is related another fashion of making Priests, to
wit, That the hands be consecrated, to the end that whatsoever they co^secrat
may be holy, and that whatsoever they bless, may be blessed. There are many
reasons which verify that no Priest has a lawful calling, in regard of him
which receaueth the power of committing symonie etc. And although it be written
that Marriage is honorable amongst al, that a Bishop ought to be the husband of
one wife, Heb. 13.4. 1. Tim. 3.2. 1 Timothy 4. Tertul. exhor. ad castitatem. c. 8.
Eusebius. l. 1. c. 23.
that it is the doctrine of devils to forbid to marry. That it was permitted
to the Apostles to marry, and to lead about their wives with them, and that
Denis Bishop of Corinth said to Pinitus, that this weighty yoke of widowhood
was not imposed upon the Saints: And Chrysostom, that all the Prophets were
married: And S. Hierom, Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 56. in f. Hierom. lib. 1. ex
Iovinian.
We read of none but the Pagan Priests which abstained from marriage, esteeming
it vnagreeable with the Priesthood, such as were the Priests of Cybel, and the
Athenian Hierophants. Nevertheles by the doctrine of the Roman Church marriage
makes one incapable to say Mass, but not concubinage, though it be in facie
Ecclesiae.

Moreover he ought to be shaven, Lev. 19. Ezech. 44. Hier. in. Ezech. c. 44.
Clem. Alex. in poed. l. 3. c. 11.
contrary to the express word of not shauing their heads, or marring the
corners of the beard. For Hier. says, We ought not to have our heads shaven,
as the Priests of the Goddess Isis and Serapis: and Clement Alexandrinus says
the same. The Subdeacon in this service marches before, to represe^t (as they
say) the law, the Deaco^ after him figuring the Gospel, bearing a stole which
crosses the loins, signifying the force and co^tinency which resideth there,
and he ought to turn himself toward the north, Titleman and Biel.
and make a sign of the cross toward that perstiferous quarter to the end
that he may chase thence the devils. Also he carries a pillow upon his stomach
to represent an humble heart.

As for the habits of the Priests, besides the ordinary, there be some which
are taken from the customs of the Jews and Pagans, Inn. 3. lib. 4. de
sacraltaris.
and therefore Innocent the third maintains that the ceremonies of the law are
not wholly abolished, because the Church of Rome maintains the oil of unction,
incense, tithes, and first fruits, candles, habits, high Priests and Levits.
Join to this the saying of Baronius above quoted, and you shall see that the
yoke of the Gospel which ought to be lightened according to the saying of our
Savior, is agrauated with Jewish ceremonies and Paganish superstitions: which
is far from the opinion of Celestine writing to the Bishops of France, Valas.
l. de reb. Eccles. c. 24. Ep. 2. de Episc. Gal. c. 1.
and speaking against certain Priests which not contenting themselves with the
surplice used in the times of the Primitive Fathers, would have their reins
also to be girt, and themselves be covered with a mantle whilst they served in
the Church, Hier. l. 1. cont. Pelag. council. 4. Carthag. can. 41
Wherefore (says he) have they not lamps and staves in their hands (mocking
them, and afterward adds) we ought to be distinguished from the people and
from others, by learning, not by robes: by conversation, not by the habit: by
the purity of mind, not by adorning: for if we begin to study novelties,
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4.11. c 17. Lev. 1. dec. 1.
we shall defile that order which was left unto us by our Fathers, and shall
give place to superfluous superstitions. Not misliking or denying hereby
vestments or habits in the Church, if both few and seemly, serving both for a
decorum and a distinction, but finding fault with those professedly Aaronicall
and Leviticall vestments, Duran. l. 3. c. 1.
then begun (it seems) but since multiplied beyond the proportion of types in
the Jewish Priesthood. For now they ordain, Six vestments for all Priests, in
signification (as they say) that in six days God created heaven and earth,
D^^an. vation. (...). l. 3. c. 1.
and nine more beyond Priests for Bishops, in token that they are spiritual,
like the nine orders of Angels, in all fifteen, betokning the degrees of
virtues But as hardly shall they prove these members of fifteen vestments, and
their mystical senses to be truly ancient, as their so many signified virtues
to have been common to all that use them. Yet have they not been beholding
only to the Levits for all their fashions, but something they have fetched from
Gentiles. For the Pagan sacrificer bore a painted coat, and above it a pectoral
of brass, afterward of gold or of silver, moreover he had a veil to cover
his head, called Amictus, 700 years before the coming of the Lord. Now of the
Jews are borrowed the Ephod, the Girdle, the Maniple, the tiara Mitra, to
which Biel and Titleman give strange significations, and such as those which
invented them never imagined. The Girdle signifies the rod, the stole the
power the Maniple the bond of love. As for the language, it is a stranger to
the people being Latin, Greek and Hebrew, following that which is writtten,
that such tongues are signs unto unbelievers.

CHAP. XVI. The actions of the Priest in the Mass.
Ovid. 4. fast. Plut. in Numa. Ap^d. l. 11. de as^no. Alex. ab A^. 4. c 17. 2.
Cor. 14.
FIrst he must turn himself toward the East, according to the Paganish
custom, and contrary to the Jews, then he ought to join his elbowes to both
his sides, lift up his hands, so that they exceed not his shoulders following
the cautell, stet erectus. This is taken from the Paganish superstition, which
prescribed unto the sacrificer not to eleuate his hand any higher then his
mouth, Plin. lib. 28. Blond. lib. 1. Romans triumph. Macrob. in Saturn. Caut.
stat. Caut. tres digitos.
and in all these turnings and friskes is put great holiness, as diverse
authors do witness, which call them Vertigines in sacris. For the Priest is
bound to join his fingers with which he makes the signs, and not to separate
them, but only in handling the host, and if he takes the plate, to make his
middle finger serve him instead of a pair of pinsers. Likewise he continually
almost turns his backside to the people, makes in all 46 signs of the cross
at several times, every one odd in number, and in a diverse manner, sometimes
with the hand, then with the chalice, host and plate, upon himself, the
bread, the consecrated host, the chalice. Makes 9 adorations of the bread and
wine, kisseth the Altar (which is answerable to an adoration) nine times,
represents diverse personages, the Jews, the Gentiles, the Law and the
Gospel, Christ living, dead, and in the sepulcher, hidden and manifested, the
thief, the Publican, Judas; and if one may believe Titleman, the plate
represents the divinity of Christ. Moreover one ought to consider the virtue
of the signs of the cross, which are essential in this mystery; And if the
host do fall into the chalice before the time, Caut. si hostia.
the Priest ought not to pull it out again, but to proceed in signs, words and
gestures, as if he had it in his hands. by which account he fames to break,
show, eleuate, and makes his fingers to be adored, and the people to say, aue
salus, aue vita. Caut. intellectu^.
also it is said above, per auxilium sanctae crucis, and in the Mass of the
exaltation of the cross, that he which shall make the sign of the cross,
shall not loose his children, and shall feel no sin, etc: Now not only in
signs, but also in words and intentions are hidden great secrets, so says the
cautell, Summa Angel. in voce Missa.
great things are hidden in signs, greater in words, but the greatest of all
in the intention. So that the Mass profits them only to whom the Priest
applies it, in so much that mere Grammatical declining by the help of
artificial memory, auailes for six several sorts of people, the Nominative
for the Priest, the Genitive for the Parents, the Dative for the founders, the
Accusative for his enemies, and so in others, which is called in the divinity
of the Mass opus operantis, the work of the worker. Now if the signs, words
and intention be necessary in this co^fection, the respiration of the Priest is
not of less importance, who ought not to do it during the bringing forth of
five words, hoc est enim corpus meum; nor make any pauses until the end, for
the cautell says, nulla ratione potest valere si dicatur, Caut. 3.
Hoc, est, enim, corpus, meum: but he ought to pronounce it in one breath.
Moreover, al comes to nothing if the matter of the Mass be not panis
triticeus, Caut. 2. Can. in Sacram. can. sic ins m^ti fica ^do. gl^n verb.
calex de consec. did. 2.
wheaten bread, if there be not greater quantity of wine then of water, if the
bread be tempered with any other liquor then water, and if the wine be dead or
sour; Alas, where consists the efficacy of this Sacrament but in words and
signs only? in the intention and respiration of the Priest? the poor
Christian lies at the mercy of the Priest, as the Lamb in the Wolfes mouth.
Lo here the accomplishment of the mystery of iniquity.

CHAP. XVII. Other circumstances of the Mass.
WE have showed how the Mass depends not only upon the work, but also
upon the worker, which is the Priest: and how the first authors of
transubstantiation were fowlly deceived, in saying that a carnal and corporal
eating is necessary, and that no Christian-like preparation is necessary, but
rather a memento of the Priest, Now we must know, that this service which in
the time of Justinian the Emperor: ^ou. 123. Hono^ris in genima animae. l. 1.
c. ^
) who made a decree concerning it,) was pronounced with a loud voice, Pope
Vigilius would have to be said with a low: and that under pretense of a
certain story, which relates how some shepherds having learned the canon,
did transubstantiate their bread into flesh. The numbers of prayers, signs,
turns, and repetitions of the same words, Mart. Polonus in chron. Etel. Math
6. v. 7. Bail. ^ect. 25.
do proceed from the like superstitions, and are contrary to the express word
of God, which forbids vain repetitions, such as the heathen use:
nevertheless they are an article of faith in the Jesuits Catechism, Rosmus
lib. 2.
imitating the Pagans which adored the goddess of numbers called Numeria, and
consecrated to the infernal gods the eauen numbers, and to the celestial the
odd, numero deus impare gaudet. Now as this fabric made much ado before it
could be brought to its perfection, so likewise has there bin no small care to
keep it from inconveniences, whereof I purpose to set down some in particular;
as first, if a Fly or Spider do chance to fall into the chalice before the
consecration, Cant. Item fi musca.
the Priest must sup it up, and if it go against his stomach to do so, then
he must finely take it out, and after he has diverse times washed it, he must
burn it, and then lay it up for a Relic. Also, Cant. item si quis.
if one being sick or otherwise through infirmity should vomit up the host,
the Priest ought to swallow down that which is cast up, and if not, then to
burn it, and lay it up for a Relic. and Alexander de Hales says these
horrible words, If a Dog or a Hog should eat the consecrated host entire,
Alex part. 4. q. 45. n. 1. Part. 3. sum. de defect. Missae.
I see no reason why the body of our Lord should not all together pass within
the belly of that Dog or Hog. Anthony, Archbishop of Florence, having confirmed
these abominable opinions, says, that if he could find any man which would
swallow down such kind of vomited morsels, he should be praise worthy,
provided that he were fasting, and says, So Hugh of Cluny commended Goderan,
who swallowed down the pieces of the host, which a leaper had vomited up with
a villainous spattering, saying that the gridiron of Saint Laurence was more
tolerable.

Let us consider the effects of this transubstantiation, how many absurdities,
impieties, and abominations have issued from it, the fables of Ovids
Metamorphosis never came near it: Arania of a woman became an unreasonable
creature; Arachne. Ovid. 6. Metam.
and the companions of Ulysses were transformed into hogs; but this invention
deifyes both spiders, dogs and swine, and turns their cinders into Relics.
And if this corporal tou hing without any other disposing, does sanctify, why
should we deny it to Judas his kiss? or to the hangman which bound, whipped,
and nayl'd the Lord? they were as capable of this apotheosis as the Nails and
head of the Lance, unless the want of sense and reason made the other the
more capable of the Popes canonizing. But we pass farther.

CHAP. XVIII. The Authors of the Supper, and authors of the Mass.
WE are taught by the Evangelists that our Lord Jesus was Author of the Supper,
Math. 26. Marc. 14. Luke 22.
and prescribed the form and matter thereof, and declared to his Disciples the
end for which he established this Sacrament. Which S. Paul witnesses to have
bin practiced in the same manner, 1. Cor. 11.
I have received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you; and indeed,
he related the words of the Evangelists, but as for the composition of the
Mass, it was not the work of one man only, nor of one time. For besides that
which we said above, we find that in the year 121. the first abuse was
committed by Xistus or Alexander, who instituted the mingling of water with
wine. Platin. and Sabellic. etc.
Higinus in the year 141, invented the feasts of dedication and consecration,
with the exorcisme of salt. Damasus in the year 377, added the Co^fiteor.
Innocent in the year 408. contributed to it the kissing of the Plate.
Symmachus in the year 508. Gloria in excelsis. Agapet in the year 535, the
Procession. Greyory interlarded the Latin, Greek and Hebrew, in the year
583. Sergius the Agnus Dei to be thrice sung. Flauian and Diodore instituted
the antiphone^. Telesphorus the Collects, Leo and Gelasius the Graduels,
Gregory the Tracts, Gothier the Sequences. And as for the main body of the
Canon, it was made about the year 800, by Alexander, Gelasius, Cyrill, Leo, and
Pelagius, as Platina a Secretary to the Popes does affirm, and about that time
the incense and offertory was ordained by Leo the 3. The soul of the Mass
which is transubstantiation, was brought upon the Stage in the year 1062, in
the time of Pope Nicholas, priuileged by Hildebrand, confirmed by Honorius, who
added the adoration of the host, in the year 1226, whilst Sergius inverted
the steeping of a piece of the bread in the wine, and the breaking of it into 3
pieces. and that nothing might be wanting, in the year 1264, Urban, crowned
this work with a Procession of the host, and a Corpus Christi day. Now in
this place consider but the foolery of these men, which boast that Saint James
sang Mass: considering that this Gregorian service was for the most part
brought in by the violence of the Popes, who were aided in promoting of these
crotchets by Charlemaine and other Kings and Emperors which ruled in France,
Germany and Italy, the one usurping the temporal sword, the other the
spiritual, under this title, Do, vt des, facio, vt facias.

FINIS.

