Luthers Predecessors: OR AN ANSWER TO THE QVESTION OF THE PAPISTS:

Where was your Church before Luther?



LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kingston for George Winder, and are to be sold at
his shop in Saint Dunstons Churchyard in Fleet Street. 1624.

Luthers Predecessors: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE QVESTION OF THE PAPISTS: Where
was your Church before Luther?
AMongst all those Creatures that yield an unpleasant sound, none are so
clamorous and obstreperous, as Frogs, and Locusts; these by land, the other by
water, saluting each passenger with an unwelcome note: the just picture and
resemblance of popish Priests, and Jesuits, which certainly are the Frogs
which S. John saw to come forth of the mouth of the Beast, and the false
prophet; whose croaking and unwelcome noise does nor a little trouble each
Christian passenger: Amongst other harsh notes of theirs, this question has
his place: for what music can there be in it? Where was your Church before
Luther? To what end is this question moved, except it be to trouble men? for,
what if we could not prove, that our English Church was before Luther? must
it needs follow, that the doctrine we hold is untrue? or shall the doctrine of
the Church of Rome be ever the truer, because of only antiquity? what if
Arrius or Nestorius could have deduced the Patrons of their opinions from Adam,
should they for that have been orthodoxall? No certainly: and why not? Because
the Church must be proved and allowed by the doctrine, and not the doctrine
authorized by the Church, which the Papists (a people wise in their generation)
well knowing, have ouerturned the course of nature, and will have the Scripture
and all doctrine to hang upon the determination of the Church: and upon this
ground it is, that they proceed to such questions as these, hoping that if
they have once amazed any one with the name of the Church, and shall have
driven him from title and interest to the Church before Luthers time, they
shall easily make him call in question the whole frame of doctrine of the
reformed Churches.

Unto this question answers have been made, arguments alleged to prove that
the doctrine of the Protestant Religion has had his being in the world long
before the days of Luther: That argument of the worthy Doctor Featly cannot by
any Jesuit be answered, who concludes, that the doctrine of the reformed
Churches must needs have Professors in all ages, because it is eternal: for
eternity must needs have a perpetual duration without interruption.

The argument of Induction* is that which better pleases the Jesuit, but by
no means will he suffer our enumeration to begin with Christ and his
Apostles; for then what shifts, what cauils and tergiuisations they have, may
easily appear by the proceedings of the late conference betwixt D. White, and
D. Featly, against Fisher, and Sweet: Wherefore, to answer a fool, according
to his folly, I have endeavored to draw the argument of Induction a posteriore,
beginning with the ages next before Luther; the which is not so hard a task as
commonly is imagined: But first, we must agree upon the terms of this
question, Where was your Church, etc? where we must first know what is meant
by your, and what by Church.

For, if by your, they mean the Church of our Nation, that is, Where was your
English reformed Church? Then are we to answer out of our own Chronicles, and
so shall we be able to name the fewer in all ages, and in some ages perhaps
none; not that there were none, but that the Evidences are lost: But I suppose
they do not by the terms, your Church, understand a National or Provincial
Church, because then must they prove, that the Church of the New Testament is
tied to a place: so that where it once has been planted, there it should
continue, which is contrary to all experience: besides, had they meant so, they
would have rather named Tyndall, or some other Englishman, then Luther a
German. By your Church, they mean then those men in what Country soever, which
confessed and maintained the same doctrine.

Then, for the meaning of the word Church, we demand whether they mean a
visible constituted Church, which might have been known by the distinction
and succession of Bishops, Elders, Deacons, etc. or whether they mean
generally any company of men, holding and professing those truths and doctrines
which we maintain?

For, if they will tie us to the former, I say still, the task is unequal,
because the Records are wanting, but especially, because they cannot prove
that the Church must always be in such manner visible: for in Elias time
there were 7000. unknown to him, much more to Ahab. In the time of Christ's
passion some of the Papists say, that the Church rested only in Marie; and all
do usually compare the Church to the Moon, which is always lasting, but not
always in the Full.

But, if they meant the latter, namely, a company of men professing the same
faith which we do; then we further propound to them two questions.

The first is, Whether the persecuting of any defacto, do hinder the
justifying of them deiure, which they must needs deny, except they will beg
the question: and then, though we find such, and such, in former ages to have
been condemned, yet if deiure, they ought not, and that we can justify their
Tenants, we shall proceed more easily in challenging them for ours. But if they
would have us to name men uncondemned, living in peace, free from persecution,
they must then prove, that persecution does take away the privilege of the
Church; that those men shall not be of the Church, because persecuted: which if
they go about, they must wipe out the whole infancy of the Church for the
first 300. years; but they shall never be able to prove it: for the woman in
Revel. 12. was constrained to fly into the wilderness for fear of the Dragon.

The second is, What those doctrines are, which we must prove, those whom we
seek for to have held: for, if they mean the fundamental points of Religion,
contained in the Creed for matters of faith, in the Decalogue for matter of
practice, and in the Lords Prayer for matter of prayer, they themselves shall
be our spokesmen, for they and we hold these in common; but if they mean
those points of doctrine wherein we dissent from the present Church of Rome
(which they must do if they understand themselves in the question) then we
further desire to know whether they will not allow us to challenge those for
ours, who held the most, and mainest, for which they suffered as well as we;
although (perhaps) in some other points they dissented from us in our general
Tenants: for, if they will allow us only such, who both in doctrine and
discipline did in all points agree, they are too narrow for any dispute;
besides, they must prove that there has been always such an unity of words
and doctrine, that in no point the professors have or may dissent, and yet
remain members of the Church: a task that will never fadge well, especially
with them in their mutinous multitude and rabble of religious orders; yea, let
them then call to mind how weakly Harding has defended his answer of Bishop
Jewels challenge; or, let them answer Perkins Problem, and prove where their
Church was before the Trent Council; for it will as much trouble them to name a
company of men in all points professing the Trent faith, as us, to find a
company of men professing in all points the doctrine of the reformed religion:
But if they give us liberty to make challenge to them, who in the most and
greatest points have agreed with us (which is but reasonable) then in the next
place we desire to grow to a point, and agree upon the maine points of
difference betwixt us and them: All which in general do concern either the
offices of Christ, or the fruits of his office, the which by their doctrine
are overthrown.

For first, the kingly office of Christ is overthrown by the supremacy of the
Pope, which draws with it the pride of the Clergy, and exaltation of them
above the temporal power.

Secondly, the Prophetical office is overthrown by their silencing the
Scripture, and by giving such liberty to the Church, yea, and to the Pope, to
frame articles of faith.

Thirdly, the Priestly office is overthrown in the work of satisfaction, by
Merits, Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. In the work of Application, by their
abuses thrust into the Sacraments, especially Transubstantiation, real
Presence, Exorcismes, etc. and by their false sacraments, which were never
appointed by Christ, as means of application. In the work of Intercession, by
Angels, Saints, Images, whom they have made their mediators of intercession.

Lastly, the fruits of Christ's office, redounding to us by the mediation of
Christ, is our Justification before God, which doctrine they have labored to
overthrow.

Now to the point, this our task we are to show forth the names of such men,
who have consented with us in the opposition of the Supremacy, exemption of the
Clergy from Civil jurisdiction, in the authority of the Scriptures, and in the
communicating of them to the people, in condemning Merits, Indulgences,
Purgatory, Transubstantiation, real presence, intercession of Saints, and
Angels, Image worship, Pilgrimage; in the doctrine of our free justification by
faith, and such other points, which are controuerted betwixt us, and the Church
of Rome. And this we will do first in the instance of our own* Countrymen,
and then proceed to others.

Know all men therefore by these presents, that about the year of Grace 1370.
in the time of Edward the third, King of England, at what time all the world
was in most desperate and vile estate, and that lamentable ignorance and
darkness of Gods truth, had ouer-shaddowed the Church most; John Wickliffe,
who almost 200. years before Luther, by the especial providence of God, was
raised up here in England, to detect more fully and amply, the poison of the
Popes doctrine, and to purge Religion from those dregs and filthiness, with
which it was defiled; a Professor of Divinity was he in Oxford, a man of note
in his time, and of famous memory in the ages following: For after he had
begun to publish some conclusions touching the Doctrine of the Sacrament, and
other abuses of the Church, (which boil and sore could not be touched, without
the great pain and grief of the world) he was much infested with the Monks
and Friars, who like Hornets, did assail the good man on every side: After
them, the Priests took the matter in hand, and Simon Sudbery, Archbishop,
deprived him of his Benefice in Oxford; yet by the friendly and favorable
assistance of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and Henry Percy, Earl Marshal,
(being also befrie^ded of the King, who had heretofore made use of him in an
Embassage) he bore out the malice of the Friars, and of the Archbishop, all the
days of Edward the third, and of Pope Urban; who being busied in suppressing
his adversary, Clement the seventh, could not spare any time to deal with
Wickliffe: and so it came to pass, by Gods providence, that the truth began to
take some place and root in men's hearts.

Afterward in the beginning of Richard the 2. and of Gregory the eleventh, his
adversaries espied their time, and incensed the Pope against him, who sends
forth his Bull to the University of Oxford, and an Epistle to the King, with
diverse Letters to the Bishops, dated all 11. kal. of June, in the seventh year
of his Pontificality 1378. By which it appears, that Wicklife was a man of
note, and that these things were not done in a corner, but that his preaching
had taken effect: So that the Bishops had need of the Popes own help to
suppress him and his abettors; the which although they attempted, yet could
they not bring to pass: his commendation testified by the University is this:
That he behaved himself as a stout Champion of the Faith, neither was he
convict of any heresy: and God forbid (says the Testimonial) that our
Prelates should have condemned a man of such honesty, of heresy.

His books were many, and spread abroad, not only throughout England, but also
by occasion of Queen Anne, wife to Richard the second, sister to Wenceslaus
King of Bohemia, carried into Bohemia, whence John Husse learned the beginnings
of his knowledge. Thus was this man a most worthy instrument in the Church of
God, like a bright Star shining far and near.

Now for his conclusions which are recorded for his; they are many, and
gathered by his adversaries, and therefore if in all points they sound not so
well as we could desire, yet certainly we may believe that they were not so
bad as some of them are delivered.

We find that in a Conuention at London 1382. May 17. they proceeded to the
condemnation of his articles, some as heretical, some as erroneous: The which
also were afterward presented to the Council of Constance, with diverse others
to the number of 45. in all, and by the same Council condemned; the which for
brevity sake I have collected unto their several heads.

1. Touching the supremacy, he held that it is not necessary to salvation, to
believe that the Church of Rome is supreme head of all Churches: That the
Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan; Neither is the Pope immediately the
Vicar of Christ, nor his Apostles, and that the Excommunication of the Pope and
his Prelates is not to be feared, because it is the censure of Antichrist.

2. Concerning religious orders (which are the tail of Antichrist) he taught,
That those holy men, as Francis, Dominick, Benedict, etc* which have instituted
private religions whatsoever they be, in so doing, have grievously offended;
And such who do found Monasteries, do offend and sin; so all such who enter
into such religions, are thereby unable to keep the commandments of God, as
also to attain to the Kingdom of heaven, except they return from the same:
yea, that religious men being in their private religion, are not of the
Christian Religion, but are members of the Devil.

3. Concerning the Authority of the Church, his doctrine was, that whatsoever
the Pope and his Cardinals can deduce clearly out of the Scriptures, that only
is to be believed, or to be done at their admonition; and that whatsoever
else they command, is to be condemned as heretical; As for the decretals of
the Pope, they are Apocrypha, and seduce men from the faith of Christ; and the
Clergy that study them, are fools.

4. As touching preaching and hearing the Word, which is the execution of
Christ's Prophetical Office, he taught; That it is lawful for any man either
Priest or Deacon, to preach the Word of God, without the authority of the
Apostolic Sea, or any other of his Catholics; and that all such, who do
leave preaching or hearing the Word, for fear of their excommunication, they
are already excommunicated, and in the Day of judgment, shall be counted
traitors against God.

5. He opposed also the selling of Prayers, Pardons, Indulgences, and such
Popish trash, by which the satisfaction of Christ is weakened; affirming, that
it was but a folly to believe the Popes Pardons. Item, that all such, as be
hired for temporal living to pray for other, do offend and sin in Simony.

6. In the doctrine of the Sacraments, which are the instruments of Christ, to
apply to us the work of his satisfaction, he labors much to reform the
abuses.

1. In Baptism, he found fault with their doctrine of necessity; teaching,
that they which do affirm, that the infants of the faithful departing
without the Sacrament of Baptism, are not saved, are presumptuous and fools
in so affirming.

2. In the Supper of the Lord, he opposed the real presence, and
transubstantiation, teaching, that Christ is not really in the Sacrament of the
Altar, in his proper and corporal person, but only figuratively; That without
all doubt it is a figurative speech to say, This is my body. Item, that the
substance of material bread and wine, even bread in his own substance, does
remain in the Sacrament of the Altar, and cease not to be bread still. That
the Accidents do not remain without the Subject in the same Sacrament, after
the consecration. So also he taught; That it is not found, or established by
the Gospel, that Christ did ordain Mass.

3. As for the other five, which we count bastard-sacraments, some he did doubt
of, as, Extreme Unction: for this is one article, if corporal unction, or
anneyling, were a Sacrament as it is feigned to be, Christ and his Apostles
would not have left the ordinance thereof untouched. So also for Shrift: if a
man be duly and truly contrite and penitent, all outward confession is
superfluous and unprofitable.

Other Sacraments he complained of, as being abused; hallowing of Churches,
(says he) confirmation of children, and the Sacrament of Orders, be reserved
to the Pope and Bishops only, for the respect of temporal lucre. So also
concerning Matrimony, he held, that the causes of diuorcement, of
consanguinity, or affinity, be not founded in the Scripture, but are only the
ordinances of men, and humane inventions.

7. Lastly, concerning the power of the Keys, and the Churches censures, his
positions are; That no Prelate ought to excommunicate any man, except he know
him first to be excommunicate of God: and that he that does excommunicate any
other man, is thereby himself either an heretic, or excommunicate. Item,
that a Prelate excommunicating any man of the Clergy, which has appealed to
the King, or to the Council, is thereby himself a traitor to the King and
Realm.

This in effect is the sum of his doctrine, wherein howsoever there may be,
some few small slips, or harsh phrases, yet no pernicious errors, much less,
damnable heresy; but for the substance, it is sound and good, and agreeable to
the Canon of the World. Wherefore, howsoever the Synod of London, and the
Council of Constance, have agreed to condemn these Articles and his Books,
yea, and his bones also to the fire (41. years after his death) yet since de
iure they ought not so to have done, and that we are able to justify his
doctrine, we are bold to challe^ge him as a fit instance to answer the question
proposed; and do conclude, that our Church had a being, and the doctrine of
the reformed Churches had professors, long before the days of Luther.

But go to, let us go on, and see what other can be named; one Swallow makes
no Summer, nor one professor a Church. True: and therefore except we can draw
down the profession of this doctrine successively from Wickcliffe, to the
days of Luther, let us lose all this labor: wherefore we are to know, that
both together with Wickcliffe, and after him, arose a multitude in the Church
of England, maintaining the same doctrine, and spreading it abroad among the
people, laboring with might and maine to defend it. Such were Lau. Redman,
Master of Arts, Dau. Sawtree, Divine, John Aschwarby, Vicar of S. Mary's Church
in Oxford, William Jones, an excellent young man well learned, Th. Brightwell,
Will. Haulam a Ciuilian, Ralph Grenhurst, Io. Scut, Ph. Norrice, who being
excommunicate by Pope Eugenius the fourth, appealed to a general Council;
Peter Pain, Lord Cobham, with diverse others, whose names are mentioned in the
Kings writ, sent to the Sheriff of Northampton, given at the Manor of Langly,
March 8. in the 12. of Richard the second: so also, for confirmation of their
multitudes, the words of the Statute made Anno 5. of Richard 2.

About this time W. Courtny Archbishop, being in his Visitation at Leicester,
conuented diverse before him, as Dexter, Tailor, Wagstaffe, Scriuener, Smith,
Henry, Parchmeanar, Goldsmith; these, with other more, were accused to the
Archbishop, for holding the opinion of the sacrament of the Altar, auricular
confession, and other sacraments, contrary to that which the Church of Rome did
teach: The which persons, because being cited they came not in, were solemnly
accursed as heretics with bell, book, and candle; yea, and by the same
Archbishop was the whole Town of Leicester interdicted, so long as any of
these excommunicate persons should remain in it. There was also one Matilda an
Anchoresse accused of the same opinions: all this happened in 1387. in the 10.
year of Richard 2. About the same time Peter Pateshall an Austen Friar, having
obtained leave of the Pope to change his coat and religion, hearing the
doctrine of Wickliffe, and others of the same sort, began to preach openly, and
to detect the vices of his Covent, preaching in London, and by the Londoners
graciously entertained and vpheld against the turbulent Friars, who sought to
molest him. Thus by the preaching of Wickliffe, and others, the Gospel began
to fructify and spread abroad in London, and other places of the Realm, and
more would have done, had not the Prelates set themselves so forcibly with
might and maine to gaine-stand the course thereof.

1389. William Swinderby a worthy defender of the faith, with Wickliffe, was
accused to the Bishop of Lincoln, of certain Articles, both untruly
collected and cruelly exhibited against him by the Friars, and by their
vehemence was urged to revoke: afterward he remoouing into the Diocese of
Hereford, was there also molested and troubled under John Tresnant Bishop of
Hereford, upon the same Articles; the which Articles as they were given in by
the Friars, and how answered by Swinderby in his protestation, hangs upon
record, and out of the Registers in the same old English in which it was
written, is by M. Fox transcribed into his History of the Church: By the
reading of which protestation, we may note a notable piece of knavery in his
accusers, viz. not to deliver his assertions faithfully, as he did deliver
them, but as they supposed to make him most odious in the defense of them; and
by that we may well guess, that these points in Wickliffe, which seem rough
and harsh, met with such unhandsome workmen. The process against this
Swinderby, his declaration upon certain conclusions touching the Sacrament of
the Altar, Confession, Indulgences, and touching Antichrist, his appeal to the
King, his letter to the Parliament, do sufficiently confirm his worth and
sufficiency in the cause.

1391. Walter Brute a man of sufficient learning, though no Priest, was
conuented before the Bishop of Worcester, and accused of the same Articles with
Swinderbies: admirable it is to read his story, especially in it, his learned
declarations concerning Antichrist, the Popes usurped power, the power of the
Keys, free justification by faith only, auricular confession, absolution, the
matter of the Sacrament, Transubstantiation, Idolatry, Exorcising, priestly
blessing, buying and selling of prayers, and other Romish dregs, the lawful
use of an oath; in which he also proves that the City of Rome is Babylon.
What could he have done more in our cause, had he lived since Luther? Out of
his declarations may be taken a sufficient Commentary and Exposition of those
Articles, which as they are ascribed unto Wickliffe, seem something harsh.
Furthermore, the Bull of Pope Boniface the 9. dated the 15. Kal. Oct. in the 6.
year of his Popedom, directed to King Richard the 2. and to the Bishop of
Hereford, does confess, that these Christians whom the common people called
Lollards, did daily grow and increase, and prevail against their Diocesans,
for which cause the Pope stirs up the King against them, who thereupon
directed forth a commission to the Bishops, to proceed with greater authority
against William Swinderby, Stephen Bell, Walter Brute, and others of the same
opinions: By which means the growth of the Gospel was nipped, and a little
kept in, but afterward it brake forth with more effectualnesse, as may appear
by the book of conclusions exhibited to the Parliament holden at London, in
the 18. of Richard the 2.

1395. Touching the abuses of the Church, Popish priesthood, single life of
Priests, the fained miracle of Transubstantiation, Exorcismes, and Priestly
blessings, Masses for the dead, Pilgrimages, and oblations to Relics and
Images, Confession, Nuns and Widows vowing single life, in all which, a
reformation was desired in the said Bill, the copy whereof is to be seen in
Archiuis Regijs: so also the Kings dealing with certain of his Lords, as
namely, Richard Sturie, Lewis Clifford, Tho. Latimer, Io. Mountacute, etc. whom
he did sharply rebuke and threaten terribly, for that he heard them to be
favorers of that side. Add to this the complaints of the Bishops against the
Londoners, occasioned by another brawle; but certainly the maine matter was,
because the Londoners were favorers of Wickliffes doctrine, as in the story of
S. Albons is to be seen, upon which occasion the King removed the Courts and
Terms to be kept at York, to the great decay of the City, which happened An.
1393. All these things laid together, do plainly and demonstratiuely tell us,
that there was more then one or two known to be infected, else what need such
adoo with Letters, Epistles, Bulls, Mandates, Commissions to root out the
proceeding of a few. No doubt therefore but there were many worthy witnesses
and confessors of the truth of the Gospel.

1400. After the deposing of Richard 2. when Henry 4. had gotten the Crown,
the next year he called a Parliament, in which one W. Sawtree, a good man,
and faithful Priest, inflamed with the zeal of true Religion, required he
might be heard for the commodity of the whole Realm. But the matter being
smelt out by the Bishops, they obtained that it might be referred to the
Convocation; before whom being conuented and examined of diverse* Articles of
Religion, agreeable to Wickliffes doctrine, for that he stood constantly in
the defense of the truth, was by them condemned, degraded, and lastly burned.
And this was the first Martyr that suffered for Religion, since the renewing of
it by Wickliffe: for howsoever the Bishops had obtained the Statute de
comburendo, in the days of Rich. 2. yet in all his time none suffered death
for that cause. But when Henry 4. came to the Crown, he willing to keep in
with the Clergy, which in those days was a strong faction, put the Statute in
execution, first upon this Sawtree, and after him followed many more, some
whereof are recorded, but certainly the names of many are lost and forgotten.
See the words of the Statute made in the second year of Henry the fourth,
mentioning a good company of such Preachers, whom that age called heretical.

1407. The story of William Thorpe is famous, written by his own hand,
containing his accusation and examination before Archbishop Arundell; his
answer, his commendation of Wickliffe, and defense of his doctrine, he taught
against the Sacrament of the Altar, Mass, Images, Pilgrimages, pride of
Priest, confession, etc. A constant Professor he was of the Truth, and
questionless continued to the end, howsoever his end is unknown: in all
likely-hoode he dyed in prison. The like end befell to John Ashton, another of
Wickliffes followers, who for the same Doctrine of the Sacrament, was condemned
by the Bishops, and because he would not recant, was committed to perpetual
prison, wherein the good man continued until his death. Somewhat before Thorps
trouble, happened the trouble of John Puruey, who, as Waldensis writes, was
the Library of the Lollards, and a gloss upon Wickliffe. This Puruey, together
with Harford, a Doct. of Divinity, were grievously tormented and punished in
the Castle of Saltwood, at length recanted at Paul's Cross, afterward, again
he was imprisoned under Archbishop Chichely, in the year 1421. his Articles
which he taught, were touching transubstantiation, confession, Power of the
keys, vows of chastity, the charge of Priests; he said that Innocent the
third, and the 600. Bishops, and all the rest of the Clergy which in the
Council of Lateran determined the doctrine of transubstantiation and
confession, were fools and blockheads, seducers of the people, Heretics, and
blasphemers: he wrote diverse books, as touching the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, of penance, orders, the power of the Keys, the preaching of the
Gospel, of marriages, vows, possessions, correction of the Clergy, of the
laws and decrees of the Church, of the state and condition of the Pope and
Clergy.

1409. John Badly first, molested and condemned by the Bishop of Worcester, was
afterward accused before Archbishop Arundel, and other his Assistants, for
being unsound in the doctrine of the Sacrament, as denying the real presence,
and transubstantiation: and being demanded whether he would renounce and
forsake his opinions, and adhere to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, he
confessed, That he had both said and maintained the same, and would adhere and
stand to these his opinions, and while he lived, would never retract the same;
for which he was condemned, and in Smithfield burned.

After this, the Prelates not contenting themselves with this, that now they
had the power of the secular arm to assist them in the punishment of
Heretics, and having a King to their mind, ready to serve their turn in all
points, at the Parliament the^ held, procured the Statute ex Officio, the
sequel whereof cost many a man his life: at the same time also came forth
diverse constitutions of Archbishop Arundell, forbidding to preach or teach any
thing contrary to the Determination of the Church in the points of the
Sacrament of the Altar, Matrimony Confession, or other Sacraments, or other
Articles of faith. Item, that no Schoolemasters should, in teaching the
Sciences, intermingle any thing concerning the Sacraments, contrary to the
determination of the Church. That none of Wickliffes books should be read,
those only excepted which the University of Oxford had allowed. Item, That
none should translate any Text of Scripture into English. Item, That diligent
inquisition should be made by every Provost, Principal, and Master of every
College in Oxford, among the Scholars, for persons defamed of heresy. Now
let all men judge, whether these constitutions given at Oxford in this manner,
do not plainly declare, that there was a great company of these men who
professed and taught such points, which these constitutions did condemn.
Again, is it any wonder, that after such strength and force, such policy and
practices used to supplant the doctine of Wickliffe, and his followers, it
should be almost extinguished? The Bishops and Clergy having the King on their
side, armed with Laws, Statutes, Punishments, Imprisonments, Fire, Faggot,
Sword, and the like, what wonder is it, if they bear all before them? Is it
equal to challenge us to show forth our Church, to require a visibility of
it, when these who are our adversaries, having the sword in their hand, did
labor so abundantly to suppress the memorial of them? And yet by the
goodness of God it came to pass, as may appear by the Registers, that those
persons whom they condemned and detested as Heretics, calling them Lollards,
did increase daily in diverse countries, especially at London, in
Lincolne-shire, Norfolk, Hereford, Shrewsbury, and in Calice, and other
quarters, in the Province of Canterbury, with whom Archbishop Arundel had much
ado, as by his Registers does appear.

1413. Henry the fourth being dead, succeeded Henry the fifth, crowned on
Passion Sunday, presently after began a Parliament to be called and holden
after Easter, at Westminster; at which time also was holden a Synod at London
under Archbishop Arundel: The chief cause of assembling thereof, was, to
repress the growing of the Gospel; and especially to withstand the noble and
worthy Lord Cobham, who was then noted to be a principal favorer, receiver,
and maintainer of them, whom the Clergy called Lollards, especially in the
diocese of London, Hereford, and Rochester, setting them up to preach, whom
the Bishops had not licensed: he was also accused to be far otherwise in
the belief of the Sacraments of the Altar, of Penance, of Pilgrimage,
Image Worship, and of ecclesiastical power, then the holy Church of Rome had
taught for many years before; his examination, confession, and declaration of
his Christian belief, his godly answers, and reasons, his constancy in the
truth is worth the reading. Finally, he was also condemned, and committed to
the Tower, out of which he made an escape, peradventure not without the help
of Sir Roger Acton, who himself, whatsoever he was otherwise, certain it is
that he was always of a contrary mind and opinion to the Romish Bishops and
Clergy, for which he was greatly hated of the^: his friendly help to the Lord
Cobham, is thought to have bin the cause why he was apprehended, and brought
into trouble; and in the end came to his death, some three years before the
Lord Cohbam; and with him I. Brown, and I. Bouerly a preacher, suffered the
same kind of death in S. Giles fields, with other more, to the number of 36. as
the stories do report: all which are said to have bin hanged and burned in the
month of January 1413. The which death also the Lord Cobham suffered some four
years after his escape, being betrayed and brought in by the Lord Powes,
either for the hatred of the religion, and true Doctrine of Jesus Christ, or
else for greediness of the reward promised by the King to them that could
bring in the Lord Cobham alive or dead: for being thus taken, he was adjudged
to be hanged upon the new gallows in S. Giles field, and burned hanging: for
you must know that the Prelates (the better to suppress this doctrine) had
gotten an Act passed, which condemned the Lollards and followers of Wickliffe,
decreeing, that they should be accounted as traitors to the King and Realm,
and so should suffer double punishment, viz. to be burnt as heretics, and
hanged as traitors to the King; testified by Polydore Virgil, and by Waldensis.

1415. After Th. Arundel, succeeded Archbishop Chichely, before whom was
conuented John Claydon, who for the space of 20. years before had been
suspected of Lollardy; He was accused to have diverse books in English, out of
which his Adversaries collected 15. Articles, which they condemned as
heretical and erroneous; for which cause he was condemned, and shortly after,
together with Rich. Turning, burned in Smithfield. Shortly after, the
Archbishop, with the rest of the Clergy, made other constitutions against the
Lollards: After the setting forth of which constitutions, great inquisition
followed in England, and many good men, whose hearts began to favor the
Gospel, were brought to much vexation and trouble, and caused outwardly to
abjure. Thus while Christ had the inward hearts of men, Antichrist would needs
possess the outward body, and make them sing his song: In the number of whom
were I. Tailor, W. James, I. Dwerfe, John Iourdly, M. Roberts, Parson of Hegly,
W. Henry, I. Gall, Bart. Cornmonger, N. Hooper, Th. Granter; so also Ralph
Mongin Priest, was condemned to perpetual prison. After this followed the
Recantation of Ric. Monk, and of Edmund Frith, besides many more recorded in
the same Register, who likewise for their faith and Religion were much vexed
and troubled. The names of 16. are set down in the process of the Archbishop,
directed forth against the same persons, whereof some whole households, both men
and women, were driven to forsake their houses and towns for danger of
persecution: yea, so cruelly was the Romish Clergy bent against them, and so
grieved to see the poor flock of Christ to multiply, that Henry Chichely
stirred up the Pope against them; alleging that there were so many infected
with the doctrine of Wickliffe and Husse here in England, that without force of
an army they could not be suppressed.

1422. Henry 5. being dead, his Son Henry 6. a child of nine months old
succeeded; In the first year of whose reign was W. Tailor accused, convicted,
condemned, and afterward in Smithfield with Christian constancy, after long
imprisonment did consummate his martyrdom. Others there were that professed
the same truth, but for fear durst not be so bold; so that it appears by the
Registers of Norwich in that Diocese within the space of 3. years, viz. from
1428. to 1431. about the number of 120. men and women were examined, and much
vexed for the profession of the Christian faith; of whom three suffered death,
viz. Father Abraham of Colchester, W. White, and I. Waddon, Priests; the rest
sustained such cruel penance as pleased the Bishop and his Chancellor to lay
upon them, which howsoever, through the hard dealing of the times, they were
constrained to recant, and many of them to abjure their opinions, yet their
good will to the truth is manifest: and it is fit to preserve the memory of
their names, if it be but to stop the mouth of such malignant adversaries, who
following blind affection rather then true knowledge of times and antiquities,
through ignorance blame they know not what, accusing the true doctrine of the
Gospel to be nouelty, and the Preachers thereof to be Nouelists, whereas this
doctrine lacking none antiquity, has from time to time burst forth, and
prevailed in many places, though in the most through tyranny it has been
suppressed, as by these good men of Norfolk and Suffolk may appear, who if
they had had the liberty which we have, and authority to back them, it would
have well appeared how old this doctrine is, so that all men would have
acknowledged, that this our Church was long before Luther.

1430. Shortly after the solemn Coronation of Hen. 6. which was in the 8.
year of his reign, was Richard Houedon, a Londoner, crowned with martyrdom.
The next year Th. Bagly a Priest, and Paul Craw a Bohemian, both valiant
defenders of Wickliffes doctrine, were condemned and burned. Not long after,
about the year 1439. which was the 18. of Henry 6. was Ri. Wiche burned for
heresy, as then they counted it. So much the more famous was his martyrdom,
because the fame was, that before his death he spoke as prophesying, that the
Posterne of the Tower should sink, which came to pass; upon which he was
counted an holy man. Many came to the place where he was burnt, and there made
their oblations, till by the commandment of the King they were forbid, and
some punished.

After Chichely, in the Sea of Canterbury succeeded Stafford, Kempe, and then
Burscher, in whose time fell out the trouble of Reynold Peacock, Bishop of
Chichester, who after the death of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, his Patron, was
molested by the Archbishop in the year 1457. because he taught against the
real presence, the infallibility of the Councels, the local dissension into
hell: That the Church may err in matter of faith: That the literal sense of
the Scripture is only to be held: He was at length enforced to give way; for,
what with blustering threats to terrify him, as also with fair promises to
allure him, they left no stone vnrolled, till they brought him to recantation
at Paul's cross, where also his books were burnt, yet for all this, himself
(belike he was suspected) was kept in his own house during his natural life.

1473. King Henry 6. being deposed, Edward 4. got the Crown; In the time of
whose reign, a godly and constant servant of Christ, named John Goose, alias
Husse, was unjustly condemned and burnt at the Tower hill.

1485. Henry 7. coming to the Crown, mention is made in the Registers of
Couentry and Lichfield, of 9. persons persecuted in that Diocese, whose names
are set down to be I. Blomston, Rich. Hegham, Robert Crowther, I. Smith, Rob.
Brown, Th. Butler, I. Falkes. R. Hilman. The heresies, of which they were
accused, were, for opposing Pilgrimages, Images, Merits, Purgatory, Shrift,
Transubstantiation, and the like.

After these, in the ninth year of Henry 7. was burned an old woman of 80.
years, loan Boughton by name, who held eight of Wickliffes opinions so
stiffely, that all the Doctors in London could not turn her: she was burned
in Smithfield shortly after in Anno 1497. Some for fear recanted at Paul's
Cross, and in the next year, an old man and a Priest, and one Babram were
burned. 1506. William Tilsworth was burned for his Religion in Amersham, at
which time, Ioane Clarke the said Tilsworths daughter, was constrained to put
fire to her Father, at whose burning, about 60. other were enjoined to bear
fagots, of whom diverse were commanded to bear and wear fagots at Lincoln the
space of 7. years after, some at one time, some at another. A little after was
Father Roberts a Miller of Missenden burned at Buckingham, and 20. other bare
fagots, and did penance. About 2. or 3. years after, at Amersham was burned Th.
Barnard, and la. Mordon in one fire, and Father Rogers, and Father Reeue was
burned in the cheek. So also was W. Littlepage, and 30. more were burned in
the right cheek, and bare fagots at the same time. The manner of their burning
in the cheek was this: Their necks being tied fast to a post with towels,
and their hands holden that they might not stir, they were marked with a hot
iron; The cause of those men's trouble was, because they talked against
superstition, and idolatry, and were desirous to hear and read the holy
Scriptures.

Thomas Chase condemned by the Bishop of Lincoln, William Smith, and cast into
prison, was there murdered, and after slandered to have made away himself.
Thomas Norrice for the profession of Christ's Gospel was burned at Norwich 1507.
Elizabeth Samson accused to speak against Pilgrimages, adoration of Images,
and against the Sacrament of the Altar, was compelled to abjure before William
Horsey, Chancellor at London 1508. Laurence Ghest, two years in prison at
Salisbury, was afterward put to death for his religion: so also was there
martyred another poor woman, whose death so greedily sought by the Chancellor
Whittington, was presently revenged by the enraged Bull, which running through
the prease of people, came to the Chancellor, and gored him through with his
horns, carrying his guts along the streets, to the great admiration and wonder
of all them that saw it.

1509. H. 7. having finished his course, after him followed H. 8. in whose
days happened much stir and contention about religion, as in the History of the
Church does appear: In the Regist. of Fitz-Iames, B. of London, are contained
the names of diverse, to the number of 40. persecuted in the Diocese of London,
between the year 1509. and 1527. of whom, some, after they had showed their
weakness in recanting, did afterward return to their former profession, and
cleaving fast to it, were for it martyred, as W. Sweeting, and I. Bruster
burned in Smithfield 1511. and I. Brown burned in Ashford, about the 4. year
of H. 8. about which time also fell out the trouble of Rich. Hunne, whom after
his death they condemned of Heresy.

But now the numbers of Confessors and Martyrs arise to such multitudes, that a
long discourse, and a large treatise would hardly suffice to set them down;
wherefore I pass over the story of I. Stilman, Tho. Man, Rob. Cousin, Chri.
Shomaker, Martyrs; As also diverse Confessors, to the number of 35. abiured
about the year 1520. for speaking against worshipping of Saints, Pilgrimage,
Invocation of the Virgin, the Sacrament of the Lords body, and for having
books in English, as the 4. Evangelists, the Epistles of Paul, Peter, and
James, the Book of the Revelation, a Book of Antichrist, of the 10.
Commandments, and Wickliffes Wicket, Books no doubt wonderfully stuffed with
heresies, and doctrine unmeet for Christians to know, and understand. Oh the
subtilty of those Romish Foxes! How many men and women were persecuted in the
Diocese of Lincoln, under Bishop Longland, anno 1521. for opposing, or not
consenting to the Romish doctrine of pilgrimage, Image Worship,
Transubstantiation, real presence. Their arguments they collected out of the
Scripture, the Shepherds Calender, Wickliffes Wicket, and such other books as
they had amongst them, and notwithstanding they had not with them any learned
man to ground them in the doctrine, yet they conferring together, did convert
one another, the Lords hand working among them maruelously. After the great
abiuration which was under Bishop Smith, they were termed amongst themselves
Known men, or just fast men; not much unlike to the present name of
Protestants: Amongst whom, to see their travels, their earnest seeking, burning
zeal, their readings, watchings, sweet assemblies, love, and concord, godly
living, faithful meaning, may make us, now in these our days of free
profession, to be ashamed.

From all which duly considered, we may easily gather, what would have bin the
number of Professors, had the world looked friendly upon them; For if when the
Temporal Magistrate took hand with the Ecclesiastical to suppress them, and
root them out; if when all men of note and learning, either for hope of
preferment, or fear of trouble, turned their studies otherways; if when the
Scripture, and English books were forbidden; if when books were so rare, and
dear, and so hard to come by (as before the Science of printing was invented
they were) if notwithstanding all these hindrances, the Truth of God did so
multiply amongst them, what would it have done, had they had multitude of
books, or those cheap, the Scripture in English, had they had learned men to
guide them, had they lived in a peaceable time, had they had the Magistrate
either for them, or at least not against them: for why was the increase of the
Gospel in Bohemia by the preaching of I. Husse, more remarkable and further
spread, then here in England, but that the Magistrate with his sword was not so
severe against them? Whence was it that Luther prevailed more then Wickliffe,
but that he had a supporter (the Duke of Saxony) which Wickliffe wanted?
Amongst us at this day, do we not all know, that Arminianisme would have more
prevailed, and infected further then yet it does, if the Kings Majesty were
either for it, or not against it?

Wherefore all men may easily see, that they are much deceived, who condemn
this our doctrine of nouelty, and insultingly demand, Where was your Church
before Luther?

To whom we answer out of this demonstration hitherto made, That ever since
the days of Wickliffe, almost 200. years before Luther, the doctrine of the
reformed Churches, that is, those points wherein they differ from the church of
Rome, and in which the reformation does consist, these points (I say) were held
and professed: for whence came those persecutions? or who were they that thus
were persecuted? If of the same profession with them, then is their cruelty
unreasonable, to persecute their own fraternity: if they were otherwise; how
then is the doctrine of the reformed Churches so new, or the Professors
thereof so lately start up, as our adversaries pretend they be? But this is the
fruit of ignorance and carelessness to read the Histories of the Church, and
the records of antiquity heretofore: For then might men easily see, that the
Church of England has not wanted multitudes of well-disposed hearts; howsoever
the public authority then lacked, to maintain the open preaching of the
Gospel.

Now whilst our adversaries bethink themselves what to say to this part of the
Induction, concerning the estate of the Church in our own country of England,
in the ages next before Luther, I will pass over into Germany, and see what
success the Gospel had there, especially in Bohemia, by the preaching of John
Husse and others, who lived in the same age with Wickliffe: Afterward will I
proceed to prosecute the argument of the Induction, by the demonstration of
History in the ages before Wickliffe, and Husse, if it shall be thought
convenient.

FINIS.

