MIDDLEBOROVV.

A brief Rehersall of the accord and agreement, that the Captains, Burgises,
and Army of MIDDLEBOROVV and ARMEVV: have made, in yelding themselves to the
right high and excellent Prince, the Lord William Prince of Orrange, County
of Nassau. etc.

With a lamentable Discourse of the calamities, great hungre and extreme
miseries, that they sustained, before they yielded up the said Towns.

* Translated out of the ducthe Copy, printed at Dordrecht.

ANNO 1574.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Ihones.

The Copy of the agreement and accord, between the Prince of Orange, and them
of Middelborrow and Armew as follows etc.
FOr as much as Sir Christopher Montdragon Knight, Lord of Rembicourt,
Captain general of the Wallowne Soldiers; being instante in the towns of
Myddelborrow and Armew: upon request made unto him by the Captain of
Strenchamps, coming again out of Prison) by his Letters dated the xvi. day of
the same present Mourn, unto the right high and excellent Prince, ye Lord
William prince of Orrange county of Nassau etc. Beseeching his Majesty to send
his Commisioners unto the Castle of Rammekens (named Seborrow) to parle with
the^, concerning the yeeldynge up of the before named Towns and Cities.

To the which request his Majesty willingly granted: and sent his
Commissioners to propose certain Articles and Conditions to the Commissioners
of the Lord Mondragon, by the which means, their aforsayd offer to yield up
the Towns might be accepted. In consideration whereof, the Commissioners met
together at the time appointed, where between them the Conditions and Articles
aforesaid were fully concluded and agreeed upon on both sides, in manner and
form followyng. etc.

FIrst, the Lord of Montdragon, shall yield and give over the towns of
Middelborrow and Armew, without spoylynge of any Forte or demynishinge any
strength thereof presently. And also all the Ordinance and munition of Wars,
with all such Ships, Goods and Marchandies as are therein. Yea, and he with all
his Soldiers (such as will not swear unto his excellency) shall immediately avoid
out of the Island of Walcheren, takeyng with them their wepons and Ensigns,
with bag and bagadge to them be longing, simply and faithfully: not medlyng
with any other Goods or parcelles, what soever to them not belonging. And who
that shall transgress the said Ordinance, carrynge away more then his own,
shall stand to the punishment of the said Prince.

Moreover, if that the Lord Montdragon do not deliver in safety, within the
space of two Months into Hollande or Sealande, or some other place, under ye
iurisdic^ion of ye said Prince, these persons hereafter named: That is to say:
Phillip of Mariner Esquier, the Lord of Mownte S. Aidegonde, the Captain Jacob
Simoissen, a Captain that was taken in the HAGHE whose surname is Citadelle,
the Liutenant of the Captain, William of Angeren, and one more, whose surname
is Pe in: then shall remain in prison, three Captains, three Liutennauntes,
three Ensign bearers, three Seriants of the Band: and three Corporals,
according to the law of Arms until such time as the Persons aforesaid be
delivered.

Likewise it shall be lawful to depart out of the said Town, all
Victellers, Gonners, Commissioners, Shippers: Ian Coppes, Jacques Pardeuille, with
their Servants, writings, Letters Bag and bagage, what so ever it be, as
also the Priests and Monks, and men of Religion, only with their habites (if
they will.)

And his Majesty shall set such good order in the premises, that all those
which depart out of the Island with their goods, as is before expressed, shall
be shipped over into the Coasts of Flaunders in good safetye, promisinge the
subscribed Commissioners and Deputyes, by their faith and hon^^^ to stablish
and perform in full and ample manner, this aforesaid agreement of the Prince
of Orange, and the Lord Montdragon, respectively: and for ye more assurance
whereof, Pledges on both sides shall be delivered.

These foresaid Articles being agreed and concluded in the Fortress of
Rammekens, the xix. day of February. ANNO 1574.

Beneath were written the one after ye other: Duttem, Gillis de villain,
Anthoni de Gerardt, Francoys de Bouchant, Iunius de long, Arendt van Dorpe,
Charles de Boisot. And a little lower was written, We William of Nassou, on ye
one side: and I Christopher Montdragon Knight, Lord of Rembycourte, of Lus,
Gussanuille on the other side: have seen and perused the aforenamed agreement
and accord: which with our wyls and full consent is concluded. For ye
confirmation whereof we have promised, and by these presents do promise by our
princely words and Honors, to perform and accomplish, and cause to be
performed and accomplyshed, the whole consents of the same in all points and
Articles, without gaynsaying, or suffer to be gaynsayde, them, or any part of
them.

In witness whereof we have subscribed and Sealed to the same, the
foresaid.xix. day of February in the year aforesaid. And beneath was
subscribed. Guillam de Nassou. Christopher de Montdragon.


The copy of the Proclamation, set forth by the Prince of Orrange.
WE William, by the grace of God, Prince of Orrang, County of Nassou etc.
Governor of Holland, Seela^d Freesla^d, and Vtreght: understanding that the
Burgemasters of the Town of Middelborrow, have simply declared and most
humbly have caused to be showed unto us, in the name of them selves, their
Cittezins, and the Coronel Montdragon: their extreme muertes, hunger and
calamities: have therefore of mere compassion, earnestly mouinge us to embrace
Christian mercy, above rigor and crueltye, thought it good to declare unto them
by these presents these Articles followyng.

First, the aforesaid Cittezns, such as will swear to us on the behalf of the
Kings Majesty, shall be under our obeysa^ce in his Majesty's behalf as other
Cities and Towns: and thereby save and retain their bodies and goods without
reproach, or rehearsal of any matters that are past. For the assurance whereof,
we shall cause a certain number of our Burgises of ye towns of Sieri^zee
Vlissyng: and Camphere to be placed in the same to keep out our Soldiers and
Mariners. Intendyng also by all means possible to suppress and quench the
hatred of other towns conceived against them.

And who so ever is not disposed to be sworn as before is said, we will choose
of them ten men, which we shall keep in the i will of Walcheren, to the end they
shall cause to be delivered (by what means so ever it be) the Burgemaster with
other Cittezins of Harlam in like number.

The other good Cittizins that are there present, or heareafter shall come,
shall henceforth occupy their trade of Marchandies: and use and enjoy their
rightes and Priuelidges within their limmits, as they have bin accustomed in
times past, we (only) retayning to our selves the power to make provision for
them of Camphere, Vlissynge, and Armew, with other such like places, for all
such necessaryes as we shall se good and expedient.

We do you to understand also, that notwithstanding the proposition of three
hundredth thousand Gildens, being demanded of us: the Citizens shall pay by
general consent, such a reasonable some of Money to the mayntinance of the
Army, and helpyng to drive away the Enemy of our native Land, and Country,
according as we shall find it meet to cease them after their abillytie, not
comprehendinge herein the Vplandysh men which have sustained and followed our
adversaries, concerning whom we will here after consider off, and set order
for them.

More over the Citizens shall be bownde to take dillygent heed that none of the
Merchandise, or spiritual Goods, or any other thing be conuayed privily,
dug, or carried away: but shall forthwith, pres nt al such goods and Iuelles
as they shall know to be buried, conuated away or given to any Body to keep, or
otherwise belo^gyng to spyritual, or other persons, that keep themselves
without the Island of Walcheren: and that upon pain of bodily punishment.

Further, concerning the request of the Burgemasters aforesaid: (namely) that
the Citizins, that are fled before this time, might now come again to their
goods and possessions: we shall hereafter consider thereof, and dispose the
same, as shall be meet and convenient in that behalf.

And also, touching the foresaid request of the Burgemaisters, and
Commisioners of Middleborrow: concerning priests, spiritual persons, divine
service, Churchegoods: and debtes, made by occassion of this war: with other
poinctes given up by them in writing: the Priests and spiritual persons,
shall depart with their habittes upon them: the rest, we shall dispose at time
convenient, for the most profit of the City and country, in such reasonable
order, as hereafter shall be thought meet.

* Given, in the Town of Vlissing, under our hand and Seal: the.xix. day of
February. Anno. 1574.
Hereafter follows a short rehersall of the calamities, great hunger and
extreme myseries, that they sustained in Middleborow and Armew, before they
yielded up the said Towns.
WHen they of Middleborow and Armew, saw that there was no more aid: and that
all their provision, (as well fuel, as meat and drink) was consumed: And that
their hunger- (which is a sharp Sword) increased more and more: they
imagyned, how to save their wives and children: which they could not do,
because they had admitted mo Soldiers, then they were able to govern.

Moreover, (that is to be lamented) the Coronel and his Soldiers, by great
violence, have taken out of the poor Citezins Houses, all kind of vittailes
wherewith they might have sustained the lives of their wives and children,
beatyng them, and handlyng them most rigorously: yea, taking the bread and
vittayles, even out of the Childrens mouths: and carried all the provision of
vittaylles, into their Camps and Trenches: not regarding the pittyful
lamentations and complaints of the Cittezins. By these means, were the
Citezins constrained (with their wives and children,) to suffer a most
miserable hungre, the space of seven weeks long: so that they were compelled
to buy for their meat, Rattes, Cattes, Mice and Dogs: with the flesh of
other Beasts, that are not meet for man to eat, and to pay for the same full
dearelye. For a pound of Horse flesh, was soulde for.xii.d. a quarter of a
Dog, was soulde for two shyllynges.iiii. d. a Rat.viii. d. and a Mowce.ii. d.

When this kind of sustenance was consumed and eaten: and that there was no
more bread left: there wear fownde within the Towns certain Garners, wherein
was Hempseed, and Lynseede, whereof the Citizins made them dread: And for
as much, as they could not eat it after it was bakte: they did knead it
again with water, and bakte it (as Wafers) in an Iron.

But (alas,) by means thereof, the Citizins be so rotted and spoiled in their
gutts, that it is greatly to be doubted of their lives and healthes.

And when I call to mind, how that (as well) the Elders, as others, must shut
up their children from their neighbors and fellow Citezins, I can not refrain
me from weeping: As for Example: a woman of good credit, coming from
Midleborrow, did most pitifullye complain, that she was constrained to shut
up her children three weeks long, least they were taken from her to be killed
and eaten. But all this while, the Coronel and his Soldiers lived of the
bread and vittaylle that they had taken so long ago, till they wear come to
half a pound of bread a day: after that to a quarter of a li. and at the
last, to half a quarter of a pownd. And finally, the Soldiers (for all their
daintiness,) have been constrained to eat with the Citizins the oyllie
Cakes. And the fat bellyed and well fed Monks in the rich Abbey, died for
hunger. Whereby may be considered, what great myserie and hungre, the common
Cittezins, with their wives and children, most lame^tably have sustained.

To the Reader.
WE mean not here (good reader) to hide from thee: how fair and fertile this
country of Walcheren is: how profitable to all Cou^treies near by, that
without it, neither Holland, Sealand, Brabande, and Flaunders: yea, the whole
Navigations in no wise (can be maintained.

And for as much: as, the poor chased Christians, have now (the space of seven
years) ben driven, from one Country to an other, and have been greatly
tormented under the Cross: not knowing wheare they might have a resting
place. Our God therefore, of his merciful goodness, (as it is evident to every
man's sight) has ordained this land of Walcheren, as a sure lodgyng and
refuge, wherein the may maintain themselves in the time of this Pilgremage. And
thus, beseechyng your goodnesses, that we may all together give hearty thanks
to God: and to attribute this victory all only unto him, not doubtyng, but he
will so proseede with the other countries that are yet under the Tirrannie of
the ennemie: and so graciously deliver them: to the magnifieng of his holy
name, and the salvation of their souls. Amen.

THE CONCLUSION.
FOr the accomplisshement of that poinct before rehearsed, making mention of
the Lord St. Aldegonde and the other prisoners. The Coronell Montdragon, has
given his Letters of Obligation, that he shall deliver them, and set them at
liberty, within two Months, either in Hollande, Sealande, or any other
place, that is under his Majesty's jurisdiction.

For defaute whereof, on his behalf: the said Coronell, shall yield himself
personally, within the foresaid space, into the hands of his excellent
Majesty.

FINIS.
ix. APRILIS.

