EPITAPHS Upon the vntymelie death of that hopeful, Learned, and Religious
Youth, Mr WILLIAM MICHEL, (Son to a Reverend Pastor, Mr THOMAS MICHEL,
Parson of TURREFF, and Minister of the Gospel there) who departed this life the
6 of January, 1634. in the 24 year of his age. Together with a Consolatorie
Epistle, to the Mother of the said young Man; wherein his Virtues and good
carriage are mentioned.

ABERDONIAE, Imprimebat Edwardus Rabanus, 1634.

DE GVLIELMO MICHELIO, Theologiae Candidato, Qui obiit Abredoniae Anno 1634.
Ian. 6.
LUx sacra Michelium, sacrae decus ante palestrae
Nunc desiderium sustulit ante diem.
Hac auru^, vt perhibent, and myrrhea munera reges
Blandaque lactenti thura tulere DEO.
Obtulit hac animam Christo novus incola coeli
Michelius, fusus Numinis ante pedes.
Munera jam confer: quae tellus protulit illi,
Hic quod siderea traxit ab arce dedit.
Gonfer opus: reges CHRISTO fugere relicto,
Illius hic claudet tempus in omne laetus.
Englished by the Author.
MICHEL of the most Sacred Race,
Now the Regrate before the Grace,
Has of his life abridg'd the Lace,
Upon a Sacred Day.
This Day, as we hear of Divines,
Three Eastern Kings, with rich Propynes,
Myrrh, Incense, and their golden Mines,
Before CHRIST'S Cradle lay.
MICHEL now clad with Light, is gone
To CHRIST, for whom he still did groan,
And has his Soul laid at the Throne
Of His Divinity.
Compare their Gifts: They did bestow
Propynes which of the earth do grow:
His Gift did from the Heavens flow,
And Sacred Trinity.
Compare their Deeds: The Eastern Kings
Having presented those great things,
Took leave of CHRIST, and with swift Wings
Left Him where He did lie.
MICHEL of earth taking Goodnight,
And dressing to the Stars his flight,
Shall without end enjoye the sight
Of CHRIST above the Sky.
ALIUD IN EUNDEM.
FEsta dies, Iani sequitur quae proxima Nonas
Obtulit infanti regia dona DEO.
Michelio haec eadem cingit diademate crines,
Nubiferas supra sidereasque domos.
Tunc DEUS accepit, nunc donat munera, mult^
Sanctior and nunc est quam fuit ante dies.
Englished by the Author.
THe day next after Ianus Nones,
GOD in His infancy
Got Gifts for the highest Thrones,
And His Divinity.
To MICHEL now above the Frame
Of the Empyrean Sphere,
This day has given a Diadem,
Most precious, and rare.
Then GOD received, now He gives forth,
Most Royal Gifts: Therefore
This Day shall be of greater worth
And worship, than before.
ARTH. IOHNSTONUS, M. D.

UPON THE DEATH OF THE MOST HOPEFUL AND RELIGIOUS YOVTH, Mr WILLIAM MICHEL,
Student in Divinity, at ABERDENE.
Enclosed in this Coffin lies
A matchless Youth, in all his ways:
The Stamp of Grace who so expressed,
That now in Glory he does rest,
Triumphant, in celestial Places,
As he was here inricht with Graces;
And unto all example leaving,
Of Modesty, and pious cleaving,
Unto his GOD, in humble sort;
Both gayning Love, and good Report.
So, Death, to him, has been great Gain,
With CHRIST which makes him now remain.
D. W. GUILD.

IOANNIS FORBESII, SS. THEOL. D. and ejusdem Professoris, super obitu duorum
SS. Theologiae Studiosorum, viz. GUL. MICHAELIS, and IOANNIS MILLII, ad
superstites SS. THEOL. STUDIOSOS.
INgenio pollens, doctrinae laud coruscum
Par juvenum, morum qui gravitate senes,
Quorum corda sibi pietas regina sacravit,
Alite virtutum concomitante choro.
Pignora chara mihi, sophiae coelestis alumnos
Angelicum in terris dum meditantur iter.
Mors properata rapit, nobis hinc luctus acerbus:
Loeta laboris enim proxima messis erat.
Vestra, velut proprios quia dilexistis ocellos,
Lumina fluminibus scamna librosque rigant.
Parcite filioli lachrymis: nam mors nihil ausa,
Nec potuit: DOMINI perficit ista manus,
Qui maturatos coeli dum condit in arce,
Hanc immaturis monstrat ad astra viam.
Grief expressed, for the vntymelie, and much deplored death of Mr WILLIAM
MICHEL, S. T.
PAle visag'd Death, why has thy dreadful hand
Spoiled us, survivers, of so rare a Treasure?
Could not his tender age, and gifts, with-stand,
This thy vntymelie Stroke? Why take thou pleasure
For to insult, on all, without regard;
As on this matchless MICHEL is declared?
If graceful words, serenitie of Face,
Zeal to GOD'S Honor, whom his Soul adored;
And other Symptoms of infused Grace,
Wherewith his life was plentifully stored;
Might have prevented this vntymelie Death,
Then this rare Youth had drawn a longer Breath.
The Defunct, to his mourning Friends.
Dear Friehds, put limits to your Sighs and Groans:
Obstruct the source of your luxuriant Tears:
Restrain the excess of your Cries and Moans:
For I Am advanced above the starrie Spears:
And There installed a Quirister of Heaven;
Praising my GOD, who has such Honor given.
DA. LYNDSAY.

IN OBITUM LECTISSIMI IUVENIS, Mri GVLIELMI MICHEL, Theologiae Candidati,
EPITAPHIUM.
OVid lachrymas Iuvenis fundunt in morte pare^tes?
An solos feriunt invida fata senes?
Quod pariter rapiant pueros juvenesque senesque,
Mortem nos coecam fingimus esse Deam.
Sed been qui vixit, si diu vixisse putemus,
Qui male, quantumv saecula multa, brevi.
Hic qui perpetuo CHRISTI vestigia pressit,
Annorum numero Nestore major erat.
W. IOHNSTON. D. M.

On the death of that learned, wise, and pious Youth, Master WILLIAM MICHEL, my
very loving Friend; Son to a Reverend Pastor, the Parson of Turreff.
THE Flowrs most fragrant, as we see,
Do soonest lose their smell, and die.
The Rose, the choice of Flora's Treasures,
At Night forsakes her Morning Pleasures.
Her posting age, as Poets say,
Does come, and pass, within the day.
The Coccos, glory of all Trees,
Within some thirty years so dies:
But Centuries of measured Time,
Does scarcely make the Ash her Pryme.
The reason's this: This fruitless grows;
The other to our use bestows:
This yields no Fruit, which makes her strong;
The other much, so lives not long.
Yet with the Ash her glory dies:
The Coccos gone, commends the Trees.
This fertile Coccos, whylst he lived,
Did yield such Fruit, that all are grieved,
To whom this Coccos did belong,
And changed have in Tears their Song.
The Nymphs, whose brightness light does sho,
In sable Robes all atrate go.
I mean, true Virtue, all her Spaces;
And pure Religion, all her Graces:
They vow that Death shall never intombe
His Virtues, nor yet Vesta's Womb.
For only to their uses he
Did bud, and with his Bud did die.
IO. LONDINE.

In Cygneam Cantionem WILHELMI MICHELII, SS. Theol. Stud. VI. lanuar. denati,
etc.
LVce sua nati celebrans solennia CHRISTI
Michelius, mortem sensit adesse suam.
Sensit, and amplexus IOMINI cunabula, vitae
Haec, ait, hac spes est praesidiumque meae.
Nunc servum, Pater alme, tuum dimitte; salutem
Scilicet adspiciunt lumina nostra tuam.
Vt novus hic Simeon Cygneam concinit oden!
Et vitae and mortis praescius ipse suae.
GUL. LESLAEUS.

Obitum cognati sui Charissimi Magistri GVLIELMI MICHELII, Iuvenis supra
aetatem and plerosque coaevos docti, piique, hac Elegia deflevit.
OVintum Michelius lustrum transegerat: haec est
Prima sacris aetas apta ministeriis:
Cumque annis animu^ dederat pater almus and artem:
Coeperat and pulchras edere primitias.
Heu! quantam tenera messem succidit in herba
Subrepens coeco tetrica Parca pede!
Huic quicunque oculos, quicunque adverterat aures,
Iste suo, aiebat, tempore quantus erit?
At vero ante alios, chari obstupuere parents.
Senserunt tacito gaudia tanta sinu.
Heu matrum indulgens animus, vanissimus augur.
Vt sese blandis decipit ominibus!
Haec puero diadema, sacram cupit illa tiaram:
Haec nato Attalicas sperat and optat opes.
Anticipant aliae fasces, loetosque hymenaeos,
Partaque victrici clara trophea manu.
Diversum interea fallax libitina triumphum
Cogitat, and tristes apparat exequias.
Laurea funereis mutantur serta cupressis:
Vertitur inque atras pineae toeda faces.
Irrita blandorum spes, omnia vota parentum
Mors interveniens omnia destituit.
At non ille tamen; quem nos lugemus ademptum
Non votis, non spe fallitur ille sua.
Sublimi in superis solio, cathedraque potitur:
Et capitolina victor in arce sedet.
Quodque sibi optarit, quisquis sapit; obtigit illi
Grata quies, merces magna, brevisque via.
Vulgus iners vacuis aevum male computat annis,
Et frontis rugis, and capitis nivibus.
Quid transacta juvant Pylii tria saecula vatis,
Si periere, simul praeteriere dies?
Non annis, canisve venit censenda, sed vsu
Vita, nec aetatem tempus inane facit.
Cui brevis vtilibus lux est exercita curis,
Huic longa in parva vita peracta mora est.
DAVID MICHELIUS, Ecclesiae Edinburgenae Presbyter.

To the Pious Rememberance of a vvell-disposed and hopeful Youth, M. WILLIAM
MICHEL.
THis little cornered Cave, this quadrate Stone,
Contaynes, and covers here, a Youth expired:
Whose Gifts and growing Graces, every one,
For multitude, and magnitude, admired.
Entering to act, but on the Stage presented,
By Death's envye, and violence, prevented.
All you that Litrate Youths, and Learning love;
And you that Virtue cherish and effect:
You that pure Zeal, and Piety, approve,
And hopeful parts in springing years respect:
Spend Spaits of Tears, for his vntymelie Fall,
Who had, in gross, these Gifts and Graces all.
And you, his Fellow-Students, and his Phieres,
Put to your helping-Handes, to grace his Grave;
Whose Knowledge rich, far over-reacht his years,
And many Grounds of its great Greatness gave,
Perspicuous Proofs, of his most precious parts,
And in sight in the Tongues, and Liberal Arts.
AL. GARDEN.

GULIELMO MICHEL, EGREGIAE SPEI ADOLESCENTI PRAEPROPERA MORTE SVBLATO.
TVne etiam Gulielme jaces, nec flectere Parcas
Es potis: aut fati vincere duritiem.
Nil tibi profuerant primae robusta juventae
Tempora: nil surgens ignea vis animi.
Palladiis teneros annos colis artibus, auctus
Ingenio, celsi mystica sacra Poli.
Sed veluti flores subitos (nova gaudia veris)
Intempestivae decutiunt Hyemes;
Sic inopina furens Lachesis te perculit aevi
Vere novo, vernam depopulata rosam.
ROBERTUS GORDONUS.

Sub obitum lectissimi Iuvenis, M. GUL. MICHAELIS CARMEN FUNEBRE.
DVm nimio Michael juvenis contendere cursu
Gaudet, anhelanti pectore summa petens,
His potitur, Pindique supra juga celsa; Sionis,
Difficili Sophiae tramite, culmen adit.
Sic festinanti Mors obvia, Siste citatos
Siste gradus, inquit; lectacorona tibi est.
Quisquis amas Musas lent properato: feraci
Ingenium firmat robore longa dies.
D. W.

In Obitum Optimae Spei Adolescentis, M. GVL. MICHEL, Discipuli sui quondam
Charissimi, EPITAPHIUM.
SEmentis tibi cur tantae mers dura Michelle
Invidit messem, primaque spica p^rit?
Consulto hoc factum, nempe ut potioribus arvis
Proventum stabilem divite falce metas.
IDEM GRAECE.
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...).
GUL. WEDDERBURNUS, Ecclesiae Bethelniensis Presbyter.

IN OBITUM SANCTISSIMI, DOCTISSIMI, ET ORNATISSIMI ADOLESCENTIS, MAGISTRI GVL.
MICHEL, SS. Thelog. in Academia Abredonensi studiosi, CARMEN FUNEBRE.
DVm lachrymas moerens (justum, sed triste tributum)
Pendebam tumulo clare Michelle tuo.
Ecce triennalem (de quo spes optima) natum
Eripuit gremio mors inopina meo.
Funera funeribus luctum superaddita nostrum
Ingeminant, animus deficit atque manus.
Obstupui; ingenti deerant sua verba dolori,
Et gemitus medios impediere sonos.
Occurritque tui, tum sors miseranda parentis,
Et trahit invitas ad tua pensa manus.
Tum tacitus mecum. Puerum tam plangis ademptum
Cujus sola bonam spem tibi forma dedit?
Quid linquis fratri faciendum quaeso Michelle,
Cui tantus perijt filius ante diem.
Filius, octonos ter habens, non amplius annos,
Deliciae matris, gloria summa patris.
Ille omnes Sophia socios superaverat: olli
Cingebant niveas laurea serta comas.
Ille sacris quatuor studijs feliciter annos
Complerat: studijs consona vita fuit.
Hunc pietas, morum probitas, miserisque benigna
Dextera, and innumeris men's cumulata bonis.
Ornarunt: olli laudem haec peperere perennem:
Parva licet cineres continet urna sacros.
Hunc vivi coluere omnes, properataque lugent
Funera, queis solo nomine notus erat.
Talia sed parcas nequierunt flectere, vitae
Addere vel minimas nec valuere moras.
Haec ego dum meditor, levior fit cura dolorque,
Cum nostra alterius comparo damna malis.
PROSOPOPOEIA DEFVNCTI AD PATREM.
DEformare genas nimium jam flendo seniles
Parce pater: luctus non decet iste pios.
Ex praeco, nondum pereo: sanctisque parata
Regna peto, angelico concomitante choro.
Tempus ad exiguum tristes divellimur, ast mox
Tempus quo laeti conveniemus erit.
Tempus erit regno cum nos jungemur in vno,
Atque alacres capiet regia celsa poli.
Ejusdem ad Lectorem PROSOPOPOEIA.
QVod curtata meae sint vitae stamina, non est
Quod doleas nostram, Lector amice, vicem:
Certavi egregie, prostratoque hosle triumphum
Loetus ago, capiti pulchra corona nitet.
Sat vixit, been qui vixit, qui morte lucratur:
Sic tibi contingat vivere, sicque mori.
Posuit ANDREAS MASSAEUS, Ecclesiae Drumbletensis Presbyter.

A Friendly Sigh, for the tymous vntymelie death of Master WILLIAM MICHEL,
the Theologique expectans Coriphei.
DEath-rype's all Flesh, has gaynd the end,
All being Man, at any age:
By Grace, not Days, true Life is kende;
Who best, not longest, keeps the Stage.
This Spring-pluckt Rose, Florefull shook Fruit,
A Pupil pregnanter then guydes:
So's tymelie fallen. Cease, moaning bruit:
Perfection no dyets bydes.
Anonymus.

Apostrophe ad Defunctum.
VIve, Michelle, vale, superas subvectus in oras,
Cumque DEO, Coeli regna beata cole
Interea hoc nostri monumentum and pignus amoris,
Quo te prosequimur, clare sodalis, habe.
Dum silvis inerunt volucres, dum mo^tibus vrsae,
Dum segetes tellus, dum feret astra polus:
Ingenii monumenta tui, pietasque virebunt,
Virtutisque tuae fama, perennis erit.
Gualt. Hempseidus.

Prosopopoeia ad defunctum.
HEu Michaele scholae decus, ac spes vnica sacrae,
Huccine te rerum mors inopina vocat?
Huccine jam fubito labor omnis and omnia tendu^t
Nec nostram de te spem sinis esse ratam?
Nuper olorina cantabas voce falutis
Ortum, nunc fatum plangimus ecce tuum
Sic hominum rerumque vices voluuntur in horas,
Nil stabile aethereo jamque sub axe vides.
At te nunc terris polus invidet, omnia cernens
In pejus labi, teque videre vetat.
GUL. BLACKHAL, Logices Professor, in Acad. Mareschallana.

WILLIELMI MICHEL, Egregiae Spei Adolescentis, SS. Theol. Studiosi Vigil anti
simi, Prae^laris Animi dotibus and virtutibus eximiis, Summatibus atque
infimatibus juxta chari; q^i praematura morte solutus, mortales reliquias dum
(CHRISTO juvante) resurgant immortales, deposuit, 6. Ian. 1634. TUMULUS.
HEic situs, octonos qui ter non vixerat annos,
Quum men's sublimis loeta reliquit hum^^^.
Nam veluti Fremium nimia levitate caducum
Excutitur citius, marcet and ante nivem.
Hac subito Lychnis mox sic defloruit, astris
Vsque tamen vivet, nec peritura solo.
Alius.
HVne propere, superos, and quae natura negavit
Sedulo dum caperet, en rapit ipse polus.
Noenia.
TErrea terrenis redeunt, pars ardua vicit;
Manibus, at potior, indigitata piis.
(...).
IACOBUS GORDONIUS.

In pientissimi, and (ut illius aetas ferebat) doctissimi, optimae indolis, ac
spei Iuvenis, MAGISTRI GULIELMI MICHELLI, Praematurum Obitum, EPITAPHIVM.
QVam cito Michelum rapuit fera parca? parents
In spem qui tantam sustulii ipse sui.
Et merito; dicam vere (vel livor id audi)
Hunc in comparibus non habuisse parem.
Ille salutem animarum ardebat; ad illud anhelus,
Illud erat porro gnaviter orsus opus.
Quum prim^ in cursu jussit mors dira silere,
Hunc operi eripiens and rationi operis:
Sic quae non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis:
At Domino in magnis and voluisse sat est.
ALIUD.
DA, Pater Alme, Tuum (suesti Michele precari)
Coetibus humanis nomen vt vsque canam.
Orasti magnum, majus dedit, anteque tempus,
Coetibus angelicis illud vt vsque canas.
Amoris ergo ponebat, ROBERTUS DOWNAEUS, Bibliothecarius.

The sorrowful Father of the Defunct, To the mourning Mother.
WIth Teare-drown'd Eyes, why look you out so sadly,
And Rachell-lyke, marres both our Minds with mourning?
Shall we not render, what GOD gave us gladly?
Submitting all our will to His, but spurning.
Cease you, sweet Heart since He who is just and holy,
Has struck His Stroke; Him to offend, were folly.
The Mother her Answer.
OUr LORD of Love, for Lazar fell in weeping,
Although He knew, he was not dead, but sleeping,
And after raysd. How shall my Sorrow swadge?
Who am bereaft by Death's vntymelie Rage,
Of my dear Darling; whom mine Eyes shall never,
Oh, once behold, till Soul and Body sever.
I had not been so galled with Grief and Tears,
If I had lost him, in his younger years.
Or had the Heaven decreed, that I had brooked
Him, to enjoye the Harv'st, for which I looked.
His Learning, others knew; his life, I kend:
Who even from Cradle, to his happy end,
An Israelite was, without all known Crime,
Momus must say, unspotted all his time.
Till twenty four years of his age was run,
And he to public Exercise begun,
In Schools and Church, loved and admired, as one,
For Grace, and Natures Gifts, a Paragone.
A fervent Fever in five days, short space,
Has me bereaft of my blessed Bird, alace!
Then blame me not, howbeit both Even and Morrow,
I sigh, and sob, and all my days I sorrow.
The Defunct, To his mourning Friends.
NOw is my Soul set free, from earthly Prison strong:
And I now see that sweetest Sight, for which I longed so long.
I am orejoyde with Joy, but Grief, but Care, but Toil:
My Heavenly IOVA I enjoye, within this pleasant Soil.
My Glory now begun, shall once accomplished be,
But intermission, or exchange, for all aeternitie.
My Corpse are closed, but pain, into this earthly Urne.
Leave off, then, Friends, and Parents dear, so bitterly to mourn.
And you, my Mother mylde, lament no more, for me:
The Day shall dawne, when you and I shall each another see.
I pray you, then, leave off, and be no longer sorry:
But walk with GOD, and beg at Him, my fellowship in Glory.
Posuit moerens M. T. M. Pater.

To the Reader.
THese few things following, being of the young Man (Master WILLIAM MICHELL)
his own making, and in my keeping, when these others came to my Press, I
took the boldness here also to insert Them: If, happily, by His Example,
other Youths might be emboldened to tread the like Steps of Religion,
Piety, and Virtue.

E. Raban.

S. M. ILLVSTRISSIMI DOMINI, ALEXANDRI IRVINI, Domini de Drum, Tribuni-Militum
Abredonensis, Domini de Kelli, etc.
DRummius astra tenet, modopossint astra mercri
Do^ibus aucta animi stemmata, census, honor.
Clarus at hoc vili pretio non venit Olympus:
CHRISTI igitur meritis Dru^mius astra tenet.
Hoc monstrant sincera fides, spes pura, peractae
Integritas vitae, Religionis amor:
Hoc larga imprimis pietatis symbola clamant,
Digna datore, DEO grata, benigna bonis.
ALIVD.
SI reddant homines magnos, stirps, census, honores,
Hic quoque magnus erat, test vel invidia.
Si generi virtus praelucens, census honori
Ancilians, meritis partus and auctus honor,
Heroas post fata ferant super aethera: jure
Hic nunc sublimis despicit astra senex.
Sed gradibus nequeunt istis haec culmina scandi,
Foelix ille tamen culmen vtrumque tenet.
Istud, honor, bonis and stirpe priora docento
Relligio, pietat, mensque renata DEO.
S. M. VENERABILIS ET HONORABILIS DOMINI, IOHANNIS VRCHARTI, DOMINI a
CRAIGFINTRI, LETHNITI, CREICHI, etc.
NAturae, virtutis opus, sortisque benignae
Delicias stravit mortis iniqua manus.
Egregij natura viri fund mina jecit,
Stemma, animum, corpus, femine digna Iovis.
Naturam excoluit virtus pulcherrima, tantum
Sensernut cives, stirps and avita domus.
^aece etenim cives, natos^re, moribus, auxit,
Nativam rexit, sustinuitque domum.
Virtutem ornavit par sors; crescentibus annis
Crevit and imperium, stirps, honor atque bona.
Cum tamea haud saturent animum mortalia, terrae
Illecibris spretis, astra petivit, io.
Englished by the Author.
Here lies, at the PARCES Pleasure,
Natures, Virtues, Fortunes, Treasure.
Nature, to make an hopeful Man,
Made choice of him, of such a Clan:
So galland Corpse, so prudent Mind,
As well becomes Heroicke Kind.
Then Virtue, as he grew in age,
Set Natures parts on public Stage:
Where Wit and Valor did bewray
His Worth, unto his dying day:
Whether he settled private Iarres,
Which often end in open Wars;
Or for his Children conquest Rentes,
At highest Rate, with all Consentes:
Or did uphold, rule, and defend,
That Old House* whence he did descend.
In fine: That he might seem more blessed,
His Fortunes lustred all the rest.
As he grew old, he grew in Wealth,
Honor, and all things, safe in Health.
Yet holding all those things as vain,
His Soul has fled them, in disdain.
The Anagram of his Name. Ornatus canis, aere.
Hic ^acet Urchartus canis ornatus and aere,
O quam convenient nomina sorsque viri.
S. M. EGREGII MAXIMAEque SPEI VIRI, D. JOHAN. URCHARTI, Dicti IOHANNIS Filii
natu maximi, summo cum omnium dolor praecoce morte brevi post funus patris
extincti.
SI quod amant anima, possent animare; perennis
Chare Urcharte, tibi vita fuisset humi.
Cum quod amant animae, semper comitentur, ad astra
Tecum animas nostras hinc fugiendorapis.
REVERENDO IN CHRISTO PATRI, PATRICIO LYNDESIO, Episcopo Rossensi.
MAgnifice Antistes me, qualia munera reddam
Aequa tuis meritis hospitioque, latet.
Solvere re grates sors obstat: splendida vestra est
Nostraque sors tenuis: nil nisi vota manent.
His quoque vix locus est, res, cani, semen, honores
Sunt tibi vix votis inferiora meis.
Haec igitur maneant and crescant, vsque precabor,
Hoc tantum superest, accipe, quaeso, been.
MAGISTRO ROBERTO BARONIO, cum redderem ei notas Logicas, EPIGRAMMA.
MOs impostoris dare (Vir Doctissime) verba
Est, tuus and pariter mos mihi verba dare.
Ergo impostorem dicam te? scilicet ambo
Pro donis homini nil nisi verba datis:
Absit, nam incertis solet hic imponere verbis,
At ne fallamur nos tua verba juvant:
Quisquis enim verbis been sit versatus in illis,
Artis eum Logicae nulla profunda latent,
Talia des igitur semper mihi verba, tibique
Acceptum referam quod fluet inde boni.
IN HONORABILE ET RELIGIOSVM PAR CONIVGVM, D. JACOB. and LUCRETIAM IRVINOS, Una
fere extinctos, unaque sepultos, EPITAPHIVM.
VNus avus nobis, torus vnicus, vna voluntas,
Communis nobis sors sobolesque fuit.
Et quid non commune fuit? dum vita manebat,
Vnus erat verae religionis amor.
Par labor and studium, pariter speravimus ambo
Vno posse frui patre, DEO, patria:
Nec modo (quod magis est) fato divellimur: vnus
Penedies ambos, vnica fossa tulit.
Quaeque petebamus vivi, potiemur in aevum
Vna nos vno patre, DEO, patria.
Ergo de nobis merito, qui conspicit vrnam
Dicat, In hoc tumulo parjacet absque pari.
Englished by the Author.
ONe Love, one Wed-locks saved Knot;
One Name, one Stem, one Brute, one Lot;
One Death, one Exequie, one Stone;
One Faith, one pure Religion;
One Hope, one Study, one Desire;
Of that one Country, GOD, and Sire;
We now enjoye, made one of two;
In Life, in Death, in Glore also.
EPITAPHIUM MAGISTRI IACOBI ROSSEI, Rectoris Abredonensis.
SObrietas, morum gravitas, dilectio pacis,
Et disciplinae sedula cura sacrae,
Indictum bellum vivis, assertio very
Constans, Romani saepe furoris obex
Rosseum laudant: quem canis, semine, sensu
In terris dominus, se super astra beat.
EPITAPHIVM D. ROBERTI ARBUTHNOTI, De eodem Equitis.
SCOTIA spectatum civem, tua Mernia Phoebum,
Communem prolem Suada, Minerva, Themis.
Praesidium miseris, gens Arbuthnota columnam
Flet raptam, dum tu Magne Roberte cadis.
EPITAPHIVM IN CHRISTIANM FORBES, Dominam de Streichin.
QVid quod tam celeri cursu rapiare per auras?
Numquid habes subiti fama refer novi?
Heu habeo, at quorsum liquefient pectora luctu,
Istud enim doleas quod revocare nefas.
Mors spoliat miserosque, bonos, puerosque, virumque*
Ara, arca, dulci conjuge, matre pia.
Non igitur mirum, vos hanc si fletis ademptam,
In quos cesserunt tanta, menente bona.
Hoc natura petit pietatis munere fungi,
Ast aliud pietas suadet and officium.
Scilicet vt loetata fuit dum vita manebat,
Vobis perpetuo commoda tanta dare,
Sic vos post vitam debetis far libenter,
Ipsa quod in Coelis nunc sua dona ferat.
EPITAPHIUM SUSANNAE INNESIAE, Uxoris quondam Magistri GVALTERI HAYI, Fratris
Germani D. a DALGATIE, Viri dignissimi: Inde vero Magistri GEORGII HAYI,
TURRAVIAE Rectoris Reverendi, Literatissimi, and Vigilantissimi.
VIxi conjugio insignis, virtute sequenda,
Felix progeny, re pietate, fide.
Hayis nupta fui bis, quorum posthuma fama
Lauds non patitur non moritura mori
Virtutis testes sint quot monumenta reliqui,
Sive inventa animo, seu fabricata manu.
Curia progeniem cognoscit, vulgus honorat,
Et vidi prolem prolis in aede sua,
Rebus posteritas nunc floret: rebus egenos
Nutrivi: rebus nunc super astra fruor.
Fida steti pactis, materque fidelis alumnos
Te docui, fidei CHRIST columnea meae.
Sic vixi, vita tandem feliciter acta
Annis plena, polum patre vocante peto.
In Memory of the right Virtuous and Religious Matron, SUSANNA INNES, Relic
first to an honorable and worthy Gentleman, Master WALTER HAY,
Brother-german to the Lord of DALGATIE: next, to the Right Reverend and
Learned Pastor, M. G. HAY, Parson of TURREF.
TWyse married, a Widow twyse I lived:
First bare the Yoke, and then the Yoke again,
It was my Glore, whereat I never grieved.
But far above those two, my greatest Gain,
The third I buire, that easy Yoke and light,
Of CHRIST, my Lord, vp-holden by His Might.
Still under Yoakes of sweet Captivity,
In middle sort content, my time I spended:
Under the third, I long have learned to die;
Till full of days, at last this life is ended.
With those who were my Yoake-fellowes before*
I mind to reygne in Freedom evermore.
ANOTHER.
IF Birth, if Bounty, Children, length of days,
Might make a modest Matron happy here,
Sho happy was: but shallow happes that stays,
On things below. Now far above the Sphere,
She tramps on Time; counts her Felicity,
Beyond all Time, to live aeternallie.
ANOTHER.
IF Virtue mixed with Grace; if Grace, with Gravitie:
If prudent Carriage be in price; if matchless Modesty.
Her Birth amongst the Best, her course of life was kende:
She lived a modest Matron here, and made an happy end.
SUSANNA-lyke she lived, unspotted, lo, she dies.
None will, none can, the contrare say, but such as lies.
MASTER WILLIAM MICHEL, Student in Divinity, in Aberdene.

AN EPITAPH, Orations and Epistles of this nature, were called EPITAPHS, many
ages since; as any may perceive by Nazianzens Orations, and Hieroms Epistles,
of the like subject.
OR CONSOLATORIE EPISTLE, Upon the death of the said Young Man: Written to his
Mother, By M. R. B. Preacher of the Evangel.
MISTRESS,
IT has pleased GOD, in His most wise and admirable providence, to make
troubles and afflictions in this life common to the godly and the wicked; to
let the world see, that the godly do wyselie seek and expect happiness in
another place; and, that wicked men are fools, to seek for it here, where it
is not to be found. But these temporal calamities, as they have diverse
effects in the evil, and in the good; so they come not to them with one and
the selfsame commission or direction from divine providence. For GOD, when He
sends out great afflictions and calamities against the wicked, such as
poverty, disgrace, sickness, and death, He gives them a full commission, to
hurt and destroy; like that commission which He gave to king Saul against the
Amalekites; 1. Sam. 15. 18.
Go, and utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them,
until they be consumed. But when He sends afflictions to His own
Children, He gives them a limited commission; or rather a loving charge, like
that which David gave to Ioab, and the rest of his Captayns, concerning
Absalom, against whom they were to fight; Deal gently (said he) for my sake,
with the young man, even with Absalom. 2. Sam. 18. 5
For He has ordained the afflictions of the godly, how sharp and grievous
soever they be, to hurt little, and for a moment; but to profit much, and to
all aeternitie. And for this effect, as He gives to His own, in their
troubles, that great Comforter, whose secret operation upon their hearts, is
most powerful, and wonderful; so also He has appointed others, who, for the
time, are not alyke visited, Amos 6. 6.
or afflicted, to be grieved for their affliction, to mourn with them, Romans
12. 15.
to speak words in season unto them, Esaias 50. 4
and to comfort them, by that comfort, wherewith themselves have been
comforted of GOD. 2. Cor. 1. 4.
The performance of this duty, as it is incumbent to all, so especially to
those whom He has called to preach that Word, which is the Storehouse of
Comfort. And therefore I, who although most unworthy, am, by GODS singular
Mercy, adjoined to that number, hearing of your great heaviness, and sorrow,
for the departure of your son; and knowing you to be one of those, whom GOD
has ordained to be gently dealt with, and comforted in all their
tribulations, I thought my self bound, to write something unto you at this
time, for your comfort; especially, seeing I know more of that young Man his
secret walking with GOD, than any other: and consequently, am able to give
you most particular and credible assurance, of the holiness of his life, where
from you may easily collect the happiness of his death. Of this he himself gave
some signification upon his deathbed, to those who were then present with him.
For when that last hour (to him a most happy hour) approached, he, after
the example of Hezekiah, comforting himself with this, 2. Kings. 20. 3.
that he had walked before GOD in truth, and with a perfect heart, did, for
confirmation of that, which he said, take himself to two witnesses: to GOD,
the only Eyewitness of the secret counsels of his heart; and to me, then
absent from him, as to the only Eare-witnesse on earth, unto whom he had
revealed his most private carriage. Wherefore I thought my self obliged, to
declare to the world, but in special unto you, in time of this your
heaviness, how earnest and effectual a desire that young man had to increase
in grace, to overcome temptations, and to live an Angelical life upon earth:
that you being informed thereof, may rejoice for the grace he had then, and
for the glory he has now.

Then, for your comfort, consider, I pray you, with me, only these two
particulars: First, what has been GODS dealing toward you in this matter:
Secondly, what has been GODS dealing toward him. For is His dealing be
toward you both in mercy, I can not see what reason you have to entertayne
such excessive sorrow.

As for His dealing toward you, and others in the like case, Job. 1. 21.
Job expresses it in these two short sentences: The LORD gave, and the Lord
has taken away; or, as others interpret the words, has taken back to
Himself: which, at the first hearing, I confess, seem to afford small
argument of comfort. For the first seems not to importe any matter of joye,
because it looks to the time bypast, and only signifies, that once we were
happy. The other seems to importe real misery, because it is meerlie
privatiue, and signifies, that the happiness we once had, is now removed.
But if we shall duly weygh these words, and convenientlie apply them to the
present purpose, we shall find, that much matter of joye and comfort lies
hidden in them. Wherefore mark, how Job begins at giving; The LORD (says
he) gave. If he had not begun so, perhaps he would not have ended so as he
did; that is, with blessing GOD.

MISTRESS, here begin with Job, and say, The LORD gave. Remember the LORDS
favor toward you, in giving you such a son, and continuing him with you
many years; to the effect, that ye may joyfullie praise and bless His Name.
David puts these two well together; Psalm. 103. 2.
Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits. For if we
would blesses LORD, we must carefully remember His benefits. Lest therefore
your melancholy make you deficient in paying this tribute to GOD, remember,
with a thankful heart, how GOD made you to rejoice at his birth, John 16. 21.
when ye saw, that, by you, a man-chylde was borne into the world: and, that
GOD had given you a son, (according to our Scottish phrase) world-lyke. But,
shortly thereafter, He gave you a far greater argument of joye, when He
made him to be borne again, of water, and the Spirit, into another World,
which shall never have an end. And whereas before he was only world-lyke, or
like to men, He made him God-lyke, or like to Himself; drawing, by His own
finger, that portrature of Himself, according to the which, Man was first
created. Yet this time of his infancy, was to him and you both, but as it were
the seed-tyme; and that both in respect of Nature, and also of GRACE. For he
had then a reasonable Soul, which is the seed, and the original of a humane
or reasonable and moral conversation: But, during that time, he could not
come to the use of it; neither could any then perceive, whether he would
prove a wise man, or a fool. Likewise, he had then received Baptismall grace,
which is the seed, and the original, of a Christian, spiritual, and
heavenly conversation. But no use, or exercise, could he then have of it:
neither could any man perceive, whether he would thereafter walk in the way
of Piety, and Christianity, or not. But GOD, who is the sower of both these
seeds, and makes them to spring up, where He pleases, and when He
pleases, did make them very soon to spring up both together in him; yea,
also to bring forth abundant fruit: so that even from his bairnlie age, he
had the wit of a Man, the knowledge of a Scholar, and the carriage of a
Christian: and, consequently, was to you, during* all these years, which
interveaned betwixt his chyldhood, and his deatth, an argument, or ground, of
great expectation, and a matter of continual joye. Now, when GOD has removed
him, and taken him to Himself, shall all these Favors of GOD toward you be
buried in oblivion, as his bones are buried in the earth? Or, if they remain
in the Register of your memory, shall they be remembered without
thankfulness? Or, Luke 1. 46. 47. 49.
if your soul magnify the LORD for them, ought not also your spirit to
rejoice in GOD your Savior; seeing He that is Mighty has done great things
to you, and Holy is His Name. It is a gross and fond error, that only such
good things, as we do actuallie enjoye, or look to enjoye, are the matter
or cause of rejoicing. The very Paganes saw the absurdity of this error:
and therefore Seneca, comforting Polybius, against the death of his brother,
tells him, that he ought not to think himself injured, by losing such a
brother; Consol. ad Polyb. c. 29.
but rather much benefited, by using and enjoying his piety so long. And he
adds, that a man is unjust, and unreasonable, who is not content, that he
who is the bestower of a benefit, dispose of it according to his pleasure:
That he is too greedy, who thinks it not gain, that he once received such
a benefit; but rather loss, that he has restored it, or that he now
wants it: That he is ungrate, who thinks the end of former delight, an
injury: And, that he is a fool, who thinks that he has no fruit of good
things, except when they are present. And if an Ethnicke said so, we, who
are Christians, ought, much more, to say, and think so; seeing we know, that
all good things, which do befall us, as well bypast, as present, and to
come, do flow from one Fountain, even that Fountain which is the sourse of
all our happiness; that is, from the love of GOD. Those who have fared well at
a Feast, are not grieved when the dishes are removed; because they know that
they were appointed for the use of the guests only for a time. And, if dishes
be removed before the Feast be ended, far less are men grieved, because
they expect a new service, and other more dayntie dishes to be presented in
their rowme. So ought we not to be grieved, when temporal benefits are
removed: First, because we know, those things were only lent us, for a
time. Secondly, because we know, those are not the best things, which GOD
has appointed for us: but we look for better, even for such as eye has not
seen, and ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man. 1.
Cor. 2. 9.


The other sentence, to wit, The LORD has taken away, seems, as I said
before, to importe real misery: for, the sweeter a benefit is, the more
bitter and grievous is the removing thereof: and it is accounted worse, to lose
former happiness, than never to have been happy at all. But first, I know,
ye never placed your happiness in any worldly thing; but in the light of
GODS Countenance, who is only able to put singular joye in men's hearts, even
then when al worldly things do fail. GOD would never have bidden us rejoice
evermore, if He had not given us a permanent and unchangeable cause of joye.
And therefore Chrysostom marketh well, that whereas all men in their
particular Trades, Sermon. 18. ad ^^^. Antioch
and negotiations, aim at solid and permanent joye; those only attain to
it, who fear GOD: because those only have gained the true root of pleasure,
and the source, or Fountain of joye. This Fountain, he tells us, is like
the Ocean, from whence all waters have their original; and that because of the
greatness thereof. For, says he, as a spark of fire, falling into the Sea,
is easily extinguished; so, whatsoever evil comes upon us, it falling into
a great Ocean of gladness, is soon extinguished, and evanisheth.

Secondly, that degree of temporal happiness, which ye had by your son,
stood not so much in having a son, as in having a good, pious, and virtuous
son. And this degree of happiness is not removed, but much augmented: and so
settled, and established, that now unto all aeternitie ye shall have such a
son. For his knowledge is now perfected; Faith being changed into Sight; and
Hope, into Fruition: and it is fred from all doubting, inquyring, searching,
and from all that trouble and sorrow, which here is increased, while knowledge
is increased. Eccles. 1. 18
Such like, his holiness is now perfected: for all the defectes of charity,
or the love of GOD, which were in him, yea, are in the best of GODS Saints,
while they live here, are now removed, together with all his temptations,
fears, sorrows, blottes, and infirmities. So that, that crying for mercy,
which while he lived was in his mouth continually, is now changed into a
perpetual Hallelujah. And the Angels, who before were delighted with his
poenitentiall tears, and groans, are now rejoiced, to hear his Songs of
Praise and Thanksgiving, which with the rest of those Heavenly Quiristers,
he sings to the honor of his Maker.

But perhaps ye will say, I know my son to be so as ye say; but how shall I
think that I have now such a son, Non amisi mus, sed pramisimus.
seeing he is separated from me by Death? I answer; Your separation is but
for a short time; and therefore sorrow not as those, who when they are
separated from their friends, Non reliquit ille nos, sed antecessit.
have no hope of meeting. Paganes may here make us ashamed; Consol. ad Pol.
cap. 28.
for even they could say of their departed friends. We have not lost them, but
have sent them before us. Dimisimus illos imo consecuturs pr^misimus.
So Seneca, writing to Polybius concerning his brother's death, said, He has
not left us, but gone before us. And writing to Marcia in the like argument,
Consol. ad Marciam Cap. 19.
We have sent them away; yea, being shortly to follow, we have sent them
before us. Indeed, it is true, they who are dead, shall never return to us.
If we knew no more but this, we might justly give way, even to the very
excess of grief: But blessed be GOD, who has given us this comfort, 2. Sam.
12. 23.
that although they can not return unto us, yet we shall go to them.
Wherefore, as when men are a-flitting from one place of habitation, to another,
some persons of the family go before the rest, to that new dwelling place,
and others stay behind, intending shortly to come thither also: and
therefore, are not grieved for the separation from them, whom they sent before
them. So we, and our families, are upon our flitting, Heb. 11. 10.
to that City, having foundations, whose builder and maker, is GOD. It is not
GODS will, that all should flit at once; but He will have whiles the Husband
to go before the Wife, and whiles the Wife to go before the Husband; whiles
the Parents to go before the Children, and whiles the Children to prevent the
Parents. What cause of great sorrow is there here, if men and women would
rightly consider this, and firmlie believe it?

Thirdly; seeing the happiness of Parents consists much in the happiness
of their Children, if death was to your son Advantage, Philip. 1.
or Gain, (as undoubtedly it is to all those who die in the LORD) how can
ye think it so great a loss to you? If he has gained so much by the
change, how can ye think your self so much hurt by it? If an earthly king
had sent for your son, promising to adopt him, and make him his Heir, the
sorrow which you would have had for wanting his company, would easily have been
swallowed up of the joye which ye would have had for his advancement, although
ye had never looked to have seen him again. The application is easy, and
the comfort unspeakable; if ye consider, that GOD, who has sent His
Messenger [ Death.] for your son, has given him that incorruptible Crown;
in comparison (...) the glory of earthly Crowns, and (...) Thrones, is but
baseness.

Now, to come to GOD'S dealing toward him; I hope it shall afford you great
matter of joy, if ye consider it, as ye ought. I will not speak of GOD'S
dealing toward him, in bestowing natural and moral gifts upon him; as
desire of knowledge, paynfull diligence, in stryving to attain thereunto,
sharpness of wit, soliditie of judgment, and an happy progress, far above
all his Condisciples, in humane literature, Philosophy, and Theology. These
were, indeed, great benefits of GOD: But it was not the rememberance of these
things, which vphelde him at the time of his death: Nor yet can the
consideration of these things now afford you that joyful assurance of the
happiness of his death, and of his estate now after death, which ye desire
to have. Wherefore, let us consider GOD'S dealing toward him, in the work of
his Salvation: And let all those who are exercysed with such Trials, and
Conflicts of Conscience, as he was, learn at him, to wait patiently upon
GOD, until they get the victory. It is well known unto you who are his
Parents, how carefully he remembered his Creator, Eccles. 18. 1
in the days of his youth: and how, while he was yet a Child, GOD, by His
Spirit, possessed his heart, making him to find heavenly delight, in all
spiritual exercyses, whereof he was then capable: which appeared by his
ordinary, and almost perpetual frequenting of them, to the great admiration
of all who knew him, and to the great benefit of his Brethren and Sisters,
whom, at all times, he was careful, partly by his example, and partly by
his pious conference, to aedifie, and to draw with himself into the way of
Godliness. He found nothing, then, but sweetness, and delight, and heavenly
ravishmentes in serving of GOD; (for it pleases GOD, often times, so to allure
young ones to His service) but, afterward, GOD having furnished him with
greater strength of Grace, called him to harder, and more unpleasant, but yet
more glorious service; that is, to wrestle with many temptations, doubtinges,
and fears; and for overcomming of these, to seek the LORD'S Face, with
extraordinary humiliations, prayers, and fastinges; which by frequent exercise
became so ordinary unto him, that it was harder to him to desist from them,
than to abstain from his bodily and natural food.

By these exercyses of devotion, he made singular progress in that strayt
way, that leads to Life: yea, I may boldly say, that he did outrunne many
who had begun to run therein long before him. Yet, so insatiable was his
hunger after Righteousness, that whereas others thought he did too much, 1.
Cor. 9. 27.
especially in keeping his body under, that his Soul might the more and more
be lifted up unto GOD, he himself thought he did nothing: ever most humbly
esteeming himself an unprofitable servant; and, with PAVL, Phil. 3. 13.
fortgeting the things that were behind. And because he intended, and most
vehemently desired, to serve GOD, in the holy Ministry, GOD having fitted
and furnished him with many singular graces for that Calling; to his frequent
exercyses of devotion, He added extraordinary and invincible diligence in the
study of DIVINITY; especially in meditating upon the holy SCRIPTVRES, and
reading the best Commentaries that he could get thereupon. Epist. 3. which he
calls Nepotian's Epitaph.
So that as Jerome said of his friend Nepotian, (who also died young) he made
his breast CHRIST'S Bibliothece. In a word, then, he desired to know nothing,
but CHRIST, and Him crucified: 1. Cor. 2. 2.
neither labored he for any thing earnestly, but only to be crucified
with CHRIST, Galat. 2. 20 6. 14.
and unto the world. This his earnest and industrious care, to seek GOD'S
Face, as it was to me, whom he often acquaynted with the secret estate of his
conscience, a matter of great joye; so, at last, it procured to himself
unspeakable contentment, and tranquillity of mind, together with a confident
relying upon the mercy of GOD, and the powerful intercession of JESUS CHRIST.
Happy, yea, thryse happy was his wrestling with GOD; for thereby he obtained
and inherited the Blessing. Happy was his hungering and thirsting for
Righteousness; for in due time he was satisfied, and filled. Happy was his
seeking of GOD; Psalm. 34. 4. 5. 6.
for the LORD heard him, and delivered him from all his fears. And, therefore,
let all those, who seek the LORD with the like earnestness, and diligence,
look unto him, and to their own comfort and encowragement, say, as DAVID
willed others to say of himself; This poor man cried, and the LORD heard
him, and saved him out of all his troubles.

To conclude, then, GOD'S dealing toward him, was as it uses ordinarily to
be toward His own Elect. For, as GREGORY the great, Lib. 4. Moral. cap. 7.
and ISIDORE following him, tells us, GOD, after He has converted a man
unto Himself, Lib. 2. Sent. cap. 8.
first makes him to find heavenly delight and joye: or, as GREGORY himself
speaks, Blandimen ta dulcedinis
the allurementes of sweetness, in His service, to the effect he may be the
more enamoured with it, and that he may the more easily with-drawe his heart
from those carnal pleasures, with which before his conversion, he was
bewitched. Thereafter, when through continuance, and increase of grace, he is
enabled, and fitted, to endure hardness, as the good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST,
2. Tim. 2. 3.
the LORD, partly to keep him from presumptuous confidence in his own
strength, and partly to exercise his faith, patience, and Christian fortitude,
withdraws from him often times the sense or feeling of His gracious presence;
and so exposes him to many sorrows, fears, and doubtinges: yea, often times
He suffers him to be vexed with dangerous motions, and strong inclinations,
to great and grievous sins, all which GREGORY comprehends in one general,
calling them Conflictes, or Fightinges with Temptations. But, in the end, that
gracious and kind LORD, Certamina tentationu^.
who will not suffer us to he tempted above that we are able; 1. Cor. 10. 13.
but with the temptation, also makes a way to escape: He, I say, gives to the
man whom He has so exercysed, inward rest, and refreshment; mitigating his
temptations, pacifying his troubled thoughts, and chearing his heart with
heavenly and unspeakable consolations: Upon the which (says GREGORY) his
Soul perceaveth joye, Moxque (...) immensam de spe coelest^ loetitiam percipit.
passing all measure, through the hope it has of heavenly Glory. So then, to
express this purpose to you in few words, (and I shall do it in GREGORY
his own words) those who are converted to GOD, do meet, Prius ergo illos
dulcia susc^^^^nt quae consolentur, postmodum amara quae exerceant, and tunc
demum suavia and sublimiae quae confirment.
first, with pleasant or delightsome things, that they may be comforted:
thereafter, with bitter things, that they may be exercysed: and, last of all,
with sweet and sublime things; even with joys unspeakable and glorious, that
they may be confirmed, or corroborated, against all difficulties, crosses, and
temptations.

Ye may see now, Mistress, how gracious and merciful GOD has been in His
dealing both toward you, and toward your son: as also, how great cause
ye have to leave off your mourning for his departure, and to rejoice for his
advancement to that Kingdom, James 2. 5.
which GOD has promised to all those that love Him. For if ye rejoiced at his
birth, because a Man was borne into this world, Dolor mortis velut obstetrix
homines ad meliorem vitam educit.
have ye not greater reason to rejoice at his death, seeing a Man, who is the
son of your womb, is borne into a better World? If your heart was glad to
see him so lovinglie and heartily welcomed to this world, by the imbracinges,
kisses, Greg. Nyssen. in Oratione de mortuis.
and lovely speeches of those who were then present; should not your heart now
dance within you for joye, seeing ye have good reason to think, that
immediately after his departure, he was most kyndlie welcomed to that other,
and better World, by GOD his Father, by CHRIST JESUS his Redeemer, by that
innumerable company of Angels, Hebr. 12 22 23.
and by the spirits of just men, made perfect? For seeing there is such joye in
Heaven, Luc. 15.
at the conversion of a sinner; Luke 15. 7. ^0.
what joye, I pray you, is there at the coronation of a sinner? And, to
conclude, if ye rejoiced so much with your friends, at his Baptism, because
he then became a CHRISTIAN, and was admitted into the Church militant, should
ye not now far more rejoice, seeing he is, by death, translated into the
Church triumphant? where, as a crowned Christian, and as a glorious Saynct,
he beholds that most amiable, and lovely, yea, most Glorious Countenance
of GOD; Psalm. 16. 11.
in whose presence there is fullness of joye, and at whose Right Hand there are
Pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.

