The most Famous and renowned History, of that worthy and illustrous Knight
Meruine, son to that rare and excellent Mirror of Princely prowess, Oger the
Dane, and one of that royal bond of unmatchable Knighthoode, the twelve Peers
of France.

Wherein is declared, his rare birth, and stranger bringing up, with his most
honorable conquest of Jerusalem, Babylon, and diverse other Cities from the
pagan Infidels: with many other memorable accidents of wondrous consequence.

By I. M. Gent.

Printed at London by R. Blower and Val. Sims. 1612.

To the Readers whosoever they be.
GEntle Reader, I am to deal with thee in this History of Meruine, as those
which bid men to a great feast, that is, to present them first, with that which
may procure an appetite to meat, and work a desire to eat: so give I thee
the first part, to cause thee to have a more longing desire unto the second
part, that shall in the full conclusion of this History give thy desire his
expected satisfaction, the which, the next Term (and if I live) I will not let
to perform. Thus committing thee to thy delight in reading, and thy favorable
acceptance in allowing my Labor, I bid thee well to fare, till I fairly
perform my promise. ()

Thine ever ready to pleasure. I. M.
The Table of the first Part.
THe famous History of the noble and valiant Knight Meruine, and first of his
birth, and the gifts given him by the fairies. Chap. 1. The Fairie Gratiana
repented her self for the carrying away of Meruine: 2 how she found a ^ermit
keeping three goats: 3 how he showed her the way to find the port of the sea.
chap. 2 The Fairie Gratiana accorded to the desire of Barbin: 2 Barbin carried
her to M^ntment unto his house: 3 how he made his wife believe that Meruine
was his son. chap. 3 Berea daughter of the king of Mermont fell in love with
Meruine, being at school: 2 of the loue-paine she endured, and other
accidents. chap. 4 Meurmont the king proclaims a great Just for trial of his
knights: 2 Meruine does great wonders. chap. 5 The treason of Brohars against
Basina sister to Minea the great daughter of Basina. chap. 6 Meruine promises
Minea to fight the combat for her sister: 2 of his great daughters in Brandis:
3 how he behaved himself: 4 how Minea delivered him from death to
imprisonment. chap. 7 How Minea, Meruine, Jacob, Tyrus, and other merchants
with the 200. pagans departed from Brandi^ to deliver Basina to Montesteure: 2
and of the battle fough* be^ween^ Meruine and Brohars and the eu^nt. chap. 8
Of the honors done to Meruine for his victory: 2 how Minea bronght him back
again to Brandis: 3 his imprisonment, and other adventures. chap. 9 Jacobs
report to king Mermont of the acts of Meruine: 2 Bereas joy: 3 the private
conference between Berea and Jacob. chap. 10 Of the dispatch of Baucamonts two
knights to Mermont: 2 Mermont in despite of Baucamont imprisoneth them: 3 of
the assault, and death of Clarissa the coward. chap. 11 The arrival of Jacob
and Barbin at Brandis: 2 the presenting of the letter to the Court: 3 Meruine
is delivered to them: 4 Minea persuaded Croysant to accompany Meruine, which he
did with 400. horsemen. chap. 12 The encounter between Galien Rotherus the
son of Oliver and Meruine: 2 of the good knight Drohes, who yielded himself
to Meruine. chap. 13 The great battle before Montment: 2 Mermont taken
prisoner: 3 Meruins arrival and recovery of Mermont: 4 Meruins exploits in
the battle: 5 his second delivery of Mermont, and other accidents. chap. 14
The honors Mermont did to Meruine: 2 Meruine made chamberlain of the Court: 3
Gratiana for his sake made lady of the chamber of Berea with other accidents.
chap. 15. The private discourse between Marant and Berea, and of her answer:
2 how she came to the understanding of Marants envy to Meruine: 3 the treason
he intended, which he had procured Calix his cousin to execute. chap. 16 Berea
hiding her self, came to understand the treason: 2 her revealing it to Drohes
chalengeth Calix before the king, and pawneth his gage. chap. 17 King Mermont
went to the forest to find out Meruin: 2 the occasion and manner of his
finding: 3 how he brought him to Montment, etc. chap. 18 Of Pimons embassage
from Esclamart to Baucamont, touching the four sons of Gaultier of Denmark:
2 and how the peace was concluded between Mermont and Baucamont. chap. 19
Florion the youngest brother was taken prisoner by king Bandus: 2 how the
pagans were overthrown: 3 how Florion was given in exchange for king Goham
Gaifiers brother. chap. 20 King Mermont, Baucamont, Meruine, and 200000. pagans
arrived before Damascus: 2 the loss the Christians received by the valor of
Meruine. chap. 21 The Christians were vanquished by Meruine: 2 how Guyon,
Bertran, Thyerrie, Florion and Huon of Bordeaux were taken prisoners, and
carried to Damascus. chap. 22 Charlemaine departing from France to see the holy
sepulcher, arrived at Babylon, and was received of king Gaultier: 2 of the
embassage two Pagans brought from Meruine and Gaudisse: 3 a counsel holden by
the Christians, who demanded day of king Karaheu, of Florion, etc. chap. 23
Charlemaine and all the Christian army sallied out of Babylon: 2 of the great
battle: 3 and how Meruine slew Guyon of Denmark his unknown uncle: 4 how
Charlemaine, Gaultier, and the twelve peers were taken prisoners, and their
army discomfited. chap. 24 Meruine and the pagan host came before Jerusalem: 2
how the Citizens rendered up the town, etc. chap. 25 Meruine would not consent
to the death of the Christians: 2 the great battle which fell out in the
pal^ace: 3 how the Christians aided Meruine, and how the pagans came and cried
him mercy. chap. 26 Meruine departing from Babylon brought Charlemaine and the
other Christians to the castle of Turgon: 2 of the appar it in of the Angel
unto Charles: 3 how Meruine knew himself to be the son of Oger, and the
Fairie Morgue. chap. 27 Meruine delivered Charlemaine and the twelve peers:
(...) Drohes instructed him in the points of religion: 3 how Berea was baptized
with the rest of the city, and was (...) Mathaburna. Chap. 28 That by means of
Guyda the daughter of Baucamont, Bettran and his brothers escaped imprisonment:
how king Bandus dangerously assailed them, and how they wonderfully defended
themselves. chap. 29 How Meruine after the conquest of many cities went to
Damascus to deliver the four brethren, etc. chap. 30 The Pagans were
overthrown, and the Christians went and converted Damascus, etc. chap. 31
Mermont by treason brought Meruin to Minor: how Gaultier after the departure of
Meruine went with all his army to Montment, where he found Mathaburna, to whom
he told how her father was become a Christian, etc. chap. 32 How Meruin was
tr^iterously imprisond, and the description thereof: how by the persuasion of
Mermont Butor went with an hundred thousand pagans to Montment: how Minea
advertised Gautier and the other christians. cha. 33
The most ancient famous mother of Histories, the exquisite History of Prince
MERVINE, the son of OGER the Dane, who conquered Jerusalem, Babylon, and
diverse other Cities from the Pagans* with many memorable accidents of wondrous
consequence.
CHAP. I.
The famous History of the noble and valiant knight Meruine, 1 and first of his
birth, 2 and the gifts given him by the Fairies.
YOu may read in the history making mention of Oger duke of Denmark (a
country near adjoining unto France) how that after by his prowess he had
conquered from the Turks, Pagans, and Infidels, Babylon, Jerusalem, and many
other towns* (countries imp^gning our holy Christian faith) he the same (...)
discourse much too long, and finish up may book only with descriptions. But
many tedious nights nor days had not run out the laboring circuit of their
minutes, before the beautiful Morgue, sister to king Artus, became all
inuir^ned with his love, and by the excellency of her subtle skill entangled
him as much or more with her affection, in so vehement sort, that the Lady who
was passing wise, prophet like knowing what in after time should be^all them
two, purchased so much her own blessedness, that she was carnally accompanied of
the good duke Oger, and that in so good an hour, that by the providence of the
Highest, she became with child, the very sight whereof added an unspeakable joy
to the heart of Oger: and all the fairies of princely estimation, holding a
counsel amongst themselves, said one to an other: Now, and not too soon, is
it sufficiently apparent that the Fairie Morgue has not ever in unprofitable
^lumber consumed her time with Oger, because by her waking deed she has given
testimony to us all, that now she has conceived, and is great with child. If
it prove a son, it is reason that for his chivalry he be more esteemed
than any living in his time, because his brith is more honorable than any of
former age has bin. Thus argued the Fairies about Morgue their companion, who
naturally bare her fruit nine months, and in the extreme end of the last, with
great travel she was delivered of a beautiful son, such, and so fair, as
until then had not any eye beheld. To his birth came many haughty and
excelling Fairie dames, who beholding the eie-inchanting beauty of the Babe,
blessed it, and gave it to the mother, who with an ouerflowing heart tide-full
of most dear affection, seeing his incomparabl^ features, wherein true beauty
had only sworn to hold his habitation, kissed and rekissed it, as if
numberless salutes should make his happy fortunes numberless in account, and
then lifting her eyes to heaven, thus or in this manner prayed: True God of
glory quoth she, I humbly implore and require thee, that of thy holy bounty
thou will bestow such or so much more divine spirit, puissance, and true
magnanimity on this Babe, happily begotten on me, as thou did inspire in my
dear love Oger, his princely lord and father, and that he may alonely resemble
or exceed him in the glorious actions of everliving knighthoode. So sweetly
spoke Morgue these sweet orizons that the God of heaven exhaled her prayers,
and registered in the (...) of the sky, that he should become the most
redoubted in the world. After came king Artus into the chamber of the Lady,
with him Oger and many other barons, to see the new child: at whose approach
came to Oger a fairie Lady, who being of a glorious and renowned spirit, was
famous for her virtues through the Fairie land: her name was Meruina, and she
said unto him, Good duke of Denmark honor me in giving my name unto thy
son* and make me eternally happy, by being his happy godmother. ^a^y quoth Oger,
I consent. After these speeches was the infant carried to be baptized, and was
named Meruin, Artus and Orient, two mighty kings being his godfathers: who
after the Sacrament performed, gave him rich gifts.

2 Which so soon as Meruina perceived, she said unto them: My Lords, you have
enriched this infant with the treasure of this world, but I will make him
wealthy with the ^^wels of Heaven. Your gifts handmaids to Fortune, by
^ischance may (...) from him: my gift the controller of (...)* shall for no
decree forsake him. I will therefore, (...) will is my gift, for I give my
will, that he be ever (...) the eyes of all creatures, and especially amongst
Ladies, who during his life, shall h^ld him dearer than their own lives. At
these speeches the Fairie Gratiana, (who all the while leaned on the fountain)
grew wroth, as well for envy of the gifts given to the little Meruine, as for
a private indignation that she bare unto Morgue, in that she had not enjoyed
some of those ^ient night-pleasing delights, which she enjoyed with her
excellent Oger, and therefore answering an untuned thought with an high ^a^ring
voice, said: And I from that great God which created the universe, and man to
his own image, give him this gift, that Meruine shall fail in the assault of
one battle, and be taken prisoner with such enda^agement, that no fortitude
shall ever release him, till a man whose mother died in her childbirth be his
deliverer. Such words as these vtterd the false fairy Gratiana, which effected
according to her wish, because he was delivered (as says the History) from
Minor, with whom he was five years prisoner, by Robastus, as shall h^^eafter
appear in process of the story. Meruina hearing Gratianaes hate-vomiting
words, she grew exceeding sorrowful, till sorrow coming to rage, made her
with her fist give Gratiana such a blow on her face, that the blood which
should have made her cheeks blush for her immodesty now sought to drown thearth
for sustainin^ her* This ^^m^lt bred (...) among the Fairies, (...) with a
world of evils on the noble Christians. Dispitefully sad was Gratiana for the
blow received, but in regard at that instant she could not do what she would
(tutored by patience) she would not what she wished, yet in her soul made a
solemn protestation solemnly to revenge her injury, as indeed she did. After
a fairi^ named Galiana, de^^rous to moli^^e the angry Meruina, came to her,
saying, Sweet sister, why should fury have such furious superiority in thy
fair self, as to bathe they hand in a bl^^dy ocean? Believe me, d^are
creature, thou ought rather to have wash^ with patience in white lillies:
but be mild, appea^^ thine anger, and I will give to thy little son a gift
shall (...) all thy i^ies* and this it is* what pri^cesse, lady, or woman in
the world he shall daine to kiss, that and the self same joy shall she
possess by that outward imbracement, as if he had consumed whole nights in
those pleasures, which to nature is only private: and since I am ascertained he
shall be furnished with incomparable valor, I give him this gift, that he shall
never be slain or vanquished in prinate or public battle: and when he has
lived till marriage has made him father of a son of twelve years old, then
my will is that he return into Fairia, and having kissed me before all the
Ladies of our land, make me his especial love, who never had nor will have any
till his return. When Meruinaes ears had received the music of Galianaes
speech, she gave her infinite thanks, and caused king Artus, king Orient, and
all the lady Fairies to do the like, only Gratiana excepted, who stood
sorrowfully dumb for her blow received. The child (as you have heard) was
baptized, and rebrought into the Chamber of his mother, who notwithstanding the
torment of her travel, yet through the love of her fair infant, she forgate
thexceeding passion of her more than great sorrow: and when the Ladies came in,
they found her fast asleep, whom they being loath to awake from out her
slumber, they gently laid the child in her bosom, and so departed without any
noise making, only the false Fairie Gratiana staid behind, who had alonging
desire to imbesell the infant Meruin, of whom the other Fairies had no regard,
neither that she staid under any false intent: but when all the Ladies were
gone, unkind Gratiana took little Meruine from his mothers breasts, and holding
him in her arms, said, Now do I wish, and I would I wore in the self same
manner that at this present I am, at the port of Luterne, which stands upon
the Sea: and so soon as ever she had spoken, instantly she and the infant were
in the same place, whence issued the never to be abated sorrow of Morgue: when
she awakd and found not by her the best of her dear self, I m^^ne her dear
Meruin. Whereupon she demanded of her attendants whether he had bin brought
back unto her, or no: Yes Madam, said one of them, Madam Mer^ina his
godmother, laid him close by your self. Alas said Morgue, and where is he then
become? Then began the good Lady greatly to lament, and to power such
uncontrolled oceans of tears from the heavenly windows of her eyes, that the
roaring tempests of her languor was easily heard of Artus her brother, Orient,
Orger and all the Fairie Ladies, who incontinently rusht into her chamber, the
renowned Oger asking her what she ailed, auowing that the greatest monarch in
the world should not dare to do her that wr^ng, which his sword should not
redeliuer and revenge. Then her attendants (for dumb sorrow kept her silent)
told him how Gratiana whom Meruina had stricken, in revenge of her disgrace had
stolen the child, and borne him to some uninhabitable climate. Oger hearing
this, gave displeasure leave to tyrannize upon his heart, and by the greediness
of his passion robbed his love the fairie Morgue of some of her lamentations:
for after consideration had recalled her reason, and hope assured her that no
power would unworthily be against her, she gave a comma (though no period) to
her mourning, and recomforted her only lord Oger with this or like oratorie:
Oger my love said she, that divine power which has sent us Meruine, will (if
it please him) preserve our Meruine, and when the winter days of our extreme
fortunes has fully bound up our hopes in forzen ribs of ice, we shall again
regreet the cheerful April of our Summerioyes, and gather new blossoms from
our drowned plants. Thus spoke Morgue to the good Oger, whom we will leave, and
speak of the Fairie Gratiana, who (as you have heard) cari^ed away Meruine.

CHAP. II.
1 How the Fairie Gratiana repented her self for the carrying away of Meruine,
2 how she found a hermit keeping three goats, 3 how he showed her the way to
find the port of the sea.
GRatiana (by her wish) suddenly arrived in a wood neighboring the port of
Luterne, but being in a place so desolately solitary, tainted with remorse in
her own conscience, heartily she repented herself, as well for having stolen
the only hope of that age, prince Meruine, as also for having exiled her self
from Fairia her native Country: wherefore desirous to return, and holding the
infant in her arms, she said, Now do I wish (and be my wish auailable for my
woes sake) would I were in Fairia in mine own palace, so, and in such manner,
that I neither do nor shall need ask pardon for my misdeed. Thus spoke
reuengefull Gratiana: but the story replieth that because she had revenged her
self* by her unlawful stealth, the God of the Christians grew offended with
her, and took from her both her power of wishes and wishing: which when the
Fairie perceived, she fell on her knees and said, alas, only merciful God* I
know I have grievously offended against thee, yet notwithstanding thy pity
greater than thy power, may pardon my misdeed, which both repents and
displeases me, and then turned she her speech to Meruine, saying; Ay me, sweet
child, that mine offense to thine infancy has lost me the delight of my
life, and yet shall the burden of more then my sorrow (unless (...) gracious
power prevent) be borne on thy tender shoulders: woe is me* what had I in my
head when I conceived this wickedness against thee, nothing but evil? yet
despite these eu^^s ought some good thing befall me, in that I will nourish
the child so long as I shall be able with such ac^^es as God or fortune shall
send me.

2 Gratiana in this manner repenting her self, rose up, and began to go to a
valley beneath the wood, with the infant in her arms, and in her passage a
long, she perceived a holy hermit, who reposed himself in the same wood,
keeping three goats in that forest. When the Fairie came nere him she saluted
him, and said, Grave wise man (for so thy white hairs, heralds of experience,
tell me) where, I pray thee, stands the next town or village? or where may I
find any woman to give suck to this fair child, which is almost pined to
death with extreme hunger, whilst, alas, I have nothing to give it but my
tears, too unsavory a firrop for so princely a taste. Hardly had she ended
this last word, but by the will of some almighty willer, one of the three
goats left the hermit, and came to the Lady, making not bestiall, but rather
divine signs, that she would suckle thinfant: which the Fairy ouerioyd to
behold, thanked God, and kissing the babe, laid it on the ground, and the goat
placed hirselfe near to the child, that it might quietly suck, for such was
the will of the Greatest. When the hermit saw this miracle, and saw divine
charity much greater than Nature, have ruling in a si^ple goat, grew much
abashed, asking the Fairie if she were a Christian. Father (quoth she) I am a true
Christian: and then she began to discourse unto him all the story of her evil,
how she had stolen Meruine, and for that cause, briefly to speak, she told him
from point to point all before written. Whilst the hermit sat amazed, and
many times signed himself with the cross, in token of wonder, than said he
unto her: Fair love know that I am a baptized Christian, living in this forest
yet are all the inhabitants of this climat none other but pagans and Infidels,
which neither love nor adore the name of Christ Jesus: and therefore to thend
you may be circumspect in your affairs, know that if you confess your self a
Christian, you and this Fairie child shall die the death.

3 Therefore be wisely wary, and I will show thee the way which leads to
the port Luterne, where ariue many merchants of foreign lands: and to the end
that this fair creature, which you name Meruine, shall sustain no want, I
will give you the goat which has offered it self unto him: for such is the
will of him that wills all goodness. After this speech, the hermit, named
Crespin, which all his time had been holy, and holy Crespin entitled, having
showed her the port, took leave* and Gratiana addressed her self to her way,
commending to God her and her intention. So parted they, the Fairy carrying the
child, and the goat attending both: at length she came unto the port where she
perceived a small bark, that with ho^sed sails was even then in departing:
whereupon she cried, Lords, for Mahomet and his temple Mecas sake stay, and
let we pass with you. When the master understood her, and that she spoke of
Mahomet: (for they were Painims) he replied, Haste thee then love, and if thou
haste, we will stay a little for thee. At these words the Fairie added such
wings to her feet, that immediately she entered into the ship, and with her
entrance the ship departed, plowing so speedily through the furrows of the salt
waves, that in short space Gratiana perceived a very fair citti^. Gentlemen
(said she to the Pagans) I perceive yonder below a very strong city, I pray
you tell me what town it is, whether it be Christian or Paynim? When the
jealous Pagans heard the demand of the Fairie lady they mistrusted in
themselves that she was a Christian: wherefore one of them fiercely answered
her: Lady, art thou a Christian, or one of our law? Reverend sir (said she) I
was never Christian, but am a Pagan. Then one who was of Montment, by calling a
merchant, amazedly viewed, and often reuiewed Meruine, whom the oftener he
beheld, the oftener he saw his beauties redouble. Whereupon inamored of the
infants perfection, he came to the lady, and asked her if she would sell her
child? In good faith (quoth the Fairie) no: for it is the son of my sister:
for whose love (so far as I am able, if Mahomet give me leave) I will
carefully nourish it. Madam (said this merchant, whose names was Barbin) from
what country is your journey derived? Sir (said she) from Antioch, where
infinite misfortune has chanced to my kindred, who have been traitorously
slain by a false Christian, on whom I beseech Mahomet rain an eternal curse:
for he has despoiled me of all my goods, and left me no comfort, but this
silly infant, my nephew, whom by the divine aid of Mahound I nourish, that he
may be my glory in my decaying and ruined age.

CHAP. III.
1. The Fairie Gratiana accorded to the desire of Barbin 2. Barbin carried her
to Montment unto his house. 3. How he made his wife believe that Meruine was
his son.
BArbin the Pagan finding the Fairy would by no means sell the princely
Meruine, yet inly beholding the necessity wherein she stood, said unto her,
What age (dear lady) has this child aspired unto? By Mahomet (answered she)
it has not fully accomplished three days. Trust me (said the Painim) if you
will go with me unto Montment, you shall be so well entreated as your degree
requires, and your child nourished aecording to the excellencies of his
beauty: only to one thing you must accord which though it carry falsehood in
the forehead, yet shall it keep danger from your heart: and that is, to
affirm this child is mine: for which report I will rain shewers of gold and
silver into your bosom, and guard yourperson and fortunes safer then the
waking dragons the Hesperian Cytrons. To these words Gratiana inclined her
ears, whilst her thoughts to her thoughts thus whispered: Since it pleases
the God of heaven, and that destiny is my director, even as I have stolen
this most excellent infant (for which I know I have grievously sinned, lost my
freedom, and am utterly banished from those dignities I inioyed as being a
Fairie) so will I now do my greatest endeavor for this princely orphant. And
for I know nothing in me to reobteine my losses, I will what he will, more
bequeathi^g our fortunes into the hands of God then according to the desire of
this Pagan: and then exalting her words which before were silent, she said:
Fair sir, from whom I behold a divine affection, issuing unto my forsaken
nephew: tell me, are you married, or no? Madam, I am (said he) and have been
this forty years, and more: so have I also one fair son, not far from
hence, whose name is Tirus Sir (quoth she) since it pleases you to offer us
the good we can desire, we will ever obey you, and go where you shall please
to dispose us. In such discourses as this they consumed the night till the next
morning, who had no sooner saluted the Sun, but they arrived on the shore,
impouerishing the ship to make the land more wealthy.

2 Barbin and Gratiana bearing the little Meruine in her arms, marched
together, and the goat followed them, the which whenever the child cried,
was ready with her dugge to appease his weeping. And as they went Barbin said
unto her: Exceedingly am I delighted with the beauty of this infant, therefore
dear lady forget not to affirm as you have promised. Of that she bade him
take no care, for her care should be, that no fault should issue form her but
carfulness, He highly commended her answer, and then further said: Lady,
diverse discourses have I had with you, and yet have I not demanded the name of
this child: let it not then be offensive that I now importune it. Sir (quoth
she) he is called Meruin, and so shall you name him in your own house, when
you come to your wife: but woe is me, a mighty suspicion throbbeth in mine
heart, lest your wife should imagine you have begot this child of me, and so
by that means turn an undeserved wrong upon my life. Lady (said he) abandon
that suspicion, and be dreadlesse of such evil: for my wife by nature is so
simple, that in an hundred years, she would not be mistress of such an
imagination: trust me, she is noue of those devilish creatures, who ouerlooke
the fortunes of their husbands, but only wise, in that she wants the depth of
such in-searching wisdom. In this sort, clipping Times wings with the
tediousness of talk. they entered into the fair City of Montment, in whose
streets Barbin stayed not, till he came to his own house, where he found his
wife, who ouer-ioyed with the joy of his sight, ran and threw her arms about
his neck, saying: Sweet love, dear life, all my comforter, welcome all
welcome: that I see thee I am satisfied: and thy life suffices me. Love (said
he) thanks to Mahomet, I live, and have happily well made exchange of my
merchandise: for I have brought home spices, drugges, and oiles and with them
richer much than all them, this fairechild, and this young lady, whose birth is
renowned, yet her virtues much more magnificent: therefore for my loves sake,
do to her and her virtues service. Sir (said his wife) have you indeed brought
home this infant?

3 By Mahomet (said he) I have, neither will I di^^emble with thee, he is mine
own, begot by me of a young lady of Milan in Lumbardy, who was triumphant
fair, for fair in her only triumphed, but in this child's birth she died: and
here behold her sister, who has promised to live with me. Wherefore sweet love
and only companion of my bed, be kind to it, which is the glory of my kind,
neither let them want what is behoouefull for their extremities. Also let my
son Tirus know as much, because he is his brother, and command him to come
unto me. Love (said she) for a truth, thy son is at the school, but no
sooner shall the morning prepare way for the suns beams, but I will send for
him unto thee: mean space I hold it convenient we seek for some Nurse for
this fair infant. But he told her it was needless, because that gentle goat
supplied the place of such a loving foster-mother. All that he told her she
believed. So the Fairie and Meruine remained in the house of that merchant, and
was nursed with the milk of the goat: for such was the providence of the
Greatest, who had predestined him to conquer a monster with three heads,
named Logrus, which was begot by a devil on the fairy Gratiana: which devil
made earnest petition, that this Logrus should never die, but by a mortal man,
that never was norished with the milk of a woman: for he thought it impossible
to bring up a child without woman's milk. But the gentle Meruine, whose fame
is renowned in the marble ^^rmament, slew him, and cut off his three heads: as
ye shall read in the end of this present history: till when we will return to
our former matter.

CHAP. IIII.
1. Berea daughter of the King of Meurmont, fell in love with Meruine, being at
school. 2. Of the loue-paine she endured. 3. and other accidents.
OUr present history, which anciently has been extracted out of the Library
in the holy monastery of Saint Dennis in France, demonstrateth, that Meruine
the son of the wise excelling Duke Oger, was so rarely nursed by the goat,
and so carefully maintained by Barbin and his wife, that among all the breathing
stars of beauty within the city of Montment, nor amongst all the excellent
faces of that country, was there found any worthy to be compared to his, much
less equal. Being five years old. Barbin provided him a grave
schoolmaster, exactly furnished with all the liberal Sciences: under whom the
gentle Meruine (to whom Nature was never found a stepmother) learned more than
all the rest (and there were many) that were in the School. All which made
Barbin, his wife and the fairie Gratiana exceeding joyful. The story says,
that the house of the schoolmaster, under whom Meruine learned the studies of
Oratorie and Logike stood next to the house of the mother of her, who had
nursed the Kings daughter, who at that time governed Montment, Tarrarie, and
Luterne, who called himself, Mermont, and his wife Marina. This king Mermont,
had sent his daughter to a castle ealled Turgon, standing within the city,
where a grave lady instructed her in all the accomplements of virtue: the name
of the princess was Berea, excelling all the maiden race of that country in
beauty, yet her wisdom equalling her fairness, but her virtues excelling
both. This virgin Berea often times went unto Meruines Schoolmaster, to
learn the hidden secrets of Art (for she was wholly dedicated to philosophy)
and one day (fatal above the rest) as Meruine was before his master recording
his lesson, the virgin with an affectionate desire (for Love at that instant
had armed himself to surprise Perfection, cast her eyes upon him, whose beauty
in her eyes like the Sun reflecting on a rock of cristall, redoubled each
feature, and of unions made so many infinites, that her desire grew more
innumerable, and loves wounds in her heart altogether numberles.

2 At that instant the princely maid was not above ten years old, and Meruine
was fully as much: yet was her constancy, discretion and wisdom so agedly
grave, and of so excellent a temper, that albeit continually she suffered the
extremest extreme of loves martyrdom, as a troubled thought, a tormented
heart, a di^temperd brain, and a dying spirit, yet did she never in any sort,
either to her father, mother, or most private companion, by the smallest shadow
give testimony of her hugest torment: notwithstanding, when loveliness drew
her self from her self, only to be alone, then would she sommon her conceits,
and muster up whole armies of cogitations, to think* confirm, and maintain
the beauties of her Meruine, and to every conclusiue argument, swore by
Mahomet, he only should be her love: yet had she no sooner decreed that
excellent judgment, but when she remembered him to be the son of Barbin the
merchant, then found she contrary motions, auowing faultines in her election.
But love, who is as reasonlesse as he is infinite, drew her from those doubts,
and only taught her thus, I will, because I must. Then was her love such and so
great, that for the space of ten days she left the use of meat or drink*
and found no ease but in the sight of Meruine, so intolerable was her frenzy,
and so impatient her desire, desiring Meruine, who all the while had not one
thought of either her, or of her passion: only when he perceived her ernest
regard of him* he being full of princely courtesy, would humbly salute her. All
which salutations were torments to increase her pain and woes that held her
wounds more open: for why, she durst not discover that, which all her wits
could hardly cover, no though in it she had been assured of a safe recovery.

3 Thus remained she the space of five years: in thend whereof came an
ambassador to Montment, who ascending the palace, and entering the hall,
where he found the mighty King Mermont accompanied with his Queen, his
princely daughter Berea, and many of his private Barons, before whom prostrate
on his knees he fell and said: Mahomet the Great, all-holder of our estate,
save and defend the mighty Baucamont King of Damas, who by me wishes thee
health, and thine own wishes, regreeting thy puissance with this letter, which
I humbly entreat thy majesty to accept. When the redoubted King Mermont heard
the speech of the ambassador, he stood amazed to think what business
Baucamont should have with him: but taking the letter, and breaking opne the
seal, he read the tenure thereof, which instantly sent a displeasing sorrow to
his heart, because the King of Damas in prow^ words commanded his daughter
the fair Berea in marriage. But Mermont calling the messenger said: By
Mahomet, thy master is much too saw^y and arrogant to command me to give him
my daughter; the which notwithstanding her young years I had done, but that in
despite he has sent so mean an embassade for her. Wherefore be well
ascertained, he shall never possess her, though it c^st me a hundred thousand
of my choicest subjects. Is there any colorable show in thy master, to marry
my daughter, when he sends no greater a peer of his country then thy self
to demand her? But what he has done is but an index of the pride with which
his heart is furnished; say so to him, for if thou so say it not, and what
besides else I have said, by Mahomet in despite or thy King, I will make thy
head poor, in taking away thine ears, two dulauditors Mighty King, answered
the messenger (whose feare-shaken heart made all his body tremble) be well
assured I will deliver all that you have spoken, or what else your majesty
shall please to command me. Be gone then (quoth the King) and bid thy master
seek him a wife in some other climate: for Berea soareth higher then the sun
has power to carry his eielight. Thus parted the messenger, on whom no rest
either by night or day dared to adventure till he came before Baucamont his
Lord and Sovereign, to whom he said: By Apollo, great King of Damas and my
liege Lord, in vain is thy care to entertain love, when thou have lost
Berea, whose eyes only create love: in brief, her must thou never enjoy, for
so her father has sworn, nor I in despite of thee mine ears, unless I tell
thee that so he has sworn. More would not Baucamont endure to hear, but all
enraged with fury, swore by Mahomet, Alcheron, and the shrine of Meca, he
would enjoy Berea, yea though she were the sole paramor to Jupiter, or guarded
with an Herculean army: all which to perform, he instantly sent forth
summons to muster all his people, and to command all his tributaries to serve
him, protesting with force of arms to find that joy which by force of words
he could not enjoy. But only to desteny are the decrees of heaven known, for
he erred in his conceits, since into the world was borne a creature excellent
enough to defend Berea, I mean rarely accomplished Meruine the son of Oger,
supposed the son of Barbin, who at that instant was grown mighty in body,
more in mind, most in beauty. Barbin who tendered him exceedingly, showed him
the trade of merchandise, and how to exchange for the greatest profit: but the
bent of his mind was contrary to that course, for his mind wholly was addicted
to ride horses, toss pikes, plant battles, and other feats of famous
chivalry, to which a while we will leave him, and will speak of the king
Mermont.

CHAP. V.
1 Mermont the king proclaims a great Just for trial of his Knights. 2
Meruiue does great wonders.
WHen the King of Damas Ambassador was departed, ye mighty King Mermont (not
without cause) fearing that Baucamont would make war upon him, proclaimed a
solemn tourneament to be held within the city of Montment, for trial of all
his knights, whi^her assembled an innumerable company of kings, princes,
barons, and knights, all subjects unto him; amongst the rest came a wealthy
Prince named Clarissa much more beholden to Fortune for his riches, then to
Nature for his valor: for though he was not reputed a coward, yet those which
knew him knew he durst not fight. This Clarissa lodged in the house of Barbin.
And when the first day of triumphs came, which by decree were to continue
three days, and a massy cup of gold proposed for a prize to the Uictor,
every one armed himself, and Clarissa also armed himself outwardly more rich
then any, though inwardly his heart was tattered with a trustlesse resolution.
When Meruine beheld him armed, he humbly entreated the Pagan that he might
attend his person to the Tilt-yard. Clarissa when he beheld through the
reflection of the young man's beuty an unmatchable splendour of concealed valor,
he exchanged his fear to hopeful audacitie and condescended to his entreaty,
des^ring the youth that if he saw (as doubtless he should) any cold streams
of fountains engirdle his temple, that he would s^eke with the fire of his
infant virtue to dry up those undoing ouerflowes. Meruine coragiously bade him
take courage, for there was no doubt of hard measure, only (said he) it is
convenient that I have a horse to run after you, by which I may sustain you
in the greatest danger: sweet are thy words and reasonable (answered Clarissa)
and forthwith commanded, and a horse was delivered to Meruine, on which he
mounted and attended Clarissa, o^ whom spurs were not spared till he came to
the tilt-yard. When the Lady virgin Berea, who was environed with her mother
and the other Ladies beheld the gallant young Meruine enter into the listes, her
heart daunced in her cristall bosom, as if not there, but in him was her only
paradise. Woe alas she loved him dearly, who neglected her wholly, and often
whispered to her soul, so Mahomet would, I would Meruine, to whom only I am a
prisoner, whose beauty only has surprised mine affection, were the son of
some pagan potentate, then would I follow him, then would I be his handmaide
then would I serve him, then would I go with him; but if he would espouse me,
O my soul! how happy were my love in such a happy requital, other then
himself no goddess would wish for: for poverty with him is richer then the
palace of the greatest Emperor in Turkey. Thus would the excellent Berea often
dispute with her self, imagining Meruine still the son of Barbin the
merchant. Anon the tourney began, where staves flew in the air like dust,
and dust like smoakie ^^aues threatened the element; at length a pagan fierce
and strong ran with his lance in his rest against Clarissa, to whom he gave
such an unkind blow, that had not young Meruine bin, he had tumbled to the
ground: but the princely youths virtue sustained him, yet so heavy was the
encounter, that Clarissa as much or more scared than wounded, returned to his
lodging, where being disarmed, he laid that heavy complaint on Fortune which
justly should have bin entitled to his own weakens. Meruine seeing him
disarmed, his heart tickled, and his blood fiered with an emulation of honor,
which set an insatiate longing on his thoughts to give some blows and to
prove his body: wherefore he fell upon his knees to Clarissa and said, I
beseech you fair prince, for the honor of Mahomet, bestow your arms upon me,
to the end I may go to the triumph, and approve my ^rength. And here do I
solemnly protest, that if I can encounter him whose proud arm hatgh dained
you this indignity, to do mine uttermost endeavor, to humble him a low or
lower then the earth. After Clarissa with astonishment had heard the young
princes desire, he willingly accorded to his wish: yet so, that Meruine should
not accuse him: but when the Iusts were ended, if Fortune made him conqueror,
he should leave the honor, not to himself, but to Clarissa. Meruine to all
most willingly agreed, saying further: Believe me prince, I will do my best to
gain the wealthy cup of the King, which also you shall have for my desire is
knowledge, no honor. At this Clarissa commanded his chamberlain to arm
Meruine with his own arms, which he so secretly did, that the squiers of
Clarissa knew it not. When he was armed, they brought him a most puissant and
fierce courser, on which he mounted, and so departed, attended on by many
squiers, who fully imagined him to be their Lord Clarissa, who slept in his
chamber like a dromedary with his cowardice. Meruine, whose spurs were
Honor, and Desire, rode so speedily that in the end he entered the lists,
where valiantly he meant to win or conquer his fortune.

2 In the end charging his lance, he ran like a whirlewind against him who had
hurt Clarissa: to whom he gave a requital blow, with such puissance, that he
cast horse and man to the ground, so furiously, as for fifteen days after he
lay without motion. Then another Pagan of his consort, turned toward Meruine,
on whom he brake his lance: but Meruine, who took pleasure in that martial
exercise, behaved himself with such virtue, that with the trunchion which
remained in his hand, he gave him such a counterbuffe, that breaking his heart
in his bosom, the Pagan died instantly in the place. What shall I need to
make a tedious discourse of a hasty conflict? In brief, Meruine so
courageously behaved himself, that ere his thoughts could be capable of rest,
with his broken lance he threw ten to the ground, of which not one ever rose
again, to the wondrous amazement of all the beholders. Then began the cry of
the multitude, to exalt him, thinking it had bin Clarissa, every one exclaiming
aloude, Clarissa of Affrike is he who ought only to be esteemed. At this
exclamation, a Pagan* on whose helm all the day before. Honor sat twining
her golden tresses, now envious that Clarissa had courted his mistress, swore
by Mahomet, he should never enjoy her favor: and forthwith pricked toward
Meruine, who had newly recovered a lance from one of his squires, and turning
his horse, either incountred other with such a violent encounter, that their
staves flying into small pieces, straue which piece should first fly into
heaven to report never like seen vigor. But for all the Pagans force, it was
impossible to move Meruine in his saddle, who sat like a tower against a
tempest, or a rock against the rage of the seas fury. But Meruins assault of
a clean contrary nature, lift the Pagan up into the air with his lance,
and thence let him fall with such violence, that he brake his right arm: and
yet Meruine brake not his staff, but with the same overthrew four more dead
to the ground. At this began a greater cry amongst the knights, then before,
saying: Clarissa of Affrike is only invincible, and Conquest herself is to
him a handmaid. Then the king caused a retreat, and the triumphs to cease, for
so a king intreted: and every one departed to his pauilion, and Meruine to his
fathers house, with the squires of Clarissa: in whom joy showed the
exceedingnesse of joy, because their lord had gained the honor of the day. But
Meruine made great haste to come to the chamber, which he ascended in all
secret manner, for he had an exceeding great care that Barbin should not know
any thing. When he was come there Clarissa lay solely accompanied with the
chamberlain, who before had delivered to Clarissa all what Meruine had done,
he took him kindly about the neck, and kissing him, said: Mine honors
crown, and my lives garland, live ever in this circle of mine arms, as thou
shall ever be in the compass of my heart: for by thee am I renowned in the
court of king Mermont, and exalted for most valiant through the Pagan provinces.
Many other speeches he used of kindness, all which Meruine either excused or
requited. To stand longer on accomplements, were tedious, and tediousness
weariness: therefore in a word, all the honor of the three days triumphs,
and the cup of gold, the reward of the victor, were by the valor of Meruine,
given to Clarissa, as most wise, and most valiant. And he was received by the
king Mermont, to bear in battle, if any assailed him, the masters banner of
Mahomet. So had unknown resolution exalted well known cowardice: and though
Meruine, in nothing was more careful then in secret keeping this secret, yet
the most excellent virgin Berea afterward attained the knowledge thereof by
Clarissas chamberlain, which alter served Meruine, who as you have heard,
knightly began, and against Bau^mont continued with greater marueiles: for he
recovered king Mermount from his enemies. But let us leave those high actions,
till they fall more fitly for our history, and let us a little speak of
Barbin, who sent Meruine to traff^que with another merchant, named Jacob* and
with Tyrus his son, to whom he gave great means for trade, and four
thousand pounds, which he ought another merchant in exchange of war^s he had
before bought. When Jacob and the other merchant knew Meruine should go with
them, they were vnwoontedly rejoiced (for he was dearly beloved of all men)
and said, if Mahomet would but grant them safe conduct, they doubted not, but
now to attain the full perfection of wealth. Then they departed, Meruine, his
brother Tyrus, and the good merchant Jacob, to whom Barbin committed his
children: for he had auowed to them his best endeavors: and at length came to
the port, where being imbarkt, they found the winds so agreeable to their
course, that in short space, they all arrived at the port of Brandis, and went
to lodge at the sign of the Hearts horn, where Jacob was accustomed to inn:
and found the hostess sitting sad and alone at the door, whom Jacob
saluted, and inquired if he might there be lodged. The hostess, whose name
was Minea, answered: you may, and then sighed: for great was the inward trouble
of her heart. Then the tables being covered, they fate down: and the hostess
with regardfull eyes beheld Meruine, rarely surprised with the incomparable
beauty, and wondrous furnished lineaments of his body, which she beheld in him.
But leave we them with their accates, and let us speak of another matter.

CHAP. VI.
1 The great treason of Brohars agaiust Basina sister to Minea. the great
danger of Basina.
MInea the Lady of the house where Jacob, Meruine* his brother Tirus, and the
other merchants lay, had a sister named Basina, whose comely features, and well
graced favor, had not without desert purchased her the title of a Fair
creature: besides, to those beauties was wed so much wisdom, discretion and
modest government, that one without error might well commend her for most
perfect. This Basina had to husband a pagan, passing wise in their Law, and
very expert in the Art of Horsmanship: who altogether frequented the wars,
tourneis, and schools of chiualry: his name was Croisant, and he embraced as
the only jewel of his life, one only friend Brohars, whom he loved
exceedingly, because he imagined the other loved him as vehemently, which in
troth was but falsehood and dissimulation. For Brohars became mortally inamored
with Basina, the wife of Croisant, insomuch as he made a vow to his own s^ule,
that unless Destiny it self prevented him, he would that forbidden fruit,
which Nature, and the custom of divine Laws most vehemently prohibiteth. To
further which irreligious Oath, a day happened wherein Croisant went from his
house in the city Montesteur, to a certain tower himself had newly erected,
and the traitorous Brohars taking advantage of his absence, entered his house*
where he found the Lady Basina, who received him kindly, because she showed her
husband loved him dearly, and setting his lust-inflamed self close by her, as
then accompanied with virtuous imaginations, he with witty (if witty may be
imputed to an act so vnwitty) and violent arguments, laid open the monstrous
desire of his uncontrolled will: which when the Lady understood a sooth in the
meaning of so bad a meaning, she answered him, it was against the laws of
hospitality to offer so hard amends for so great a merit, his speeches being
as unfit, and his desires frantike: and for herowne part, rather would she be
di^membred piece-meale, then think that her though^s should think of any but
her husband. Wherefore, in conclusion she told him, if ever again his lips
gave leave to his tongue to tell her the like villainy, she would give notice
unto her husband, who thenceforth should not him for most inhumane. Whilst
they were thus discoursing, stood by them one of the gentlewomen of the Lady
called Ysea, who not seeming to regard their parlee, well understood and heard
all they had uttered, as well his monstrous assault, as her modest defiance,
all which was to her a notable safeguard, as hereafter shall appear. When
Brohars had received this cold comfort to his accu^sed desire, he left the
Lady might^ly perplexed in heart, and swear by Mahomet, to bring to ruin both
her renown and virtue. As the traitor went, he sommoned all the damned
parliament of his senses together, to bethink some notable treason against
her, whilst the good Lady* innocent of all evil, wept to think that men
should be so wicked.

The story reports that this Brohars had a servant named Brison, whom one day
when Croisant was at Montesteur, he called unto him, and said: Brison, come
hither, long have I nourisht thee, better then a servant, and do love thee as
dear as my son: tell me, to work revenge of my greatest enemy, would
thou not adventure one fortune? say yea: Brison said yea* and I will heap so
much treasure to thy store, that Turkey shall not boast of oue more wealthy.
Sir (quoth Brison) I will perform all your will, let your will, will what it
will: therefore ^peake, for there res^eth nothing but that you command me.
Well does thine answer please me (replied Brohars:) then this it is, Basina
the wife of my companion Croisant has done me that injury, which poiseth
mine heart down to death with sorrow: neither shall my soul take rest, till
revenge rock me asleep. The mean I have thus devised: thou in the evening
shall go to Montesteur, and in the chamber of Croisant, if possibly, with all
secrecy hide thy self till midnight: at what time I will undoubtedly call
upon him, who not for a world will fail my will: then so soon as he is
issued out, thou like stealing Salmacis shall lay thee down in his pla^e, with
all the ^ilent secrecy thou can devise, to the end that the false Basina*
whose hate to me is now infinite, may without suspect suffer thee. Long shall
thou not there remain, but Croisant and I will return: to whom I will tell,
that of a long time his wife has lived disloyal with thee, with many other
arguments of her inchastitie.

Thus did he set abroach his treasons to Brison, who accorded in every point to
his masters villainy* and for execution thereof, they parted and went to
Montesteur, where Brohars found Croisant, who did entertain him as kindly as
he loved him dearly: and in discourse they wasted the day till night with
iron scepter arrested all creatures to rest: at what time Brohars took leave
of Croisant, and told him, that very eare^y in the morning he was to use his
presence in an urgent affair: to which Croisant said, he was ever ready to
perform the office of a friend and his will. Thus the false thinking traitor
departed and left ^rison. Croisant and his wife, who when the hour of bedtime
came, betook them to their rest, thinking of nothing less than that which
they never knew, to wit, evil. Basina at that instant was great with child of
a son, who in aftertime highly exalted the Christian faith. Brison, in whom
treason had taken root, and now began to blossom, according to his masters
directions, was so close hid in the innocents chamber, that the cunningest
searching eye could never perceive him: every minute protesting to himself to
accomplish the treason, for which he adventured. Anon, the night, as half
ashamed to behold such intolerable shame, whippt her misty wagon with such
haste through the heavens, that in the eyes of all creatures she had lost her
pre-eminence, and yet had day in the sky no preregatiue: so as of waking eyes
it was then called twy-light. In this fatal hour arose Brohars, and coming
to the palace of Croisant, sent a squire to tell him he stayed for him: at
which first sommons, by the help of the same squire, Croisant attired himself,
and so departed without disturbing Basina, who as then slept soundly, for her
innocence kept her from care-taking. Scarcely was the good Croisant without the
limits of the Chamber, but Brison the varlet of Brohars, profaning so holy a
receptacle, entered into the bed, and lay by Basina. By this was Croisant and
his false fairs-seeming friend mounted upon their horses, and gotten without
the walls of the city, when Brohars thus began to discourse: Long time is it
since (my dearest second self) I made the disloyalty of thy wife apparent to
thy weak vnretaining ears, yet armed with flinty dullness, thou have denied
thy heart leave to believe me: and now therefore, if thou will prove, by that
proof a more auailing Orator. And for the inseparable love and holy marriage
rites of our long ^onioyned friendship, I will advise thee, like him that is
the purest part of my being. Yesterday when the declining of the Sun made the
day deny to be day, as if glory were gained in being adopted the evening,
Brison my servant reported to me, that he had enjoyed the excellencies of thy
excellent wife, this two years and better: which shameful report of a
villain, so galled me, that drawing my rapier the traitor hardly with life
escaped: yet seeing him by flight repriued, I thought it in some measure my
duty, to let thee know so high a scandal, both that thou might revenge
and regard it. And by Mahomet he reported further, that the false woman
concealed him many nights in a press, in thy withdrawing chamber, where the
strength of my imagination makes me believe he is at this present* which if
thou will approve, and we find true, by Jupiter he dies, had he the lives
often thousand. Hard it is to say, whether at this discourse Jealousy or
Sorrow took first hold on the heart of Croisant, yet both so exceedingly
tormented him, that led by the fury of his passion, he and Brohars leaving
their squires behind them, returned back to his house, where entering secretly
at a posterne gate, they lighted a torch, and mounting into his bed chamber
found Brison laid by Basina whom envious sleep charmed against this miserable
adventure. Brohars at the first sight drew his rapier, and slew Brison in the
bed, ere almost any eye would have judged he had seen him in the bed (a
just reward for so unjust treachery.) Then said Brohars* (dear self) how
sorry am I for thy shame? by Mahomet, ^he judgment of b^rning bears in it
too much lenity: and by Jupiter, were she my sister, I would hold it treason
against the gods, if I excused her from being an instant sacrifice. Ha
Croisant, Croisant, Let her be burned, let her be burned.

2 At these words, the no ill-thinking Basina awaked, and with an amazed
shamefastness, sweetly blushed to see her husband and Brohars so near her
bed: but when she saw the sheets not full so white as her cheeks exceed them
in blushing and perceived them all stained with a warm goarie liuorie, then
she scricked out aloud, and asked, what meant that prodigious token of
tragedies? Ah strumpet, false breaker of wedlock, and worse then both,
(answered Croisant) burnt shall thou be for the sin wherein this night I
have found thee: and then drawing his rapier, he drew the innocent lady by
the hairs, who dead-slaine with amazment, lay at his feet. Whilst, Brohars
(ever damned for this action) thus proudly insulted over her: Basina (quoth he)
many times have I told thee I would manifest thy sin, yet would thou not
desist to sin, but evermore increase thy sin with Brison my servant, whom
this night I have slain in thy bed, amidst the paradise of his embraces.
Traitor, said the lady (awakened with these words, as with a crack of
thunder) falsely thou lie. Dear love and lord, all dearer then my soul, my
Croisant, vouchsafe to hear me. O for pity cover thy shining weapon, and let
my words have through thine ears a gentle passage. Never have I in my thought
been guilty of that execrable treason which he unjustly urges, nor would I
be, were I tormented with worse then fires torture. All this my false imagined
shame, vilde traitor, thou have vene author of, because I have neglected
thine own monstrous desires, which (by heaven) dear husband, he has more
then this whole year prosecuted. Falser then falsehood (said Croisant) too
apparent is thine evil: and then shaking his sword over her, like the wing of
a haggard faulcon over a surprised dove, he draw her from her bed, and had
there severed her guiltless head from her as guiltless body, had not Isea
her gentlewoman come forth, who seeing her lord tyrannising our her poor
innocent Lady cried so loud, that many barons which belonged to Croisant, came
forth, and repriued the Lady from the hands of their then too cruel lord,
saying: Alas my lord, what will you do against your excellent wife, whose
virtuous wisdom, and wise virtue, is to women an example, and to men a just
admiration? Lords, said he, her ill is beyond the bounds of ill, and more than
the degree of illness. It is proved, it is proved: and then he repeated all
that Brohars had reported, and himself seen. Lords, said the Lady, by
Mahomet, or what other god soever takes true patronage of our soul, my inward
thoughts are innocent of this accusation. With that Isea, who (as ye have read)
heard all what had before passed between Brohars and the lady, both his
be^^iall assault, and her divine repulse, said: By Jupiter, the god and patron
of our country, my lady in thought and deed is altogether giltlesse: and this
treason, false Brohars, is the invention of thy brain, because she has ever
lothed thee and thy detestable desires. When the lords heard Iseas constant
affirmation, they chid their lord for too rashly following his own will: and
bade him listen to Isea, who protested the ladies most pure pure innocence,
auerring withal, the appeal she made against Brohars. Whereupon they told
him, it was convenient to use advised means in so great an action: which was,
that if Brohars would accuse the lady of such detestable ilnes and approve it
against some knight in equal combat, that then the lady should have respite
to find out a champion to defend her honor. By Alcheron (said Brohars) which
contains the law of the holy Mahomet, I consent. And I (cried out the lady)
for pureness is my Sanctuary. Then was Croisant appea^ed, who caused his wife
to be imprisoned in a strong tower, giving her one whole year for quest of her
defender: but in all that time she could not find any knight, who dared
encounter Brohars: for he was valiant, fierce, and courageous, and so excellent
a man at arms, that the world knew not a better, had not the shamefulnes of
his treson poisned the virtue of his prowess. When Meruine, Jacob, and the other
merchants came to lodge with Minea, there wanted but three days of making the
year accomplished: so that poor Minea became her own tormentor, because her
sister Basina in all that space had not found one that durst undertake her
quarrel: yet it happened in supper time, that Jacob troubled to see her sorrow,
desired one to move her to come to him, thinking that meats mirth would expel
minds melancholy: and she more to satisfy him, than to please her self,
came, and set herself next to Meruine. Then they demanded the cause of her
grief: to whom she reported all the treason of Brohars, and how her innocent
sister within the spare of three days should be burned, if some divine power
vouchsafed her not a knight to defend her. And when Minea had reported this,
she sighed with such extreme ardencie, that all the company were moved with an
extraordinary pity.

CHAP. VII.
1 Meruine promises Minea to fight the combat for her sister. 2 of his great
dangers in Brandis. 3 how he behaved himself. 4 how Minea delivered him from
death or imprisonment.
When Meruin the renowned issue of Oger had heard the Ladies discourse, who had
in feeling terms deliuerd the danger wherein her sister stood, Ho^our that in
his first creation was married to his soul, could no longer he held within the
limits of Oblivion, but as twere chidden by virtue for his former silence,
brake from his hony-breathing tongue, and swore to the Lady by Mahomet wh^m he
adored, he would be the defender of her sister, and make treason in the death
of Brohars more than most ugly: and then rowsing himself like a princely lion
at the Suns approaching, he e^^lted his voice that all the company might
understand him: Lady (said Meruine) for Mahomets love, who is our countries
protector, clear thy heavenly eyes, that they may no more distaine thy divine
countenance, for thou have found out a champion which delights to subdue
treason, and will be proud to publish to the world thy sisters not offending:
the fear of his fame, which in others ingendreth fear with cowardice, on me
begets an invincible courage, so that I will either clear her reputation,
or end the kalends of my life in enterprising her delivery. When Minea heard
him, she embraced him in her arms, and said, divine blossom of some excellent
stock, thou from whom youth has only a glorious title, since first I beheld
thee, I did adiudge thee of an incomparable courage: blessed be therefore that
blessed one which begot thee, and blessed be the womb which bore thee, go on
fair youth, Justice shall be thy warrant and Innocence thy protector. When Tirus
considered the promise of Meruine, he grew sad and said: Alas fair brother,
what will you enterprise? what, will you take in hand nothing but your own
overthrow, and the loss of our fathers business which against the hour cannot
by you be performed? Brother (said Meruine) doubt not but our fathers business
shall be effected, and by Mahomet (which astonisheth the world with thunder) I
will not for all the wealth in Montment, I will not forbear to succor a
distressed Lady, the rather for the love of th^s Lady to whom we are all
be^^lden. At this they al beholding in him a constancy, half angry to be
contradicted, left off further arguing till the next morning. Minea, throughs
exceeding joy that she had found a champion for her sister, would not suffer
her eyes to close with sleep all that night, but rising early in the morning,
gathered together 200 Turks to conduct Mernin to Montesteur: who soon by day
had awaked Jacob, and the rest, saying, my dear friends and consorts, be not
wearisome to your selves in attending my back-returne, neither be displeased
with what I undertake, but frolike and triumph: for why I will discharge the
charges of you all: if by* my want you be a little hinderd, let patience
mittigate your anger, and whatsoever I gain, I will willingly give amongst
you. With that came Minea into the chamber to bid them good morrow, to whom
Meruine said, Lady, provide me of good arms, and an excellent horse, and let
want of coin be no decay to my fortune, hold, there is store, disburse and
^pare not. When Tirus perceived him, his color changed, and he grew pale
saying, what mean you brother, so unnecessarily to spend and employ our
fathers money which he has given us to pay to the merchant, to whom he owes
it. Brother (said Meruine) regard not silver and gold more then earth, the love
whereof makes the minds of men worse then the worst of earthinesse: better love
I to be well armed and bravely monnted, then here and there to consume virtue
by exchanging merchandise. Thus spoke the honorable minded Me^uine, whom from
his infancy nature taught to resemble the famous Duke his father. Excellently
excellent young man (said Minea) keep thy treasure, for in mine own coffers
do I harbor such store, as shall maintain thee an hundred knights to be thine
attendants: as for arms and horse, be careless, they long since have been
readily pro^ided: for the princely Earl of Brandis to who^ my husband (whom he
exceedingly loved) during his life was chamberlain, has given me the
courageous horse Morbon, on him shall thou mount, a seat worthy the worthiest
knight the world contains: Then would Jacob, Tyrus and the other merchants
needs mount on horseback to conduct Meruine on his way: but he desiring a
little respit, said, before I depart I will approve my arms, my horse, and my
body against someother knight, because on my life relies not my self but
another fortune. Friend (said a Pagan that had followed those which had
brought his horse and armor) arm your self, for I will arm my self and
charge you: yo^ honor me (said he) and then Meruine buckled his gorget, cast
on his curats locked his pouldrons, put on his caske, and armed him self at all
points, then demanded he a sword, which was delivered him* but he refused it
for being much too light: whereupon Minea went into her chamber, f^o^ which she
brought a sword, big, strong, and massy: this sword sometimes had been the
sword of King Brandifer a Pagan, whom the renoumed knight Valentine, Nephew to
king Pepin slew before Angoria, Minea presented this sword to Meruine, who drew
it, and beholding the beauteous brightness said. O excellent engine, worthy an
invincible spirit, add to me as much fortune as I will lend thee force, and
both of us will in the tongues of men be immortal. Now false traitor Brohars,
be as wise in defending thy self, as thou art wilful in offending others, else
shall thy life wast with thy slander: for Meruine is armed as himself
desires. At that, without the aid of his stirrope he mounted on the back of
Morbon, and demanded a lance, which so soon as he had received, he put him
with a princely majesty forward, passing a swift, strong, and round ca^iere,
with such dexter^tie and nimblenesse as bred wonder, and commendation in all the
beholders, chiefly in the Earl of Brandis, that beholding him from his
palace, said to his Barons, behold a noble and victorio^s warrior, worthy to
be adorned with a kings diad^me, his hand is an ornament for a lance, and his
person a receptacle for all virtues: with that came the Pagan, who went to arm
himself, and cried to Meruine, friend, will you ^eaue those measures and
proportioned iumps which your horse in his coming seems proud of, and try the
goodness of your arm by a sturdy encounter? It is my desir^ and nothing else
replied Meruine, so they retired back the one from the other, to take their
course with more violence. The Story says this encounter was on a goodly
green plain before the Earls palace, who as before I said, stood to behold
them, with him his wife, and a gallant young Prince his son and heir
apparent. When Meruine and the other were seuerd more than the length of a good
cariere, they put spurs to their coursers, and cowching their lances, ran
with such terror, that the ground trembled at the chidings of their horses
hoofes: and when they joined in the shocke, the Pagan shiuered his lance close
to his gantlet, yet no more stirred the princely Meruine then the gentelest
breath of air, the strongest pyramide in Egypt. But Meruines encounter bore
death in his lances point, for he stroke his staff more than a foot and a
half through the Pagans body, and pursued it with such vigor, that he bore him
headlong down dead unto the ground: then stopping his horse triumphantly, he
said in himself: even as he thus is overthrown, overthrew I all the knights
which ran for the golden cup which Clarissaes imagined valor enjoys. What
reason now can deny me knighthood? None but will, and that will is unjust.
Merchandise farewell, henceforth will I traffike nothing but honor.

2 Thus said young Meruine, grown proud of this late overthrow: but when the
Pagans, and the friends of the Pagan which was slain, saw him pay Natures last
debt unto never satisfied death, they all at once with one mad fury assailed
Meruine, which though it nothing appalled, yet at last it bred amaze in his
senses (till then unacquainted with tumultuous outrage:) but when his virtue
was awaked, he said: Since I am assaulted, the defense I make, offorce must be
lawful: and when he dr^w his sword, with which he gave such a blow to the
brother of the slain Pagan, that he claus his skull to his teeth. God of our
forefathers, great Mahomet (said Meruine) behold an excellent sword, if I can
but maintain strength to his edge, the world shall cronicle me for a famous
merchant. But the extremity of the assault put Meruine from further speech,
for the whole company assailed him: but being as wise as he was valiant, he
defended himself with unspeakable ver^ue, and that in such sort, that he
slew more then a third part of them. Yet his foes Hydra-like increasing, by
killing, had mightily endangered him, if the other marchaunts and the two
hundred Pagans which Minea had assembled to conduct him to Montesteur,
beholding his instant peril, had not taken an oath to die in his su^^or. But
the Count Brandis, knowing this might arise to some grievous accident,
descend^d from his palace with five hundred horsemen, and coming to the place
where the fight was, cried out to Meruine and the rest: By Mahomet my god, he
that su^ceaseth not, but st^iketh another blow, shall die the death. At these
words they all retired, but Meruine in the instant of the speech laid ^ixe
dead at his foot.

3 Wherefore the Count took a solemn vow, he should dearly make vaunt of
that days chivalry. But Minea ran and caught Meruine by the arm, crying,
alas dear son, this envious day in blood has drowned all the hope of our
good fortune: forbear, forbear, for Gods sake do forbear, for either must
we fly or die for our misd^ing. Then went Minea toward the Count, and
falling on her knees before him, said: For Mahomets sake, for Mecas honor, and
thine own reputation (most excellent Prince) take pity upon me, and my poor
innocent sister, who through treason shall faultlesse consume in fire, if
within this three days she be not delivered by this happy now made unhappy
young man. When the Earl saw the constancy of her tears which issued from
the true fountain of grief, he accorded to her desire, with this condition,
that wheresoever Meruine should go, he should yet be his prisoner* and that
she should deliver him sufficient hostage for his return: whereupon Minea
delivered to the Earl all the evidences, bonds and titles whatsoever belonged
to her or her inheritance: all which he detained till her back return to
Brandis, And thus was Meruins peace agreed, who mightily grieved that he should
be troubled or fought with, for but only making proof of his body.

CHAP. VIII.
1. How Minea, Meruine, Jacob, Tyrus, and the other Merchants with the two
hundred Pagans departed from Brandis, to deliver Basina at Montesteur: 2 and of
the batell fought betwee^e Meruine and Brohars, and the enent.
WHen Minea had appeased the tumult, she departed from Brandis, and with her
Meruine and the other merchants, with them the band of two hundred Pagans: and
the second day after, they arrived at Montesteur, where they found Croisant
madde-manlike tormented with grief in his soul, for the supposed monstrous
indignity which the treason of Brohars had rooted in his head against his
constant and loyal wife Basina. When Minea saw him, she went to meet him: and
he encountering her first, gave her this salutation. Fair sister Minea (quoth
he) thy sister has falsely betrayed the honor of my bed and given an
immortale scandal to my name: the deed is evident and apparently true* the
rather in this that none can find a knight, who will undertake battle
against Brohars, to defend the iustne^se of her cause. Wherefore, if I live
till to morrow, and behold the Sun bless the earth with his countenance, I
will see her burned, according to the execution of our law Brother Croisant
(replied she) fortune, I hope, has alo^ted her stars of much better
influence: and for her innocence I have brought one, who shall defend it
against Brohars and his treason^ whom I hope to see at his hanging as public
aconuertite, as ^e is now a monstrous false accuser. At these words Meruine,
whose countenance did both apprehend, and discharge a princely king of
majesty, stood forth, and said unto Croisant: By the faith I owe unto
Mahomet, and mine homage to distressed ladies, I will voluntarily, and with an
assurance of undoubted guiltiness, enter battle against that false traitor,
who under my sword shall either publicly (...) his villainy, or die for
private concealing so worthy to be known an indignity. S^arse had he
finished these words, but Brohars came thronging into the press, exclaiming
against all men, that none d^rst encounter him: and withal said: Brother
Croisant, even the world, and babes nor yet borne into the world, will condemn
thee for a wittolde, and a wilful ^uckold, since thus long thou de^errest the
burning of that odious strumpet thy wife, whose implacable sin n^ne dare to
make seem vnfaultie. When Meruine heard Brohars, he scratcht his head, and
with a grizlie look, wherein virtue showed her self more then impatient, he
said: False bastard, son of a most detestable whore: whose hateful speeches
augment the abomination of thy treason: by Mahomet, this day I will see thee
hanged, for thy wrongful accuse, and unjust slander of the virtuous Basina.
Brohars more then wounded with Meruines fiery pointed speeches, grew mad
with wrath: and drawing his sword, st^^cke at Meruine. But virtue ever awake to
defend honor, taught him how to ward the blow, and with his fist well armed
with a gauntlet, he returned Brohars such a buffet, that he made the blood gush
from his ears and nostrels, saying: Traitor, behold the champion for the
just lady Ba^ina, who this day will make thy heart as sad, as thy thoughts
are false, and neither by any to be matched. When Croisant saw the incomparable
valor of Meruine, grew enamoured of his virtue, and said in himself: Believe
me, my soul, mine eyes have not seen a frame of youth so fair, so big, and
in all parts so excellently accomplished with all perfections: by Mahomet, had
nature but adorned his chin with dowlne, I should have taken him to be (so much
he resembled him) Oger, the renowned Christian, who ^lew Iustament before
Arius. After these cogitations Croisant came between Mer^ine and Brohars,
desiring forbearance of their fury till the next morrow, and said: Lords, let
prowess slumber, till this next days Sun awaken you to combat, and then
Mahomet give honor to him that has the right. They both a^torded, and then
Croisant demanded pledge of both sides for their appearance. And Minea pledged
herself ^or Meruine, but Brohars could find neither baron, knight, nor
squire, who would be hostage for his faith. Wherefore Croisant caused him to be
imprisoned for that night in a strong tower, whither was delivered all things
necessary for him or his happelesse undertaken action. Minea with all her
train went and lodged in a castle heard by, and took Meruine, Jacob, Tyrus
and the other merchants with her, who though they spoke not much* yet did their
heavy countenances tell long tales of their tedious sorows. But Meruine
comforted them* saying, Fear^ not my dear companions, neither let your watery
eyes any longer woe an evil fortune: for by my faith (my souls debt to Mahomet
if you will pursue my steps, you shall no more be merchants, but knights of
regard and honor, and then will we tread over the face of the earth, and by
redoubted fight ennoble and extol our law through all nations. But one, whose
name was Braha^, compact of the coldest constitution a cowards heart could be
engendered of, replied: Sir Meruine, for mine own part, I love no honor with
disturbance, nor fame with a bloody forhead: let them fight that are angry,
for my patience is eternal except it be against this pleasant cup of wine,
and that conflict may boade my overthrow, but no wounds. At these words they al
began to laugh but Minea whose head at that instant was a Parliament for grauer
matters, went unto Croysant, and with a grave discontentme^t in which was
figured a modest suffrance, she desired leave for her sister Ba^ina to come and
suppe with them, that the burden of her grieves, though they were not vnladed,
yet they might by that recreation be a little eased. He willingly agreed, and,
so sent the iayler to fetch her, who instantly did as he was commanded. But
when he came where the forsaken lady was set, and had unlocked the two unkind
embracing yrons that fettered her, he told her of Meruine, and how her sister
Minea had brought him to fight against Brohars in defense of her honor. Alas
(said she) how unfortunate is ye vnfortunatenes of my malicious fortune, and
how endless the spring of my teares^ Before I wept, because I wanted a
champion: now must I weep, that having a champion, I fear I want fortitude:
for Brohars is invincible, and who then can conquer the never to be conquered?
Here she sighed as if she had never before sig^^^ while the ^ailer (...) Lady,
embrace comfort* and be st^ong with an innocent hope* for this day has Mern.
given Brohars such an vnresistab^e blow, as the blood sprang out of his veins,
and ran through his ears and nosthrils, A notable prologu^ to a wished
trag^dy. The poor lady hearing this she gave hope (which before was banished)
leave once again to possess her, and so rose and went with her keeper till
she entered into the Castle hall: but when Minea saw her first appearance, she
ran to embrace her, and she (albeit not with so much fury, for sorrow had
weakened her endeavors) did the like. And beiug both locked in each others
infoldings, Basina asked her sister which was the champion whose unspeakable
virtue had vowed once again to make her happy. Fair sister, quoth she, look
over all this assembly, and he is thy new creator who is most high, strongest,
and most excellently furnished in all his lineaments, and yet so young that he
has not attained to fifteen years. And as she was thus speaking, Meruine rose
from the place where he sa^e, ^o go comfort Jacob, whose looks were sad and
discomfort^ble* and Basina seeing him rise, knew by his proportion, he only of
that company was likeliest to redeem her; wherefore she ran unto him, and
falling on her knees she embraced his legs, making offer to kiss his feet.
Meruine repulsed so much too divine homage, and demanded of her what she was.
Excellent creature (said she) I am the woeful subject of unspeakable misery,
even that unhappy Basina, in protection of whose innocence, as I understand,
you are come to make hazard of your celestial honor: and as it is pure, so be
the purity of my redemption wonderful in the eyes of the beholders: for by
him that gave my soul motion, there was never moving of unchaste thought
within me. What is auerred against me, the traitor falsely suggesteth, because
I truly with stood his lascivious affection, which he has not left for the
space of a year hourly to solicit, mine honor guarding what dishonor would
violate, but rather shall a thousand slames dissolve me into cinders, then
breach of my wedlock faith congeale frosty damnation within me. Now the base
slave, slave to his (...) appetite, came to be lodged by me, neither know I,
nor can imagine. And more to make my ignorance perpetual, he slew him, that by
him might nothing be discovered: blameles are my thoughts, albeit (...) fortune
faulty. If giltlesnes be any defense be then assured thou art inuincibly armed.
When Meruine heard her words graced with a graceful delight of modest
speaking, he recomforted her, promising to die or behold her deliverance. By
this supper was served up, and they set down, but yet Jacob, Tirus, and the
other merchants whispering one against another, mightily repined at the
^orwardnes of Meruine: for why, their hearts were created in a cold clime, where
the true sunshine of honor never shined. By Mahomet, said Jacob, if we pursue
the humors of Meruine, we but run po^te after our deaths: for say he win the
honor of the field and release the Lady, yet if he escap^ with life and
return to Brandis, there shall he be imprisoned, and for his late ^utrage
adventure as great a hazard. So that as his desires are boundles, so shall his
quarrels be endless, and we for being his consorts be disgraced: he is much too
courageous to win wealth by tra^fike, and too mad to be praised under the title
of a merchant. Thus they grinded their tongues against their teeth, with
repinings against Meruin, who all the while ate and drank without respect or
heed taking. After supper they went to rest till the flight of birds gave
assurance of the suns presence, and told them it was morning* then arose
Croisant, causing the lists to be prepared, and 200. horsemen to guard it, in
the midst whereof a stake was set up, at which his wife should be burned, if
Meruine failed in the conflict. Then arose Meruine, and armed him self with
all the royal accomplements his soul desired, and being at al pieces
furnished, he caused Morbon to be sadled, and couerd al over with a costly barb,
on whom he leapt: and though Morbon for strength among horses was only
excelling yet his chine bended with the weight of the yongling. Then demanded
Meruine his helmet, which Croisant deliuerd him, and withal a mighty lance,
strong, and till then untaught to skirmish. Meruine thus sat like a second
Mars, or an excelling Perseus, he made a solemn and religious vow to Mahomet,
ever after that to be so, and in such manner, and never more to use or inherit
the trade or name of a Merchant: for (quoth he) that trade abaseth an honorable
disposition, and brings slander to the sword and lance which ever should be
adored. Now was Brohars (who before ye heard to be imprisoned) infranchised and
set at liberty, immediately causing his attendants to arm him, whilst his
thoghts expostulated with fear, his soul holding argument with doubtfulnes,
yet was he an unmatchable knight for valor; only treason the impoisoner of
virtue having got habitation, began to stain resolution. Yet the story says
that this Brohars was brother to Geffray, whom Karahew slew in the battle
before the walls of Babylon, as is written in the history of Oger the father of
Meruiue. But in no pagan court durst Karahew ever after meet with Brohars, as
well for fear of his fortitude, as for a general hate conceived agenst him,
for offering to have forced Rabions wife the son of Antifer. But that which
gives Brohars the greatest title of dignity, and makes all men fear to
encounter him in combat, is for that he has fought xiiij-fields, all with the
sword, and preuaild, which ever after made him so fierce and proud of his
fortune, that he held himself altogether invincible, as if by a parliament of
the gods, he alone were deified. Now was brought to him to mount upon, a mare
of his own, which was damme to the good steed Marcheuall, which Oger lost upon
the sea: her color was not black, but blackish (...), he got her of Baucamont
king of Damas and she was (...) and made ready for the wars to go assail
Mermont in his city of Mon^ment, thence to win the fair princely virgin Berea,
whom Mermont had denied in marriage. This mare which was brought Brohars, was
called Mordant, fiery and courageous: one quality of cruelty she had, which
was, that no horse, how strong or violent soe^er, but she would instantly
strangle, if there we^e not a more than v^uall regard had to her manner of
fighting. Brohars won her in an honorable combat and being mounted thereon, he
took his target and hanged it before his breast, fas^ned a battle ax to his
saddle po^ell, and griped in his strong arm a mighty lance: thus accoutred, he
paced tow^rds the field, where Meruin attended his coming. Croisant still
environed with jealousy and revenge, had now fas^ned Basina to the stake, her
executioners garding her, with fire ready so assail the wood so soon as
Meruine should be overthrown. By this time was Brohars entered into the lists,
on whom when Meruine had fixed his eyes, and saw the portly majesty of the
princely beast that ^ore him (I mean Mordant that gallant mare) he fell
mightily in love with her, and took a vow in his own soul, never again to
esteem him self, if that days conquest made him not true possessor of so
highly to be esteemed treasure. Now the time sommoning an end to these great
deuoires, a herald entered the lists, and after a solemn warning given by the
sound of trumpets, he pronounced this charge: Lords and Knights belonging to
the noble lord Croisant, I straightly charge and command you upon pain of death,
not to speak any word til the combat be fully ended: and further, upon the
foresaid pain, I charge, that none, of what estate or condition soever, do
either assist, resist, impugn or deliver either by sign or actio^, any of the
comba^ants, but r^^er the trial of their truths, to fortune, valor, and their
swords. At these words the whole assembly of infinites silent, and then the
Herald departed. Then en^ered Croisant to the Champions, and first spoke in
this manner to Brohars: by all the allegiance thou owe to thy earths
sovereign, by thy faith to Mahomet, thy hope of conquest* and thy spirits
redemption, I charge thee ^elme whether all thine assext^on and accusation
auowed against this lady Basina my wife* be tr^e, I or no. Noble Croisant
(answered Brohars) all is true by Jupiter I swear, and this day shall thou see
that truth glorious by my conquest. Meruine hearing him so obstinat, desired
Croisant to desist from further speech: for (said he) it is more then time the
t^aitour had made his new re^antation. Knights said Croisant) begin at your
pleasures, and this day let truth prevail.

2 So departed he the lists, and the two combatants putting down their beauers
departed either from other a good distance, to add more violences to their
courses: and Basina with a more then speaking heart (for fear had bound her
lips to silence) cried upon Mahomet to guard her champion, and confound the
false confounder of her honor. Now were they far enough asunder, when
turning their (...) and couching their lances, they ran against ^ch other
with such swiftness, that they ouerran the winds, which ouerrun all other
moving creatures: but in the sho^k, when their lances felt honors seals upon
their curats, Meruin stroke Brohars so hard (worthy a better name then that by
which force is entitled) that he tumbled him from the back of his good mare to
the ground: and on the other part he likewise assailed Meruine so courageously,
that both horse and man equally kissed the earth together: but Meruine being
quick and nimble (and never more quick then in the quickness of extremity)
quickly gate up vnamazed. But Brohars astonished with falling from a beast so hie
and lofty, arose (th^ugh not so well) yet as well as he co^ld, and drawing his
^word came to assault Meruin, who cried unto him, Traitor, this deed this day
shall make thee act a sorry tragedy. Brohars enuiously angry at these words of
Meruin struck at him with almost a more then divine courage: but he perceiving
the blow, retired a little, and took it upon his target: yet it came from so
violent an arm, that it claue it down to the ground, cu^ting withal the spur
from his right foot* and the sword vnsati^fied entered into the ground more then
afoote and a half, whose greedines to conquer, hindered his conquering: for
he could not recover it again but with much pains taking. Meruine dying to
die in debt of so good payment, lift up his sword and struck the traitor on
the^helmet, from whence the sword sliding, descended on his thigh, and there
cut away a collop sufficient enough to gorge a faulcon two days together and
better. Now was mere then time for Brohars to change his footing, for the
weight of this blow gave his hinder leg pre-eminence to be better and
stronger, to his intolerable grief and fury, making him rail on Maho. for
suffering him thus of a boy to be mated. Meruine in who^ valor held her
residence, and of whom virtue was only inamoured, bearing sword point blancke
with the Pagans eye, ran furiously against him, and in his course said:
Brohars, the execreable treasons that damnedly thou have suggested, shall end
thy life before the day shall end his light, else shall my reputation die in
his infancy, and truth hereafter never be accounted the Innocents
protectresse: and with that he struck a blow (which ye Pagan received on his
target) with such violence, that it entering in an vnimagined way, Meruin by no
means could pluck it out again, though with sundry twiches he gave, he
almost pulled it from the Pagans neck. Brohars not unexperienced in any
advantage occasion could offer* in the extremest of those conflicts, watching
(with a greedy deliverance of mischief in his head) and when he perceived
Meruine pull with all his sw^y he let the target ^lip out of his hand, so that
Meruine with his own force fell backward to the ground, on whom immediately
the Traitor lea^ed, thinking then to finish the end of all his wishes. All the
Barons that beheld this unfortunate misaduenture, murmured amongst themselves
and said, What pity is this, that fortune, not (...) should be the ouerth^ow
of virtue, and that this youth unconquered should not be conqueror: Minea
whose heart daunced lively on the sword of Meruine, when she saw this stoure
boding evil* grew mad with grie^e, that griefs power held her from being
mad and whispered to her self. Ha Mahomet, thou which art adored in our
pa^^heous, if thou thus give our virtue, and leauest this excelling creature
to be slain by a miscreant, for ever will I ab^ure thy deity, raze thy
Temples, and ere the sun go down, be baptized a Christian. Whilst thus her
waue^ing thoughts amongst themselves held a civil dissension, poor Basina
her torments exceeded the bounds of tormentings being run a degree beyond
the coast of illnes: so that what others in their private selves lamented, she
with loud shrikes, cries, and clam^rs publicly noted insomuch that ye echo of
her lamentations pearcing into the ears of Meruine as he lay, conducted an
honorable shame with theirs to his heart, so that gathering a better strength
then that which is strength, named, by vigor of his spiri^e* he turned
Brohars topsie turu^e under him. By this time Meruines horse, who through the
cruelty of his fall, could no sooner get up, arose, which Mordant the ma^e
perceiving, came and assailed him: so that between the beasts began a
cruel and fierce battle, but in the end Mordant strangled the good Morbon, to
the small delight of Meruine, who at that instant was bu^^ed from intending any
remedy, so long did Meruin remain upon the traitor, that the whole company
were in admiration at his indurance. But when he perceived all means of
release banished, and that no power he had, had power to ouerturne Meruine he
said unto him, Meruine this arest of burden is an vnwounding ^omb^t, by whose
means we can neither win honor, nor bring our battle to a desired ending. I
will offer thee therefore what in honorable censures shall be honestly valiant,
arise from this vain suppressing servitude, unburden me and go fetch thy
sword and I will go to my mare and fetch my ba^tell axe which hangs at my
sadle, and with them let us e^^her finish our lives, or amend our fortunes.
Meruiue in whom the ragefull fire of youth kindled a divine valiance, presently
(...) and arose from Brohars, who found in himself a pain full weakness to
get up, through the great loss of blood which issuing from his wound, had
already called the earth where he lay in a scarlet mantel^, as if he already had
made it Judge of his life or destruction. Now had each of them taken their
weapons according to their agreement; but Brohars as if his heart wholly dwelt
on the edge of his weapon, having the axe in his hand (...) it into the air,
and cried to Meruine. This day (boy) shall be thy lives last day, unless thou
swear and maintain that all the articles are true which I have imposed
against Basina the wife of Croisant. which if thou do, we will no more be
foes but companions, and like men in^in^ible measure the earth, and conquer
great Charles of France, who only p^rsecuteth ou^ law and religion. Guilt
tongued traitor (said Meruine little should I please Mahomet to be
treacherously minded, less to be the companion of ^o base a miscreant*
wherefore I esteem both odious. After this speech they assaild^^h other on
every side, where there advantages lay most aparent and that in such vehement
sort and so tediously, that they both became so exceeding weary as they were
feign for a time to repose themselves. After they had a while rested
themselves, Meruin^ called to Brohars and said, Traitor, this rest is the last
Sabbath of thy life: for thou have wrongfully accused yonder innocent La^y: and
theref^re ere the euenings eye shut in the day thou shall die most miserably^
Sorrow at this reproof so stopped up the speeches of Brohars, that he only
gnashd his teeth, and mounting his keen edged axe, he struck such a blow, and
with so great might on the helmet of Meruin, that if the greatest of divine
powers had not preserved him, and that the ^emper and the living were both more
than extraordinary, that day had ^in the last of his life and fortunes.
Notwithstanding all the favors of his staves, so strong a poise issued from the
blows falling, that Meruine was forced to fall upon his knee, yet was he soon
remounted: and as wise in danger as valiant in his fight, raising his good
sword, struck the traitor with such puissance on his helmet, that if Brohars
had not turned back he had cloven him to the shoulder, the sword in his
stumbling fell on the thigh of the Pagan, so as he quite disseuered it from his
body, and with that threw the traitor unto the ground, who with the grief of
the blow cried, that the echo of his clamors were heard afar off. At this
Basinas heart daunced in her body for joy, so did Mineas, in whom was an equal
sympathy: and all the barons that held either of the Ladies in regard
triumphed saying amoug themselves, no eye has seen fortitude accompanied with
such true fierceness in any knight, as in this young youth vnconqu^rable
Meruin. Such speech spoke every one of him. But the traitor Brohars, who had
then lost a leg, took his axe into both his hands saying, Boy, braggard, and
worse than a boyish braggard, stand but before me, and thou shall see this
loss the gain of my better courage: for I shall never aspire my end or
orethrow, til I have cut thee peece-meale into a thousand pieces. Meruine
smiling at this v^nt* stooped to take him by the other foot, thinking to tra^le
him into the midst of the field* but improuidence guided his action, for the
traitor clasping him about his helmet, drew him to him with such maine
strength, as he fellouer and over. Great God of heaven have mercy upon him, for
if thy pity be not his savior, death must be his redeemer.) Brohars was
mighty and strong, and so was Meruine, insomuch, that between them was ^hewed
all the triumph and perfection of strength and agilitie. But in the end,
Brohars, through the riuerlike effusion of his blood, was so exceedingly
weakened* that in a happy time, and in despite of Fortunes worst, Meruin arose,
taking from him his battle axe: then houering over him like an vngorged eagle,
he said, Traitor, now behold the last date of thine affliction, confess
therefore the treason thou have done against the good lady Basina, or by Mahomet
thy own weapon immediately shall di^orce thine accu^sed head from thy shoulders.
But he whom villan^e had taught nothing but villainous replies, answered: Thou
son of a diffamed ^urtesan, coward, recreant, I was never traitor, nor did
treason ever lodge in my affinity. As he was about to say more, Meruine
impa^^ent to see such audacious impie^ie, with the axe gave him such a blow on
the other thigh, tha^ he cut it quite from his body leaving him as leglesse as he
was graceless* the pain whereof, together with the laboring of his life's
departure, made him bel^ow out such lamentatio^s, that all the mountains, and
plains were privy to his miserable fortunes. Then called he to Meruine and
said, Eu^n now I find my soul contending for her delivery: wherefore if thou
have as much pity in thy heart, as force in thy hand, defer^e alittle my
judgment, and call Croisant and Basina to behold my departure. Meruine
forthwith called them, who willingly came thither. And being come, Meruine said
Brohars, behold, Croisant and the Lady are present, say what thou have to say
unto them. Ah Croisant, Croisant, said he, even for Mahomets sake that pardons
all, pardon me, and have mercy on my misery, thy wife the virtuous Basina is
most loyal, most true, and most undefiled not any between the Poles more
honorable. It Is true, it is true, I have importuned her long, more than a year,
but never could obtain it It Is tr^e, it is true, I only for that have hated her.
It Is true that this (...) was mine own invention: I brought Brison to h^^bed, I
suggested her disloyalty, and I alone deseru^ this miserable infortune. Then
he called the lady to him, and said, Divine Basina, and excellent Lady, for
^oues sake, who created all things, create me anew with thy pardon, and from
the white veil of thine innocence, let my misdeed find a shadowing forgiveness:
for I confess with a ^^^ting soul my monstrous imparted treasons against
t^ee, and will maintain (whilst vanishing breath maintains power to maintain
any thing) my self the most falsest tra^tor that ever was recorded amongst
the Pagans. Never spakest thou more true than now, answered Meruine, therefore
shall thou endure the Law, and I only will be thine executioner, and with that
lifting up the axe, he struck the Pagan between the helmet and the collar
with such forcible vigor, that he compelled his head to fly from his
shoulders. So died the traitor by the hands of Meruine the sonn^ of Oger, in
whom the excellency of prowess was only excellent.

CHAP. IX.
1 Of the honors done to Meruine for his victory. 2 How Minea brought him
back again to Brand^s. 3 His imprisonment, and other adventures.
AFter the death of Brohars, (whose death was as a festiual to the beholders,
chiefly to Minea and Basina, who coming to Meruine, did him great adoration
and worship) Croisant caused the body of the traitor to be drawn to a pair of
gallows, where it was hanged ^or a spectacle of monstrous villainy. But
Meruine, whose mind was still making love to honor, regardlesse of other
accomplishments, went to the goodly mare Mordant, and having caught her as his
prize and honors right* he mounted upon her back, spurred her, ran her,
leapt her, and so thundered about the fields, finding in her all the rarest
perfections could possibly be wished for in such an incomparable creature, that
his joy reached beyond the bounds of extremest pleasure and in this sort made
him give praise to Mahomet. Ah Mahomet, quoth he, behold here a beast of
invincible puissance, I honor thee for the gift and by her valor will exalt
thy name in foreign nations: she is my hearts wish* and I prize her more, then
her weight of the finest gold. Thus spoke Meruine, and then rode on with the
pagans, who honored him as a demy-god, ^uen to the gates of Mo^testeur, where
he was received with triumphant joy and solemnity. After he was ascended the
castle, and had disarmed himself, his wounds were found slight, and of small
importance, yet not withstanding there was an excellent Surgion appointed him,
whose skill in three days would have cured much greater woundings. After he
was ^ressed, and had given his mind a little recreation with ease hunger (in
that he had fasted all the day) began to seize upon his stomach so, that he
desired the Barons to make have with his supper, assuring them he had not felt
so good an appetite before in his life time. One of ye barons told him all
thing were prepared for his repaf^, and there wanted nothing but his presence.
The^ sat Meruine and the other merchants down, who were served with all
pompous magnificence, nothing wanting that wit, wealth, or wish could
accomplish. When they had supped, they fell to discourse of diverse oc^urrents
according to the time or humor of their opinions: but Minea taking Croisant
unto her, said: Brother, this princely yo^g man has done thee great honor,
and to my sister an eternal never to be requited favor, even as much as her
souls redemption. True Madame (replied he) I acknowledge as much or more from
his valor: wherefore if he please to employ me, I am all only at his service,
and from this day do I reckon my new natiuiti^, binding my life to his dispose,
and glorying in nothing more, then in that I am his subject. Brother (said
Minea) thy speeches are worthy of thy virtues, therefore now prepare thy
people and go with us to Brandis, for there have we actions of hi^ importance
with the Earl thereof, where you must be aidant and agent, to perform unto
him the weight of our business. Lady (quoth he) as willingly is mine
agreement, as your wish is ready, and I am proud of s^ happy an occasion.

2 Thus after their inter^ourse of speech, they remained at Montesteur until
the next morning and so from thence they rode to Brandis to the house of Minea
where she feasted them so ro^ally, as either treasure or friendship could any
way purchase: but after they were all disarmed, and had pleasantly recreated
themselves one with another excellencies, on the sudden they heard one
knocking at the gate: whereupon Minea commanded the Porter to go see who
knocked, and to give them entrance. A way went the Porter, and demanding the
occasion of the noise, they bade him open the gates, which he had no sooner
done, but there rushed in 14. knights, all well armed, of whom the nephew of
Brandis named Merquier was one, and thence ascending into the hall, they beheld
where Meruine was playing at the cards with Croisant, on who^ instantly they
sei^ed whilst he by force thinking to purchase his delivery, found that force
by their prevention surprised. When Minea beheld this more then cruel
occurrent, she cried to Merquier, and said, young lord, for Mahomets sake, and
the love of virtue, forbear and suffer this excellent creature till to morrow,
at what time, by thallegeance my soul owes to heaven, I will deliver him to
the Count thy renowned uncle. Lady (replied Merquier) pardon me, for I will
not, bicau^e if he pass this hour, it is impossible tappe^se the kindred of
them whom he has slain. Six has he sent to communicate with the dead,
therefore he may not liue^vnlesse he can, as none can, find any means to
recoue^ the dead. To make a short tale of a tedious astonishment, this answer
brought the lady to her wits end Sorrow desisting to counsel her in her
disputation, and notwithstanding all the force Meruine applied for his own
delivery, he was taken by them, bound carried to a strong castle, fet^redin an
iron chain, and safely imprisoned, all as unpleasant to him, as vnpittied of
his enemies, both without bound.

3 Being thus all alone, having no companions but anger, and his harms
grieved, began thus to ch^^e himself against reason, improuident man (said he)
how much better had it bin had I trusted Tirus my brother, then mine own
thoughts: for then refusing the battle* I had divorced my self from this
mischance, which too unluckily lays hold on me: but he that impugns virtuous
counsel with wilfulnes, shall be beaten with repentance, and have no pity but
his own tears. Thus spoke imprisoned Meruine, while Tirus, Jacob and the other
merchants, desperate to wish him any other good, than goodness in his death,
prepared them to depart about the effecting of their foren business. They
calling Minea said: Lady, we are sorry for this disastrous misfortune which is
chanced to imprisoned Meruine: yet the importance of our business commands our
departure for the mart at Boniuant approaching so near, if we should thence be
absent, would highly redound to our losses: she answered them again: Gentlemen
depart at your best pleasures, and for all your care of Meruine, bestow it on
my thoughts, which shall so busy themselves in that action, that before you^
return I doubt not but purchase his liberty, so that he shall accompany you
home to your country. To be brief, her speeches so much satisfied them, that
the next morning they took their journey toward Boniuant: in which travel we
will for a while leave them, and speak alittle of the great king Baucamont, who
calling Pimon a noble gentleman of his Court to him gave him letters to carry
to his two nephews, that is to say, to Brandis in E^clardia, and to Antifer in
Tartaria, which contained hie matter of entreaty in the^, to thend they should
aid him against the mighty king Meurmont of Montme^t, who in despite had
refused to bestow on him the beautiful Berea his daughter in marriage. The
serviceable gallant soon effected the will of the king his master, and the two
kings instantly v^on thintreaty, mustred so many of their men as were able to
b^are armor, and came to Damascus, where they were royally entertained, and
among their discoursings Beaucamont discovered all the indignities conceived
against Meurmont, first the denial of his daughter, then the disdain of his
embassade, and lastly, his threats of death to Pimon, whom he esteemed every
way worthy of so great an employment: the very encountering whereof so
imprisoned his thoughts with such fury, that he swear by all the hie titles a
king adoreth, not to leave him a foot of earth in the world to be ruler of, if
with penance he asked not mercy for his misdoing, (they two ayding him whom he
knew and ever esteemed invincible) with others. They quickly bound their
consents to his impatience, and so forthwith caused all their nauies to be
rigged and thight in most royal manner, which in short space they committed to
the mercy of the merciful ^^ood, hoysting up their sails, and sailing with a
prosperous gale for many nights and days, til in the end Fortune (who ever
will show the nature of her condition* ^^ost them with a mighty storm, which
was more then grievously troublesome unto them. And to the favor of that same
we will leave them for a while, and return to poor imprisoned Meruine, whom
Minea and Croysant with their never ceasing petitions, bribes, vows, and
protestations, had by this time delivered: at the instant of whose enlargement,
Tirus, Jacob, and the other merchants made their return from Boniuant, and came
directly to the house of Minea, who entertained the^ most kindly: yet told them
with a seeming countenance of sorrow, that by no means they could have Meruin
back with them, because he was adjudged six years imprisonment, and till the
end thereof no releasement: and from thence forth an eternal banishment for
ever from that country. This (said she is the agreement we have made with the
parties which pursue him and proud we are, we have agreed under the price of
his most precious life. Wherefore persuade reverent Barbin his father to expel
grief for his absence assuring him, my care shall exc^ede if possible, the
care of a natural mother, and my purse shall be lauishly open to defray all the
costs, charges, and hindrances of Mer^ine from his ar^^es and the famous
Mordant his excellent beast: I will preserve them for him as trophies won by
divine honor. Madam, said Jacob, the music of your ^^ordes become well the
virtues of your mind: wherefore, as reason binds us, we are satisfied. To
mor^ow before the sun shall bless the bosom of thearth, we will begin our
journey, only with this request, that we may see and salute Meruine before our
departure* The heavens forbid, said Tyrus, Fie Jacob, thy speeches are too
near a kin to thy old follies, for it will prove no salutation, but a
provocation to our own deaths: sithence thereby suspect may make us parties to
his actions. This speech of Tirus made Jacob condemn himself of alittle
improuidence: so they rested with Minea for that night, and early the next
morning went aboard their ships, and sallied with so favorable a gust, that in
short space they aimed at the port of Luternia, where they anchored their
vessels, and from thence marched to Montment. The History says, that this
Jacob the merchant altogether frequented the court of king Meurmont, who for
sundry virtues he saw shine in his honest simplicity, loved him exceedingly,
and took and intimate delight in his company. Now is Jacob entered into his
own gates, where his wife with all obseruances of true duty, kindly
entertained him, and Tyrus the house of Barbin his father, who seeing him
unaccompanied of any but his own presence, blushed, as highly amazed, and asked
him, Fair son, where is Meruine thy brother that he is vnreturned with thee,
to make happy my desires. Dear father, replied Tyrus, he is taken prisoner at
Brandis, which is a strong city seated upon the sea: Prisoner, said his
father, tell me quickly for what cause? Sir, said he, with a fearful
trembling, Meruine whom you call my brother, is too fierce, proud, and of an
ambitious aspiring spirit, me has he altogether neglected, and bent his
thoughts only on impossible endeavors. The cause of his imprisonment is, for
that he has slain seven renowned knights at one instant with his sword. And
from thence Tirus discoursed to his father all the deeds of Meruine, his
promise to Minea to resuccor her sister, his danger in Brandis, her delivering
him by mean of hostage, his going to Monte^^eur, his combat with Brohars, his
back return to Brandis, his delivering Basina, his being there surprised, and
lastly, his delivery after six years imprisonment with perpetual banishment,
till when there was no expecting his return. When Barbin with a grieuing joy
had heard him recount all these famous exploits of Meruiue, he asked Tyrus in
all these dangers, what aid or help he had done for Meruine: and Tyrus told
him, not any at all. Then the blood of anger started into the face of Barbin,
and he said to Tyrus, False Pagan boy* recreant to trus nobility, why did
thou fail him who would have failed life for thy loves cause? Where was thy
sleepy sword, that unsheathing it, thou did not hazard to die in his rescue?
By Mahomet, dear father, said he, I dare not fight, my weapons are only the
words of an honest merchant: let Meruine, on whom the goddess of war is
inamoured, fight for us both, whilst I in a peaceful climate win honor by my
traffike. Thus disputed Tyrus with his father, to whom Chiualry was nothing
beholding: but Barbin most sadly sorrowful for the troubles of Meruine, flung
away with great fury, making a solemn vow to Mahomet, either speedily to
purchase his delivery, or in the pursuiteto spend his life and treasure.

CHAP, X.
1 Jacobs report to king Meurmont of the acts of Meruine. 2 Bereaes joy. 3 The
private confe^ence between Berea and Jacob.
AFter Jacob was returned home, and had by a little rest given ease to his sore
traveled limbs, he demanded of his wife, if not any from the court had made
inquiry of his return: and h^s wife told him yes, a squire, whom as she
imagined, belonged to the beautiful princess Berea: therefore she persuaded
him as a thing not unnecessary, forthwith to go thither and to take with him
from her to the princess a most curiously wrought purse which of self purpose
she had made for her. Small persuasion prevailed. So Jacob took the purse and
went to the Court, where being entered within the hall, he found the mighty king
Meurmont, who was glad to see him, most graciously demanding of his welfare:
to whom Jacob with humble reverence answered as became a loial subject. By
Mahomet (quoth the king) I feared greatly left Baucamont the proud king of Damas
had met with thee, who is now coming to besiege me with so innumerable an host
of men as to our seeming they double the stars of heaven. Credit me (redoubted
sovereign said Jacob) if it pleased Mahomet, or your gracious stars were so
fortunate, that you had but to aid you xxx. such knights every way as
excellent as Meruine the son of Barbin the merchant, not Baucamonts power,
nor the worlds infinits were able to wrong you by sword or violence: for why,
Meruine is even Uictory itself, as fortunate as courageous, and both
admirable, that Wonder it self alone sits wondering at his actions, his valor
instru^teth valor, and his equal in every virtue has not issued from ye womb
of a living mother, insomuch that my thoughts rather bind me to adore him as a
god, then esteem him as the son of Barbin my friend a merchant Berea, from
whose eyes love borrowed a light to illuminate all the lamps of heaven, hearing
Meruin thus highly eralted by the speech of Jacob, found a joy exceeding al
joy, as much beyond compare, as her beauty above equality, triumphantly
dominering through her royal veins, enriching her heart with the treasure
delivered to her parts. wherefore like babes, greedy of sweet meats till they
even surfeit with delight, she further demanded of Jacob, where he had beheld
Meruin in that warlike sort, which made him estemd so rare a Martialist. Divine
Lady, quoth Jacob, by that religious faith I owe our great god Mahomet, I have
seen him in so dangerous fight, and in such unspeakable trouble, that never
knight has endured or performed so mighty a warfare with such unspeakable
virtue. And there he in self manner discoursed all the enploits done by Mernin,
as Tyrus before had reported to his father: which not only bred an amazement
in the King* but an inward entire love, insomuch that from the boundless humor
of his affection, he heartily wished he were his son. And withal said,
incomparable Meruine, might but thy valor ingirdle my fortunes, excellently
would thou revenge me of these ouerdaring Kings, who come to assail^ me: but
woe is me, base is the desert of thy lineage, that should I hold thee as my
supporter, dishonor would attach me with indignity: yet I am assured, should
I send to thee Count Brandis, he would not for a world deny his delivery. Thus
reasoned the King in himself, diversely h^lde with the diverse arguments of
fear and desire.

2 But Berea in whom the extremity of pleasure challenged an intrest of
(...), gave joy the possession of her heart, and su^rendered al her spirits to
the dispose of love, and her happy fortune. Yet as a corrector of passion,
when he he grew too great a Libertine, she would sometimes sigh, and chide her
forgetful conceits, saying Care to purchase his return, ought to busy them
from their delight, and then would she create a thousand thoghts, how to bring
him back wohse absence diuorst her from her happy longings. Whilst thus she
and the king were both musing, she of his virtues, he how he became so
virtuous. Jacob, who perceived in them both a dumb wishing, said to the king,
Trust me (my sovereign) if either aff^a^ce may be had in my true intent, or
trust in my counsel your Majesty shall undoubtedly send for him, since his
presence is an assured conquest, and the gods alone have sworn he shall
command and control victory, whose like for mightiness of shape, and
courageous resolution has not been seen in all our former ages. The king to
these words would return no answer, but as one desino^s to forget his own
desires, talked of other matters, to expel the thoughts of these proceedings.

3 But Berea, who made precious every time with the preciseness of her
regard, now finding opportunity (a kind agent to her hopes) drew Jacob aside
into a private corner (and greedy to know an end of that which in her could
atteine to no end) said unto him, Jacob, by that excellent creator which
created me, thou have married my delight to a delight beyond delight, in thy
loves praises of that delicat young man whom we call Meruin, because I have
known him, even from the infancy of his infa^cie to these riper years of
youth that have infra^chised him from the ^^^^etnesse of school rudiments: yet
in all that time, nor in my time have I seen a creature more admirably
compact, or in whom valor, and adventure have held more pre-eminence. Believe
me, and by my, souls god Mahomet I protest, it is a pity deserving more the^
a pitiful regard, that he wants lands and revenues worthy to enric^ him with
honor: but most of all grievous, that he is no gentleman, in whom all the
conditions of gentry chalengeth such a wondrous prerogative. Ha, divine lady
(said Jacob) Meruine has all whatsoever Nature or heaven can infuse into a
mortal creature, or man or woman can bestow of a blessed infant. As for land,
it is as fruitelesse as tastlesse, if labor give it not a sweet relish: velure
is the mistress of his devotion, and he is exc^llently valiant the heaven
climbing conceit, whereof doubtless will mount him on the highest step of
honor. If I may well say what in my conceit portendeth to a well meaning
intent, were I king of Hungaria, Calabria, and Polonia, and for a blessing of
those hie dignities, had but one sole daughter twice fai^er then the fairest
ever Mahomet created, I would give her and it only to Meruin: yea, and imagine
it a dowry much too little for the virtue, force, and true magnamitie with
which he is so gloriously adorned. When the paragon of al perfections, the most
beutiful Berea heard the^e words, first she blushed as afraid, lest his eyes had
st^ept the^r sight in her inward desires, and then drive away the blushed with a
pale mantle of shamefast rejoicing, to hear him so admired, exchanging white
and red so often in her counterance that the beh^lders might well grow enchanted
with those co^lours, and yet h^ld them never more excellent, and yet the most
excellent when equally m^xt, they bare like soueraigne^^e in her
angel-ex^^lling face. After this contending superiority of looks, she turned
as^de, and whispered thus to her self, Ha Mer^^^, Mer^illc, the many praises
of thy renoune, a^e the (...) my heart, leaving no restraint to my desires, but
the palle of virtue: and yet thou know it not, it is now more then six
years since first love took flight from thine eyes to harbor in my heart,
yet thou know it not: only have my vows aspired to heaven for thee, yet
thou k^ewest it not, neither dare I (alas) for the baseness of thy lineage take
away this ignorant mischief of my bliss. Alas thou know it not. Yet should I
live an exile fro my fathers country (so a divine union, called marriage, had
made us one soul) I had rather endure a tormenting evil with thy presence,
the^ all the gorgeous advancement, heaven or mine own wishes could give or
desire, with the greatest pagan emperor of the world. Thus spoke Berea the
glory of Nature, who when Jacob perceived so passionat, fearing le^^ the too
great liberality of his words had offended, in this manner began to excuse
them. Dear lady (said he) be not offended that the height of my praises have
attained no higher a subject then Meruine, who is higher in my thoughts, then
heaven in the eye of any man: neither impute error to my speches, fith by
heaven I have not lied in any thing, neither spoken to flatter the private
conceit of any peculiar, nor the public auditorie of so gracious an assembly:
but what I have said, even the wings of every wind will whistle. Then gracious
madam bow not your countenance from me, neither be displeased with my rude
reportings. Ha no quickly answered Berea, who was willinger to increase volums,
then abridge a letter, thy words move me no amasement of dislike, therefore I
beseech thee fail not, but come and speak with me in my chamber before thy
departure from the court. At this the lady and Jacob discovered themselves, and
Jacob went again unto the king, who even then was roially set at dinner, and
commanded Jacob to attend him and the Queen. Then began the king to discourse
the hie malice of Baucamont and of his warlike expedition toward Montment,
with all the occurrencs of that intended warfare, as a troublesome theme whereof
only his mind noted. After di^^^r was ended, and the king risen Jacob humbly
took his leave to depart, yet ere he went, he inquired the way to the young
princess Bereas lodgings, and thither he went: but she, poor loue-torne lady,
was laid on alitle couch couerd with rich tissue, tormenting her heart with her
thoughts, and her thoughts with love, so exceedingly, that the abundance of her
sorrow gave l^berty to her tongue to utter, and in uttering to double her
languor: ay me, quoth she, dearer then the dearest of my self to me. O only
absolute Meruine, thy absence is my death, and thy remembrance the continual
obsequies for my deceased happiness: yet is my death blameles, since I die for
the most wise, most beautiful, most valiant, and most accomplished creature in
the world, whose renown is spread through Galile, and all the corners of
thearth. Ha Meruine, Meruine, when shall I behold the day of thy arrival? when
shall I bathe my eyes in thy eyes, whisper in thy ear, and hang on thy bosom?
O excellent love unknown to thee, thou have my love, my virtuous love, govern
me then as thy captive, and dispose me as thy servant. At these words beating
the palace of her breast, she turned and tossed, as if the motion of her body
could remove her passion, but it was impossible. Then calling an eunuch to her
commanding him to marry his voice to his lute* she bade him sing some canzonet
that might rather kill, than increase passion: the eunuch sung as follow^^

I do not now complain of my disgrace,
Though never soul of greater griefs could bost:
Nor of the hour, season, time nor place.
Nor of my foil, for any freedom lost.
Nor of my lives joy by misfortune danted,
Nor of my wit, with ouerweening struck,
Nor of my sense with any sound enchanted,
Nor of the force of fiery pointed look.
Nor of the steel that strikes within my wound,
Nor of my thoughts, by worser thoughts, defacde:
Nor of the life I labor to confound
But I complain, that being thus disgracde:
Fetterd, feared, fra^t^ke, charmd, fierd, shotthrogh, slain,
My death is such, as I may not complain.
On the last clause of this sonet, the noble merchant Jacob entered her chamber,
whom so soon as Berea beheld, she gave some respite to her mones, while a
seeming joy ouershadowed her face, and an inward resolution (for many good
parts she knew in him) took hold on her heart, giving her assurance without
fear, to make him privy to her long hid affection. Wherefore after due
reverence done to her greatness, and a gracious welcome deliuerd from her silent
look, she bade him sit down by her, and with a trembling voice the true
herald of a virtuous meaning, ^hus said unto him: Jacob, let it not seem
strange to thee, that having gone one step beyond wisdom, I seek by danger to
ouerrun fear, and let me conjure thee by that power, to whom in thy deu^tion
thou have given power over thy being, to keep secret in thine inward soul,
wbat my ouerburdned heart shall unload unto thee. Jacob in whom wonder had
raised a hie color of amazment answered: Lady, by that inuiolate faith due to
our great god Mahomet, I promise to keep secret in the enclosure of my soul
whatsoever you propound unto me. Know then quoth she (O chide me not when thou
know what I blush to know) at such time as I lay at Turgon with my mother
nursed* not far from thence the beautiful Meruine (on whom doting Nature
had bestowed all her treasure) went to school, whither I much frequented to
learn the knowledge of divine philosophy: but alas the knowledge I learned was
the confounding of my understanding: for there, even there ^^came I surprised
with the beauties of Meruine, and so entangled with the love of his
perfections, that his thought is my torment, and his absence my death: so as if
his return be long, my life will be short, so much my loves martyrdom wounds
me with intolerable ^orrow: yet I take Diana to my witness that al my love has
bin honorably chaste, in such sort as became my virtue, or my fathers daughter,
neither is he yet acquainted with my desire, nor have I to any but thy self,
bemoned my unhappiness, or discovered my love. Wherefore I pray thee by the
vehement passion of an unfeigned lover, make means for his return, fith many
years are past in my remembrance since his departure. Lady said Jacob, it is
but x. months the last week past since his departure. Ten months answered the
Lady! Ay me, every day is a wo^lds age in the computation of my mind, so flow
is the passage of my sorrows: wherefore, by all the virtues of thy mind^, and
the love thou bear to Meruine, I conjure thee, join with me in some happy
stratageme by which we may work his return to this country. By Mahomet, quoth
Jacob, Lady I can not possibly invent how. Then have I devised the way (repl^ed
Berea) and thus it is: You shall to morrow morning come to my chamber to speak
with me, at what time I will have written a letter in my fathers name to the
count Brandis, and having this night privily taken his scale, sign it
therewith in such sort as you shall have Mernine deliu^red you. Then shall you
take Barbin with you, but by no means make him privy to our complots, but
stiffly maintain, it is the act of my father. When you have Meruin, at such
time as Baucamont who shortly will beleager us, shall detain his army, bring him
armed at all points into the field, to join with my father, and doubt not of
his intertaine whose succor will be so gracious. Jacob accorded to al she could
invent or desire, and so departed, leaving the lady to herself, to study on
the inditing of a letter so weighty, which at length she perfited to her own
contentment, and then sealed it with the kings own seal. And in the morning
Jacob came and received it, protesting a diligenter regard in performance of
such a royal affair. The lady gave him infinite thanks, with promise of an
inspeakeable reward, and then she delivered him an C. ducats to defray his
ordinary charge, and a curious wrought chain, of pea^le and gold, which she
charged him in her loves name, to present to Meruine, and withal to let him
understand the interest he held in her love. All which with solemn oths he
vowed honestly and zealously to perform. Then Jacob took leave of the Lady,
and came to the house of Barbin, to whom he said, My best friend Barbin make
your self ready with all speed to go with me from the K. to Brandis, to fetch
your son Meruine home again. Barbin, to whom no sound could bring sweeter
melody, told him the news was balm to his griefs. So dispatching his
business, and taking order for his home occasions they departed together in
great have, whom on the seas sailing toward Brandis we will leave, and a while
speak of king Baucamont, and the other pagan princes, who after the late storm
found so prosperous a gale, that he arrived at the port of Luternia, a month
after the departure of Jacob and Barbin. Thence they marched with conquest to
Montment, which city they be^ieged with two hundred thousand Turks. After they
were lodged and entrenched Baucamont caled a council of his chiefest barons,
and consulted among them what was to be done, and whether it were best to
assault it at their first approach, I or no. To which opinion of assaulting
Eclamard dissented, saying, Rather would I hold the first decree agreed of
amongst us, which is, to send ^j. of your approved knights to Mermont, to show
wherefore we came hither, and what cause has s^wen this seed of warfare among
us, requesting hi^ daughter the beautiful Berea, which if he will send to you
to be joined in the holy bands of marriage, that then we will return to our
countries, otherwise endure the uttermost worst of wars afflictions: and this
hold I the safest course in our proceedings, because if here we lengthen out
time with a long and lingering warfare, Gualtier the dane, now reigning in
Babylon, and Guion of Denmark both brothers to the ever renowned Oger, who at
this instant bear such eternal hate to pagans* may in our absence exile our
peace from our own countries. Again, which is of greatest avail against us,
one of great knowledge revealed to me, that the mighty emperor king Charles of
France, means this season to visit them, and to adore the holy sepulcher of
their god. Wherefore the speedier we make our return, the stronger our own
peace, and safety of our countries; for the absence of kings are the deaths of
nations

CHAP. XI.
1 Of the dispatch of Bauc^monts two knights to Mermont. 2 Mermont in despite
of Baucamont imprisoneth them. 3 Of the assault, 4 and death of Clarissa the
coward.
THe counsel of Eclamard, Baucamont and all his Barons applauded as most
excellent, wherefore at that present was Morgant and Nigron roially dispatched
for the embassade, who in solemn manner entered into the city, and thence were
conveyed to the palace, where ascending a pair of stately stairs, they
entered into the great chamber* where they found the king Mermont accompan^^^
with a number of worthy Barons, to whom Morgant first speaking, gave this
salutation, That Mahomet the eterna^l regent and poss^ssor of the whole world,
who keeps from evil and lends vnending days to the mighty Baucamont king
of Damascus, the same Mahomet confound his enemies, whose weapons mainetaine
war against him. Then he proceeded thus in his embassage: King Mermont, the
king my master salutes thee by us, and Says he wondereth whither thine
ancient wisdom is fled, that thou refusest to give him thy fair chaste
daughter, whose every excellence, the height of his royal dignities shall
counterpoise: therefore these are his latest summons, either now send her by us
to make happy his desires, or hereafter it will be too late to repent thy lives
end, ending thy glories: if then now thou will stoup the ambition of thy will,
sending her with a free consent, the marriage without delay shall be solemnized,
and all his royal army shall depart without damage to thy country.

2 When Mermont with an often exchanging cheek had heard his delivery,
cholerike anger roused up his lion spirits teaching his brow such frowns of
displeasure, that Morgant quaked to behold the^. Then said Mermont, take those
insolent orators of disgrace* and cast them into some hideous ^^^^^couering
^ungeon, for that is both my reply and resolution, where in despite of
Baucamont, their woes shall consume their breathes. At these words they were
each one on every side (having nothing to say for themselves, but prayers to
Mahomet for their (protection) taken and cast in most loathsome imprisonment,
where their day was blackness, and the breath they ^rew, the air of their
sighs before breathed.

3 After this the king Mermont caused an alarm to be cried over all the city:
then calling Clarissa, said unto him, let it not be troublesome to thee
honorable Clarissa, that this day I commit into thine invincible protection,
mine ensign, the glory and badge of my dignity, since to thy worth the earth
has refused to bear an equal, as the glory of thy carriage at our last
triumph was a sufficient^witnes, thy wisdom is the gouerner of my fame, and
thy fortitude the hope of my redemption. My earthes god (answered Clarissa)
banish al doubtful fear, for I will support thy standard with such resolution
as shall become the greatness of so royal a burden, (woe alas, had but Mermont
known his extreme cowardice, not the world could have made him hazard his
honor in so weak hands) or his imagind reputation was but ye stolen shadow
of Meruines perfection. Now Clarissa w^unded to death with his own glory, had
no succor to fly unto, but his chamberlain that only was privy to what
passed betw^xt Meruin and him, who at that instant lay exceedingly si^ke of a
qua^tane fever. Wherefore coming to him, Clarissa said, either must thou now
rise and sustain my falling fortune, or all the honor that I have won by ye
ever conquering hands of inui^c^ble Mer^ine, will now utterly be lost, and I
confounded: for the m^ghtie standard of king Mermo^t this day is delivered to
my protection, and what a never dying sham it were thou know, if it be not
carried with red^ubted valiancie, when inumerabl^ blows eternizeth the helmes
of deaths tragedians. Sir* said the chamberlain (who euene then was piteously
ague shaken, were all the golden mines of the world proposed to me for
recompense, it were impossible to raise me, because in my body wantes vital
ability. When Clarissa heard him, he stroke him with so fierce a cowards
blow, that two of his teeth flew out of his mouth and then departed out of the
chamber in great choler, and came to king Mermont whom he entreated with all the
speed he could to give an alarm to the tents of his enemies, who as yet
secure dreamt of no danger, and by that surprise, doubted not but to attain
infinite renown. And these words were uttered with such a trembling spirit,
that king Mermont in that Index, might have read his cowardice, if former
resolve had not blinded suspect. But he feared him not so, that at his
en^reatie, he withal his Barons sallied from the town, being 10000 well
ordered soldiers. When as Baucamont beheld the comeliness of their march, he
called all his barons together, and said. Behold lords in what warlike pomp
king Mermont brings the paragon of beauty, divine Berea, to be espoused to
our greatness. I charge therefore every soul on allegiance and my love* that
they be ready to receive them with all ye honor possible can be devised. Thus
spoke he whose thoughts were flowen beyond ye Alps far from the purpose of
Mermont for he came accompanied with the king of Calabria named Sallames, and
of his brother Marandus, to whom he used contrary eloquence, saying Ualiant and
heroike commanders, we are but a point to the great circle of our enemies, a
handful to a boundless mass, let us keep together, and making of our many
but one true strength, fight like a not to be sundred mountain, that when the
great host of our foes is convicted* we may with small or no loss, make an
honorable r^trait to Montment. To these words the whole army gave a shoute of
consent, and withal spurring their horses, gave a gallant charge on the face
of their enemies: but Clarissa, whose heart was then benumd witha cold palsy,
durst not carry ye standard upright, least the view of that mark of honor
should incline the ambitious minded mighty ons to assail his faint hardines
which all the army of Montment. to their grief perceived, so yt Mermont with
his fellows in vnspe^ble fury, thrust himself amongst his enemies, even
amongst their tents which they cut and hewed down in admirable manner, killing
their foes as they went in huge multitudes. There was never a turk that
Mermo^t met, but he stroke him dead to the earth, crying to al his host; Lords
and renowned fellows, strike courageously, and neither fear king, prince nor
peasant, for this day have I taken conquest my prisoner. At these words, a
pleasant angry Turk went to Baucamont, and said: Glory my sovereign be to thy
wedding day, for Mermont has brought his daughter on his sword, and tendered
her unto the priest, with such memorable blows, that if you s^^ne acknowledge
not satisfaction, his payment will impouerish you of all your attendants.
Baucamont hearing, and angry to hear this, took his lance, and swore by all
the deity of Mahomet, to be gloriously revenged on Mermont, and the^ like a
stormy whirlewind he ran into the host of Montment, crying Damas, Damas, for
the glory of Damas. Then began the ^ight to renew his age, and to show himself
in his lustiest youth, doubling the deaths and wounds, of the both sides
pursuing pagans. Anon Baucamont being maunted on his steed Marcheuall, which
sometimes belongd to the ever renowned duke Oger, the father of Meruine, he
peceiued where Mermont rode triumphing in the conquest of his sword, whom he
pursued with a valiant emulation, till Mermont beholding him, turned to
encounter him, and said: Now Baucamont receive from my sword the love salute of
Berea, whom before thou shall enjoy, this earth, the common receptacle of the
dead, shall be mine instant ha^itation. Then with their wounding heels spurring
their horses* they encountered either other so furiously, that both flew from
their horses to the ground.

4 As Soon as Clarissa beheld the king his master overthrown, as if his coward
heart had a symp^thie of every man's afflictions, he betook himself to flight,
but far had not the wings his woe borne him, but a pagan, who all the day had
observed his faint hartednes, came upon him, and gave him such a blow with his
sword, that he fell soon dead from his horse* yielding to a shameful life, a
sudden death. But all this while Mermont and Baucamont assailed each other with
such kingly magnificence, that all the army stood in an amaze to behold them. In
the end Mermont by the help of many hands was remounted, after which he
assailed Baucamont with inestimable cruelty, yet he by the miraculous aid of
his powers, which were infinite, defended himself, and despite of spite got
on the back of March^ual. Then began the battle, as if til then it had not
begun, during which lamentable effusion, the king Sallames perceiving Eclamard
who had flaine a countlesse number of his host, came running against him and
gave him such a well wishing blow, that if the pagan had not speedily turned,
he had never turned more than the last turn which turns to life eternal:
notwithstanding, the blow was sent from so willing a spirit of anger, that
glancing down, it disseuerd his hand from his arm, which when Eclamard felt,
he spurred his horse, and betook his flight to his tent, whilst the whole
army which then were sadly discomforted, advised him to return and enclose
Mermont, which Sallames understanding, forthwith gave counsel to retrait,
lest that a sudden enclosure should defeit their gotten happiness, which they
did most honorably, retiring pace by pace to the town, their faces still fixed
on their enemies: but in this retraite Mermont lost much, because Baucamont
followed exceeding close, yet nevertheless, the other side lost much more, who
returned to their tents discontented, because unrevenged. Now was Mermont
brought to his palace, where his Queen and daughter roially received him,
demanding both his health and success in battle, which he reported in
doubtful manner, saying, both sides had lost, yet assuring them that Baucamont
should never live to enjoy Berea: to which words Berea gave humble thanks with
princely reverence. Then demanded Berea what was become of Clarissa, to whom
the king said, If thou love me daughter, name not the base traitor, whose
cowardice would never give him leave to strike one blow, either with sword or
lance, till he was slain by the hands of a common soldier. Many other
discourses the king and his barons held, til supper being served, they sat
down: which no sooner finished, but Berea went to the chamber of Clarissas
chamberlain, to whom she reported his masters death. Lady (said he) griene not
for his destiny, for why, his merit was of al men least deserving, and he
altogether unmeet, either for skirmish or battle. And there he discoursed
unto her all his stolen glory, how the prize he had before won, was not his,
but the prowess of young Meruine, and that he himself had been many times
armed in his name. And lastly, of the vngentlemanly blow he gave him, because
he refused to wear his armor, and bear the standard of Mermon in that last
battle.

CHAP, XII.
1 The arriual of Jacob, and Barbin at Brandis. 2 The presenting of the letter
to the Count. 3 Meruine is delivered to them. 4 Mineae persuaded Croisant to
accompany Meruine, which he did, with 400. horsemen.
WHen all the worlds beauteous eye, beautiful Berea understood, that Clarissa
had got the honor of the Ioust, and the prized cup, not by himself, but by
the divine valiant hand of her best beloved Meruine, modestly her heart capred
in her bosom, and she unable to contain her thoughts, departed to her
chamber, where first throwing her self upon her bed, and then taking a well
speaking lute, she apparelled her voice to the sounding strings, and sung in
this manner:

Eyes with your tears, blind if you be,
Why have those tears such eyes to see?
Poor eyes, if your tears can move
My tears, eyes then must moan my love:
Then eyes since you have lost your sight,
Weep still, and tears shall lend you light,
Till both dissolve, and both want night.
No, no clear eyes, you are not blind,
But in your tears discern my mind,
Tears is the language which you speak,
Which my heart counting, it must break:
Then cease ill tongue to t^ll my wrongs,
My sighs shall get them better tongs,
To tell what heaven to love belongs.
After she had sung this, as if the lute doubled her imaginations, she threw it
from her, and with erected hands and beteared eyes, she said. Thou only honor
to beauty, exellent Meruine, be gracious to my thrall, and retorte my misery,
and you gentle winds, quickly and with easy murmr, convey my passions into
his ears, whereas yet never entered my lamentations: be speedy honorable
Jacob, and assure the honor of my affections, else shall my de^ires be my
death, and love my burial: thus lamented she* in whom woe was lovely, because
adorned with her love: but Meruin altogether skillesse of her complaint, led in
Brandis a most pleasant and delectable life: for why? the Countess thereof did
love him with a most perfect and sincere love, so likewise did Minea, whose
careful intimacie so regarded him, that it was more laborsome for him to wish,
then to attain the end of his wish, but the absolutely virtuous Meruine never
had unchaste thought, nor ever accompanied woman but Berea, whom he married, and
begat of her Orient, the father of the seven signs, as is written in the
holy histori^ of Godfrey of Bullein. But I will leave them, and return to
Jacob and Barbin, who ar^iuing at Brandis, and com^ing to the house of Minea,
were solemnly received of her and all her attendants. Then Barbin inquired of
the health of Meruine, and was assured by her, that he was excellently well,
for that she had supped with him the last night. Then he told her, that his
occasions importuned him to go to the earls court to deliver him a letter for
the re^ease of Meruine. The music of this news entered harshly into hereares,
for that she wished nothing less then the departure of Meruine, yet she covered
it under a deceitful shadow of conten^ment, and then conducted them to the
earls palace, where they found him with a falcon on his fist: (for his
delight was wholly in hauking) but wh^^ the Count beheld Minea, he said, Lady,
what occasion has drawn you into these parts? Then Jacob drawing forth the
letter, gave the earl this salutation.

Mahomet that is our god, and the god of Asia, preserve the mighty king
Meurmont, and bless you, whom that good king kindly regreeteth by these
letters. Then in most humble manner, kissing the superscription, he presented
them to his hands, who breaking open the seals, read them, the tenure whereof
was this. ()

The letter of king Mermont, to the Count Brandis.
MOst thrice excellent and renowned Count Brandis,
we have been advertised, that for an occasion of no great moment, more then
the defense of a spotless reputation, you hold one of our liege people
prisoner. Wherefore, by virtue of our royal authority, we command you, that
without delay, or further prolonging of excuse, you return him to our saved
hands, and send us in writing all the articles of his imprisonment: and we
protest by the holy title of our Crown, to make full satisfaction. If
otherwise you repel, and effect the contrary, expect nothing, but the
uttermost worst of our indgnation.

Written at Mou^ment, and signed Merm^nt.


No sooner had the earl read this letter which Berea had composed and sealed
with her fathers seal, but he said to Jacob, honorable sir, your welcome is
as good as your own desires can entreat, and most willingly shall you have
Meruin restored, who^, if he had wronged me a thousand fold more then he has,
yet would I deliver him for the love of the famous king Mermont, to whom I am
in kindred nearest allied: and assure his highness, that if I had known him
for one of his subjects, I would not have detained him for a kingdom.

3 It Is vain to make a long tale of a light subject: Meruine was sent for, and
delivered to Jacob, and his father Barbin, who accepted him with all joy, and
embraced him with the highest contentment: and he on the other part did that
duetifull reverence, which either a son ought, or a father expects. Then the
earl said unto him, Meruin^ this night will I do thee honor to sup with me,
because for the love of king Mermont I have forgotten thy misdoings: and then
the Sewer being arrived, the kings service was sent up, and they feasted with
great pomp. The solemnity being ended, Jacob, Barbin and Meruin, went with
Minea, to her house, where they lay for that night: yet before they went to
their rest, Jacob drew Meruin apart in secret, and told him in well couched
phrases, adorned with a most grave and stayed countenance, that the divine lady
of all hearts only beautiful Berea saluted him, sending him that sacred chaste
affection which no time could outweare, nor force violate. In brief, he laid
open all the large volume of her love, and how she had composed that l^tter
which was the mean of his redemption, with many other testimonies of her holy
desires; even on the tip of Jacobs tongue, as he was talking, sat Love heading
new darts, and from thence took his ^light into the heart of Meruine, where he
commented of all that was spoken, doubling each praise, and redoubling every
perfection, and in the end, in that religious Sanctuary, set down this
immovable judgment, that Berea was most excellent, worthy of all love, and
therefore by him should ever be beloved. Hence began the sparkles of loves
purest order, and hence grew an unlimited desire in Meruine, speedily to behold
his n^w selected goddess. Then Jacob presented to him from her a pair of
gorgeous gloves, on which was imbrodered a turtle dove in a bower of roses, and
this Motto, Neue^ ever alone, which Meruin received as kindly, as they were
sent willingly, often kissing and rekissing them, as the blessed ensigns of a
fortunate love. By this the night grew old, so that every one betook them to
their rest: but Meruine that night indented with his new thoughts that they
should exile sleep from his eyes, and make his rest the resting on his loves
imaginations: and so they did.

4 But when Minea perceived that Meruine must so soon depart, she sent a
messenger in all haste to Croisant, to entreat him to bring all his power to
conduct Meruine to his own country: the which he did, bringing with him to
Brandis four hundred horsemen his attendants. When the morning had set open
the gates, through which the day might pass, Meruine arose and desired his
father and the rest to make haste in their departure: he longed exceedingly to
see his brother Tyrus, and the rest of his kindred: but they that could have
read on the table of his desires might have seen it was Berea to whom his
wishes aspired. By this they were all ready, then Minea brought him his arms,
and his sword, and one of his squires brought him his mare Mordant, whereon he
lightly va^ted without the aid of stirrup, and said; Ladies, to whom my
service is bound in an eternal band, be Mahomet eue^ gracious to you, and
grant you all what you can desire. At this the countess and Minea kissed him,
and then they departed: but the earl himself would needs be their conduct to
their ships, giving Jacob a letter to deliver king Mermont, importing that he
had set Meruine quit of all accusations. And further, that if his majesty
pleased to command him or his power against the enemies of his commonwealth,
he was ready, and would take it for a grace of unspeakable kindness. Thus
having brought them to their ships, and seen them aboard, with triumph he
returned to his castle, and Jacob, Barbin, Meruine, Croisant, and the 400.
horsemen bequeathed themselves to the favor of the seas and the winds mercy, of
whom we will cease to speak, and treat of other matters.

CHAP. XIII.
1 The encounter between G^llien, Rotherus, the son of Oliver and Meruine, 2
Of the good knight Drohes. who yielded himself to Meruine.
THe ever memorable record of this famous history makes mention, that in the
same time that Meruine was departed from Brandis, as is before written, there
was sailing upon that sea, upon which he then daunced, many French Christian
knights, that forsook the flowrie country of France, to behold the divine
sepulcher of their holy Savior, amongst whom Oliver that was exterminated by
Marsilius, had begotten on Iaquelin, whom Oliver the beautiful daughter of the
rich king named Hugues of Constantinople, at such time as the truce was made by
Charlemaine and his twelve peers. There was also with this Galien, Rotherus
another knight, the remembrance of whose virtue, might exceedingly well equal
the most praiseworthy reputation: he had to name Drohes, who after that time
became friend to Meruin, as shall be fully mentioned in this present ^istory.
Behold now these christians chased by the unmerciful fury of a violent storm,
a^riued near unto Meruin, who first perceiving them, cried to his companions,
this day is better then a Sabbath to my desires, for I discover a ship laden
with christian gallants: if it be rich, be yours the profit of their wealth,
vouchsafe me no booty but prowess, and honor to my sword, which is al I
desire to deserve. And at these words a courageous fire of valiant fury
environed his heart. Now if the zealous minded christians, when they beheld the
pagans were ouerrun wieh a doubtful fear of their success wonder not, for
they were but thirtie^ and those il appointed both for armor and munition, so
that if the eye of heaven behold them not with a pitying aspect, their lives
and honors are all in ieopardy by the valiancy of Meruin. Cousin Gallien said
Drohes, behold how these pagans draw near to assault us, if Jehovah look not
from heaven, he^e shall our lives pay their last forf^t. Fear not cosine
(replied Gallien) for by that faith I owe to th^lmightie, so long as I can hold
my battle ax in my hand* so long will I maintain my liberty, and doubt not but
to send thousands of them to hell. Ha co^ine, against the foes of religion we
ought to be eternaly valiant, yet if God in his great book of destiny have
set down our tragedies in this conflict, let us receive with ioyfulnes what we
cannot repel with unwillingness: Yet I protest to you by the greatest
protestation of a christian soul, that before I be taken, i will infranchise so
many pagan^ souls from their cursed bodies, that the cr^mosin cur^ents of
their blood, shall vouchsafe my hands a perpetual couerture. While Gallien was
speaking this, Meruine and his companions, being already prepared for the
battle, boorded Gallien, to whom Meruine ha^led and demanded whence, and what
they were, whose white cros^es were (said he) the signs of christianity which
he had vowed to root from the face of all nations. Scarcely was his last
wordended, but the pagan mariners assaulted the christians whom Meruine and the
rest with their swords in their fists, violently seconded, making almost the
beginning and ending one moment. There might the eye of man behold a lamentable
spectacle; for of xxx Christian souls in a trice were xxvj. breathless, only
iiij. suruiuing, which* were Gallien Drohes, and ij. others, which breathed
scarce a breath, before their breaths vanished but Drohes turning aloft his
steelehewing sword (which the count of Meulant had given him, when he fought
against Sodonas) slew an infinite number of the valiantest Sarazens but Gallien
carried himself so courageously that he never stroke blow with his axe, but he
disseuered the life from the body. When Croisant saw the prowess of Gallien,
he cried unto his people, that they should not for a world kill him, because he
would present him as a great estimate to king Mermont: but that word of life's
safety cost him more by much than he desired to tender: for Gallien smote so
thick with his axe, that the Pagans in abundance tumbled into the sea,
Gallien still crying S. George and me; and withal crying; Thou holy Lamb of
Judah, comfort thy people. All this while the valiant acts of Meruine the son of
Oger did, were wonders beyond wonder, and more than words have power to
deliver: yet what he did, he ill did, since it was to exalt Mahomet, and show
himself an invincible pagan, yet ought he not be hated for his misbeliefe, but
curse with immortal malediction, that false fairy Gratiana, who stealing him,
told not the truth of his birth and being. Gallien and Drohes made great
resistance against the Pagans, but the highest valor is profitlesse against an
higher resolution. Wherefore cousin Drohes, said Gallien, let me kiss thee, and
bid thee farewell, for here shall our bodies vnsundered, sunder their
acquaintance, but our soul I hope, embrace in the highest palace of heaven.
Well do thou know, O that we had such cause to know! how Ganelon the traitor
by his treason delivered unto the king Marcillius, my father Oliver, and the
famous Orlando, who died at Ronceualli: O Oliver my father, thou scourge of
S^razens turn back into heaven. Thus spoke the wise Gallien, whom Meruine
beholding with the eyes of perfect anger, and seeing that none of his people
durst approach him, cried, retire thou valurelesse amated nation, whose earthy
spirits are consumd with the fire of this christian, to me belongs the
conflict, to me the rep^tation. Approaching to Gallien, he said, Traitor, all
thy defenses are but mists that vanish from thy safety, great has bin thy
conquest, greater thy fault for such conquest and greatest now shall be thy
overthrow: Yet for thy valor sake, I will contradict my judgment, yield, and
thy life is saved. Were it not for charity (said Gallien) I should hate thy
soul, but thy body be assured, I detest, yet my self much more, should I have
but half a thought of submission: never was there pagan borne, to whom I will
be obedient: and at that word he struck a pagan that approached him with such
fury, that he fell dead before Mernin. Mer^in beholding this true magnanimity,
had not even at that instant wrath thrust pity from her sovereignty, he had
both saved and loved him, but being blinded with emulation, he rusht upon
Gallien, and struck him upon the head, that he claue him even unto the girdle.
Woe alas Gallien the son of Oliver, as memorable for his virtues, as famous
for his victories, is now slain: forgive him great Jove that slew him, and yet
it was a wound that wounded all christendom.

2 Now is Drohes alone, and yet not alone, for seeing Gallien dead, he was
consorted with infinite perplexities, and as twere armed with their invisible
tumults, he swear that before he died, he would revenge his death, then flew he
amongst the proudest Sarazins* sending infinites to attend him whom he loved,
but alas their courses were contrary, for Gallien ascending, they descended. So
like a careless mad man, only discreetly wise in the ways of prowesses did
Drohes behave himself, that leaving his own, he boorded the ship where the
Pagans were inhaused, and there defended and offended with such unspeakable
courage, that not any but started back and refused to assail him. Jesus, said
Drohes, that made the cross glorious by thy passion, shall I, O must I die
here, and thus unrevenged, with that word he leapt into a little boat that was
behind at the st^rn of the ship and swore by holy Mary, that who so entered
there, he would be his deaths man: for sithence he was alone, he would sell his
own* and his fellows lives, at the rate of a bloody tribute. Then came Meruin
all amazed, saying; Christian, for pure love only of thy virtue, if thou will
yield, and trust mine honorable reputation, by Mahomet, and him thou call
thy redeemer, thou shall have no harm, only the title of my prisoner, and for
the renown of thy valiancie shall go whither fortune shall conduct me: this
do, and so do, otherwise by Alcaron, my honor and my sword, instantly either
thou or I will be entertained into de^ths mansion. Drohes hearing the thunder,
yet the sweet thunder of Meruins speech, albeit it made but a doleful melody
in his ears, yet entering into many souldierlike considerations, both of after
adventure, and present danger, guided by the grace of God and his good Angel,
he accepted a will to accept those conditions* saying to himself: By that
celestial virgin who bare the fruit of life, it is better to be in prison, and
prolong life with some hope, then presently die, and the soul unsatisfied.
Then raising his voice aloft; Noble pagan, quoth he to Meruine, on these
conditions, that neither my life be violated, nor I urged to deny my religion,
I yield my self, Christian quoth Meruin I assure it thee: then Drohes deliuerd up
his sword, and Meruine received it. At the instant of this adventure, there
stood by a pagan, who boiled to show himself a notable varlet, and seeing
Drohes without arms, he smote him over the face, saying Uillaine, thy death is
sworn. With that Meruine turned back, in whom rage by desert challenged an
interest, because both his faith and honor was profaned, saying to the Pagan,
Thou son of a common unsatisfied whore, prove why thou smotest this Christian,
who is yielded my prisoner, and to whom by warranty my reputation is engaged:
with that Meruine lifted up Drohes sword being naked in his hand, and stroke
the Pagan, that he claue him to the teeth: then amplifying his protestation,
said, By Mahomet, if there be any man, of what estate soever, that impeacheth
my promise, or does my word wrong to any christian, this hand, and this sword
shall minister revenge: for all my deeds shall be just and religious. O
immortal creator (said Drohes to himself) how well worthy is this Pagan to
rule a monarchy! I have not seen a creature more wise, gracious, nor more
valiant. O thou that disposest all things, dispose and convert his thoughts to
christianity* so shall he be well worthy of all honors, otherwise my thoughts
are prophets, presaging an unspeakable loss to ensue by his chivalry. These
praises whispered Drohes of Meruine, being but the first sacrifices of a
greater love which ensued. Now came Barbin to Meruine saying, My beloved son,
too strong a a witness is this blow of thy heavy displeasure, I pray thee of
love* give not to thy followers matter of indignation, as you have done to him
you have slain. Father quoth Meruine, dissimulation is a branch of cowardice, I
will be plain and just, if the greatest monarch under heaven wrong me, my
sword shall right me. Yea but (said Barbin) fear is fellow with tyranny and
soldiers must be preserved with affability. By Mahomet answered he again, I
will be feared throughout the world, and who so is not feared, is not truly
beloved* of whatsoever is gotten by the conquest of these christians, I desire
nothing part it amongst you, save only this prisoner: wherefore let none do
him villainy, for it is mine indignity. This said: all the pagans trembled,
till with a cheerful countenance he gave new life to their terror: such
effects of wonder was in his beholding. Now all troubles being appeased, the
pagans divided the booty amongst them, and Meruine withdrawing himself into
his cabin, only made himself rich, with heaping to himself infinite wishes
to behold and enjoy the most admirable Berea: and in these cogitations he
sailed with such prosperous success, that in few days they arrived at the
port Luternia, where they landed, two leagues from the host of king Baucamont,
who as you have heard, had besiedged Mermont within Montment, with two hundred
thousand men, and had so continued five months, from the time that Barbin and
Jacob departed in quest for the only valiant Meruine, whom they brought with
300. fighting men, 400. they had at their departure from Brandis, but in the
conflict at sea, they lost 100. Now as they marched, it was told Meruin that
the next morning should a great battle be fought between the kings, wherefore
Meruine said unto Jacob, I pray you let us add wings to our feet, that we may
fly to the beginning of the battle, for in it shall Berea behold me either
honored or intombed. Thus, and in these discourses, they shortened the tiresome
way, passing by a little cottage, and thence entered into a small village, but
there they found nothing to eat, for Baucamont had destroyed al. Thus will I
leave to speak of Meruine, and will return to Mermont, and his fortunes in
the next days mighty battle.

CHAP. XIIII.
1 Of the great battle before Montment. 2 Merm^nt taken prisoner. 3 Meruines
arrival and recovery of Mermont, 4 Meruines exploites in the battle. 5 His
second delivery of Mermont, and other accidents.
AS son as the sun had put on the days golden armor, Mermout arose and
commanded proclamation through the town that every one armed should mount on
horsback, for that day he would give battle to Baucamont: and when all the
host was assembled, he ordered his battalions according to the customs of the
most ancient Romans: which done, he gave his standard to be carried by a
notable pagan, the son of his sister, named Tufer, who had in his regiment.
20000. h^rsemen. The second batalion was commanded by a most fierce Sarazen
called Arufait, who also had 20000. Murgaffier his brother conducted the third:
the fourth was led by the high Admiral, a man both proud and valiant: and the
fifth, the king himself commanded every regiment being 20000. from rank to
rank. Mermont the king in great majesty pased, admonishing his people with
excellent persuasions, saying, Lords and my fellows in this high work of
fortitude, behold now the prize of the most excellent resolution, make her the
aim of your thoughts, and win her by your almighty actions: right is your
assistant, and Mahomet your guide, the thing you defend, is your inheritance,
and the man offending is Baucamont a st^a^ger, an usurper, and worst of all* a
tyrant: be then valiant, and spare none, since his malice spares not to root
out you and your families. Many other arguments of encouragement he used and
then issued out of the town in a well ordered march, and pace for pace, in as
orderly equipage approached their enemies, who stayed, for them ranged and
ordered in most formal, proportion. When Baucamont beheld the power of Mermont
so well deraind and divided, he went from rank to rank, and cheared his men
with these speeches: My Lords and Barons, for the honor of your names ever
till now eternized, lap up in oblivion the remembrance of your wives and
children, and save honor alone, keep nothing secret: our enemies are but few
in number, it is impossible for them to hold long, if every one do his
endeavor: O ^e then wondered at for valor, for the easier to attain, the
greater dishonor not attaining. Sir, replied the chief commanders of his
army, be resolved, that this day we will either win Berea, or al be dissolved
and in that hope set forward to fortune and our conquest. At those words
Baucamont mounted on Marcheuall, which sometimes was Ogers, whose damme Meruin
conquered, when he slew the traitor Brohars (as you have before heard) and
when Baucamont was mounted, he caused a charge to be sounded: and his foes on
the other side, answered with like music, O how gallant a thing it was, to
hear the reviving clamors, to see the joining of the hosts, to behold the
shot of one and other side, in such abundance that it seemed like a snow
descending from heaven: when the shot ceased, then began they to fight hand to
hand, Mermont, crying Montment, and Baucamont, Damas. There might you see a
fierce skirmish, as well of the ^laine pagans, as the dying wounded: there ran
the horses up and down, trailing their reins in contempt, after them that but
ere while ruled them. There might you see a hand holding a sword, but wanting a
body to rule it: a man that but now fought to keep away death, now lamenting
for nothing, but that he could not have death, all things confused, all things
tumultuous: for such and no other is wars beauty. Mermont being valiant,
pricked amongst his enemies, exclaiming against Baucamont, and threatening
revenge for the wrongs both to come and perfited. And in this fury he smote a
pagan named Malcuidant, that he tumbled dead before him: thence he passed and
incoun^red Affricant, whom he slew likewise. Why shall I make laboursome my
discourse? Mermont, before he ceased, slew five, and then cried on his standard
^earer, whom he brought to the strength of his battle. Then Artifalt of
Luterne, and Murgaffier his brother followed him: on the other side Baucamont
cried to his army, come on gallants, if any have courage, let him follow me,
and he shall not only win gold, but kingdoms. With Baucamonts speeches his
sou^diers took such courage, that in despite of fortune, Mermont and his
host were compelled to retire. During the black sunshine of this
contagions day* Berea was at Turgon standing on a tower, from whence she
beheld the battle: and when she saw her fathers army retire, with a pitying
sigh she said, Ah Mahomet, that ou^ men had new strengths, or better fortunes:
with that with entered the thoughts of Meruine into her memory, for whom she
exceedingly lamented, saying Dear love most excellent, because only worthy to
be excellent, O how tardie are thy plumes, that convey thee with no more speed
to our affliction? thou staiest too long, O thou staiest too long, come
speedily my love, or these iron blows of our enemies will confound us, O
bless mine eyes once again with the sight of thy ^alure, else shall my soul
leave my body, because my body shall be compelled to forsake thee. Thus, and
with these tears of lamentation, complained she for her absent love, who
stayed in the village where we left him, even until morning, at which time he
arose, armed himself, and gorgeously adorned the top of his helmet, by
fastening thereon the gloves sent him from Berea* Thus armed, he mounted on
Mordant, and pacing forth, found all his troop ready attending his coming,
and so in warlike manner they all departed, but in their marching Meruine called
Drohes to him, and said, Christian, if by that faith which so much thou hold
inuiolate, thou will this day aid us in the battle, to which we are marching,
I will both do thee honor, command thee arms, and reverence thy reputation.
In faith (replied he) or what else thou can imagine I esteem deerer, I will:
neither doubt me for disloialtie, since if all thine army should renounce thee,
Drohes would die faithfully by thee. At those words Meruine commanded him
arms; and when Drohes was armed, he made a vow, that if that day he encountered
the pagans, then the Discipline and Justice issuing from his sword, should
testify, that the death of Gallien Rothorus should not sleep unrevenged. Now
had they ridden so far, that by the giantbegotten clouds, and the murmuring
rumor of the troubled air, they might see they were not far from the
battle: anon they might hear the noise, the cries and the incounters, all
which assured their former imaginations.

2 Then pricking more eagerly forward, they hasted to b^ made parties in the
con^^ict, yet ere they could approach, by ill chance Mermont was ouerthrown by
Baucamont, and in despite of his followers, taken prisoner: to whom Baucamont
with reuiling words, said, Uassale to my fortune, this day is the last of thy
life's date, and thy death shall be shameful, thy daughter in spite will I
tear from thy possession, yet will I lie with her but one sole night, for after
I will bestow her on Pimon mine ambassador to who^ thou threatnedst death for
bringing my message: such shame will I heap on thy crown, such scandal to thy
fortune. This said, Baucamont called Antifer, and commanded him to convey
Mermont to his tent, til he had utterly discomfited the rest of his army. Then
took they Mermont and bound him with strong cords, and muffling his eyes lest
he should see any alteration in that base manner, haled him to their tents.

3* But as Mer^ine rid aside discoursing with Jacob, the good merchant Jacob
perceived how pittilesly his king was martired with his tormentors: wherefore,
as if his eyes had wounded his heart, he cried to Meruine, O save him, save
him: behold, king Mermont taken, dishonored and tormented. Meruin, as if awaked
from a slumber, at such exclaiming, looking about, and seeing him, smote the
mare with his spurs, who like a whirlewind carried him against Antifer. He
approaching so near that the sound of his words might be retained, he cried,
Mermont my king, fear not thy ill fortune, for in despite of these villains,
I will recarry thee into Montment, at that word he encountered a pagan called
Esclardy, nephew to Baucamont, and with such commanding violence, that no
steel durst withstand it, but the head of his lance made a passage both
through his heart and body: he dead, Meruine cheered his followers, chiefly
Drohes, to whom he said; Absolutely valiant Christian, I challenge thee, make
good the covenant betwixt us, spare neither king nor prince, commander nor
follower: then spurred they two in amongst the pagans, in such sort, that as
the ripe corn before the shearers, so fell they before them. Then Meruin
approaching to Mermont, whom a Turk holding, Meruine gave him a blow that claue
him to the girdle. After v^loosing the kings bonds, and giving him liberty to
see his redemption, said unto him, famous king, and my loves sovereign, my
work is but the work of duty, command my life for thy ransom. As Mermont was
about to reply and embrace him, Meruine stayed him, saying, what I do, I ought
do, hereafter shall write mine allegiance: hold, lace on your helmet, and I
will provide you a horse to mount on.

4 With that he beheld Antifer, who was princely mounted, and came thus to him;
Pagan, of necessity you must present me your horse for the king my sovereign:
and for a full point to his speech, he gave him a blow cross the beuer, as he
fell down mortally wounded. Meruine took his horse, and thereon mounted king
Mermont, whose joy none can speak of* but those that have tasted his
affliction. Now began a marvelous battle, wherein all did very well, yet every
one covetous to do more: pleasant and lovely it was to behold Drohes, who
thinking every pagan he met the murderer of Gallien, sent thousands to hell,
that had not seen Gallien, but above all, Meruine surpassed, who never lifted
up his hand, but death followed the falling. At these two Mermont wondered,
swearing within himself the one was Mahomet, the other Apollo, and that they
were come, the one to show deity, the other to attain a greater conquest than
the death of Pithon. In fine he said, both were his assistants, because his
quarrel was lawful. In such sort did Meruine and Drohes behave themselves,
that of 3000 that carried away Mermont, not one escaped, but either slain or
sore wounded. A Sarazen beholding this fight, seeing two thus triumphant over
so many thousands, smote his horse with his spurs, and came running to
Baucamont, crying, King of Damascus retire for even Mahomet and Jehovah are
come to fight against thee, Mermont is recouerd and thy men discomfited, two
for two millions are much too mighty, retire then, retire, for save death thou
can have no companion. Night-rauen, quoth Baucamont) care for thine own
soul, I scorn thy prophesies, yet tell me from whom, or from what part are
those people arrived. Instantly (said he) you shall see them ascending from
yonder valley, fly, fly, for death is in their foreheads. Traitor said
Baucamont, turn thee and bring me to them. Not for the wealth of the world
answered he again, for by Jupiter I had rather mountains should fall upon me,
then the wrath of those enraged people should by adventure find me: and in this
saying, he stroke his horse and^ flew over the field, fear giving him wings
and flight bearing him beyond the compass of eyes prospect. No sooner was he
gone, but Baucamont perceived the approach of Meruine. Then mustred he his
people together, saying, Never till now houered the crown of Glory over us,
win (...), and wear it: for see, he that commands it, coms unto us to present
it, and with that he smote Marcheuall, and charged Meruine. Meruine on the other
side gave Mordant the reine to encounter with Baucamont: their carier was like
the meeting of two tempests from two several corners of the earth: but Meruine
hit Baucamont such a blow, that he fell from his courser to the ground, neither
had he ever raised his head from the earths pillow, had not a band of 4000 come
in to his rescue. Betwixt him and them, a singular to an infinite plural began
a fierce, doubtful and vndying combat. Jacob this while the good merchant
valiantly behaved himself, so also did Croisant and Barbin, whose swords bare
liueries of their Lords wages: yet when I think on Meruine and Drohes, the
deeds of the others were but as margent notes to their h^ge volums: there might
one see confusion in her royalty, heads without hands, hands without bodies,
legs without feet, thighs like feet moving: there you might see stones broken
with bodies burden, yea burdened bodies by stones broken: all things horrible,
yet nothing but honorable: there lay pagan slain on pagan, misbeliefe on
unbelieving, while Drohes smiled to see self religion, self discipline and
law confound one another, and b^ganne to pride himself, that that day his
deeds should be eternized. But at this time what Meruin did is impossible to
describe, because they ascended higher than mortal capacity. He incountered
Africant, and slew him, so did he thadmirall, whom horse and man he bare down
to the ground. What shall I say more? al force was no force, when his force
gainestood it, as Hares from drun^s, Lambs from lions. Fawnes from tigers, so
flew the pagans before him. What he did, what his power sought to do, was all
this while beheld both by Berea and her mother, who stood next her, and from
the tickling spirit of her heart, said to her daughter: Fair soul, see thou
not yonder pagan, whose arms are like sun shine* and his deeds better then
the suns beauty: in his helm he wears two gloves, a swimming swan in a bower
of roses: on my soul he is not mortal, for his deeds are celestial* his
prowess is heroical, and his carriage like the god of warrefare. Berea hea^ing
her mothers speeches it seemed the Roses in Meruines headpiece were fled thence
to her cheeks; for she prettily blushed, and thought of her love Meruine, and
as she looked down toward him, her thoughts, the truest heralds of a ^o^ing
conceit, told her it was he alone that so gallantly behaved himself to the
wonder of all men. O how with that imagination love gave new fire to his old
flame, and surprised her with delicate thinkings: then grew she dumb with
admiring, sighing because she was dumb, blushing to hear her self sigh, and
then grew pale, lest her dumbnes, sighing and blushing, should of other than
her own eyes be perceived. After this war of maiden looks had taken alittle
truce with her intentions, thus to her heart her heart whisperd. Thou God of my
forefathers, how excellent have thou made my love! death being most fierce,
fearing, is become his vassaile, attend him death, but touch him not. As she
was imagining more, her mother turned about, and perceiving her distraught in
countenance, challenging the distemperature of looks, asked what she ailed,
and desired nothing to be hidden from her. Madame (said she) I felt a torment
of such vehemency take hold on me, as no creature can imagine. Mahomet defend
my father, for I fear some evil. Thus dissembled she with her mother, Meruine
being the loadstarre by which all her lodgings were guided. All this while fell
destruction from the sword of Meruine upon the pagans who like larkes under the
wings of a hobby, sought holes in the earth to hide them. Drohes pursued his
footesteppes, and the nearest of any imitated his virtues. Now was Baucamont
remounted once more, and passing through his ranks, gave them new incoragement,
reuiling the new come strangers, and disabling their actions, though his wounds
bare bleeding witness of their worths.

5 When he had done, he charged afresh upon Mermont, and that with such
impregnable violence, as he overthrew him horse and man to the ground, but with
nimble agilitie, he soon recovered his feet, and drawing his sword,
brandished it for his defense. All that show of magnanimity had but little
auailed to his profit, if Meruin had not again by chance come to his rescue,
who cried aloud, Mermont my king, defer thy fortune but a moment, and i will
yield succor to thy life: and then rushing amongst the thickest, he struck
Gyrion on the head, cleaving him to the waste. After him, the next, and the
next, sparing none that was within his encounter. When Baucamont saw death and
destiny lie in Meruins sword, like a man made desperate, because his estate was
desperate, he joined himself to Meruine, striking so violent a blow, as he
claue insunder the crest of his helmet, but to his head did no harm but
amazement. Meruin displeased at his entertainment, drew Entrant his sword, and
without other salutation stroke at Baucamont withal his puissance. The pagan
king fearing the blow, retired alittle: yet had he never breathed any more
malice, if the sword had not turned in the hand of Meruine, which like a
thunderbolt fell on the arm of Baucamont, and that in such heavy manner, that
the armor, shoulder, and all, were cut asunder, When Meruine saw him thus
spoiled of his defender, in jesting manner he said, king Baucamont, it is time
now the world excuse you from these martial occurrents, since the fittest for
you is a monastical function: say henceforth for the love of Mahomet you will
abjure your folly, having paid to this good king your right arm for a
ransom. Thus having said, he returned to Mermont, and remounted him the second
time, but Mermont in whom was ingrafted a strong belief, that Mer^ine was
Mahomet, with prostrate humbleness said unto him, great and almighty God of
most excellent authoirtie, this day has thy goodness newly created me, and
made my life more happy then the lives of my forefathers, henceforth be
gracious to my proceedings great lord of our religion, and I will make thy name
be rung through all natious, thy temple I will multiply, and all thine ornaments
shall be of purest silver. Meruin seeing the blindness of his amazement,
raised him from his prostracie, saying, no, but you are deceived, you are
deceived, I honor him and you: and with that he rusht again into the battle.
Thus while Drohes and the other behaved themselves valiantly, effecting such
feats of knightly chivalry, that force* perforce, they drove to retraite the
host of Baucamont, many flying, none abiding till the mighty king Esclamart
caused all his troops which came for the succor of Baucamont, being 10000
Sarazens, all fresh and vnfoiled, having as yet not stricken one blow, to turn
upon their enemies like a storm begotten by a storm in the month of April.
When Mermont perceived them, and considering his people and horses were weary,
unable to withstand them being fresh, caused a retraite to be sounded, and in
honorable s^rt retired into the ci^ie: but when he came to enter, Esclamart and
his men, being swift and nimble, had gained the port, had not Meruine and
Drohes withstood them, who marched behind, and Meruine in that last encounter
slew the nephew of Esclamart, with many other pagans, and they so well defended
themselves, that king Mermont and his host entered into the city, and Meruine
and Drohes after them, to the confusion and dishonor of Esclamart, who returned
sorrowful for his nephews slaughter, whom he caused to be brought with
great solemnity into his tent, vowing to Mahomet his god, revenge for his
misfortune.

CHAP. XV.
1 Of the honors Mermont did to Meruine. 2 Me^uine made chamberlain of the
Court. 3 Gratiana for his sake made lady of the chamber of Berea with other
accidents.
KIng Mermont and all his knights, being entered into Montment* were most
roially received both of the queen his wife, and the most beautiful lady
Berea his daughter, to whom he said, thou golden planet of mine age, my dearest
daughter, I beseech thee honor with all the excellencies thou can imagine,
this admirable creature who sits armed and mounted on this mighty mare, I once
imagined him to be our great god Mahomet, so godlike was he in mine
understanding, and so impossible it was for the force of man to enterprise what
he has effected. When Jacob came and heard the kings speeches, pleasantly he
replied: My gracious sovereign, it is a common saying, that a fools bolt
sometimes as well hits the mark, as the wise man's arrowe. True said the king,
but I pray thee, to what end do thou cite this adage: to this my liege lord
(answered he) I who am basely unworthy to counsel kings, yet anciently
experienced in wars doubtfulnesse, went in your majesty's name to Brandis,
and thence brought this Meruin, the son of Barbin, who this day by his most
celestial prowess has twice preserved you from death, and the dangerous hand
of your enemies. Now if the actor be worthy his honor, is not the agent for
the act worthy to be rewarded? else let my fortune refuse me, said the king.
Jacob I will heap wealth upon thy wealth* and on Meruine I will double a
thousand honors of knighthood: for by Mahomet* I imagined him to have been
Mahomet, so far excelled he all creatures, yea even Bruhier, and Iustament
his valiant brother, who were slain by that renowned Oger, the scourge of our
religion. O Meruine, if Mahomet continue gracious to thy proceedings, our law
shall be by thee exalted as much above christianity, as the first moouer is
resident above the earths center. Woe alas, this prohesie was too true, for
with the eyes of infants shall be watered with tears, as hereafter shall be
declared. Now Mermont looking upon Drohes, asked Jacob what he was, and Jacob
in every point described him both their meeting, conflict, and conquest, and
how he was a christian, whose name was Drohes, adding withal, that if any
miracle could make him renounce his religion, that then the law of paganism by
him more then by any christian, but Oger, would be raised and admired, but this
wisdom is so great that no will can remove him. Then Mermont asked Jacob from
whence, and by what mean Meruin had gotten that band of men which he had
brought to the battle. Then Jacob showed the king Croisant, who then was busy
in talk with Meruine, and from point to point declared his fortunes, both how
^a was accused, Meruin engaged, Brohars flaine, and Croisant restored from his
unbelieving: the king hearing all this, his heart danced for joy, and he
solemnly vowed to raise Meruine higher in authority, then the conceit of man
could aspire unto. Whereupon, calling the gallant young knight before him, who
came with all the reverence belonging to so great a majesty, the king with a
dumb, but speaking countenance amazedly, as if in a manner skared at his beauty,
and with his long looking and intimate searching in every lineament of his
proportion, he suddenly apprehended in his memory the divine features of Oger.
Wherefore he said, believe me Meruine, by that Alcheron in which I trust, thou
resemblest both in body, figure, and beauty, the famousest of all christians,
renoumed Oger the duke of Denmark, whose fortunes if thou counteruaile, the
pens of all men shall write thee most happy. By this time the day had
exchanged the color of his garment, and put on the nights vesture, wherefore
all the tables being roially apparelled, and supper set on the boorde, water was
brought for the king, he sat down to eat: but because all his study was to
do honor to Meruine, he commanded him to sit down before him, after him
Drohes, swearing by the faith of a christian, that he would never part or
obscure himself; unless it were by the commandment and ^onsent of Meruine,
and for that vows sake, he was neither restrained nor imprisoned, but suffered
to go and dispose himself round about the town at his own pleasure* the
roialty and solemnity of that nights service, I will leave to speak of,
because tediousness inuenometh a willing hearer. Supper being ended, and every
ceremony performed to a kingly magnificence, the king called Barbin, and spoke
to him: Barbin, I bind thee by thy fealty, neither deceive me in thine
answer, nor restrain from the knowledge of that I intend to demand of thee:
who, and on whom did thou beget this wonder, this Meruine, trust me he
resembles thee in nothing, neither be his deeds the fruits of a merchant-like
generation? My dread sovereign (answered Barbin) I begot him of a noble and
renoumed Sarazen lady, as great in dignity, as the house of Ottoman, who
through her pain in childe-birth, piteously died. After whose decease I took
the infant and a most delicat lady (the sister of my dead love) who swear to
her in her last pangs never to depart from him til term of years had brought
him to manhood, and transported them with me into these parts: if now your
majesty misdoubt my protestation, I have the lady at my house, who is both an
eye, and an eate-witnes. Let the lady be commanded before us said the king,
which imediately was done. To herlikewise the king propounded these articles,
with many other egressions as he had done to Barbin, and she in every point
answered without differing, insomuch that the king believed them, so artificall
was their cunning.

2 The king demanding her name, she told him it was Gratiana: ^hen said the
kin^; fair^ damosel descended of a divine issue, for love of Meruin thy nephew*
whom al love that have any splendour in them, how sacred a thing love, is my
pleasure is, that henceforth thou be lady of the chamber of Berea mine only
daughter: by thee be she disposed by thee he her (...) increased, love her and
live with her, for thou can teach (...) both excellency and honor: thus was
the fai^^e lady Gratiana borne up to the clouds in hono^r for the love of
^eruine, whom falsely she had stolen, as wa^ before mentioned.

3 When this was done, the king called Meruine and asked him if he found no
declining in his memory from that hie staire of virtue, which hitherto he
scaled, but that he would persevere in his beginning, and bear the glory of
Mahomet, as far as the sun was born in his chariot. My earthly god (said he)
and the next in my love to Mahomet, my whole desire is to make famous my
religion, and the aim of my content to prove my force greater than any
christians: this I love, in this I live and thus shall my life consummate. The
king hearing this, was very joyful: wherefore embracing him in his arms, he
said, Dearer than my kingdom, Meruine my champion, henceforth for thy
prowess, valor, and magnanimity, and for thou did twice restore me fro
death to my former being, I create thee the principal chamberlain of my court,
be thy rule like thy self, righteous, and let all obey thee. The thanks which
Meruine gave the king for these honors, were such as made glorious the giver,
yet the receiver seemed only glorified. Thus in great pomp Meruine continued in
the kings house, beloved and feared of all men, except of the traitor Marant,
nephew to the king, being his sisters son, and espoused to Butor that gouernd
Minor, where Meurine was imprisoned five years, as hereafter you shall hear.
This Marrant could by no possible means love Meruine, so hugely had envy taken
possession on his soul, to behold the honor the king his uncle had done him,
wherefore he watched to do him villainy, for villainy is ever waking. It happened
one day, Meruine rising early in the morning even with the sun, there came
to him a certain spy, who gave him intelligence that king Baucamont, with 800
of his approved warriers was intended to hunt the stagge in the great forest,
bordering upon the city. As soon as Meruine heard it, he called Drohes, the
traitor Marant, and 500 expert soldiers, and with them privily issued out of
the city, taking an usual path, through which he paced so long, till at length
he perceived where Baucamont with his host returned from the chase, his arm
as then healed, and he mounted on his steed. Meruin ambushed him self and his
men within a little grove, whence he intended to charge Baucamont, holding both
his la^ce ready in his fist, and having under him his mare Mordant: anon when
Baucamont was approached so near, that he was hopeless of retiring, Meruine
caused his men to march against him, saying, fellows in arms, think not of
fortune, but victory, for in my self there is no other imagination.

CHAP. XVI.
1 How Baucamont and 800 soldiers were discomfited, and himself taken
prisoner. 2 With him the King Antifer and 24. pagans, all by Meruine. 3 How he
delivered them to the traitor Marant, to present to king Merm^nt his uncle, in
Meruins name the conqueror.
WHen Baucamont beheld Meruine, whom he knew by his helmet, because in many
battles, which I leave to speak of, he had taken notice of the same, he
turning to his train used these speeches: You folowers of me and my fortunes,
revive your selves* and in the name of Mahomet, be now or never courageous,
battel^ surely we shall be offered, be fortune as auspicious as please her, for
behold an enemy whom my soul hates, even he whose single sword did me more
hurt then Mermont or his huge host could have effected by a godlike
incoragement, yet is he no other then the base son of a ware-exchanging
merchant, whom some devil has nursed for a damned execution. At this word he
took a tell axe in his hand, and broching Marcheual with his spurs, charged
coragiously, Meruin on the other side, as nimble as lightning, ran to intertain
him, their running, meeting, and coniunctio^, being louder the^ thunder, and
stronger then a northern tempest, and when in midst of the ass^mbly, they had
discharged upon either other, the wonders of chivalry, Meruine having broken
his lance* drew Entrant his sword, and therewith assailed Baucamont with such
fury, that he threw him from Marcheual his gallant beast to the ground, and
that with such incomparable prowess, that he lay a long time on the ground in
a deadly passion. Meruin descending, unlaced his helmet, and was even ready to
divide the long conjunction betwixt his head and body, when Baucamont awaking
from his trance and beholding himself utterly exiled from the hope of longer
living with erected hands cried unto him: thou flower of chivalry, and the
bed-mate to fortune, be as honorable as thou art valiant, and take me to thy
presence: then turning his sword in his hand, he deliuerd the hilts to Meruin,
who perceiving it, delivered him unto the traitor Marrant saying, Prince
Marrant, take king Baucamont to your charge, and guard him safely because I
know the king your uncle will esteem this fortune much better then the gift of
an empire. Marrant accepted him joyfully. This while Drohes and the rest were
in the midst of their enemies, where the deeds they did were worthy of immortal
memory. Now after Meruine had lef^ his royal prisoner in safe keeping, he
flang himself into the heart of the battle, like a hunger-starued wolf
amongst a flock of sheep, the first he met, he stroke dead to the ground: so
did he the second, the third the fourth, and the fifth: why should I be
tedious in description? ten to their deaths he sent with one breathing.
Drohes seeing him do these excellent feats of knighthood, grew inamored of
him, and praised him in his heart next his creator: but God of heaven (said
he) how wonderful beyond conceit are these actions! if his thread of life
lengthen like his courage, and some pittiing powder of heaven alter not his
unhappy misbeleeuing al christendom shall quake, and the house of David be
forsaken: thus from the anguish of his soul spoke the most righteous Drohes,
whose valor and feats of arms were boundeoo in no limite, augmenting
hourly; the rather to behold the examples of Meruine laid before him.

2. All this while was the son of religious Oger furroying through the
midst of the army, and had even now ouerthrown^ king Antifer to the ground,
whose head had paid his ransom if fearful, humbleness had not made him
submit to mercy: him likewise he gave to the keeping of Marant. Now had
Drohes incountred a giant-like pagan* with whom he maintained a dreadful
battle, but in the end he smote him a blow with such vigor, that he claue
his head to his teeth. Which another pagan beholding, ran at Drohes, and with
his lance struck his horse through the heart, that he fell down dead at the
instant. But with great agilitie Drohes recovered himself, and flourishing his
sword, vowed vengeance for his injury. But Meruine seeing the pagan by such
dishonor had slain the horse of Drohes, prevented his intent, and with one
blow stricke the pagans head from his shoulders. As this was in doing, the
gallant horse Marcheuall came gallopping masterlesse by them, running here and
there, having his reins at his own randon. When Meruine saw him, he thrust
his spurs against Mordant, and flew after him, and that with such voilent
swiftness, that in short time he took him, and delivered him to Drohes, who
being mounted thereon, swear by him that with blood washed the world from her
transgressions, that if ever Meruines fortunes stood in need of his
employment, his life should be wa^ted in his service. Then again Drohes thrust
himself into the midst of his enemies, of whom he made infinite destruction,
that both pen and wit are too blunt to describe them, and yet were they to be
joined with Meruine in no degree of comparison, no more then the night to the
days glory, for he never lift his sword aloft but he killed either horse or
man, or both horse and man together. Let me not dull your ears with a heavy
tale: such excellent feats of arms were performed by Meruine, that of 800.
which went with their king on hunting, there were left alive but twenty and
four, which with Baucamout and Antifer were likewise taken priso^ers* great
was the booty and riches which there was taken, but Meruin refusing to touch
it, caused it to be equally divided among his soldiers. Then commanding a
retraite, and summoning his band together they marched in soldier like manner
to Montment. But amongst the rest a Pagan, whose name was Hebie, thrust spurs
to his horse, and posted from the troop with such swiftnes, that he ran to
Montment before the rest a long season: as soon as he was lighted he ascended
the palace, and kneeling before the king he said. My dread sovereign, more
ought you to adore our God Mahomet and greater incense to throw upon his
Altars, then any Monarke whatsoever: for Meruine this day by his never failing
prowess, brings bound in triumph Baucamont, Antifer, and twenty four of
the most courageous Pagans, taken al prisoners by his only sword: when the
Paragon of al ages (divine Berea) heard this, if her joy exceeded her beauty,)
and yet than her beauty was nothing more amiable, (let no man wonder nor
demand the reason, si^h love is beyond ye bond of a larger limit.

3 Now whilst the king and his nobles were increasing their conceits of
pleasure with imagination of these adventures, the Prince Marant, with
Baucamont, Antifer and the ^4. Pagans entered into the hall, and kneeling
before the king with a stiff knee, faintly, as unwilling his tongue should be
guilty of any virtue, he uttered these speeches, Fair uncle and my liege
Lord highly may you (if you please) honor Me^uine your great chamberlain,
whose renowned prowess and true valor has taken these mighteous prisoners,
in whose name, and with all humble reverence, I present them to your Majesty,
assuring you the deeds he has this day done, are more then the wisest has
power to describe, or the strongest force to counteruaile. Then whispring his
malice to his own soul, he said: Meruine, these praises which in giving I
have given mine own desires the lie, I will shortly heap upon thee with an
eternal vengeance. Now heaven that saves al things save the renowned Meruine,
against whom the thunderbolts of private envy threaten destruction: when
Mermont beheld Baucamont, Antifer and the other prisoners, his joys exceeded
in greatness his kingdom, and he repeated the wrongs their unlawful armies
had begotten in his countries, threatening a requital for these indignities. But
Baucamont regardlesse of all mistrusting fortunes, without any amazement in his
countenance, made a petition to Mermont, that all the twenty four prisoners
might be delivered, only himself and Antifer detained for the satisfaction:
which if it would please him to vouchsafe them, would restore him recompense
for all the indmagements, they or their war had procured, and that their
mighty army as yet not wholly vanquished, should return to Damas. Upon these
Articles the king concluded, so the 24. were infranchised and with them also
the two imprisoned Ambassadors of Baucamont, to wit Morgant, and Nygron, who as
then had been prisoners the space of a whole year, during which time the war
had continued. Now when they were returned back to their tents, they found the
king Esclamart mightily perplexed with sorrow for the taking of Baucamont, and
Antifer his brother: yet notwithstanding they told him the conditions of
compromise agreed upon between the kings of each party, upon which report
he* made proclamation for the raising of his tents* and leaving the siege in
perfect manner, departed without further trouble to Mermont or his country: and
betaking himself to the seas, sailed so prosperou^ly, that in short time they
arrived at Damascus, where they reported to the state their unhappy occurre^ts
which had befallen them. Thus will we leave them to the sorrows of forsaken
subjects, and return unto king Mermont, whose joy was the greatest of all joy,
to see himself hold in his subjection Baucamont and Antifer, two of the
greatest kings of all Asia, whom he had sworn upon Alcheron and a kings
majesty, that they should not pretend any flight or escape without his royal
will and license. All this while was Meruin in the court no less honored,
exalted, and admired of the king, the queen, and the nobles, than of the
basest vassal living by the graces of his favor. The reason, because as he
was valiant, maiesticall, and invincible: so was he sweet, courteous, affable
and pleasant in the eyes of all creatures. Yet Marrant, in whose heart envy had
built her a black sepulcher, increast his malice, and hated him the more,
because no man else hated him. Thus being great with child of damnable
imaginations, he grew thought-full and sick, how he should be delivered:
anon he bethought himself there was no so ready mean to heap ruin on the
rich days of Merui^es prospe^itie, as to come to the true understanding of the
love between him and Berea, wherefore to that mark he aimed all his
thoughts, but yet his leauell carried him far away, and his labor in that
point was utterly frustrate, as you shall hear in the next Chapter

CHAP. XVII.
Of the private discourse between Marant and Be^ea, and of her answer. 2. How
she came to the understanding of Marants envy to Meruine. 3. The treason he
intended, which he had procured Calix his Cousin to exec^te.
IT happened on a day that Marant espied the princess Berea, set all alone in
her chamber without other comfort then her own cogitations, wherefore drawing
near unto her, and saluting her with an humble dissembled reverence he said:
my most excellent cousin, and the ornament of your sex, excuse me to speak
boldly what love and nature carefully stirr^s in me; I find no profit, in more
liberal sort abound to this nation then the happy counion of you in a lawful
^arriage, which if the king mine uncle neglect, he robs both his years and
this kingdom of their greatest felicity. And in mine opinion (if the love of
virtue lead me not into a blindfold path of forgetfulness) there is not any
whose excellencies better meriteth, who^e wisdom can reach to higher desert
of government, nor whose v^lure after the decease of my most gracio^s uncle,
could better defend this Realm from disquiet, than incomparable Meruine, the
glory of mankind, and the loa^starre to all honorable actions: now tell me
my dearest divine cos^n* can you not love his person, whose inward goodness
flies beyond common admiration. Berea whose natural wisdom had taught her a
politic dissembling, answer: Cosine, were thou not in jest, I should be
angry in earnest, or if thou bee^t in earnest I must needs jest at thy
extreme folly: fie, that thy tongue is so loose to deliver words without
thoghts: counsel of better aduisement: Believe me thine error is inexcusable,
and thy punishment worthy no ending: alas, imaginest thou me, because a woman,
therefore a fool, or that I am so infinitely poor of understanding as to build
the hope of my life, I mean mine affection upon Meruine, which is but the
bastard son of a silie Merchant? Believe me, believe me, rather would I be
torn in pieces: neither is my love augmented to you for this persuasion, but
rather abated for prophesying my dishonor. Thus with an angry countenance
spoke she to the traitor, who many days before had watched to behold their
proceeding. But so wise were they in the course of their affections, that not
any creature, more then Jacob, and Gratiana: no, scarce Cupid himself knew of
their self likings, yet all their love was honorable, chaste, and holy,
without touch of an unlawful imagination, only kisses the hearts heralds, and
imbracings, the knots of sacred affections, with which they consumed two years
in unspeakable contentment. When Marant beheld with what affia^nce she had
deliuerd him her answer, he imagined she spoke from her heart, as indeed she
did, for such thoughts never lodged in that habitation: wherefore he replied.
By Mahomet (sweet Princess) thou have answered excellently to my motion, and
in nothing art more wise, than in not loving Meruine. Alas, what is he but a
boy, whose descent not any knows, save that one says he is the bastard of
Barbin the poor merchant: as for his honor, I think all the deuilles in hell
have conspired to make him famous: but if I live, I will bring to an end all
his glory. Berea hearing this, was stricken dumb, and had not power to
answer a word.

2 Then the Traitor taking his leave, departed: but she into whose breast
Sorrow was ^^owne to make sweet his lamentation, stayed, and with beteared
eyes cried out in this manner: Alas, alas (said she) now may I well say that
Meruine my love, he that in all loves alonely is gracious, he in whom my love
lives, lives to live unhappy: ay me ^ now go my joys on their last date:
and Meruine must die by vndying treason. Forsaken that I am, what shall I do?
I know not. Help me memory: O thou w^lt help me, but to record whose horror?
If I discover what I conceive, I am guilty of my kinsmans tragedy, for that
nothing but his life can make Meruine satisfaction. If I hide what I have
heard, Meruine my Lord shall be my Lord no longer: woe alas: misery in my mind
has made a perpetual dwelling. If Marant die, Berea is dishonored: if
Meruine die, Berea is forsaken. Live Marant, so Meruine live, and die Berea to
save them both from misfortune. Thus argued the virgin, whose heart by this
occasion was held with a thousand sorrows: and in the midst of the agonies,
Meruin entered into the chamber, who beholding her in that confl^ct of passion,
grew wonderously amazed, and demanded both a reason for her sighs and the
cause of that infinite torment, vowing by all the zeal of his unspotted love,
that if any creature, of what estate soever, had either in deed or word given
occasion to those tears, that he would die or wonderfully revenge it.

When Berea heard him, she was at her wits end^, what answer to reply unto
him: yet on the sudden she apprehended this fiction, and thus excused them:
My most dear love (said she) mistake not my woe, which is no other but an
entire desire to enjoy thy company, which I am afraid will too soon vanish
from my happiness. since one told me, not long since, thou were determined to
depart from my fathers Court to seek adventures in strange countries: this is
the reason of my tears and cause of my mourning, no other thing at all
afflicts me, thee and thy loss is my whole lamentation. Dear Lady mistress
of my life (answered he) falsely they lie that have so falsely blazed my
thoughts into thy bosom, by Mahomet in whom I affie, my love shall never be
dislodgd from the sacred tents of thy Celestial eyes, till an eternal night
ouershadow the Element, and then embracing her in his arms, with a world of
inumerable kisses, he sealed the deeds of his perpetual possession. My dear
love, said Berea, I beseech thee (not for knowledge, but for suspicion sake)
that thou have always a regardfull respect to the deeds of my cousin, prince
Marant, for he is false and full of insupportable pride, and withal, the
son of a mighty King, even Butor of Minor, that is so strong and
impregnable. Madam (replied he) all that is nothing in my estimation: and by
this right hand of yours* in whose Sphere my heart is contained, and Alcheron
so worthy as shall never be profaned, if your cousin Marant do me the least
touch of honor may be imagined, his life shall make good mine indignity,
neither will I desist for his parentage, since the mightines of the man makes
the art of dishonor almighty, when received. Thus spoke valiant Meruine, but
Marant still notwithstanding continued, both in thanking and contriuing how to
bring a domes day on his praises so manfully atchi^ed.

3 It happened on a day that king Mermont for his recreation intended to ride a
hunting, and took Baucamont and Antifer with him: which when the traitor Marant
understood, he was exceeding glad, and instantly assembled a band of traitors
together, to the number of 500. all nobly borne and ^f his own lineage, to whom
he made this short preamble: Lords and Princes, you are royally descended from
the same stem of which my self am issued: in you then either does or should
remain a liueall thread of amity to support mine honor, and revenge me of my
protested enemies. Cousin answered one, whose name was Calix, it is true,
therefore without ceremony, where love and nature binds allegiance, display
thy griefs, and be it right or wrong, we are thexecuti^ners of thy vengeance.
Calix (quoth Marrant) thy love is flowen into my bosom, and there shall find
an immortal residence: the thing whereof I complain, is of that
honor-deuouring Meruine, whose pride if it take root, and his life flourish,
the king will give account to no man, but him, for happiness: but if my wits
fail me not* that as yet never quailed in like stra^agems, this day will I
bring his praises to a full point, and in^ombe his body in a grave of
destruction. And thus it is, the king my uncle intends this day to hunt in the
forest, it is needful then that you lie in an ambush in some private bordering
grove, until such time as you shall see Meruine pass along by you: for which
purpose there shall be an espial to give notice of his passage: then when you
have him within your power, he being naked, and you armed, shall dismount him
from his lofty mare, and with cords bind him to the body of some oak,
growing in some desert and ^orlorne place, to whose abiding traceth the
footestepps of no humane creature, and so leaving him without more torment,
because by that means, if you shall be examined upon any point of his
misfortune, you may justly swear you were no agents of his death or fu^erall.
And I doubt not but in a moments space, the wild beasts of the forest, which
so abound in this region, will soon be the actors of this wished tragedy.
This is the revenge I have invented, and the mean I would pursue for his
affliction. Cousin, said Calix) you have spoken excellently, and by my life all
shall be performed. ss you have devised. Upon this traitors conclusion, they
shakt hands and departed, he to the king, and the band of 500 to the woods,
where they ambusht themselves in a covert, through whose thicknes, as yet the
sun had never pieped. Now early in the morning before Meruin went tattend
the king on hunting, he went to the chamber of lady Berea, who that night
dreamt a fearful and strange dream, which had not only put her senses in
amazement, but drowned her heart in a deluge of extreme sorrow, yet when she
beheld Meruine like a flame, she threw her self about his neck, heaping upon
infinite kisses infinite redoublings* said: Ah Meruine my love my dear love
Meruine, for thee my soul breaks, and for thee my heart dies. This night I
dreamed a dismal dream the solution whereof belongs, I fear to thy
fortunes. Me thought I had a most delicate and princely gray hound, so swift,
so nimble, so deliver, that it was impossible for Nature to conceive how to
form such an other. This greyhound me thought, went into a chamber, where were
many serpents, who with in^enomed malice so enclosed and assailed him on every
side, that it was impossible for him any more to return to my company: the
grief for his want made tears burst from mine eyes, and those tears invited
fadder lamentations, that striving to make known my languor, I awakned with my
sorrow: what this pretends, I know not, only I beseech thee for the honor of
Mahomet, that above all men thou beware of mine unkind cousin Marant, for he is
traitorous, and treachery hates always the virtuous. Is it possible quoth
Meruine, that in Marants fair countenance should lodge such distemperate
malice? Ha my one only excellent love (said she) trust him not, looks are
liers, and his cheeks are a table of falsehood. Madame replied he, I trust none
but my sword, and that in extremes shall be mine only redeemer: what shall be
shall be, only dear lady, I beseech you command some careful attendance to be
given to my neuer-failing friend Drohes, who is fallen exceedingly sick of a
fever, for his like inconstancy and manhood, is not to be found among living
creatures. To this she gave him assurance with many protestations, and so after
diverse kisses and embraces, they departed either from other. But when Berea was
alone, her sorrows gave a new onset on her soul, and put all her hopes to
slaughter, and that not without good cause: for before her eyes again shall
give salutation to his forhead, his life and honor shall be both indangerd, if
God himself, and the virgin mother of the greatest moouer, with a gracious eye
pity not his huge misfortune. Mermont with Baucamont, Antifer, Meruin, Marant
and other noble gallants, departed from Montment, and came to the forest, where
they had kingly pastime, and killed many wild beasts, continuing their sports
iij. days without thought of returning: all which space, an espiall of
Marrants attended foot, by foot upon Meruine. The fourth day approaching,
Mermont prepared to go home again to the city, which he did, but Meruin staid
behind: the reason was, he had that morning found out a dainty spotted young
goat, whose color and beauty so well pleased him, that he swear he would have
it to bestow on his lady Berea: but no sooner offered he to assail it, but it
fled, and with all speed pursued it, even till in the maine chase, he had
utterly l^st sight of it, which not alitle grieved him, but when wisdom told
him there was no avail in anger, he sought te return, but the greedines of his
sport had expelled the knowledge of his way from his memory, and was he knew
not where. The spy whose eyes never forsook him* perceiving his ignorance,
thwarting through strange paths, placed himself in a way through which Meruin
of force must pass. When Meruine saw the spy, he was more than well pleased
and demanded of him: which way king Mermont his Lord rode: Sir said the spy,
if it please you to follow me, I will conduct you: so the spy led the way, and
Meruine followed him, whose heart was thoughtles of any treason. After they had
traueled long in a nightconcealing corner, Meruin said, friend, I fear me we
are both out of our way. O sir, (replied he) fear not, I will bring you to the
king my master prelently. And as he was thus saying, they were arrived in the
place where the traitors were ambushed: and as soon as Calix beheld him, he,
and with him forty lanciers charged Meruin behind him, not speaking any word,
and that with such violence, that ere he dreamed of disadvantage, they had
thrown him to the ground from his mare foreward: but like the flower of all
knightly chivalry in a trice he remounted himself upon his feet, and drawing
Entrant his sword, flew upon the spy, and gave him such a blow that he cleave
his head and chaps in two pieces, saying: Uillaine thou which have led me to my
death, in death shall be my first companion. But scarce were his words ended,
before he was assailed on every side, with all five hundred: but he defended
himself more like a god then a mortal man: and questionless, had he been
armed, as he was naked, twice so many as they, had not taken him prisoner, for
before he removed his right foot, he had lain an hundred dead before him. But
now faint heat ingendering within the torment of his incessant labor,
distilled such a weakness through his all too extreme traveled members, that
his hands began to weep in sweatie drops, that they had power to weld his
sword no longer, and his body faultered, as most willing to die, since it had
least strength to relieve his master: when they perceived this, all at once
they cast themselves upon him, and like a tempest against a princely forsaken
building, ouerturned him to the earth: then, as if too few, they all lay upon
him, some taking from him his sword, some blinding his eyes, and some binding
his hands behind him: this done. violently they dragd him to a forsaken pine,
whose mansion was so horrible, that no living eye till then, had seen where he
was planted. Against it they bound him, and so leaving him, returned to
Montment. When Meruine beheld his pitilesse estate, he said; Ha divine
prophetess of the world, fair Berea, excellently did thou foretell my
danger, and the hatred of kindred, but my deaf resolution would never, till too
late, believe my, misfortune Thus said Meruine, and in thus saying, sighed out
such heart-killing lamentations, that if the most barbarous vplandish pesant,
had but heard his means, he would not only have melted, but have been
partner of his afflictions^ All night continued Meruine in this wofulnes, who
in a moment had bin devoured of savage beasts, if some heavenly power had not
inspired his galant mare Mordant with a man-like understanding, who defended
and preserved him from a thousand deadly daugers. Mermont who was returned to
his court in Montment, and understanding Meruine was absent, grew exceedingly
sorry: but the traitorous Marrant told him, he was ridden alittle out of the
way to visit a gentlewoman, who dwelt near unto the forest, and that no
other occasion withheld him. Which report, although it satisfied the king at
that present, yet ^otwithstanding, it was nothing sufficient to quiet Berea,
who incessantly inquired for her Meruine, and that not without abundance of
tears, and intolerable sorrow, which when her heart, too public a tell-tale
of her love could with no more patience conceal, she went into the chamber*
there to publish the mountain of her cares, which else would wound her body by
her hearts breaking, and thus she began: Thou patron of our country, thou
great God Mahomet, con^entedst thou alas, so soon to divorce me from that most
divine creature, in the temple of whose eyes, my heart and thoughts are
inshrined? Ha, speak, speak thou immortal prophet: and at that word she
wrong her li^lie fingers, and tare her hair, her hair more fine than the
golden thread of Diana: and as she was in this lunatike trance of complaining,
the Fairie Gratiana entered into her chamber, who seeing her perplexity, grew
more than her self amazed saying: Madame, what wonders wrought grief in your
countenance? trust me, they did him wrong that lodged him in so rare a
receptacle of beauty. Ha, peace, peace, said Berea, my moanes are worthy no
measure, and then she declared how Meruine her Lord and love was not returned
from the forest, and that not any could tell news of his absence, and then she
began afresh to weep, as if these winter clouds of sorrow had but then
ouercast her faces element: but Gratiana with not to be refelled arguments,
lent such comfort to her comfortless imaginations, that she deferred, though
took not away the worst of her extremity, and with a dissembling countenance of
contentment. Berea went into the hall to supper, for the king her father was
then set at the table, about the midst of supper, Calix and diverse others of
his traitorous consorts, entered into the hall, whom as soon as Berea saw, she
said in her self, this is the cousin of Marrant, and in his looks are written
tyranny and treason. O my heart presageth that some notable villainy by them is
wrought against my loving Lord thrice singular Meruine.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 How Berea hiding her self, came to understand the treason. 2 Her revealing
it to Drohes. 3 Drohes chalengeth Calix before the king, and pawneth his gage.
B^reas thoughts were the true augures of her loves mischances, which so
vehemently vex^d her, that she swear by Mahomet, her eyes should never close in
rest, till she knew the truth of her presages: whereof privately unseen of
any, she went into a secret chamber, whither Marrant when he had any private
occurrents ^o discourse of, usually repa^red: and under a cupboord over the
which hung a rich (...) carpet, she closely conveyed her self: but no sooner
was she enclosed in that forgetful cell, but Marrant and Calix entr^d, and
Marrant leaping upon the cupboord, there sat to understand all the misfortunes
of Meruine, which Calix described altogether, as fearfully as it was done
^uthlesly, and how before he could be taken, an hundred were slain. My dear
cousin (said Marrant) well have you performed my wish, no more shall that boys
great pride pester the courts of princes, and for your exploit assure your
self it is more full of honors* than midnight of stars. After this was said,
Marrant and Calix went to their bedchambers, and the heart-consuming careful
Berea rose from her black lodging, deeply vowing that this damnable practice
should be declared to the king her father, and so she went unto her own
chamber, where the Fairy Gratiana attended her coming, and when the Fairy
beheld her, she said; Madame, your looks are ghastly and dispairefull, how
fares your Ladieship? or where have you bin? At that demand Berea with a sad
countenance reported from point to point all the treason committed against hor
Meruine, and with such feeling protestations, that all her amazement flew to
Grariana, and she looked with a greater terror. At length gathering her senses
together, she said, It behooves us madame to be wise how we manage this
mischievous action. By heaven, said Berea, I will tell it to the king my
father. Not for a kingdom quoth Gratiana, for so may you draw your self in
danger.

2 Rather let us accuse false Calix, and lay the treason on his shoulders, but
because we will not be uncircumspect; let us go to the virtuous Drohes and take
his counsel, to which they agreed, and so came into the chamber of Drohes, who
had lien long sick of a burning fever, whom when he beheld he knightly saluted,
and demanded what occasion they had, that so late an hour brought them from
their rest. Berea without circumstance, in plain, but pitiful speeches,
denounced unto him both the reason and the treason: which when he heard, his
manly heart was mad at the misaduenture, for Meruine was as dear to him as his
souls safety. Yet with a staid countenance he said: Lady, banish al fear: for
to morrow I will not fail, but before the king I will call Calix to account for
the treason and even so God deliver me from my extreme malady, as I will
without dissimulation show the true love I bear unto the princely Meruine.
Thanks good Drohes, said Berea, and so departed to her bed, but no rest could
draw the motions of her sunny eyes, but al night she wept and lamented for the
losss of her only beloved Meruine. As soon as the morning had thrust his
forehead over the mo^^taines, Drohes in whom could slumber no forget fullness,
arose with a l^on-like resolution, to combat against Calix, and make him
confess his treason: but alas he had lien vij. weeks sick of a fiery ague,
and through want of food, was now weak and feeb^e: now God be his guide, for
his attempt is dangerous. When Drohes was ready, he went into the great h^ll,
where he found K. M^rmont, Jacob the Merchant, and Barbin: inco^inently when
Drohes saw the king, he said: King of Montment, justly may thou be accounted
unwise, and traitorous to thine own majesty, when thou suffer the death of
the most wise and valiantest creature of the world, who had done thee so great
honor and pro^ite, as to the like may nothing be compa^ed, whose sword twice
in one day has ransomed thee from thine enemies, and whose prowess has
deiluered captive to thee, the kings of the greatest nations. Alas, how little
right or law is back repaied him, when he is traitorously murdered? It is
Meruine of whom I speak, he in whom valor is proud to have an habtiation, he
that took Baucamont and Antifer, who yet are thy prisoners. When Mermont beheld
with what a settled and displeased count^nance of coffeehouse Drohes spoke,
he said; I pray thee desist thy speech, for there is neither king nor prince
under the cope of heaven, who shall wrong the gentle Meruine, but i will die or
work a mighty reuengement. Yea said Drohes, these speeches are of royal
value, know then he is in your house that has murdered Meruin in the forest
where yesterday you hunted: name him (said the king:) it is Calix said Drohes. At
that word the King changed his color, and calling before him a Sergeant at
arms, commanding him to take a band of soldiers with him, and fetch Calix
before him, which immediately was done, the rumor whereof astonished Marant,
who went after to behold the occurrents.

3 No sooner approached Calix before the king, but Drohes said: Traitor thou,
even thy false self, who have murdered renowned Meruine in the words, which if
thou deniest, my sword shall make thee confess with repentance, before this
day be fully vanished: in sign whereof there is my gage, which I pawn to
prove all my assertion truer than thy religion* When Calix heard him, he
began to wax pale, bowing his head to his breast, without speaking any word:
which the king perceiving he said: false traitor, why take thou not the gage
which he offers? by the says I bear unto Mahomet, if thou be guilty, all
the gold in the world shall not ransom thee from a shameful death. I refuse
it not quoth Calix, and then lifting aloft his head, took up his gage. Marant
seeing what had passed, aduising himself said to the king: Now your majesty
must assign us a day of combat, to the end we may assemble our friends and
kindred together, to behold the combat, and my self will be pledge for the
fealty of Calix my kinsman. By Mahomet says the king, I understand not your
intention, but as I am king of this region, I will not eat, till I see an end
of this dissension. Then forthwith was Calix commanded to be armed, and Jacob
carried Drohes to the chamber of Berea, who gave him the most excellentest
wines, and rarest conserues, that time or experience had found out, of all
which he tasted with good appetite, making himself strong and lusty. Then was
he armed in every piece according to his own liking, and when he was readily
prepared, he mounted on his horse Marcheuall, which sometimes was belonging to
the famous duke Oger, then taking a lance in his hand, trotted in stately
manner into the great court, joining on the castle of Turgon, which the king had
then caused to be prepared for that dreadful battle, a world of gallant
cheualiers attended Drohes into the lists. And a short space after Marant
brought Calix, whom he ernestly besought, that if he were discomfited, yet that
he would not accuse him, and he would quickly procure his peace with the king.
Calix agreed, giving his faith thereunto, and entered the field where Drohes
attended him, whose bodi^, though sickness had made weak, yet his courage as
invincible, was most mighty, albeit he knew Calix to be renowned for faith of
chi^alrie. When both the combatants were in a readiness, the king said,
Champions stand forth, for I will that the occasion of this battle be
published unto every one, say therefore Drohes of what thou accusest him. I say
quoth Drohes, and what I say, this sword and arm shall witness to be true, that
this traitor Calik here present, has murdered Meruine in the forest, where your
highness yesterday hunted, as I will prove upon his body before it be night. It
is a false he said Calix, I never had thought of so monstrous treason, in sign
whereof, I defy thee, and crave no other redeemer than this hand and the
combat. This said, retiring themselves, the trumpets sounded, and they putting
spurs to their horses, charged each other. Calix valiantly assailed Drohes,
breaking his lance into many shiuers, but Drohes answered him with so strong a
counterbuffe, that he threw him to the ground backward: but in a moment be
rose again, and drawing his sword, said to him* Traitor, if thou dismountest
not thy self, I will kill thy horse: at that word Drohes alighted, and with
his sword charged Calix so mightily, that had not his weapon turned, it had bin
the first and last of the battle: yet for all this ill hap, it fell with so
huge a power* as hewing away his pouldrons and laces, it pierced his flesh so
far, as the traitor shrunk. Then said Drohes, villain, ere thou and I depart,
I will make thee dance before the K. a Morisco galliard. Calix, as much ashamed
at the contempt, as grieved with the blow, rushed upon Drohes, and struck him
with so manly a puissance, as thearth and flowers thereon trembled, and
withal, the sword glauncing down, cut away one of Drohes spurs, and alittle
of the flesh with it, insomuch, that he wanted little of falling over and over:
and let no man think it any dishonor, considering his weakness, and the long
living pain of his sickness. Then Drohes lifting his heart to heaven, said;
Sweet Jesus, thou divine savior of the world, look down from heaven upon me,
and lend strength to my weak arm to vanquish this miscreant, since all the end
of my act is to exalt thy divine Godhead. As he was thus speaking, Calix
struck him again with such merciless vigor, as he turned about and staggerd
iij. times in amazement. Then said Calix (whose pride lifted him higher then
his fortune:) by the allegiance I owe to our great prophet, if thou do not
immediately confess before the king, that thou have accused me falsely of this
treason, ere the sunn^ descend from the heavens. I will divorce thy head from
thy shoulders. U^ilaine (quoth he) I esteem thee not a pin, then mounting his
sword, he smote Calix on the helmet* that he fell to the ground: yet instantly
he rose up again, but by the glauncing of the blade, was cut from his right
thigh a piece of flesh enough to have gorged a cast of Falcons for a whole day.
Calix made mad with this ill misfortune, grasping his sword in both his hands
came right against Drohes, meaning with that blow to make an end of the
combat: but Drohes turning himself suddenly, for the sword came as thunder
or lightning, wisely slipped aside, and the sword unstaid by any interception,
drove into the ground more than a foot and a half, and that with such unusual
violence, that by no power he had, could it be drawn back again. Drohes
se^ing this leapt before Calix, and struck him in such manner, that he cut off
the arm which then was contending with the sword for mastery: the anguish
whereof made him fall to the earth. But Drohes striking, in his falling, cut one
of his legs off also: the ^orment whereof made him cry that the whole
assembly heard him. When the traitorous Marant saw Calix thus vanquished, in a
moment he mounted himself on horseback, and never gave over flying, till he
came into the strong city of Minor that was governed by king Butor his father,
Drohes now seeing there was no power left in Calix to defend himself any
longer, said, Traitor, this mischief has thy sin heaped upon thee, know
then I will kill thee in the sight of this assembly, if thou confessest not thy
treason, and the murder of Meruine. Now by Mahomet said Calix, my thoughts are
guiltless of his evil: at that word Drohes cut off his other arm. Then said
Calix, ha excellent knight Drohes, be no more my tormenter, but call the king,
and to him I will report all things touching Meruine. Then came the king, and
with him many barons to hear his confession, to whom he told all their
committed treason: the first complotting* the continuing, and executing:
lastly, how, and in what manner they left him, and the place where his sword was
hidden. Then to the king he said, My liege, lay hands on your kinseman Marrant,
for it was he alone wrought us all the mischief, for which now my heart is
inwardly sorry. When the king had heard all he could say, he caused him to be
dragged by the strength of horses into the field, where he was hanged according
unto the custom of traitors in those countries. And thus will we leave to
speak of him, and return to our former matter.

CHAP, XIX.
1 How king Mermont went to the forest to find Meruin. 2 The occasion and manner
of his finding. 3 How he brought him to Montment, and other adventures.
AFter the death of the notable traitor Calix, Drohes was carried into the
chamber of Berea, where he disarmed himself: then calling for the skilfullest
of the kings surgeons, he had his wounds bound up and dressed, which with
careful regard, were ^peedily healed. Now Mermont who was piteously perplexed
for the loss of Meruine, commanded Jacob, Barbin, and diverse of his chiefest
nobility, to mount themselves on horseback, for he would instantly to the
forest in quest of Meruine, to which they all accorded, and being come to the
woods, they ranged a long time, but could not find the fatal place of his
abiding.

2 But at last Mordant the courageous mare, neighed so loud, and with such an
unusual shrilnes, as the K. hearing her, said: without doubt I hear the cry
of Meruines mare in these parts: let us ride toward her with all speed, which
doing, they found the mare in the midst of the high way, but Meruine by no
means could their eyes recover. Then hallowed the king alowd, saying: Ha, my
dearest and best friend Meruine, where art thou? I pray thee speak, if thou be
near me, conceal not thy self from him, who so loves thee. When Meruine
heard the king, whose voice he knew by the resounding, he turned his head with
great pain, and said: Come hither my lord to this unhappy tree, and behold how
I am tormented. Then went the king to him, whose eyes ran over with pity,
neither was there any flinty heart so obdurate, which would not have relented
to see Meruine so near the door of misery: for he was bound with such
straitness, that his nose gusht out of blood abundantly, and his neck, his
arms and legs were swollen and colored like a man in leprosy. The virtuous
King Mermont quickly cut his bands in sunder, and Jacob and Barbin held him up,
for his legs were not able to sustain him: whereat Barbin wept grievously. But
Meruin recompensed him, saying: Father appease your sorrow, for albeit my body
be thus tormented, yet my mind is so free from bondage, that at this instant I
could encounter with xx. knights well armed, could I find Entrant my good
sword, which unmanly the traitors took from me. Meruine, said the king, thou
shall soon have thy sword, and then went to the place where Calix had assignd
him, and brought Meruine his sword again. My gracious liege said Meruin, how
knew your highness where my sword was hidden? Then reported the king unto him
all the circumstances of Drohes challenge and victory against Calix. To what
purpose shall I double my discourse? the king forgate not any point of the
story, Meruine was well contented with the history, and loved Drohes, if
possible, more than he did before.

3 Then being mounted on his mare, be returned with them in gallant manner to
Montment, where all the burgesses and rulers of the town ran forth to meet
him, for Meruin was esteemed the patron of peace, and highly loved amongst
them: then was he brought to the palace where he was most roially received of
the queen, and more then may bespoken, of the beautiful Berea, whose joy to
see him alive, like the highest heaven, had no circomference: yet durst she not
proclaim i^ but often sighed, that under clouds she was compelled to contain
it. Which when he perceived, he smild, and loved* for she was wondrous fair,
and withal most wise and prudent. Of her Meruine begat Orient, who was father
of the seven signs, of which one had ^o name Elias, who begat Ydaim, from whom
issued G^df^ey of Bullen, which conquered Jerusalem, as it is written in the
famous history of the same Godfrey. Meruine at that instant was of all men
most joyfully received* and the king commanded his physicians and surgeons
carefully to attend, who in one month, through their art and diligence,
delivered him safely recovered: for which the king being glad, both praised and
rewarded them. After Meruine was healed, make no question but he ouerslipt no
time or occasion to visit his hearts goddess Berea, who to either other read
all the legends of their misfortuns, he making her, she him, a cabinet where
they stord up their chiefest treasures: after they devised of their loves,
whose last hope and conclusion, was, chastely to espouse one an other, which
before they could bring to pass, they passed through many worlds of greater
troubles: for Meruine after he was returned to be a Christian, he was five
years detained in Minor prisoner, during which season Berea endured infinite
mischances, being twice enforced for her life's safety to renounce the redeemer
Christ Jesus: yet not by any means would she adore Mahomet, but what she did,
was woman's weakness, and her life's love: for always the true God of heaven was
mighty in her memory, as shall be declared hereafter in this history. And thus
will we a while leave to speak of them, and entreat of an other occurrent.

CHAP. XX.
1 Of Pimons embassage from Esclamart to Baucamont, touching the 4. sons of
Gualtier of Denmark, 2 and how the peace was concluded between Mermont and
Baucamont.
Soon after Meruine was recovered of his late misfortune, as Mermont was
sitting at the table with Baucamont, and Antifer, Pimon the ambassador of
Baucamont entered into the hall, and after humble reuerences performed,
kneeling upon his knees, thus saluted the kings: That Mahomet which governs
the vni^erse, save and defend the puissant king Baucamont, my lord and
so^eraigne, the good king Mermont, and Esclamart, that hither has sent me.
Know then you mighty kings of the most mightiest nations, that king Esclamart
desires you, and in the name of Mahomet, commands you to knit an eternal peace
between you, both for the profit of our religion, and the maintenance of al
your kingdoms: which if obstinatly you refuse, all your dominions are in
hazard, and Baucamont my sovereign shall assuredly loose Damascus: for the
false christians, who seek to confound our great prophet, are entered into his
confines with sword and fire, consuming his territories, not spacing infants,
or taking any paganto mercy, that willingly without compulsion falls not
down, and adoreth their God the God of heaven, as your majesty shall more
plainly behold, by the contents of this letter which king Esclamart by me has
sent you, then kissing the letter, he delivered it Baucamont, which contained
this that ensues.

To the king of Damascus, health.
Thrice hie and mighty king of Damascus, my sovereign uncle: sithence these
three years that your sacred majesty has unhappily been detained prisoner, I
have not budgde my foot, nor removed from this city, which I have governed
and ruled in most peacceable quiet, until the end of this last month, at what
time the hare-braind sons of Gualtier of Denmark, invaded thy dominions, the
names whereof ensues: The eldest as it is reported to me, is named Guion: the
second Bertran, whose valor not any creature is able to resist: the third,
Thyerry, and the foureh, Florion, all exiles, and banished their countries:
wherefore I entreat your excellency, find some mean to give an end to your
trouble, and come home to defend your own nation and if possible, bring some
aid, for your foes are mighty.

From Damas, Esclamart

When Baucamont had read this letter, he said to Mermont: behold, king of
Montme^t, if this news be not a rea^y mean to thy favor, assure thee it is a
hie tract to my utter desolation: for since these four brethren are entered
into my country, I know them so redoubted in arms, that nothing is able to
withstand them. By these four brethren in one year, was the most famous
Gratiana, and five other kings, before renowned for chivalry, utterly
discomfited. Besides, Brandis has written to me in enclosed letters, that they
are the most renounmed conquerors this day under the firmament. These things
considered, I beseech your highness let us conclude upon agreement, and leave
the hostility we have maintained one against another: the beginning whereof is
my grief, and the ending that I ask thy mercy.

2 Baucamont, said Mermont, more to defend the law of our religion, then for
any other zeal I have to thy kindness, I freely pardon thee the forfeit of thy
life and kingdom, and withal promise thee by a kingly protestation, to aid
and defend thee against thine enemies. Thus with diverse other ceremonies of
st^icter combining, was the truce concluded between the kings, and instantly
edicts sent abroad into every ^^untrey for the assembling together of an
infinite nu^^be of pagans, to make an unvanquishable army: which being mustred
and enrolled, instantly there betook themselves to the sea, King Mermont,
Antifer, Baucamont, and the wise al conquering Meruin where for a while we will
leave them, and return to the 4. brethren, to wit Guion Bertran, Thietry, and
Florion, and noble Huon of Bordeaux, who at that time was in the army with
them In their host was 20000. good christians by whose prowess they had
marched so far, that now they had laid their fledge to Damascus, which then
swarmed full of mis-beleeuing infidels, because since the return of Esclamart,
he had still in that place detained the ancient army: there was also with him
in the town the king Brandus, Herades, and Isay the king of Judah. In brief,
there was five kings, and their powers at that time in the city of Damascus.
When Esclamart saw how gallantly the Danes had besieged him, he called Bandus
and the other kings, and said unto them, You kings of Asia, and defenders of
Alcheron, let us issue out courageously. and visit these christians, and I
doubt not, but if we virtuously show our resolutions, we shall before the
Sun touch the highest point in the heavens, vanquish and amaze them: for they
imagined to have found us altogether vnprouide^, because mine uncle king
Baucamont is at Montment prisoner, and so in his absence, thought suddenly to
surprise us. It Is true, said Bandus, therefore you have my consent, to sallie
out immediately. To this stratageme every one concluded, therewith arming
themselves, and then with a cry able to deafen thunder, they sallied out of
the gates, and in a trice, cast themselves into battalion order. Bandus (said
Esclamart,) bear you the standard, and for your guard, take twenty thousand
of the best soldiers. You Herades shall have other twenty thousand, and
incompasse them about, through yonder valley, my self with the rest will
charge them in the faces, and doubt not, but soon to behold their
destructions. In this politic sort, Esclamart trained his troops, who burnt
with desire to bring our good christians to confusions: but they as too wise to
be foiled by invention, had advertisement by their espials of this approaching,
wherefore Guion called his brothers and sayd^, Princes, remember you the blood
from whence we are descended, and the virtues of our famous father Gualtier,
whose back was never turned to the face of the proudest pagan. Remember you
also our renowned uncles, whose almighty prowesses have conquered the realms
which they now govern: even now is the time for us to imitate their virtues,
and with lik^ prowess to obtain to our selves crowns of perpetual
indurance. And for mine own part, I vow by him that died for me, this day to
give my name such life amongst the pagans, that the rumor of mine honor, shall
endure beyond all ages. To this they all answered, with an equal desire of
honor, whose courageous spirits like lions, were never tamed, yet they were
all exceeding young, the oldest amongst them having not as yet attained to the
age of xxj. years. Now God of his goodness prosper their proceedings, for
immediately begins the battle, which will be both fierce and dangerous. When
ensigns were displaied on all sides, and the sign of battle given by the
trumpets sounding, Bertran took a mighty lance in his hand, and spurring his
horse, was the first that charged: whom, when a Turk named Butor, who was king
of Ecalion, beheld, he d^sranged himself, and ran to encounter him, but
Bertran who took his flight like a tempest, came against him after such a
fashion, that at one blow, both horse and man tumbled to the ground, which when
Bertran had performed, he returned with his sword drawn upon the Turk, who
with the blow was so astonished, that locking his hands together, and li^^ing
them up, basely begged life, and pardon. Then Bertran dema^nded if he would
renounce Mahomet, and believe thence^foorth one only Jesus Christ: to this the
Turk answered, no. Then by heaven, said he, in me thou shall find no mercy,
and at that word struck his head from his shoulders: then turning to his
brother Guion, who ^hen was come unto him, h^e said: Brother, if to every one I
pay this payment, I believe the pagans will game nothing by my tendure. Now
began the batttell to be mighty on both sides, and Guion leaving his brother,
thrust himself amongst the midst of the pagans, where the first he met, he
threw dead to the gronnd, and in like manner made an end of the second. Briefly,
before his lance was broken, he sent some to the earth to acompany their
forefathers: but when his lance was broken, then he drew his sword, and meeting
with a pagan* he cla^e his head to his teeth and then pursued another. Bertran
this while being amongst the thickest bands of his enemies, encountered a
pagan, who was the cousin to Esclamart, to whom he lent such a salutation, that
he claue him down even to the girdle, which another pagan beholding, ran to
Esclamart, and said, General, thy noble cosine is slain by a christian, see
where he lies, and see where his foe rangeth. When as Esclamart saw Bertran
possessed with a fellonious rage of immortal revenge, he thrust spurs to
his horse, and assailed Bertran with such puissance, that with the force of his
present blow, he struck his horse dead under him: but Bertran quickly vawted
on his feet again, and with his sword in his hand, ran against the pagan,
against whom he boiled to obtain but one straight blow, but by any means, he
could not for the prease: yet notwithstanding reaching one, he light so
violently on the head of his horse, that it was more then time for Esclamart to
bear him company on foot also: and Bertran then running against him, had
there slain him, but there swarmed such innumerable troops of pagans about
him, that if God himself had not been his defender, Bertran then had breathed
no longer. Yet for all this, the gentle young gallant miraculously behaved
himself, for he struck not any pagan, but he severed the life from the body.
Isay the king of Judah seeing Bertran thus courageous, thrust himself against
him, but there was mighty folly in his work, for Bertran met him in the
midst of his carier with such a blow, that he claue his head to his collar.
O Mahomet, said Esclamart, this christian is possessed with some devil, what
mischief he does me: and then he cried to all his soldiers, promising prizes
of great worth to him that could take him. Then was the famous gallant assailed
on every side, but like an enraged bore, he ranged amongst them, and in such
sort defended himself, that the pagans like larkes fell under the houerings of
his wings. But yet alas, all his prowess had profited him but little, and he
was at the point of taking or killing, when Thyery and Florion his brothers,
with Huon of Bordeaux, with diuors christians, by great chance came to his
rescue. Brother Bertran (said Florion) now or never remember who you are, and
banish the fear of a pagan infidel, and with that word he thrust into the
prease, ouerturning and killing all that stood between him and his brother.
When Bertran saw him, he took new courage, and like a lion rouzed himself
with greater fury: in so much, that he struck Esclamart to the earth, whom
Florion like a gripe seized upon, and delivered him to two stout christians,
who bare him to their tents. Then began the battle Hydra-like to renew, in
which the pagans died without number, for whom soever Bertran touched, never
more stood need of the physician: on the other side his brother Guion did
wonders who encountered a king named Afriquant, who was exceeding strong and
valiant, him Guion overthrew to the ground, but a band of Sarazens despite his
head, mounted him again, and assailed Guion in cruel manner: but like a wise
and valiant knight, he defended himself from their fury. Then came Huon of
Bordeaux, who like a valiant knight of unspeakable virtue, ^lew infinite
troops of the pagans: but when he saw young Guion in hazard, he turn^d unto
him, and in a moment, delivered him from the swords of those miscreants. Atal
this, the battle weakened no deal, yet might you have seen as many knights
lie dead on the earth, as stars in a winters night shine in the heavens, and
so many masterlesse horses posting about the fields, as atomies playing in the
suns beauty: yea, so valiantly our christians bare themselves in that
conflict, that in the end the pagans were discomfited, as you shall hear
hereafter.

CHAP. XXI.
1 How Florion the youngest brother was taken prisoner by K. Brandus. 2 How the
pagans were ouerthrown. 3 How Florion was given in exchange for king Goham
Gaifiers brother, and other adventures.
Mighty was the s^urre, and most dreadful the battle, in which our
christians showed the renoume of their valiancies, but above all, the price of
victory seized on the helmet of Bertran, for the number which he slew, were
accounted numberless: even the youngest of the brothers, most delicate Florion,
did that day marvelous acts, who beholding a pagan in his presence to kill a
christian, swore devoutly, his hand should be his revenge: but the pagan flying
before him, thrust himself to a batalion of Sarazens, where Florion ouertaking
him, slew him in his entrance. But evil befell that chance to the young
gallant, who imagining to return, found himself enclosed on every side with
the power of king Brandus, which the^ were twenty thousand pagans: all with
one violence they laid siege against Florion, but prevailed nothing against
him, until by an evil misfortune, they killed his horse, who in his falling,
fell upon him: by which mean, and no other, they took him prisoner, and sent
him to Damascus. Then Brandus brought his army into the heart of the batel,
with whose sight, it recovered new life, became sharper then at the beginning.

2 Yet was Bertra^ so feared amongst the pagans, that not any durst stand
before him, but if any by chance did, they never after were beholden to their
surgeon: so mighty and invincible was his force that day, that by him king
Goham the brother of Gaifier was taken prisoner, whom he commanded to be
brought to his tents. Not far from ^im, his brother Guion, like a demie-god
of arms, encouraged his soldiers, charging them for the honor of Jesus
Christ, and his dear passion, that day to be invincible: for though the pagans
be infinite, yet their flight is shameful. To this renowned Guion belonged a
squire, whose name was Regnier the son of his sister, who with a battell-ax
which he held, struck a pagan named Tufier, thwart the helmet, with such
virtue, that he c^aue his head to his shoulders. When Guion saw the
mightiness of his blow, he went unto him, and embracing him, gave him the
second order of knighthood, saying. Thou branch of the stock from whence I am
descended, continue thy magnanimity, and by that honor, to which I covet to
aspire, I will make thee the commander of a town, or a stat^ly castle. Even in
his greatest mightiness was the battle, when Bandus had joined his army with
the others. There might you have seen so many lost heads, so many forsaken
bodies, so many overthrown knights, so many vnbckt horses, who trailing their
bridles under them, ^^ode their masters to pieces: that since the Lamb of Glory
was shadowed under the spotless womb of a virgin, the like has not been
seen, nor heard tell of, nor that so great resistance could be made by so few
as our poor christians: For the pagans were in number one hundred thousand and
more* but our christians by their valor, lest but ten thousand which were not
slain or taken. The king Bandus was in the m^dst of the christian army, of
whom he made mighty destruction. Among whom he thrust one noble christ^an to
the heart: and after him, like a wolf in a flock, sent a number to follow him.
On the other side of the field was Bertran triumpha^t with victory, ranging to
seek his brethren. Two of them he quickly found out, who were joyful to
behold their conquest. Brothers, said Bertran, where is Florion? I know not,
quoth Guyon, it is convenient that we go seek him. Then put they themselves
into the battle to search him out, but could not find him: and there was
reason, for he was straightly imprisoned at Damascus in a strong tower. When
Bertran saw he could not find him, he took a solemn oath, that nothing but the
extreme darkness of the night should drive him from the field, and with that he
began a new conflict, proposing his body against a world of swords: but how
many soever he dismounted, never rose again to become armed. Amongst the rest
he encountered Croniquant, unto whom he gave such a blow, as he cl^ue him in two
pieces. Now began the Pagans to recoi^e, and fly ^oward the town, whereof
when Bandus was advertised, be used all his force and eloquence to return. But
it was in vain, for they reported how king Esclamart, Goham, and diverse others
were taken prisoners, an^ carried to the Christians tents: which so soon as he
heard, he betook himself to flight also, wh^m Bertran, Guion, Thyerry, and
Huon chased so fiercely, that they put many of them to the sword, as they
ent^ed the gates of the city. Reignier in this chase, whom Guion had newly
made knight, behaved himself so valiantly, that he was named the Pagan^
tormentor. Thus entered king Bandus into the town, with ten thousand that
suruiued of an hundred thousand and better. Thus the Sarazens were overthrown
by the valor of our Barons: who as the story reports, were so noble in their
conquests, that nothing could resist them. They in this battle lost but four
thousand men, and the wealth they gained was so innumerable, that the basest in
the Christian army, was able to purchase a castle. Besides kings, they had an
hundred of the greatest pagans prisoners. Yet for all this, the generals were
not committed, but sorrowed for the loss of their brother Florion, to whose
fortune they knew not what had chanced. Briefly, their woe was so great, that
no tongue is able to report it. But leaving them in their doubtfulnesse, let us
return unto king Bandus, who being entered into the city, and sad for his
discomfiture, commanding Florion to be brought before him, said: Christian, I
charge thee without any dissembling, tell me thy name. Pagan, answered he, in
whom it was impossible for fear to have any residence, I hate the thing from
which thou bindest me: know then I am called Florion, and so they baptized me,
as those know that are acquainted with me. I have three brethren whom thou
ought exceedingly to hate, for they have vowed never to part or turn aside,
until they have taken the city of Damascus, and converted her people unto our
Religion. But I wonder much, I saw not Baucamont all this day, surely he
either ouersleepeth his glory, or wants courage to sustain himself in
combat. Christian (said Bandus) he is at Montment, and from thence is coming
with a mighty host, to chastise your follies, amongst whom is a Pagan named
Meruine, whose very rumor of excellency, will daunt you with amazement. But
letting those things pass, tell me I pray thee, from what line art thou
descended? My fathers name, said he) is Gualtier of Denmark, that now rules
Babylon, whose mighty prowess has converted millions of your faith, to a
perfect and true religion. Duke Oger also is mine uncle, who converted king
Moysant, and that worthy son of his called Florion, who as the fruit of
baptism gave me the name I now carry: know then, if by thee my death be
procured, not all the kingdoms of the world can shilter thee from vengeance. Be
therefore advised by me, and let me return to my brethren, so shall thou
please them, and rescue thy fortune from a greater mischief. By Mahomet
(replied ^andus) though thy youth and smiling eloquence might in a milder
regard then mine, pay thy ransom, yet know, I am so far at (...) with
relenting clemency, that before the sun decline an hour lower, thy head
shall be twenty score from thy body.

3 But when Gaifier heard him, he said, remember king Bandus the famous
prisoners and our fellow kings who bide within the christians jurisdictions. In
my conceit it were more wisdom to exchange him, then by his death to hazard
al their fortunes: and I beseech you, if they will render my brother Goham for
him* that you will yield and be pleased. I am most willing answered Bandus, t^y
your fortune in the affair. Then departed Gaifier, and came to the tents of
the chri^tians, at such time as our barons were set down to supper, whom in
this manner he saluted. The great god Mahomet preserve king Bandus, and direct
his counsels* and that God which you adore, soon dispatch you from the borders
of th^se countries. Guion, and you other commanders of this christian
society, Bandus by me demands if you well ransom your brother from
imprisonment for one of those kings you have taken, which I shall nominate*
With all my he art (said Guion) whose heart for joy would have leapt from his
bosom, when he heard Florion was not dead: name whom thou will, and he shall
be given for his ransom. Then deliver (said he) Goham my brother. Immediately
was Goham fetched, and his forfeit arms delivered him, and so conducted by
Guion, Bertran, Thierrie and Huon, even unto the walls of the ci^ie. And Florion
armed stood in the port where the exchange was solemnly finished: Gaifier and
Goham entering in, and Florion issu^^g forth, who vowed by the g^ory of his
Savior, to pay his host a round payment for his short entertainment. Then
came his brothers who embraced him, and pompoufly brought him to their tents,
where still remained many Pagan prisoners, unto whom Bertran said, that if
they (...) not remove then false idall Mahomet, and be willin^^^ b^ptiz^d, they
should (...): but they like devils hardener (...) their m^schiefe, r^fused.
Then said Guion, Brother (...) these kings safely in prison, until the
emperor Charles return from the holy S^pulchre, who (...) with our father: so
shall the emperor (...) with our gift, and applaud the honor of our swor^s. It
plea^eth me excellently, said Bertran: so dispa^ching their prisoners into
strong (...), they went to their ^est, till early in the next morning, at what
time they valiantly assaul^ed the town, but with fruitless success: for why
the city was strong^y fortified and peopled, with abundance of all nations,
who defended it ((...) with loss) to their hie admiration. And in that
do^^^full manner we will leave them, and speak of King Mermont, and the ever
to be feared Meruine.

CHAP. XXII.
1 How King Mermont, Baueamont, Meruine, and two hundred thousand Pagans arrived
before Damascus. 2 The loss the Christians received by the valor of Meruine.
THis while was Mermont upon the Seas accompanied with Baucamont, Antifer, and
the puissant Meruine, but not with the good Knight sir Drohes, for when he
knew the expedition was made against the Christians, he refused the Kings
colors, and stayed with the Angel of women, divine Berea, who was richer in
nothing than in the riches of his company: so prosperous were the winds to
their sailing, that within a very sh^rt space, they attained to the sight of
Dam^scus, where they landed about two leagues from the city.

Now the History reports, that there was a certain espiall, who beholding
their landing, ran to the tents of the General, and cried out, My lords, why
have you neglected to defend yonder hate-nourishing haven, where even now there
is landed so many Pagans, as it is impossible to number. Bertran more angry to
fear, then hear his words, said Anaunt villain, thunder thy threats in the
ea^es of dead men, we fear no Pagans a pinn^. Sir, said the spy, believe me
for certain, I have seen an hundred thousand or more. When the rest heard,
and saw his constancy, they said, let us arm our selves, providence auoideth
had-I-wist. When they were all armed, Guion called Bertran and Thierry, and
said, I pray you stay behind with five thousand soldiers, to this end, that
if they of the city issue upon us, you may prevent them from enclosing us
behind: to this they were agreed. So Guion and the rest went against the
Pagans, who began to approach a little before the evening. The rig^t renowned
Meruine marched before the rest, and with him only Croisant, and Jacob, whose
conference was the praising of Drohes, in that he had refused to bear arms
against his own religion, to which praise Meruine lent double commendations,
affirming him as well worthy the title of a King, as the honor of Knighthoode.
All the while that they were in praising Drohes, Mermont was encouraging his
soldiers, saying: Now was the time for them or never, to raise on high their
god Mahomet. In these discourses they did march alongest a river, which led
them to a broad and spacious field, where the Christians were ready to charge
them.

2 Amongst whom, Huon with his lance in his rest, dis^anged himself against
Meruine, upon whom he broke his staff with such fury, that the more Meruine
was astonished, the more he highly esteemed him, tha^ lent him the cause of
amazement, yet not accustomed or willing to die in any debt to so good a
creditor, he assailed Huon so valiantly, that he bare him from the crupper of
his horse back: the shame of which fall, lent sorrow to the soul of Huon,
because till that hour, not any, how puissan^ soever, had power to make him
loose his stirrops. When as Meruine had thus dismounted him, he turned to Huon,
and delivering him his horse, said Noble Christian, mount thy self again, for
so excellently have I tasted of thy virtue, that I will not wrong thee to
purchase a kingdom. Then va^ted Huon up into his saddle, eased with this
hope, that a world of Pagans that same day should pay for the shame which
Meruine had done unto him. Now by this time was Meruine like unto lightning
flowen into the midst of the army, and Mermont like him, was amongst the
strongest battallions, whom the gentle Florion at the first encounter overthrew
even unto the very ground, and had in the same moment cut off his head, if he
had not been relieved by a strong band of Sarazens, who mounting their Lord
again, flew all upon the infant, but so gallantly did he defend himself, that
they all started back, and the boldest du^st not give another onset. Then
cried he aloft. Denmark, and victory, which as soon as Huon hea^d, like a
mad man he ran into the battle, and the first he encountered, was Marquant,
whom he so saluted, that his head flew in two pieces: and after him, a second,
a third, and a fourth fell dead to the ground before him, so mightily he sought
to revenge the shame Meruine had given him. And in brief, such was his
prowess that he soon delivered Florion from the throng of his enemies. Not
far from them was Guion, who had made a great sl^ughter of the Pagans, for
from one at a blow he struck his ear from his head, and his head from his
shoulders. Then old Baucamont advance himself, who had but one arm, in which
he held a strong lance, wherewithal he was inflamed to assail Guion, but he
^ailed of his intent, though Guion failed not at all of his purpose, for with
his sword, as he passed by, he struck that arm also from his shoulder, to the
terror of the beholders, and torment of Baucamont, who having never an arm
left, cried o^t: Now am I the most misera^le (...) reigning under the sun,
who am as hateful to my self as fortune: and with that passed through his
army, who sorrowed in behold his misfortune. When they of the City heard the
rumo^r of this battle they issued out of the town, but were immediately
intercepted by Bertran, Thyerie, and five thousand christians, who bravely set
upon them. Bertran, who was most hardy was the first that charged, and meeting
with a noble Sarazin, named Moysant, stroke him dead from his horse: after him
four more in the same rank he after the same sort served, and then cried:
This day (trai^ors) shall be Doomes day to your generation. At which words his
brother Thyerie and all the army gave a most courag^us charge, and overthrew a
thousand Pagans that never rose again to draw sword in anger. What shall I
write more? Bertran his brother, and their soldiers (though not without great
peril) so behaved themselves against the citizens that if they had bin any
more then five thousand* the Pagans had never passed to join with the great
new landed army. But now the day failed, and the night began to shut in the
suns windows, which was propitious for our christians because, if the day
had endured, the valor of Meruin had overthrown their reputation: but now, by
reason of the darkness, a retreite was sounded: for which Meruine was
g^^eued, and said, they had coniured up clouds to shadow their flying. But
notwithstanding, all parts were content to use the present benefit. Now Guion
and Bertran are returned unto their tents hugely enraged* and Bertran said:
Brothers and Lords, this might has the Pagans worst us, but if I live til the
morrow (God being mine ayder) I will atchieue such wonders, that the bloody
livery my sword shall put on, shall last longer then their religion. Now the
Tables being covered, the noble company sat down to supper, where they were
honorably served. After supper, as soon as the tables were taken away, and
the watch set, the Generals went to their rest, til the morning star awakened
the sun from slumber: then rising and arming themselves, they martialled their
army into a warlike proportion, intending to assault the pagans, who on the
other side were every deal so watchful, and stood ready to behold the
signal. Guion the virtuous Dane beholding both parties equal preparation,
fell down upon his knees, and thus prayed: Thou true God of us and our
forefathers, I beseech thee in this battle be our guide and our defender: lift
high the glory of thine own name, and bruze the arms of thy professed
enemies, increase in us everlasting spirits of courage, that no scandalous
report of our misfortune, bring our aged fathers hairs to the grave with
disquiet: if otherwise it be thy will, that our death shall this day give an end
to our aspirings, yet thou Lamb of Redemption, and thou God of Israel,
vouchsafe that our souls may be placed with thy saints in Paradise. As soon
as he had thus said, bowing his head, he kissed the earth 3 times for
remembrance of the holy Trinity.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 How the Christians were vanquished by Meruine, 2 How Guion, Bertran,
Thyerrie, Florion and Huou of Buraeaux were taken prisoners and carried to
Damascus.
AFter Guion had ended his Prayer and ceremony, he came to his brethren, and
said: Princes, I beseech you in the honor of the holy passion of our great
God, blot from your thoughts, the remembrances of all worldly action* out (...)
all your understandings he applied to the axaltation of our true religion, and
the destruction of these faithless miscreants. This said, they marched toward
their enemies. And the Pagans ra^ged on the other side, came prowdly against
them. But now by this time was sprung up in Mermont and the other Pagan
princes, a mighty envy against Meruine, as if his glory darkened their
praise, and it seemed to them, that without his assistance they were able to
vanquish the christians wherefore Mermont came unto him and said: Meruine, thou
art too valiant and over daring, to march thus before continually in the hazard
of all chances, I pray thee stay behind with two and twenty thou^and, and
approach not until the extremity of our last fortunes call thee, because, in
thee consists our hope, and thy loss will give an assurance to their
conquest. I will (said Meruine) do what your Majesty commands me; but of my
lif^, there is no wisdom in this policy, for I know by proof that all your
mightines is not able to resist their prowesses: yet notwithstanding approve
your imagination, and if fortune prove contrary, mine aid shall not be far
distant, though what you do in my conceit) is but to gain that which I regard
not. I mean this days glory, and not as you pretend, my safety. And it was
true he prophesied, for they envied he should bear away the prize in each
battle, and he but the son of Barbin the merchant. Now began the allarum to
lighten in the ears of each army* and a resolved pagan named Turquant was the
first that charged, who^ Bertran separating himself, incountred with such
violence, that his lance making way through both his sides* carried him to the
ground, his first and last mother: at this the battel^es joined, like the
outrageous meeting of many confused waters, where the Christians bare
themselves most valiantly, and in the first shocke overthrew a thousand Pagans
dead to the ground. Bertran, who as yet had not broken his lance, meeting with
M^rbrom, (...) him to the heart, and brake his lance with the encounter. Then
drew he his sword, with which he excellently knew when to aid, when to def^nd,
and when to assail* and with it did wonders. Guion his brother struck
Acquilant* but not he of Lucerne, but an other, whom at the first blow he
divided to the girdle, and then c^ied, Forward in the name of ^od, you
christi^n nations, the day is o^^s. Thus said Guion, whilst Thyerie, who held
his sword in both his han^s, was with his brother Florion in the midst of the
army, making an admirable slaughter. Now ^eganne the ^^ttell to be strong and
fearful, in which the Pagans died innumerably: and the christians increased
so highly in their resolutions, that the Saraze^s began, from a little
recoyling to betake themselves to a maine flight, in which Baucamont ^as slain
by Bertran and Mermont taken pris^ner, and with him diverse others of the
greatest estimation, who were carried to the tents to accompany Esclamart, that
had run the way of dishonor before them. ^ut now behold the exchange of
immortal fortune, our thrice renowned christians, in whom Conquest seemed to
be proud, because she lived, and who r^turned victors from every battle,
shall unluckily be vanquished and overthrown by the hand of their neearest
cohsine, most absolute Meruine.

You have heard before, how Meruine stayed behind with twenty thousand,
according to the commandment of Mermont, to whom as soon as a Pagan had
declared the mighty o^erthrowe that was befallen them, with a smiling anger he
said: ^he King and his Princes imagined to subdue the christians without
Mernine, in despite of Meruine, but it is happened otherwise, and themselves
are forsaken for forsaking Meruine. Well, now shall they know my power, and the
worth o^ my service, for before the evening shall call forth the Moo^e to
appear in the great Star Chamber, I will revenge them on their enemies, and
restore their liberty. This said, he broached his renowned beast, and with his
army gave a hot charge on the christians, who when they beheld Meruine (though
not discoraged) yet were they wo^derously amazed: and not without good cause*
for his men were fresh, and Meruine the best knight that in the world then
lived, and they both ouerto^de and weary. Which when Bertran saw, he said,
Courage immortal spirits, and be not dismayed to behold these Pagans: as I
bear faith to my Savior, they are no more to be este^med then the withered
grass in a medo^ or the stalks of corn in the hand of a shearer. By my life
said Huon) I think those we have slain have purchased a new resu^rection.
Not so (said Guion] behold how they lie in heepes one upon an other. After
this talk they prepared themselves, and incountred their enemies, whom they
assailed with unspeakable resolution, but to too little profit, for their
weariness had so much weakened them, that the Pagans slew them most
p^teously: and Meruine so victoriously tr^^mphed where he went, that not any
escaped with life, on wh^me the weight of his arm descended. He slew Reignier,
Guyons young knight, and after him another, and another, and al whosoever was
within the reach of his ^urie. Our barons were astonished to behold his
resolution: and yet more great incombrances immediately fell upon them: for
why, the citizens issued again, and the rather, at the ^^reaty of Guyda w^o
besought them to aid her to tak^ him alive, who had slain her father: to
whom Pimon declared, that Bertran was he that slew him in the great battle,
whom Guyda mightily desired, and inwardly loved, imagining her self happy if
she might but behold him. The Pagans assured her her wish, and so sallied out
upon the christians, on whom Meruin had reigned lamentable misfortunes.

^ Now were the gallants of christendom enclosed on every side, they of the
city behind them, and Meruine before them, who alone was the planet of their
destruction: for why, no force was proof against his magnanimity. When
Florion saw that he alone held in his hand their destinies, he pressed unto him,
and gave him such a blow, thwart the helm, that he closed his eyes from the
day light. But Meruine recovering himself, paid him back so heavy a
requital, that he struck the infant from his horse to the ground backward,
who was no sooner down, but Sarazens eagerly le^pt upon him: to whom Meruine
said, Kill him not (soldiers) on your lives, for he that wounds him,
wounds my soul also. Thus was one of the four brethren taken, for whom was
made piteous lamentations.

There was at this instant left of the Christians but ten thousand, who with
one voice cried on God to be their ayder: and Bertran said, follow me (my
hearts) one God, one honor, and one grave: and then like a tempest of thunder
he cast himself into the bosom of his enemies, confounding and killing all
between him and the goal of Honor. Meruine this while chased the Christians
to the gates of desolation: at the which Guion grew mad thorough anger: and
setting himself against Meruin, gave him such a blow, that he made him bow
his head to the creast of the great mare Mordant. But Meruine unaccustomed to
have any such manner of regreetings, stroke Thyerrie (who then had thrust
himself between them) so mighti^ a blow, that he ^ell to the earth, and was
instantly taken prisoner by the common soldiers.

After that Meruine had thus overthrown Thyerrie, there came a Pagan unto him,
and told him, there were two Christians yet suruiuing, whom it was impossible
to take without great effusion, for on whomsoever their hands fall, death
follows. And then he brought Meruine where he found Bertran and Huon of
Bordeaux, who having joined back to back, showed such discipline in arms, as
might well have remained a miracle to all ages. When Meruine viewed their
courageous resolutions, he grew inamoured with their virtues: yet for all that,
with Entrant his good sword he struck so manfully at Bertran, that albeit he
never bended but to heaven, yet now he was forced to bow one of his knees to
the earth. Then leaving him, he charged Huon, who seeing the blow, by recoiling
backward, escaped the violence: but the Pagans came swarming so fast behind
him, that he was able no longer to defend himself against Meruine. Now were
all the noble christians taken, except Guion, who alone with five hundred, did
defend himself, and they were all that sur^ued. Like a wild Bore against a
tree environed with a kennell of hungry dagges, so stood Guion defending his
life, and teaching his followers how to die bravely. But in a trice Meruine put
those fifty to the sword, and took Guion prisoner, whom he delivered to the
Pagans, whom he charged upon their allegeaunce, and his displeasure, to use
those virtuous prisoners honorably.

When this was done, he went unto their ^ents, where he found King Mermont,
and four of his consortes: also King Esclamart and sundry other Pagans. When
Meruine beheld them, he said: Kings and Princes, what make you here? I
imagined you had overthrown the Christian army, but I see it is otherwise. Ah
Meruine (said Mermont) even for thy countries sake, and the honor of Mahomet,
deliver us from this thraldom. Thou art only wise, only valiant, and only
most fortunate. Mermont (said Meraine) thy freedom is already paid for, and
then cutting their bands in sunder, made them free from their af^^ictions.
This done, M^ruine commanded the tents t^ be ransacked, and all the wealth
there of which was exceeding much, to be brought into the city. Then when al
was performed* and they returned into the palace in Damascus, Meruine
commanded all the prisoners whom he had taken to be brought before him, and
the other Pagan princes: which being accordingly effected, Guyda looked upon
Bertran with a burning eye of desire, and an amorous amazement sayi^g to
Mermont, can your Majesty possibly behold a semblance that more exquisitly
resembles the gallant features of our most famous Meruine then this christian,
if his lineaments were as big and as largely shaped? It is most true Madam
(said Bandus) and the more I behold him, the more I behold him in him: How
Princess, (replied Meruine) is there in every place one like me? Heretofore
you said I did resemble Duke Oger, and am I now become like this christian?
what, is he also of Ogers li^e? Then turning to Bertran, he said: Christian,
I beseech thee without dissembling tell me the name of thy father, and the
descent of thy predigree. Pagan, said Bertran, we whom you behold are the four
brethren that have tormented Paganism, and yet hope to be the last end of
their destruction, Gautier of Denmark is our father, who wanne his crown with
his sword: and Oger whom you so renown, and whom Envy her self dare not but
extol, is brother to Guion our grandfather, who now rules Jerusalem: It is
m^st true, said a Pagan standing by, Guion king of Jerusalem is brother to
Oger, whom I beheld in excellent combat to kill Bruhier before the walls of
Laon, and his brother Iustament before Accre so fierce and valiant is the
descent of their pedig^^e. By Mahomet (said Meruine) since I resemble Oger, I
would I were also of his issue: and so he was, though mischief and evil (...)
it from his knowledge: but the time comes, in which he shall know himself
and his offspring. Thus (as you have heard) questioned the Pagans with Bertran,
who most stoutly made replies. Then Mermont rising up said to Bertran: All thy
lineage has been the scourge and ruin of our religion: and I am too well
assured, that nothing but your deaths can give peace to our quiet: wherefore
(Meruine) it is most necessary they die, to excuse our further trouble. Not so
my Lord (answered Meruine again) we will not wedde Tyranny and Conquest
together: besides, I vowed in my self, not to do them indignity, till I have
taken, as them, their father Gautier prisoner: which done, I will in a royal
navy cross the ^eas, and lay siege to the flourishing city of Paris, and give
battle to the emperor Charles that is surnamed Great: and by the aid of Mahomet
I doubt not to bring all France to my subjection. When Meruine had thus said,
he commanded the four brethren and all the other christian prisoners to be
strongly imprisoned in an impregnable tower, where Bertran consumed his time in
lamentation for his royal father and mother. It happened that Guyda, and Goham
the brother of Gaifier, being one day under the turret, they heard the
complaints of the hapless Christians. Sir (said Guyda) what is he that now
speaks, know you his voice? Madam (said Goham) it is the mightiest of the 4
brethren, and the most absolute knight in the world next Meruine, and his name
(as I take it) is Bertran, whose lineage is as great as his mind, both
incomprehensible. After these speeches they departed: but from Guyda never
departed the remembrance of those speeches: wherefore as she went, she said to
her self that* Bertran from her love should find an invincible army to
release him, and that her desires should atend on him whilst her heart
entertained a sympathy of his afflictions. Now were they returned to the
palace, where all the Pagan princes were set, who both honored, and scared
Meruine greatly, because, when he was angry, he spa^ed no creature, of what
estate soever, but dealt his alms alike to all that malign him. When supper
was ended, Meruine commanded that all the slain Pagans should have
souldier-like burial: which being done, amongst the dead was found king
Baucamont, whom Meruine inter^d r^yally, offering in his obsequies, honorable
lamentations. As soon as the next day appeared above the mountains, Meruine
commanded all his army to be mustred, for he would instantly march toward
Babylon. Wherefore calling king Bandus unto him, he gave him the charge and
government of that city of Damascus, swearing him to his allegiance, and with
careful respect to nourish and guard the honorable christian prisoners, and
also with all the reverent obseruances appertaining to so great a Majesty, to
adore and renown the excellent princess Guida. When every ceremony of his
charge was ended, he, king Mermont, and a thousand Pagans took shipping for
Babylon, where we will leave them, and a while discourse of other matters.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Charlemaine departing from France to see the holy sepulcher, arrived at
Babylon, and was royally received of King Gualtier. 2 Of the Embassage two
Pagans brought from Meruine and Gaudisse. 3 A Council holden by the
Christians, who demanded day of king Karaheu, of Florion, of Mesque, and of his
father Maysan^, at their coming to Babylon.
THe History reports, that in this time the most famous Emperor Charlemaine
would needs go to Jerusalem, to adore the holy sepulcher, and to that end
demanded of duke Naymes if he would accompany him in the voyage, who most
willingly agreed, aduising his Majesty withal, that it were good to take with
him also the reverent archbishop Turpin, who had a longing desire to the
journey, the twelve Peers, and five thousand resolved soldiers, to the end,
that if in that expedition they were incountred with any Pagan princes, they
might yet be able to defend themselves from mischief. Thy counsel pleases
me (said Charles) yet I can assure thee we may unresisted pass even unto
Samaria and Damascus, for that the rule of the Christians runs even unto
their city walls. To be brief in my Discourse, after Charlemaine had gathered
his train together, he betook him to the seas, where the gentle winds lent
him so prosperous breath, that in few days he arrived at a Cape called the
Arm of Saint George, where they landed, and thence marched to Babylon, whither
they ran a little before dinner, where they found Gautier the nephew of Oger,
and with him Claretta his queen, who had no understanding of Charlemaines
approach till they beheld him in their palace. The joy at their first meeting
was unspeakable, and their entertainment so royal as made al (...) wonder.
After many ceremonial obseruances, and some repo^e taken, Charlemaine asked
Gautier for his four w^rr^ly sons, whom all the world made so famous for
their (...). He replied* that they were even then before the w^lls of Damascus
with a puissant host, where they had taken Goham and diverse other Kings and
prisoners, and given the Pagans a mighty overthrow as he was certified by
letters not long since received from their ^ents, and many other discourses
they had, which I omit.

2 Anon, as the two Kings, Duke Naymes, and the twelve peers were devising of
sundry recreations, there entered into the hall, in proud and maiesticall
manner, tow Pagans, the one had to name Iuorin Montbrant, the other Malegrap.
And when they came just before Gautier, without reverence, the first thus
spoke: Gautier of Denmark, first understand, that we are sent to thee from the
puissant king Mermont, from Gaudisse his royal admiral, from king Manuel,
from Goham king of Egypt, and from five other mighty kings: lastly, though
deserving a title before al other for the vnvanquishable wonder of knighthood,
from a vassal of king Mermonts named Meruine, who has vowed to make all
christendom acknowledge no god but Mahomet: and to that end, by the exquisite
perfection of his magnanimity, he has taken thy four sons prisoners, and
slain all their host, except themselves and thirty others, who with them are
detained at Damas, whom again thou shall never behold, but with sorrow. Now
these royal Pagan kings, and thiefly Mermont, by us commands that
Pilgrim-like thou appear before them at Montbrant, (where they are landed) and
on thy knees hum^ly implore their favors, so shall thou purchase thy self
grace, and know their pleasures: if otherwise thou resist, with sword and
fire* they will instantly besiege thy city. When Gualtier had heard this
thunder of a dismal oracle, his heart trembled in the arms of grief and
disple^sure: at last, though it were long ere words could find way from
amazement, he said: How can this be true which thou reportest, when thou say,
my sons are detained prisoners? Gualtier (replied the Pagan) it is most true:
then leave to wonder, and give answer to mine embassage.

3 At this, for a space they dismissed the Pagans whilst the christians betook
themselves to counsel, where Gualtier demanded what course was to be taken in
these times of extremity. Great princes (said Duke Naymes) this is my opinion:
to the ambassadors should no indignity be offered, both because they are but
the tongues of others hearts, and also because our barons whom they detain,
are subject to the like vengeance, wherefore let us demand aid of the
Christian King Karaheu of Judah, and of the king Moysant, and his son Florion,
entreating them, to whose religion and land it as nearely concerns, speedily
to repair with their forces, and maintain the Temples of our God, and our
own liberties. To this counsel every one concluded. Then sending for the
Pagans again, thus Gualtier made them answer: Pagans, return to your Lords
at your pleasure, and say to Mermont and the others, that I am heartily sorry
for the thraldom of my sons yet can I not alter their fortunes: as for their
invasion, if they come to ex^le me* my sword shall defend me, whilst there
is either native honor in me, or till the glorious God of my creation forsake
me. Say he said thus, who will do thus? With this answer the Pagans
reparted, and Gualtier dispatched Letters to King Karaheu: and the Emperor
Charles and Gualtier himself went to Jerusalem, where they found the good king
Moysant, who entertained them with royalty beyond expectation. To him Gualtier
receunted his sons misfortunes* and the threats of his own overthrow to
whom Moysant promised all the aid and succors of his kingdom. Then went
they to the holy sepulcher, where they offered up their vows, gifts, and
protestations, and then with all speed returned back to Babylon, where they
found Claretta the Queen in great perplexity of sorrow for the loss of her
four sons. The same day arrived king Karaheu with seventeen thousand
knights of estimation, all which were gallantly received. The next morning came
Florion of Mesque with five thousand, and his father Moysant with as many: old
Guyon of Denmark, the brother of Oger, and the father of Gualtier was not yet
dead, he brought with him four thousand: so there was in ^abilon of strange
nations threescore thousand besides five thousand which the Emperor Charles
brought with him. Al which received an oath before the throne of the true God,
not to leave Gualtier till the death. Now let us leave them a while, and
return we to Iuorim, and Malegrap, the two Ambassadors, who returning to
Mermont and the other Pagan Kings, declared their answer the estate of
Babylon, the presence of Charlemaine, and the general resolution of the whole
nation. Mermont at the first, with silence began to wonder, til Meruine
awaking him said: What dream yon of (my Lord?) my heart is set on fire with
their words. I beseech you for honors sake, let us march away presently.
Hereupon a trumpet was sounded, and they all departed till they came within
half a league of Babylon, their whole army being three hundred thousand,
amongst whom were four giants, which were the brothers of Bruhier, whom Oger
had slain before the walls of Laon. When the Emperor understood they were
come, he said, it would be a mighty indignity, if they should molest him in
the town, wherefore he would needs issue forth, though all the dangers of the
world hung on the adventure.

CHAP. XXV.
How Charlemaine and all the christian army sallied out of Babylon. 2 ^Of the
great battle, and how Meruine flew Guion of Denmark his unknown uncle, 3
Also how Charlemaine, Gaultior, and all the twelve Peers were taken prisoners,
and their army discomfited.
NOw began Charlemaine, by the summons of the trumpets to gather together of
the christian army 60000, and planting them in a souldierly proportion for the
sally, ^ode about the troops with these encouragements: You sinews of Kings,
and vpholders of Mona ^ichies, I beseech you this day be almightyrn re^olu^ion
and combat agenst that coward Fear, if he whisper in your hearts a thought of
retiring imagine now the glory of heaven (for so it is) is to be gotten by the
conquest: and that the height of felicity, for which from your infancies you
have made endless imprecations, is sent from above, and on this day by your
valors to be achieved: that done, angel-like contend for your perpetual
happiness, and that crown of immortal recommendations, which the God of our
forefathers will bestow on every one that raises his truth above these
misbeleeuing, infidels. Behold then, (you champions of the highest) how like
hunger-starued beasts they come ravening, and hare already before your faces
devoured your own suppers: wherefore revenge that indignity, and maintain
the freedom of your Religion. These and many other speeches the Emperor
Charles used, to which the people answered with shoutinges and reioyeings. Then
might ye have heard a world of trumpets sound, double so many drums, tabors
and tamburins: after which they marched against the Pagans, who in like manner
came ordered and aranged to the encounter, king Mermont, with Meruine, being
two of the foremost leaders.

2 When Guion of Denmark, who was the brother of Oger and father to Gualtier,
beheld Meruine, he charged his lance and ran against him, whom Meruin with
the same accomplement regreeted in the encounter: the good old Guion brake his
lance, but without hazard to Meruine, who on the contrary part smote him with
such fur^e, tha^ he overthrew him dead to the ground without motion. When
Gui^ns band beheld that misfortune, they al at once ^^^ailed Meruine seriously:
but his defense was gallant, that he slew all who^ he touched. Now joined the
battle on every side perilous, strong, and grievous against the christians and
^^uel, and desperate against ye pagans. Mermont Gaudisse and Brandis that day
wondered, for they were at the beginning of the mischief: but above all was
Meruine highly feared, for death upon his sword had taken an everlasting
lodging: he as he posted, brake their ranks asunder, for not any Christian
durst dare to assail him. On the other side, Charles the great, king of
France, duke Naymes and the twelve peers, did such admirable exploits by
their chiual^ie, that had it not been for the invincible prowess of Meruine,
the Pagans had not stood one hour before them, albeit they were three hundred
thousand: so exp^rt and wise in warrelike actions was Charles. All this while
the battle increased: at last Charles incountered with Malegrape, to whom with
Joyous his excellent sword, he gave such a blow that he divided him to the
navel, and withal cried, Courage Mountioy, Saint Denis. When Iuorin beheld
Malegrape, slain, he thrust himself against Charles: but the emperor gave him
such entertainment, as he fell dead to the earth backward: after him, another
and another. The duke Naymes imitated themperor as near as might be, who
incountring Gaifier, cut off one of his arms, and Gautier that had but newly
seen the death of his father, like a mad man did wonderful actions: neither
was Moysant nor his son florion short of praise worthy commendations. As for
the good king Karaheu, he was in the midst of the battle, where he incountred
king Mermont, unto whom he gave such a blow* that he killed his horse under
him, and he had then bin taken prisoner, had he not cried Montment, so loud,
that Meruine heard him, who thrusting his mare forward, orethrew all between
him and Mermont. No sooner was he seen but all soldiers gave him place, so
well they kn^w, and were acquainted with him, only king Karaheu stowtly
withstood him, and struck so mighty a blow on his target, that in the midst
he cl^ue (...) asunder. Whereat Meruine was much grieved, and in qu^^al gave
him such a blow with Entrant, that he claue him to the jaws. Thus was king
Karaheu (whose like hardly suru^ued) flaine by Meruine: who afterward was by a
general Counsel canonized a S. and called saint Karaheu. Many miracles were
done after the battle, which I may not report, but must return to Meruine,
who still conquered where he came. Amongst the rest, he slew a kinseman of
Charlemaines, for which the emperor being displeased, and seeking reuengement,
encountered a pagan whom he overthrew, and had flaine, but for the rescue of
many soul^iours. Terrible was the battle, both of the one side and the other.
Notwithstanding that our Christians were few in number, yet their spirits so
often redoubled, that their hands were bathed in blood continually, Gautier
straue ^till to revenge his fathers death. Meruine to increase his conquest, by
hap he incountred with therie of Dampmartin, throwing horse and man to thearth*
and taking him prisoner, bound him with cords. Then came the earl of Labrec to
revenge Dampmartin: but the gentle Meruine soon unhorsed him, and took him
prisoner.

3 At which Mermont rejoiced, because he was the xv. prisoner Meruine had
taken: so greatly were the ^hristians viscoraged by the prowess of Meruine, as
they now began shamefully to fly for their safety, and save twenty thousand
that still were re^olued, not a man would stay to sustain battle. Whereat
Charlemaine sorrowed greatly saying, their shames should not follow him but
their own confusions: which done, desperately he ran into the midst of the
battle and D. Naimes after him, effecting greater miracles than before.
Meruine rode triumphantly, and in the end met with the Count Villiers, the
earl of Flanders, and the (...) peers: amongst them began along fearful, and
a doubtful battle, but in the end, for all things are subject to fortune,
they were every one taken prisoners: so as of the christian host remained no
more commanders but themperor Charles, and duke Naimes, who defended themselves
gallantly against their enemies. Meruine seeing Charlemaine, he fell in love
with his virtues, saying: O Mahomet, bow down thine eyes, and behold (...)
invincible christians: and then moved with one envious love, and alone, le^t
envy should wrong so excellent perfection, cried to the common soldiers, upon
pain of death not to touch them: which commandment they obeyed, for they
durst not gainestand. Then Meruine opposing himself against them with
honorable speeches, the true badges o^perfect magnanimity, he said: Princes,
yield your selves, when Fortune can avail to no more conquest, and enrich me
with your names because many pagans have told me the arms you bear do belong
to France, and that one of you also is the emperor. Thou say true, (said
Charles) and know, my name for dread of any Sarazen was never changed: Charles
is my name, Charles that rules Rome, France, and all Christendom: and ^his
is duke Naymes, the nearest to me in counsel and affection, therefore stand
upon thy guard, and approach us not, for here will we live, and here will we
lear^ to die. Who first presents himself to be our tutor, shall never have
other priest, surgeon, or sepulcher. At this speech a pagan king rusht to duke
Naimes, giving him such a blow as he struck him to the ground: but the duke
quickly recovered his feet again, and mad with that amazement, sent him back
such a requital, that the Pagan thereof died. And then were the Emperor and
the Duke assailed on every side freshly: who notwithstanding defended
themselves valiantly: insomuch that Meruine pitied them, and stood in doubt
whether it were better he should prevail, or they perish. At this he descended
from his mare, and embraced king Charles, to whom he said, Thou excellent
wonder of Knighthood, alas, thy defense is bootlesse, and I die, to think thy
fortune should perish: yield to him, whose pity thou ha^^ taken prisoner in
beholding thy virtue. Charles hearing this, and such honor in his enemy, said:
Thou glorious Almighty, that for their sin exiled Adam and Eve from paradise,
comfort, and coun^ell me: and with that he yielded himself to Meruine, only
desiring him to balance his honor* not by the foil of his overthrow. Sacred
emperor (quoth Meruine) fear no misfortune, thy thraldom shall be but thine own
pleasure: then receiving his sword, and taking off his helmet, delivered him to
a band of the noblest Pagans* to whom he gave so special charge of adoration
and reverence, that like a demie-god he was deified. Duke Naymes seeing
Charlemaine taken, deliuerd his sword to Meruine. Thus was the emperor Charles,
duke Naimes, the xij peers, and xxxiiij noble christians taken prisoners, and
all bound one to another, except the emperor, who had engaged his royal word
t^ Meruine, not to depart without his license. This being done, and that there
was not left a christian which was not slain or taken, Meruin went instantly,
and gave an assault to Babylon, but the citizens knowing it folly to withstand,
when their chief commanders were imprisoned, came forth, and delivered the
town to their mercy, bowing their neekes to the yoke of slavery, renouncing
the only true God, became misbelieuing miscreants. As soon as Mermont was
entered into the town he imprisoned Charlemaine and the other Chr^stians, in a
tower where they were safely guarded, as prizes of inestimable^ value: but king
Charles spent all his time in tears and such like lamentations. Alas, thou
maiden mother of the worlds saluations ought I alone to be the subject of all
misfortune? must my long admired honor die in so shameful a grave of
disparagement, and must my rule that stretched beyond Europe and Asia, be her
self contained in a square of this little compass. If so it must be, it is my
sin, and happy I, if it alone be chastised for my transgressions: thus spoke
king Charles, whose bird flourished like a white palm tree. Meruine having now
alittle repasted himself* called together the pagan kings and princes, saying:
My lords, this place we must make no place of repast or banqueting, because
s^uggardise is hateful to the honor, whereto we covet to aspire: wherefore
prepare your selves presently to depart, for I will not rest till I have taken
Mesques and Jerusalem, and brought the whole countries thereabout to our
subjection, and taught the people to adore no god but Mahomet. Lord Meruine,
said Mermont, thy will shall be our guide, and thy courses shall direct us: Then
sending their drums and trumpets about, and sommoning their bands together
triumphantly, they departed from Babylon, and so restless continued in their
marchings* that they shortly appeared before the walls of Me^ques, to which
they laid so fearful a siege, and gave such marvelous assaults, as in few
days they took the town putting man, woman, and child to the sword, except
those that willingly fell down and adored Mahomet. Thus Meruine made himself
lord and master of Mesques, dor he had a desire to rule in that city: yet he
would needs forward to Jerusalem. So he made a Pagan his lieutenant to rule
only in his name: and with the greatest pomp that might be, before his
departure, crowned himself king of Mesques.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 How Meruine and the Pagan host came before Jerusalem, 2 How the citizens
rendered up the town. 3 How Meruine refused to enter into the city, but
returned to Babylon, at which many of the pagans murmured.
AFter Mesques was converted to the damnable belief of Mahomet, and Meruine
had established it for his own government, he would not sleep any occasion,
but charged all his army to be in readiness, for that forthwith he would march
to Jerusalem, to make himself lord of that mighty town and the country
thereto adjoining. When Mermont heard him, and saw the desire he had to spread
their law through all nations, he said: O Mahomet, how great are thy works,
that from the loins of the poor merchant Barbin, have ^aised a glorious
branth, to exalt thine honor, and to bring all Christendom to subversion?
This spoke Mermont in the hearing of Meruine, to whom he did all the reverend
honors might be devised: but in soul, both he and all the Pagan princes
extremely hated him, because the honors wherewith they shined, were but
borrowed from his splendour. And for that their labors could never attain to a
perfect end, yet they durst not but obey him, fear, not love being their
ruler. All things being now prepared, they departed from Mesques, and marched
with such prospe^ous expedition, that they came before the noble and ^acred
town, where the Lam^e of (...) all glory suffered his death and passion for
the worlds redemption.

2 As soon as Meruine behold it he practiced it and imm^diatly prepared for so
strong and dreadful assault: so that the poor Christians beholding their
imminent danger, held a counsel, and concluded to deliver up the keys of the
city: wherefore coming forth, and casting themselves prostrate before
Meruine, they said: Dread Lord of our lives and beings, behold, we the chief
rulers of this haples town, render ourselves to thy gracious mercy* delivering
to thee, as to our liege lord, all our possessions, promising to serve thee
loially, and to hold thy faith law, and religion. Meruine hearing them,
replied, Citizens stand up, and be courageous, for your peace is concluded in
an happy hour. Assure your selves from the honor of my reputation, neither
man, woman nor child of this town shall be damnified: so return in all peace,
and be loyal: for not a soldier shall come within your gates, but we will all
return unto Babylon: then turning to the host, he commanded them to take up
their pauillions, and march toward Babil^n.

3 At this all the Sarazens were mischieuously agr^eued, and with private
murmuring, railed upon Meruine, who to their troubles would allot no ending but
notwithstanding, all they set forward, and by the restless labor of many
days and nights, at last they arrived at Babylon, where they banqueted and
reposed themselves, the space of (...) days. After it happened upon a day, that
Jacob the merchant came to Meruine, and said: How now my lord, how walks love
in your thoughts? what, is he utterly exiled? is there n^ remnant of memory
left to preserve the perfectio^s of beutifull Berea? Ha Jacob (said he) more
then thy blunt senses are able to measure* but why do thou now examine me
upon this holy article? For this (said Jacob) that if absented time have not
shut excellency in doubtfulnesse, then would I have you, that you may by it
bind her love in a more eternal band of affection. Take Charles, his twelve
peers, and the rest of thy prisoners, and as the conquests of thy sword and
her beauty, deliver them to her sacred majesty, that she may dispose them,
until they return from France, and those other countries, which already thou
have subdued, and of which in ensuing time thou shall be king and ruler. Jacob
quoth Meruine, thou have tutored me to my contentment, and thy councelis as an
Oracle: for to her and no other my self and my sword is devoted. As they were
thus conferring Mermont entered in, who with a lowly, yet kingly adoration,
saluted Meruine, and more would have done, if he knew, to have done, more for
fear he stood in toward him, than for any religious affection he bare him:
and then said; My lord quoth Meruine, it behooues you now to think of your
expedition into France, and to dispose of these christians you have already
taken. Said Meruine, if your Majesty will walk into the great hall, where
the rest of the pagan princes are set in counsel, we will discuss of this
affair. Meruine calling the jailer, commanded him to fetch the prisoners he
had in charge. Insta^tly the Turk performed his will, and brought forth
Charles, the twelve Peers, and all the rest of the christian prisoners. As
soon as Meruine saw them he stood up and said, kings princes, and barons, My
will is, that these Christian prisoners be conveyed to the castle of Turgon,
until by my prowess I have conquered France, and all the famous countries
bordering her territories. How (said Gaudisse) or wherefore shall they be
thither haled? O what reason is in so doing? I tell you, their lives are
dangerous death they have deserved, and death by my will shall they have. Scarce
were his words ended, but another pagan rose up, saying: Meruine attend my
words. This many yee^s have I traueld my body, and wasted my revenues to effect
these conquests, and shall I now loose my g^erdon? part have I won of these
prisoners, my part will I have, and that part shall part with their lives at
this present. And I also, said another pagan, who was both rich in wealth and
strong in friends, and his name was Gratian: it is reason I have my part and
profit of these prisoners, otherwise princes, let us join together, and with
our swords divide them.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 How Merui^e would not consent to the death of the christians. 2 The great
battle which fell out in the palace. 3 How the christians aided Meruine, and
how the pagans came and cried him mercy.
WHen Meruin (and not without (...) saw the arrogancy of the pagans, and that
(...) force they would divide those spoils (...) them, which his sword only
had obtained, he was almightily displeased, and with a fiery countenance of
anger, told them, it should not be as they had deemed, but that in despite of
the proudest in that assembly, he would bear the christians to Montment: and
as divine trophies of his affection, he would present the^ to his celestial
Lady and mistr^sse, (as Jacob before had given him counsel) wherefore (said
he) if there be any pagan, of what estate soever, that speaks another word of
resistanc^, Entrant my sword shall be so equal a judge twixt him and me, of my
vengeance, that the rest shall be warned by his misforture: and then raising
his voice more higher, What (said he) will you divide the things belong to me
at your pleasure? I swear by mine homage to Mahomet, the proudst pa^a^ that
dares to contradict my will, or mislikes the intents of mine actions, shall
forfeit his head to my sword presently. As he thus spoke, K* Gratian rose up
who had about him a mighty band of sarazens, and swear by Mahomet, he would
kill Charlemaine, for he has been the scourger and tormenter of our religion.
Therefore (said he) this day will I take vengeance on his head* and not be
withstood by threats, or denied my pleasure by a boy, ye base son of a silly
marcha^t. At this word he went to king Charles, and took him by the beard,
which was whiter then snow, saying: false traitorous king, this day will I hang
thee like a thief, and withal stroke him with a cudgel.

2 Which was so unpleasant to the eyes of Mer^ine, that drawing Entrant his
sword, he struck king Gratian twixt the neck and the ear* with such violence,
that he chined him even to the girdle: but no sooner was that fatal blow
delivered but the whole army assailed Meruin with infinite violence: yet
miraculously defending himself* never striking in vain, so that from every
blow death ensued. There was amongst them another king, and cousin to Gratian,
who was the greatest setter forward of the sedition him Meruine overthrew dead
to the ground, and then began the battle to increase with huge horror against
Meruine, who like a madman laid about him here and there not sparing any.

3 When our christian princes perceived, that for their safety Meruin had
thrust himself into this dangerous adue^tu^^^ they concluded among themselves,
either to aid him, or p^^rish in attempting: and the^ thrusting themselves
before him they said, courage prince Meruine, this day we will die for thee,
for thou have been gracious to our misfortunes, and we will partake thine
ex^remitie. With that, they thrust them selves against the pagans with every
one a sword in his fist, making a fearful and bloody skirmish, from one they
cut his head, from another his arms, legs from the third, and generally, life
from the most they encountered. Charles in this battle behaved himself most
courageously, but Meruine more enraged then a long hunted bore, without regard,
made slaughter of al before him, and by the aid of the christians, quickly
win^wed the hall of living creatures. Meruine seeing this, said to the
christians: Lards, beware that by you no treason be^ide my fortune, for then
shall your vniustnes give shame to your valu^es. Prince Meruin quoth Charles, doubt
not our trustiness, who whilst we breath, will not fail thy fortune, and when
thou art conqueror be judge of our lives and deaths as please thee. After these
speeches they al issued out of the hal, and assailed the pagans on every side,
who with fear were so s^rprised, that they (...) not to what fortune to betake
the^* but cried out: woe alas, Meruin is enraged, he has forgot, Mahomet, and
is become a christian. Notwithstanding this Meruine and the christians pursued
them, and as the history says, slew 64. in a moment, which not a little
grieved Mermont, who now could not record any mean how to appease Meruine. At
last he called Barbin, and with tears besought him to cool the fi^e of his
sonn^s wrath: and then they two ioining together, went, and on their knees cast
themselves before him, whilst Mermont said: ^rince Meruine* for the love of
Mahomet and Barbin thy father, and in ruth of my tears whom sometimes thou
have called thy soueragine* appease thy just indignation, and I Will swear unto
thee by the host of Mahomet to perform thy will in all things, and if it be
pleas^ng in thy sight, henceforth become thy subject. By Jupiter, said Meruine,
thou have spoken in a happy hour, Rise father* and rise king of Montment, mine
anger shall break, if my wrongs be amended. Then turning to the christians, he
said, Princes, return into the hal, for a t^uce shall be concluded, and my will
no more neglected. No sooner had he spoken, but Charles and his peers, retur^ed
into the palace, and Meruine with an angry look said to the pagans: Princes,
imagine me not satisfied, though I show a relenting: for by my right hand, my
servants death shall not be dismissed, till the proudest of you all, upon your
knees* come and cry me mercy. At this, all the pagans cast themselves on their
faces before him, and with one voy^e cried, have mercy upon us invincible
prince Meruine, and thy will shall be the law to rule us and our nations. Here
pity took place in the eyes of Meruine, and raising them from the earth, gave
to them new peace and comfort. Which done, he bade them arm themselves to
guard those christians to the castle on Furgon, which is situate within
Montment, where he intended to detain them till his return from France and
her neighbor countries, where he meant to ruinate their abbeys, and burn the
monasteries of ancient foundation: this done, they ran and kissed his feet in
sign of their subjection, glorying that by him they and their laws should be
so highly exalted. Thus triumphed they with proud hearts, but I fear me within
short space they will have other resolutions: for even now almost is the sacred
^^nger of the dial, upon the hour in which Meruine shall know, who is his
tru^ father, and the royal descent of his glorious pedigree: a history more
delectable to hear, then those iarring tumults already ^u^r passed.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 How Meruine departing from Babylon, brought Charlemaine and the other
Christians to the castle of Turgon. 2 Of the apparition of the angel to
Charles. 3 How Meruine knew himself to be the son of Oger, and the fairy
Morgue.
THe history reports, that during the time that Meruine was in Babylon (where
he brought the pagans and Sarazens to such subi^ction, that his very looks
commanded them to all humblenes) the good king Charles who many times with
zealous admiration beheld Meruine, at last imagined him so lively to present
the image of Oger, that he could not choose* but one day said unto him prince
Meruine, I know not thy descent nor generation, but of what or whence soever
thou art, believe me thou do so lively resemble the most victorious duke of
Denmark prince Oger, that were but hair discovered upon thy youthful ch^nne,
I would have said, thou had been no likelihood, but the selfsame most
excellent creature: for of my soul there is not the greatest master painter in
the world that can so vere^y (...) his per^ra^t as thine own looks: neither
dis^aine (...) to him thou art compared, for that never yet in any battle
(...) there pagan, (...) or Sarazen, that by manhood was able to resist him.
It Is most true, said duke Naimes, and the twelve peers also*

When Meruin heard the^, he said, I know no^ well my (...), what my self am,
but many as well Saraze^s as christians, who have seen the duke Oger have ever
compared me unto him, so that my self am in love with him to whom my self am
so often compared. After diverse other such like discourses, Meruine commanded
the Christians to mount them selves on horseback, and then coming to Mermont
and Gaudisse, he said, I will my Lords that you stay here in Babylon till my
re^urne, whilst I convey these christians to the ^astle of ^urgon where they
shall be safely imprisoned, and I will leave the keys with beautiful Berea,
whom until my return I will make their Empress. Prince Meruine (answered
Mermont) be all things as pleases thee, for willingly we will stay to attend
thy pleasure. This spoke he with a servile humbleness, rather inferd from
fear, then issuing from a certain love. Thus Meruine and with him 4000. of
the best esteemed Pagans, took their journey toward Turgon* whither the
heavens and all the gracious aspects of well portending Planets happily guide
him, because he shall never return to Babylon, till he be made a divine and
religious Christian, rooting from the face of the earth both Mahomet and all
other false gods, and only lifting up in most hie exaltation the Name of the
everliving JESUS. So prosperously they iourneyd that anon they came within the
sight of Montment, where Meruine calling Jacob, sent him before taduertise
Berea of his approaching: who with an entire zeal performed his commandment.
And after he was entered to the town, he ascended the Pallais, where he found
the only star of perfection Berea, whom with low humbleness he saluted, and
reported the coming of Meruine, the bringing of ^ing Charles of France, the
twelve Peers, and diverse others whom his invincible prowess had made
captives before the walls of Babylon. Berea hearing this had al her s^nces so
suddenly ouergone with joy, that from her amazement issued nothing but great
wo^^er. But Drohes wh^ sadly had given attention to his discourse, dissolved
his hearts blood in water from his eyes, and with extremity of passion thus
exclaimed, O thou true God of glory, how speedily shall the ruin of France fall
upon her bosom, since Charles and the twelve peers, the columns that sustaind
her, are broken by Meruin, whose unspeakable magn^ni^itie nothing has force to
resist^ Many other tears of sorrowful meanings fell from good knight Drohes,
who for the love of Charles seemed to pine^ with lamenting. Now the day being
grown by many hour^s aged, Meruin and his train entered the city: thence he
went to the Palace where Berea most royally guarded came down and met him:
between them was an encounter of hie delicacie, their arms locking together
their lips, and from their lips interchangeably breathing their so^les into
each others bosom. Many pretty questions they had of each others safety, many
oracles of their fortunes and many histories of their loves, the legends whereof
lasted, till they were returned into the great hall of the Palace. Then were
the Christians conveyed to the castle of Turgon, and safely imprisoned, all the
Peers being most disconsolate.

2 Only king Charles from whom no misfortune would take away the title of a
royal spirit, and whose faith in the living God was ever immovable, cast
himself on both his knees to the ground, and with lift up hands, and erected
eyes thus prayed, Glorious God, that for our sins* and for our salvation
vouchsafedst thy life by thy death and passion, thou that the third day rose
again and ascendedst into heaven, thou that deliueredst Adam and the Prophets
which had attended thy coming also, as this is true, and on it my faith is
grounded, so I beseech thee be my deliverer from these gates of ill chance and
bondage. When king Charles had made this short petition in honor of the holy
Trinity, he kissed the earth three times. And then as he was in rising there
appeared to him an angel of light, who blessed him with this happy salu^^^^^
Noble king Charles, be not abashed, for that power which hitherto has
succored thee will no^ now refuse thee, who by me assures thee, tomorrow thou
shall be delivered by Meruine, (...) the son of Oger (...) strong in thy
says and take comfort. ^his said the heavenly ambassador (...) from his
presence, and the emperor (...) thanks, rose up, and (...) the vision to the
nobles, who called home joy to their hearts* and gloried in their adventure.
Meruine this (...) a private chamber with Berea and Jacob the merchant: and
Gratiana the fair^^ had withdrawn her self to behold Drohes in another
chamber, where he rent his garments, ^are his hairs, and lamented exceedingly,
crying out, that Meruine, in whom virtue was only beautiful, would be the
utter overthrow of virtue that had made him beautiful^ Ah (said he) now shall
Truth sleep again with Oblivion, and Time shall consume in mourning for his
daughter. Ha, Charles, Charles, thine affliction is my torment* and thy
disgrace the death of our religion. This said, he fell down to the ground,
wr^ng his hands, and with dumb sorrow exceeded all speaking lamentation. After
Gratiana had beheld his infinite formentings* and with-all entering into
consideration, that from Meruine issued this almighty misery, and she the
cause why Meruin made them so miserable, without any word speaking, she
departed from the chamber, her heart even wounded ^o death with the terror of
others mourning, and coming into an a^bour whither every morning Berea was
accustomed to come, she there continued all night, using such strange actions
of unusual sorrow, that if some divine power had not guarded her wees, she had
there dispaired and died. Early in the morning according to her wont, gentle
Berea, came to the arbor, and beholdi^g (ere she approached) strange signs of
distemperature in Gratiana, staid alittle to see the issue, and with that she
heard her say, Thou true God of immortal glory have mercy upon me* whose
infinite evil deed is almost run beyond the race of all pity: and then she
swouned, recovered, and freshly lamented* After this Berea came unto her, and
demanded a reason of her passion, to whom she said, Ha madam, my torments be
worthy no end, because the ill I have committed is without measure. And then
she recounted unto her all she had done against Meruine, his birth, her envy,
his stealing away, her arrival in these parts, and what besides, whence these
ill turns were succeeded. Alas madam, said she, my sin is worthy no
redemption* nor my sorrow any eye of pity* the rather because I have from him
kept ever obscured this which to you now I have revealed, neither dare I at all
make known his fortune, lest he should kill me for my treason therefore madam
let your heavenly tongue bear to him the embassage of his birth and lineage,
whilst from hence I fl^e into some forsaken desert, where never man or woman
shall m^re behold me or my misfortune.

3 Not so answered Berea, since my love twixt him and thee shall make a peaceful
conclusion if thou will stay here and dilate to his own ears his offspring. I
will madame, said the* and forthwith Berea went where she found Meruine, about
whose neck when she had foulded her arms, she said, Sweet love, I pray thee
grant me one little little petition. What ever it be said he, it is granted,
be it the greatest thing the world contains. Then, said she, I beseech thee
be not offended with any of thy forepassed fortunes, neither with the causers
of thy destiny chiefly with Gratiana, who will repeat to thee the truth of thy
descent and pedigree. Why lady (quoth she) should I be offended for my birth? I
know I am the son of a merchant, neither am I ashamed of that lineage, because
my (...) me higher in the world than the son of the greatest Sowldan. Walking
along with these discourses, anon they entered into the arbor where they found
Gratiana, who repeated such stories of his fortune, as cost the lives of many
hundred thousand pagans and Sarazens: such was the valor of Meruine, who by
his powerful magnanimity descended even to the gates of hell, and made the
devil obedient to his sword* as shall be declared hereafter. Gratiana no sooner
saw Meruine, but she fell upon her knees saying; Prince Meruine, immortally have
I sinned against thee, and the li^e whence thou art descended, admire not the^
the wonders thou have achieved: for thou art by birth a Christian, and the
son of the most famous that ever drew sword with resolution, even the son
of Duke Oger, the never to be conquered Prince of Denmark, who begat thee in
the Fairy land of the royal borne Fairie Morgue: from her I stole thee, hither
I brought thee, and here until now have I kept in covert thy fortunes:
wherefore I confess my self worthy damnation, since by me, and by mine
occasion thou have ruined both thine own blood, and the glory of thy fathers
religion. When Meruine with great attention had heard her* he grew amazed, and
bowing down his head, stood dumb with admiration. At last, desirous to be
better satisfied, he said to Berea, How can this be? Believe me, I cannot trust
this newborn honor, if it be not proved more evident. Meruine (said the
Fairy, be my soul, which sobs with sorrow in my breast, all that I have said
is true, thou art the son of the most renowned Conqueror of the world, who
at this instant is in Fairy land with the princess thy mother. Now the great
devil (said Meruine) that conveyed thee hither, convey thee to hell for the
wrongs thou have done me, making mine hands the murders of mine own kin,
viper-like eating my glory from mine own friends destruction: live henceforth
banished of sunshine, and never ^^nd company but shame and darkness: how well
has every one compared me to Oger, making my looks an index to his virtues,
W^l, since I am assured of my descent, thanks to the Greatest that has sent me
this understanding, whom on mine humble knees I pray to pardon th^rrors of my
ignorant evils, and to add to my new spirit a new resolution, that these hands
of mine may tear down the evil I have exalted. Turning again to Gratiana he
said, Thou author of my ill fortune, tell me, am I baptized in the Christian
Law, or no? She answered him that he was, king Orient, and king Arius, and the
glorious Meruina, from whom his name was derived, being the witness to the
Sacrament. Meruine having weightily pondered on all the speeches of Graiana,
his displeasure grew mightily impatient, and he said, Malicsous, auant my
sight, and never henceforth dare more to behold me: for were it not my love and
oath binds me to this goddess of my service, instantly would I execute on
thee an infinite vengeance. At this angry discharge Gratiana depa^ted with
dying sorrow, from the presence of Meruine, and as the history reports fled
to a wast and unfrequented wilderness which bordereth upon Damatam, where the
rem^ined, and where we will leave her till some! better occurrent revoke her, and
we will proceed with renowned Meruine, who espoused Berea, on whom he begat
Orient the father of Helias that begat Idain that bore Godfrey of Bullen, as
it is written in the holy Legend of the same Godfrey. ()

CHAP. XXIX.
1 How Drohes instructed Meruine in religion. 2 How Meruine deliuerd
Charlemaine, and the twelve peers. 3 How Berea was baptized with the rest of
the city, and was named Mathaburna, and other accidents.
IMmortally valiant Meruine, when (as you have heard) he was assured of his
genealogy, which bred in him no little comfort, and the rather, because he was
a Christian, and the son of so famous a champion, yet he not a little
grieved, that by him the Christians were surprised and brought to so straight a
door of misfortune, wherefore his sorrow strangely increased, which Berea
seeing, she grew troubled, seeking (albeit in vain) many ways to recomfort
him: which seeing they auailed not, she went to Drohes, and discoursed all that
had chanced, a lively cordial that inspird with an inexpressable gladness, so
as without any tarriance, he went with her to the a^bour where Meruine lay
prostrate on the ground, beating himself with extreme languor* Drohes
beholding the fury of his passion, though at first amazed, yet ran to him, and
with true zeal o^ everliving intimacie, thus kindly chid him: Ha, quoth he,
thou glory of mankind, and flower of chivalry, whither is the virtue of thy
resolution fled, that thou lendst conquest to a weeping passion: What* will thou in tears drown thy body, and consume thy soul? Arise, arise, thou
excellentest of all creatures, and with a lively faith in the living God of
Abraham, ask pardon for thy sins, and the lamb of peace that redeemed the
world, will wipe out thy trangressions, since under the face of heaven, there is
not so boundless an offender, as God in his mercy is an almighty par^^ner.
When Meruine had heard Drohes, he rose up, and kissing his hand said: thou balm
of mine afflictions, and health to my sick soul, O pardon me I beseech thee,
the unlucky slaughter which on the sea I committed where I slew Galien thy
dear companion, the famous son of renowned Oliver, and the other christians,
otherwise I will sauefist that hand which sauefisted them in duty I should have
adored. Thrice dear friend replied Drohes) my inward soul has forgiven thee,
and then Drohes sat down and expounded to him many places of holy scripture,
and instructed him in all the points of christian religion, he declared how our
savior had a divine reside^ce in the sacred womb of the virgin Mary, and how
from thence he was delivered, she being both a mother and a maid. Then how at
the age of three and thirty ye^res he suffered death and passion to deliuet
mankind from the gates of hell and destruction: and the third day arising from
the grave, mounted into the doors of the highest heaven from whence he sent
down the holy spirit to inspire and recomfort his apostles. To be brief,
there was no point appertaining to salvation, which Drohes did not explane with
most heavenly eloquence. Berea that sat by, as soon as she had heard
discovered the mysteries and comforts of our religion, with a constant and
maiesticall modesty, rose up and said: bear witness princes, that here I
renounce Mahomet, Tauergant, and their Alcheron, and desire to be baptized, and
embraced for a perfect thristian. At this they all clapped their hands for joy,
and kissed the skirts of her clothing in token of reverence.

2 Then said Meruine, who through Drohes instructions was both resolved and
comforted, let us waste no more time but go and deliver Charles the emperor.
Forthwith they went, and coming into the castle, they found all our Barons
heavy and sad* but the emperor recomforting them with kingly resolutions.
Meruine no sooner came in his sight, but falling upon his knees, he said,
Royal king of France, and all you right noble knights of Christendom, pardon
me I beseech you, both mine error and mine offenses, to you I will be a liege
man and a subject: to these a never failing friend, in the hardest adventures,
whom in sign of ever living amity, I desire to kiss. Then arose he up and
kissed both the emperor and the rest, and after he declared how he was a
Christian borne, and the son of Oger the Duke of Denmark. Many other
discourses they had, and infinite reioycings, crying, the son of Oger is
become a Christian, woe to the Pagans and their false god Mahomet. Then issued
Charles and the rest out of the Castle, protesting solemnly the sack of
paganism: By my redeemer, said Charles, I will not rest, till I see the
Sarazens tremble under Joyous my good sword. As I am proud of my birth and
progeny (said Meruine) there is not living a pagan, how redoub^ed soever but
if he refuse baptism, he shall also refuse his life and being. This said, they
went into a chamber and armed themselves. Meruine caused a cornet to be winded*
at the so^nd whereof, the 4000. Pagans Meruine had brought with him, assembled
themselves in the base court of the palace: unto whom Meruine made this brief
speech. Fellow soldiers, admire not my speech but be rea^y in your resolves:
My will is, that every one of you be baptized, and become a christian, and he
that refuses, to die the death: choose either eternal life or destruction. The
wonder was not little* that these words cast amongst them, yet what through
f^are of his prowess, and terror to behold the christians at every point
armed: they agreed to obey him, both in the course of life and religion.
Meruine commended them, and forth with gave them charge to range through the
city, and to put all to the sword, that refused to receive baptism. The
christian peers of France were their fore-leaders, that spared neither man,
woman nor child, that would ^ot be baptized, so that in less than in an hours
space, all Montment was wholly converted. These things ended* Charles called
Meruine unto him, and asked if he would accept at his hands the honor of
knighthood. My lord quoth he, it is the only thing to which my thoughts have a
longing: then kneeling down, Charles drew Joyous his sword, and laying it on
his shoulder bade him rise up the most renowned knight under the firmament:
only be thou steadfast in thy faith, and raise high thy god and religion. Thou
earthly god of Europe (said Meruine) in the majesty of heaven, and before thy
royal presence, I make a vow, there shall not a pagan move his foot upon the
earth, if he renounce not Mahomet, and put his trust in the living God. And
what he vowed, he effected: for his conquests against the pagans doubled his
overthrows against the Christians, as (...) shall hear hereafter. Now had the
emperor Charles, Meruine, and the p^^res of France* so well managed every
occurrent, that the whole city of M^^tment was now wholly in their subjection.

3 Then was there a vessel filled with water which the Archbishop of Rheimes
having (...) they of the ^^tie were baptized therein, and the four thousand.
But before all, and above all, the most virtu^us princess Berea was baptized,
not by her ancient name, but by the name of Mathaburna. And when all the
cere^^nies belonging to that most blessed sacrament was finished, Meruine with
king Charlemaine and his peers, made a progress through the realm,
converting all to chr^^^ianitie, for not any durst gainsta^d Meruin whose
valor in those parts was almightily ^adord* so as even to the walls of Brandis,
was not left a breathing pagan. After this Meruin returned again to Mo^tment,
where he was godlike received of Mathaburna, who amongst other of their private
conferences, demanded when he would (...) pouse her, who returned this answer:
Lady goddess, and ruler of my thoughts and wishes, I have made a solemn oath
in the high parliament of heaven, not to marry any creature, till I have
reconquered back all that I have spoiled from the christians, and have set at
absolute liberty again, the four famous brethren and sons to the good king
Gaultier. My lord (replied she) be all thy decrees as immovable as desteny,
and I will attend the effects of thy extremst desire. Thus will we leave them,
king Charlemaine and the christians, and return to Bertran, Guion, Thierrie,
and Florion, Gaultiers 4. sons, who as you remember, were prisoners at
Damascus.

CHAP. XXX.
1 How by means of Guida the daughter of Baucamont, Bertran and his brothers
escaped imprisonment. 2 How king Bandus daungerously assailed them, and how
they maruelousty defended themselves.
YOu have heard in the story before, how the four gallant sons of Gualtier
were by Meruine, taken and imprisoned in Damascus: now further in the same
discourse he says, that Baucamont had one fair daughter named Guyda, who
with a most perfect affection was inamoured upon Bertran, and for his sake
often did repair to the prison, to do them honor and service, making the
days of their induraunce like the hours of a happy festival insomuch tha^ on
a time, as the brothers were in consultation, they said one to another, that if
they were but well armed, they would soon have the castle at their
commandment, and doubted not, but the God of h^^uen would so protect them,
that themselves would make themselves lords of their own liberty, and in this
they f^^nd no impossibility, since the Princess Guyda smiled on them with good
fortune. My lords (said Huon o^ Bordeaux) I will tell you what my soul
thinks: had I but half the loue-sicke thoughts hanging upon me, which I know
that Princess powers into the ^osome of Bertran, or would she, but as
privately converse with me, as I know she secretly weepeth her love to him, I
would in one natural day deliver both my self and my companions, yet without
impeachment of my love, or touch to her honor. Scarce was his last word ended
but Guyda entered into the chamber, who with a modest gravity (the cloud of an
impatient love) saluted them, and demanded of their welfare. Madam (said
Bertran) my health is in the hand of thy mercy: and but thou give end to my
sickness, there is no creature can preserve me from a sudden dying. When she
heard these speeches, with a frosty blush of a little wonder, she answered,
Prince, repose a while, and immediately you shall know, if help be in my
power. Then she went forth and called the Jailer unto her, whose name was
Corbun, and entreated him ^o bring unto her into an other chamber the Prince
Bertran* who was a little sick, that she might give physic to his evil. The
not mistrusting Jailer, with low bowed reverence* told her, he would perform
her pleasure, and forthwith called Bertran, telling him he must go to the
Princess Guyda, who attended for him. The very joy of those words made him
leap and caper through the chamber, whilst Huon with like show of iollitie
followed him. Then said Bertran, Huon stay here a little till I call thee:
Agreed said Huon: Then went Bertran to Guyda, and entreated that his friend
Huon might participate of his physic, for he is not well also. Prince Bertran
(said the Lady) with all my heart, so he be secret, for fear of danger. Fear
not excellent Madam (said he) for Huon is most loiall, most constant, and most
religious. Then she commanded Corbun to bring Huon unto her. Madam, said
Corbun, I dare not, lest I bring the life of king Bandus in question. Your
Ladyship is too bold in these rash adventures, and nurse mischief in gracing
these christians, I fear some evil will succeed this hazard: wherefore if Bertran
return not instantly, I will reveal his being to the king and your kindred.
Lady and my dear love (said Bertran) if not he, then I will perform thy
pleasure: and in so saying, he drew near to Corbun: to whom with his fist he
gave so mortal a blow, that he fell dead to the earth, without any word
speaking. When Guyda saw what he had done, she tare her hair, and sorrowed
without measure: but Bertran embracing her in his arms, whispered such
reconcilement into her ears, that he appeased her passion: and they slumbered
in divine contentment* either from other taking the delight of long wishing
hearts, and most dear was their delights to all Christendom: for in that
hour he begat on her a son, whose name was called Barrant, who was father of
Dolifern. Was there never creture more cruel^ or tyrannical: for that he slew
both his father and his mother, and brought upon Christendom lamentable
fortunes as you shall see hereafter. But to return again to Bertran: who
as soon as he had accomplished his will upon Guyda, he returned to his
brethren and said: Princes, now follow me, if you will revenge your selves
as well upon the Pagans, as I have done upon him who in these walls has
restrained us. At this they all pressed to follow him: to whom Guyda said, Ay
me Lords, what madness is in your thought? alas what will you do, but
overthrow you selves, and my glory? Madam (said Huon) content your self, I
know Prince Bertran so ^xceedingly loves you, that no fortune can divorce him
from you, so you will renounce Mahomet, and become a Chr^stian. Lord Huon (said
she) there is nothing I more desire: but it is past my capacity, how our
happiness shall be contrived, Madam^ (said Huon) I have found out the mean: let
us but have armor and weapons provided us* and there is not a Pagan living
that shall dare to deny va passage at our pleasure. As I am true to my Lord
and ^oue (said she) that shall be effected, and then she brought them into the
castle armorie, where was warre-like provision. So they armed themselves, and
desired Guyda to condu^t them into the bedchamber of king Bandus: to which she
consented. But a certain vassal Pagan ouer-hearing them, without tarrying
ran to the kings chamber, who then was a sleep, and beating at the door,
cried: My Lord the king, treason, treason: and thy death, if speedily thou
do not abandon thy chamber, the Christians are in arms, who fly with wings
of malice to work thy desti^ction.

2 King Bandus hearing this rauen-song, rose up, and calling his Nephew, said:
we are betrayed; let us fly for our succor. At this they ran forth of the
chamber, and came into a garden, where ^inding a little turret, they mounted
into it, and thence hcried, to arms: and raised a mighty alarm, their voices
sounded through all the palaces. The christians entered into the kings chamber,
but could not find him. Then went they from chamber to chamber* and slew the
Pagans, with whom they encountered: in brief they slew in their search above an
hundred persons, and then held the castle at their own disposing. After this
they descended to the gates, and thence sallying forth they were incountred
with king Bandus, who with many bands of approved soldiers, gave them a
courageous onset* between whom began a sharp, fearful* and bloody battle*
but the multitude of the Pagans so infinite^y increased, that the christians
were enforced to retire back into the castle, which in despite of the Pagans
they did: then fortifying their gales they ascended upon the walls to defend
them, if they should be assaulted, which indeed was done most valiantly on
every part, but the christians defenses were so sharp and dreadful, that the
Pagans prevailed not at all in their fury: Now God of his mercy be their
defender, for their quarrel is just and lawful.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Meruine after the conquest of many cities went to Damascus to deliver the
four brethren. 2 How Charlemaine refused Meruines company, because of Huon. 3
Of the great battle betwixt Bandus and the Christians.
Soon after that, Mermont, and the whole realm about it was by Meruin
converted to christian religion: king Charles, the twelve peers, together with
Meruine, made their expedition into the other countries bordering thereabout,
where they conquered more then four hundred cities and castles, bringing all
to the knowledge (...) Christ Jesus. Which do^e, they took shipping to make
^or Damascus, and Meruine said. Fly swift^y you laboring hours of the day,
and bring me with double speed to Damascus, that I may both confess my
error, and deliver from bondage my thrice excellent kinsmen, the four famous
brethren, and that renowned Huon of Bordeaux s^ peerless in his acts of
chiualry.

2 No sooner had Charlemaine ^eard him name Huon, but a mountain of
distemperature sent an ocean of angry blood into his fac^. And he said who, is
then that monst^ous traitor Huon, the (...) murderer of my dear son Charlot
in Damascus too? even by my crown, and soul of my deceased father, I will
bathe Joyous my sword in his heart blood. Brother (said Gautier) will the then
world add a villainous title to thy glory, because thy self bra^est the
covenant thy self made. You have banished him your ^ealme, and thence he is
departed. To m^ he came for refuge, and ^o me he has done those immortal
seruic^^, that whilst I breathe, I will never forsake him. By m^ ^^^pter
(said Charles) Gautier, thou have ever been (...) unto me, neither has thy
self, nor any of thy li^e (...) to my proceedings: wherefore, if I b^ Charles
of France, thou shall not long reign Gautier of Denmark^ M^ ^oueraigne (said
Naymes to Charles) why are you thus mightily vexed? Believe me, Huon is a noble
gentl^man, both wi^e and valiant, whom if he did you evil, forgive him because
it was honorable evil. But if your displeasure str^^ch beyond mittigation, yet
smothe^ it in this pl^ce* because you are bound to revenge it not where but in
your own kingd^^, and the rather, not now, because we are but the followers
of Prince Meruine. Naymes (said Charles) thou addest ^^ell to my fire, because
thou think never again to return into France: but if thou do remember,
I am Charles Meruine half angry at these civil debates* went about to appease
them, but finding his labor effectlesse through Charlema^nes wilfulness, he
said: My lord and emperor, since my oratory is so harsh in your ears, know that
neither for you, nor for your displeasure will I desist or break off the
enterprise I have undertaken. And then turning about Gaultier, (who knew the
Emperors anger was most against him) entreated Meruine once more to solicit
Charles to accompany them to Damascus: but Meruine by no means would be
persuaded, but raking his colors into his own hand, marched away without more
speaking. Charlemaine on the other part who was highly enraged against Duke
Naymes, and the twelve years, because they forsook him to follow Meruine,
departed an other way, vowing to God and his own soul, to lay waste and
ruinous, the flourishing country of Denmark, unless Gaultier on his knees
came humbly to ask him forgiveness, and to beg part on for releeuing the
damned murderer of his son: In this agony of high displeasure, Charles
marched so incessantly day and night, that at length he arrived at Maience,
where, in despite of Gaultier, he began to burn and destroy the country:
where we will leave him* and proceed with the acts of Meruine.

3 After the departure of Charles, Meruine made such expedition, that in few
days he arrived in the country adjoining to Damascus, where he began to conquer
and convert the nation til he came within the sight of Damas. It happened that a
certain currier Pagan, who had beheld the deeds of the Christians, posted
with all his power to Damascus, and coming before king Bandus, he said: My
lord and sovereign, to arms, for before the morning star shall again be
seen in the heavens, I assure you, you shall be bid strong and fearful
battle, a mighty army of the christians I have discovered, whose looks and
resolutions are both stowt and valiant. Meruine, who lately has renonnced our
faction, is the foremost leader, with him Gaultier, of Denmark, and dluers
others, only king Charles of France is absent, who (as I understand) for some
prinate displeasure has abondoned their companies, and is returned to his own
territories. Bandus was astonished at these words and charged the Pagan upon
his life that he spoke nothing, but what truth would justify. My Lord
(replied he* if I lie, let me die the death for further, Montment, and with her
almost 200 other cities are converted to christianity, even the princess
Berea her self has reuounced Mahomet, and is baptized by the name of
Mathaburna. Where then (said King Bandus) is Mermont her father? At Babylon
answered the Pagan. This while arrived an other Pagan King named Gorbant* who
having encamped his host in a meadow, arrived himself at the palace at such
time as the pagan was discovering the approach of the christians. This Gorbant
came to behold Guyda, the estimation of whose beauty was renowned through al
Asia, whom as soon as Bandus saw, he solemnly received, and the more, because
he was known for the most absolute valiant pagan that the^ lived, whose age
then had accomplished but thirty: and by his means Bandus flattered his hopes
with assured conquest. After diverse embracings, seeming knots of true amity,
Bandus declared the coming of the christians to besiege Damascus, and with
perswasiue arguments intre^ted his aid, stir^ing him more with inueying against
Meruin* who so l^^ely had renounced their god and Alcheron. ^o al his
entreaties Gorbant gave willing ear, and consented, vowing his uttermost
endeavors for the release of Damas. Al things concluded upon Bandus commanded an
alarm throughout the city, and having assembled his men at arms together,
he issued out of the ports in warre-like manner, and joining his troops with
the troops of king Gorbant, made one almost impregnable ar^^e. The Christians
this while were on the foreside of a great wood, through which they speedily
passed, and ordered battle Gautier looking upon them, and seeing the
diversity of their ensigns, he said: Good God, what strange nations are yond
that come to encounter us? A christian hearing him, made answer* (for he of
old knew the coat armor he beheld) my Lord yond strange iolious you see, of
my knowledge belong to king Gorbant: he whose valor and excellent approved
prowess, has placed him higher in Fames books then my Pagan whatsoever:
whose courage make dreadlesse of men, though he be assailed with many legions:
Is it true (said Meruine) that he is so wonderful in the deeds of chivalry?
Now to God I make a solemn protestation, that if I can but encounter him, I
will teach him such a bloody Letanie, that he shall willingly become a
christian, and bitterly curse the first hour of my nativity: this said, they
marched forward, and the Pagans likewise: to whom king Gorbant made many
orations of honor valor, and encouragement, debasing Meruine, and reuiling,
his backe-turning from his first known religion; but those railings will beat
on his own crest, and his mind will be changed if Meruine live, and Entrant
hold his virtue. When the armies were ready to join: a young squire named
Thyerrie, came unto Meruine, and made humble petition, that for the honor of
his God, he might be the first to give the charge in that battle. Meruine in
love with his forwardness, bade him pass on, and be fortunate. At that word
Thyerrie thrust spurs to his horse, and coming even unto the face of the
Pagans host, he said: What is there never a Pagan amongst you, that has the
spirit of valor to encounter me (who have contemtuously renounced your false
God Mahomet, and sworn to adore no name but the everliving Jesus) or try the
breaking of a lance in his religious quarrel? Traitor quoth the Pagan
Troulart, who was nephew to Gaifier) Behold, it is I will give thee battle, and
scourge thee for thine ouer-daring. And so saying, he disranged himself, and
brake his lance upon Thierrie with a gallant spirit: but Thierrie did return
him back such an encounter, that overthrowing both horse and man to the
ground, the Turk had never again risen, if one of his fellow Sarazens had not
flowne in to his rescue, who all at once assailed Thierrie with cruelty* while
he defended himself gallantly until the Christians came to his succour^ then
began the battle to be fierce and wonderful. The renowned Meruine broaching
the brave mare Mordant, ranged amongst the Pagans like an hunger-starued wolf,
or an enraged Lioness. Drohes with many acts of admriable chivalry that day
seconded him. There might ye have heard such clamors, such noise, and
tempestuous outrage, as if the clouds had resigned to the earth a greater
power, than the power of their thunder. In the midst of the battle Meruine
met with Thierrie, the valiant son of Bourchier, whom for the valor he
expressed in the first encounter, he embraced about the neck, and after
kissing him, gave him the sacred order of knighthood, saying: Hapfull bloome of
a happy issue, this hour I give to thee virtue: which virtue will cease to
flourish, when as it leaves to exalt the name of Christ Jesus: and then
departing from him, Thierry thrust himself amongst the Pagans, where he
showed his dalour to be augmented by the honor he had obtained. Gaultier all
this while made great slaughter of the enemies, being inflamed with a double
fury: the one of revenge for wrongs forepassed, the other of desire to see his
four sons, who during this battle were in the palace at Damascus, which by
the means of Guyda, they lately conquered. Guyda, with whom Bertran inioyed
all the ho^res of loves contentment: and were now recreating themselves upon
the leads of the Castle, from whence they might distinctly bear the clamors
of the battle. Insomuch, that calling up his brothers, he said: Princes, what
noise is this I hear about the city? Is it not like the meeting of two
invincible armies? Believe me I cannot alittle wonder; they all admired as
much. Then ascending up higher into a heauen-kissing turret, whence they might
meas^re the confines of all the country adjoining* they beheld the battle, and
knew the ensigns displayed by each party. Then cried out Bertran, This day
shall we be reputed shepherds, if we conceal our selves within these walls,
whilst our countrymen and kin^e before the city, for our sakes maintain a
dr^adfull bat^ell; for shame let us issue out, or forswear our names, and the
ancient disposition of our natures. Guyda hearing this, wrung her hands, and
with beteared eyes (then which there could be no better Orators) besought
Bertran to stay: but he ever resolved in honorable actions, made answer he
would quickly return. Bu^ Guyda from whom all hope and relief was exiled,
would not give credit to his words: but with tears of the bitterest
displeasure could be harbored in so fair a ma^sion, said he abused her: but if
Mahound were Mahound, she would revenge herself of his shameful departure.
Leaving her in this agony, the princes departed easily out of the gates of the
castle, because the garders of the same neither saw or heard her tormentings.
And when they were passed by, the Porters would have locked the gates, but
Bertran, whose spirit was mad for his love Guyda, with his sword drawn, come
to the chiefest which bare the keys, and gave him such an unrecoverable blow,
that he fell dead to the earth. Uillaine (said Bertran) the devil take thy
soul, I will be thy Porter whilst thou take thy rest This seen, diverse
other Pagans assailed him: but his brethren, and the valiant Huon, brought to
him such powerful rescue, that in less space than an hour they had sent
thirty to sleep with their forefathers. The pagans seeing this, fled from
their violence, and they marched ^o the battle: whither as soon as they were
come, they cried with one voice, Unchristned dogs, this is the doomes day,
and last of your glories: and then began to show the unspeakable wonders of
their high valors, with such admirable deeds of arms, that the Pagans knew
them as well by their chiual^ie, as if their faces had bin bared. Now ha^ they
dispersed the battle, and the Sarazens began to turn their backs: insomuch
that the young Princes beheld and knew their father Gautier; to whom they came,
and falling on their faces, adored him as their earth-god, and second mean of
creation. When Gautier saw his sons, his unspeakable joy would not let him
speak, only silence was his best ambassador of boundles contentment. When
Huon saw this equal contention of Natures purest love, he brake their passions
with these words: My lords, banish these slow salutes, and think on these
deuotres. To arms the pagane cry, their deaths must be our glories: that
done, we shall have time to discourse of passed fortunes.

CHAP. XXXII.
1 How the Pagans were overthrown, and the Christians went and converted
Damascus. 2 How Meruine went after to Babylon, where Mermont and the other
Pagans for fear of him, fained to receive baptism. 3 Then how he went to
Mequa and Jerusalem, and converted them to Christianity.
AT this speech of Huons, the four brethren departed from their father, and
thrust themselves into the battle: leaving vndying Registers of their
everliving renown: Yet in the heat of the conflict there was a pagan called
Gryffoy, of wonderful great valor, and worthy every way, except for that
way, which should govern all ways, all the exquisite titles of a complete man
at arms. This Pagan well taught by proof the greatness of the Christians
spirits, with a battle-axe which he brandished in his hand, he stroke a
Christian, called Adrian, so mighty a blow, that he chined him to the breast:
and after him, another, and an other, till he had laid ten breathless under
him. Bertran giving aim to this slaughter, grew so impatient to behold his
countrymens effusions, that turning his sword aloft, he came and assaulted
Gryffoy with so mighty a stroke cross the helm, that cutting away his plume*
he entered more than an inch into his beuer: and with the blow so astonished the
pagan, that at that instant he had cut (...) his head, if an infinite ^^mber of
pagans had not in^ironed him, and assailed Bertran with numberles blows, and
desperate resolutions: insomuch that they forced him to recoile for his safety.
Then came Huon, and diverse other christians, who retaind Bertran, and that in a
lucky hour: for then was the battle most sharp and doubtful: there might
you have seen many knights on every side ouerturned, horses wounded, and men
at their wits end: some flying, some dying, and some amazed. The gentle
knight Meruine, this while on the other side of the field, approved his valor
to be strange and irresistable: for he lost not a blow, in which death had no
interest: so resolute were his proceedings, that now the pagans were at the
conclusion of their glories, and had been wholly disco^fited, if the valiant
king Gorbant, in that very hour had not arrived with an army* which by the
eyes account could not be l^sse than a hundred thousand: king Gorbant marched
before his army, mounted upon the beast Montehaut, which was valued before all
the hor^es in Painime: and like to lightning gave a charge upon our Christians,
breaking their ranks, and dispe^sing their battles, so as in less then an
hour the christians had almost lost the hope of their good fortunes* for
Gorbant ere he brake his lance, brake the necks of vij Christians: and with
the strange valor he was adorned, so gallantly behaved himself, that the
common sort of Christians were not able to endure him, but began to fly. But
Meruine ashamed to see their dishonours, demanded a reason for their flight.
To whom one of them, whose name was Vincent, made answer. My Lord, there is
newly arrived some God or devil, in the habit of a Pagan, whose force is so
irresistable, and his blows so huge and insupportable, that fr^^ his hands
issues nothing but our deaths and destructions. I pray thee said Meruine, with
all speed conduct me to the party. Not for a kingdom my Lord (said Vincent)
for he is altogether invincible, and mine eyes shall die if they behold him. At
these words Meruine would not stay, but thrust him self amongst the Pagans to
find out Gorbant, who was then in the prease, and had newly incountered with
knight Drohes, whom he beheld respectively, and the rather, for the beauty of
the gallant steed Marcheuall, so that he said^ unto him: Boy, descend from that
worthy horse whereon thou art mounted, lest while I chasti^^ thy folly, I wound
the horse, with whose comeliness I am highly delighted. Drohes hearing
himself so basely entitled, with a reuengefull fury joined himself to the
Pagan, and struck him thwart the helm with all the puissance he was able, yet
made the Pagan move no more than an oak or a mountain: in requital whereof
Gorbant repayed him so heavy an interest, that the blow slipping from his
be^uer, desc^nded upon the horse, and cut his head from his shoulders so that
the good beast Marcheuall fell unto the ground in a moment Drohes more
astonished with wonder than with fear, lightly raised himself again, and
drawing his sword, said: O God, this pagan is undoubtedly strong, who has
slain my horse, but if I die unrevenged, let my knighthood forsake me. This
said, he ran against the Pagan, led by a tempestuous fury, but was prevented
for striking, by means of Monthaut, who with the thundering noise of the
horses feet, came running thither: and also at the same time came Gaultier, and
sundry other Christians, wh^ with all their powers assailed Gorbant, which with
so excellent resolution defended himself, that the slowtest strained courtesy
to approach him: yet notwithstanding, in that time Drohes had so gallantly
borne himself, that he had now recovered another most famous horse, upon which
being mounted, he came to assail Gorbant, that even then had brought to the
ground all that incountred him, giving such vigor unto the dead spirits of
the Pagans, that the christians were almost amazedly vanquished. During this
homage, Meruine was on the other side of the field, where he approved his
divine excelencie of valor upon king Bandus and his army* whose numbers being
numberles* stroke the beholders into admiration: whereas alas the christians
were but xxv. thousand at the beginning, and now but ij. thousand at the
co^clu^^on At which Meruin grieved not alitle, vowing never to return, if
either he got not a crown for victory, or a tomb for burial. Then doubling
strength upon strength, he so lion-like ranged among his enemies, that even as
the corn before the shearers sickle, so ^ell the pagans one upon an other,
dead and discomfited: not to dwell long in this discourse, so immortal was his
valor that the pagans were half dead with the astonishment of the glory.

In the end, as he ranged to and fro, he arrived in the place where Marcheuall
lay slain: which when he saw, and knowing him both by ^is largenes and
beauty, he immediately imagined Drohes had there written the last end of his
life's Legend, so that not able to suppress sorrow grown in his breast,
Giant-like almighty he cried out, alas* alas, art thou gone my love, art thou
dead my champion? be my life cursed, and here vanish the praise of my
knighthood, if I tyrant-like revenge not this infinite unhappiness. This said,
like unto a peale of thu^der, or to a stormy tempest in the midst of Winter,
he ran amongst the Pagans, even from one side of the field unto the other,
and where he espied the greatest number, thither flew his greatest fury, the
which he dispersed, so like unto a forsaken flock, that being at their wits
end, they knew not which way to turn them. In the highest of this ^urmoile,
Meruine espied Bertran to be dismounted from his horse, who being on foot,
maintained a more then knightly comba^e against Gryffoy, and an hundred other
Pagans, to whom aloof he hallowed this encoura^^ ^^^* Beauty of thy fathers
house, this day shall be th^^e h^^^rs festival. Take ^ourage, take courage
fair Prince: for the Pagans fly dist^aught and vanquished. These cordial
speeches so lively uttered, inspired Bertran with such new spirits, that
bearing himself against a Pagan, he stroke horse and man dead to the ground
without word speaking. The next to him he likewise dismounted, and arresting
his horse, leapt into the saddle, effecting wonders in the pagans destructions*
who like kids from the wolf ranue fearful at the sight of Meruine, seeking
by running, the stain of Honor, to save that which should maintain honor.
Meruine, like himself passed from rank to rank, and never stayed till he
met with king Bandus: to whom he gave a blow, that he cleft his shield to his
fist, and made it fall to the ground: which the king fearful to recover
(death being a greater fear) betook himself to flight also. Princely Meruine
passed along, to find out Gorbant (the only excellent amongst his enemies)
vowing upon him to lay the burden of his wrath. And as he was searching, he
incountred Thierry the son of Bouchier: unto whom he said, Fair young knight,
know thou if near hereabout, be that famous pagan, who this day had been
our vengeance and half destruction. O, if thou can, show him me, and make me
happy. Follow me, said Thierrie, and then they went together, making Death
their servant smoothe their way to the place where Gorbant was, who had that
day been the ruin of the Christians. No sooner was Meruines eyes fastened upon
him, but boiling with rage, he thru^^ forward to strike him: but the Pagan
turning himself from the blow like the falling of a mountain, it fell upon
the gentle knight Thierrie (whose over hasty valor bare him twixt them.) with
such and so great infortunacie, that it overthrew the man, yea and claue the
horse into two pieces: which to Meruine was no small grief, who grew mad to
revenge his own m^^^^ing: but Gorbant by that witness, knowing his pit^ilesse
omnipotency, and seeing his army ^^ie from him on every side, thrust his spurs
against the sides of Monthaut, and in a moment was fled from the presence of
Meruine, who all alone stood wondering at his flight, and his own mischances.
The pagan made his flight toward Damascus, his burning heart desirous to have
possession of the beautiful Guyda, in whom he had placed all his affection,
whom he finding, after many embraces, he mounted her on his hor^e* and bare
her to his ships. Guyda not r^pelling much his inforcements, because as then
she was offended with Bertran, both because he had most unkindly left her, and
was also one of the sons that had slain her father, and the rest of her
royal kindred. Thus fled king Gorbant, who met with Bandus, Gryffoy, Grisoner,
and with ten thousand Pagans, all which, to save their lives, were fled to the
seaside, unto whom Gorbant cried, Away princes, away, for he that is tardy in
flight, shall be first and swiftest in his death. At this speech, fear lent
wings to their heels, and they al imbarking themselves, gave their safeties to
the mercy of the sea. Those which remained behind, the Christians p^t to the
sword. When the chase was finished, our Christian Princes went toward
Damascus to assault it, but the Citizens issuing from the ports, brought the
keys, and with submission delivered them to their mercies, so that Meruine,
Gautier, and the rest of the Christians entered, who by means of that battle
were not above 200. After they had reposed themselves a while, Gautier called
unto him his four sons, and said: Princes, know you to whom the offerings of
your honor is due, or who it is that from the days of your unhappiness has
restored you? behold, it is this princely and heroike Meruine, the son of
your renowned uncle duke Oger, and then he discoursed at large to them the
wonders of his prowess, the taking of Charles, the overthrow of the twelve
peers, and al their imprisonments. To be short, he ran through all the
chronicle of Meruines heroical actions, and how Charles discontentedly was
returned into France for the hate of Huon. Huon hearing that word, as rackt
with his own infortune, he said: O God, when shall the hour come to bind me in
perfect peace with that famous emperor? Huon having thus said, he, Gautier, and
the four brethren did honor to Meruine, who returned them praise for praise,
thanks for thanks, vowing to aid them against their enemies. Thus was the joy
unspeakable among the Christians, making hours like minutes vanish by their
pleasures. Next morning, Meruine caused all the citizens of Damascus to be
christened, and whose refused, to be put to the sword. This done, he caused all
the country adjoining, to come in, and be baptized: whereto all the nobles
accorded. These things finished, Meruine called Florion, and said: Cousin, for
thy beauties sake, I give thee this city of Damascus, and the whole realm
about it, accept it kindly, as I give it willingly: and then he made all the
nobles and citizens swear homage and fealty to his Crown* and for a guard to
his person, left him those 200. Christians, which the sword had preserved,
mustering for himself out of the city and country two thousand that hardly
before had born arms.

2 After that nights repast in the city, Meruine, Gautier, and the other
princes departed from Damascus, and marched to a village two leagues from
Babylon, where remained Mermont. Gaudisse, who by many intelligences knew all the famous deeds of Meruin, and how he was then come to besiege them, of which
they stood in fear, called a counsel together, where they disputed what way
was best for their safeties: Princes said Mermont, our arguments must be
brief, and out resolutions speedy, for otherwise we shall lose our
inheritances with our disputations, and our lives by flouthfulnes, for well we
know Meruine is wise and invincible: for my own part, to me he did the
greatest indignity, though I were the first that made mountainous his honor,
for he has slain my men, baptized my daughter, yea, and will espouse her, if
heavens prevent not my disgraces: yet so I know him replenished with true
fortitude, that it is impossible to withstand him, if treason be not an agent
of our delivery. It Is true quoth Gotham, who was newly arrived in that city, it
behooues us to search out any mean for the restitution of our God and religion.
The mean quoth Mermont, I have already invented, and we will all be revenged so,
that babes unborn shall speak of his misery, and this it is: we will all
hang forth the ensigns of peace, and submissiuely yield to his pleasure, bow
at his feet, and flatter him with fained obedience: we will conclude against our
religion, and take upon us that they call Christianity: and that he may the
less mistrust us, shall be proclaimed through the city, our conversion: what
will of this ensue, shall be his ruin. The pagans applauded this resolution, so
they arose, and having effected what they would, took the keys of the city, and
marched forth with great joy toward Meruine, who so soon as he saw Mermont
and the other, he turned to Ga^tier and said: Behold with what joy the pagans
approach us, bearing in their hands witnesses of peace: How blessed is this
conquest that is without effusion, and how glad am I they are so easily
converted? Alas his innocence thought not of the treason they had invented. By
this they were come either to other, whilst the Pagans falling upon their
knees before Meruine cried, Welcome, O ten times happily welcome is Meruine,
the son of invincible Oger into this country. Then bespake Mermont: Thou most
wise* most strong, and valiant Prince, living in this or the immortal world,
behold, we fall down before thee, ready to receive and acknowledge thy law
and rel^igion every one most desirous of that celestial happiness, who
already have renounced Jupiter, Apollo, and Mahomet, under whose shadows we
have bin miserably conducted. When Meruine heard these words, he was joyfully
contented, more than at any time before he had bin, thinking that came from
sincerity, which indeed was nothing but treachery: wherefore embracing every
several prince in his arms, severally he said to Mermont: never did your
Highness your self so glorious reputation, as in believing in the immortal God
immaculate Christ Jesus. And since you have made me the blessed workman of this
high dignity, henceforth, as I have ever bin, hold me for your own knight
and true subject. Many other ceremonies was between them: and then they
marched on to Babylon, whose walls were repleate with joy, triumphs, and
banqueting. Then was a solemn festival held, and the Temples most
sumptuously adorned. Then was Mermont and all the other pagan Kings baptized,
who unwillingly went willingly to the sacrament, comforted only with treason
and false infidelity.

3 When all the kings and citizens in Babil^n were baptized, Meruine went thence
to M^qua, where in an hours space he caused all the country to be bapt^zed.
Which done, he went to Jerusalem, where easily he accorded all the citizens:
for albeit they were conquered, yet they had not forsaken chr^stian religion
only doubtful at the first, not knowing Meruins conversion they fained to
adore Mahomet, but knowing his will, they soon cast away that base believing.
These things thus effected, the gentle Meruine returned to Babylon, and made
all the country bordering there about become Christians: and whatsoever before
time he had grafted in hell, seeking paganism: for joy whereof the Christians
made many holy days, singing hymns in his honor, protesting him to be the
renowmedst that ere was borne of a mother. But on the contrary part, Mermont
lay working his imaginations, how to work vengeance on him whom the heavens so
exceedingly loved.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How by treason Mermont brought Meruine to Minor. 2 How Gautier after the
departure of Meruine went with all his army to Montment, where he found
Mathaburna, to whom he told how her father was become a christian. 3 How
Mermont spoke to Butor to imprison Meruine.
IT happened after Easter, that on a certain day king Mermont resolved to work
mischief on Meruin: and calling him to him, to blindfold his eyes, he said:
Son, it is not unknown to me thaffections twixt thee and my daughter, the
which is an usual joy to my imaginations: wherefore since no better good can
make better my happiness, I beseech thee let me know the day of thy espousalls,
a day, than which nothing is more desired. My sovereign king, said Meruine,
let the day be at your Highness disposing: and if it so seem pleasing, let us
to morrow rather than to day pass to that des^red conjunction. Willingly (quoth
Meruine: yet before, of necessity we must go to Minor unto the Queen my
sister whom by a solemn oath I have given assurance, that I will my self in
person come to inuit her to those gorgeous nuptials, because my daughter has
ever bin most dear in her regard and estimation: as for your army, that may
K. Gautier conduct before to Montment, and take order for all preparation
worthy in so great a solemnity. Well has your Majesty said (quoth Meruine)
let every thing be so disposed, and in the morning they and we will take our
several iournies. Willingly quoth Mermont, imagining with himself to bring
Meruin to a place whence he should never be restored. After this Meruine called
Gautier, to whom he told his resolutions, entreating him to convey his army to
Montment, his soul to his Lady and Mistress, and his happiness into her
bosom. Gautier at the first stood amazed, and besought him not to be too
much too trusty: and Drohes told him he was suspicious of some evil, under
this extreme familiarity. But Meruine, who adjudged every thought by his own
thinking, persuaded them otherwise, insomuch that Gautier, his wife, his sons,
Huon and Drohes, together with the army, embarked themselves for Montment: and
Mermont, Meruine, and a troup of traitorous confederats likewise took shipping
for Minor, Fortune being so favorable to mischance, that in short time they
came to their wished landing.

2 Then mounting upon their horses, they took the way that led to the city, in
which we will leave them and return to Gautier, and the other christians, who
doubtful of the mischiefs that followed, made such haste* both by land and
sea in their journey, that in short time they came to Montment, where they
found the miracle of Nature Mathaburna, who rejoiced at their coming. But when
her eyes were not hallowed with the sight of Meruine, her joy converted to
tears, and she demanded of Gautier, where her love, her life and substance
remained: forth with Gautier reported how her royal father was baptized, and
consented to her espousalls: to which end, he and Meruine were gone to Minor,
to fetch her aunt to be a glory to the festival. When Mathaburna heard this,
that her father was baptized, she praised God: but in that he had carried her
love to Minor ^hence issued doubts, fear and suspicions: and woe is me, it was
not without strong reason, for the place was dreadful and impregnable, the
description whereof follows, as is set down in stories Minor, as ancient
Chronicles do testi^^e, from whence this history is derived, is very strongly
situate: It has at the four corners four most high rocks or promontories,
of which, one exceeds all the other in height and hugeness, from whence
descends a mighty river named Orb, most wonderful deep, rough, and
contageons, it is guarded upon each side with a couple of rocks, between
which every one must pass to the city, by a narrow way but five foot in
breadth at the extremest, neither is there any way save that only: the
history says, that in the time of king Pharao, these rocks and this river were
made by Magike art, and this city named Minor founded as a thing impregnable:
for it has before the entrance four ports or passages strongly guarded, the
first is Auster, and it has a Pagan named Auroufe, fell and powerful
continually to defend and keep it. Oueragainst it is an other of the same
strength, defended by one even as strong and sufficient. The third is of a more
terrible fashion than these: for the gates are of iron, and next it a tower,
whose height seems to touch the heavens. After one has passed that gate, whose
name is Tombare: they enter into Minor, a beautiful city, washed upon every
side with the river Orb. Mermont and Meruine, by this time were passed through
the first port, who was much abashed to behold so strange a passage, and such
works of wonderful resistance demanding diverse questions of their hugeness:
in the end they incountred with Auroufe, who knowing Mermont since the bringing
of his sister into those parts, let him pass in peace, and Meruin also. Thence
they came to the second gate called Baucair: which when Meruine saw* he
demanded what devil of devilish ways that was, and when they should come to
the city; Fair son (quoth Mermont) you are abashed at the^e entrances: yet be
content, and we shall easily ouerpasse them. Then they went till they came to
T^mbar the last port, whose ghastly proportion made Meruine wonder more than
before: and demanded what fury of hell had exalted that Tower to threaten
heaven, sure it must needs fall, it cannot long ind^re. Yet (said Meruine) for
that the masonary is both strong and exquisite: and the rocks of each side as
supporters do maintain it. By my soul (said Meruine) this is a vilainous
situation: for I see not any way to issue or enter but this only. ^is true quoth
Mermont. Neither is there any creature whatsoever, that enters within this
portcullis, that can repasse without the leave of king Butor, or Gaiamy his
sister. This said, they came to the iron gate, through which they passed, all the
porters doing them great reverence. Thus far having go^e, they came into the
fairest and honorable city: which to behold, Meruine mightily rejoiced,
because till then he went in worse than starrelight. A certain pagan went
before to king Butor, telling him the approach of Mermont* wherefore he arose t^
go meet him, but his son Marant would not but withdrawing himself into a
private chamber, sat musing what occasion should draw thither his uncle, one
while he thought he was come to take vengeance upon him for the treason he had
committed against Meruine at Montment: for which Drohes had slain Calix in
combat, as was before written: other-whiles he did imagine other occurrentes:
but the traitor Mermont, as false as himself was faulty, had not one
thought so near a kin to honesty for only his coming was to do
endamagement to Meruine, because he adored the true god, and renounced their
false prophet Mahomet.

3 Now was Mermont come into the court even to the kings palace, where he
found Butor and diverse of his Barons that were come forth to greet him. Kingly
was their encounter on both sides, and much ceremonious the largeness of their
accomplishings. Then came the queen, being, sister to Mermont, between whom
were strait and dear embraces: with her was also her daughter, one o^
beauties best superlatiues* na^ed Singlay: to her was Mermont kind and full of
observance. Gratulations finished, to the test^monie of welcome, entered, and
the palace rung with clamours of delights and contentment. Supper by this
time was ready and royally served, where full bowls* and rich accates adorned
entertainment When supper was ended and music came in and the gallantes of
the court betook them to da^nsing, amongst them Meruine t^king Singlay,
daunsed with her a stately measure: during which heavenly motion, Mermont,
Butor, and the queen, ^el^ a solemn (though damnable) counsel, about the
ruin of the ever to be regarded Meruine, Mermont auowing the occasion of his
coming, to be for nothing* but to behold his utter destruction: and thence he
dilated his bringing up, and a duentures, his conquestes, triumphs: and
lastly, his backsl^ding f^o^ Mahomet, whom before he had adord, withal
affirming his valiance so boundles, and not to be resisted, that he would soon
sub^ert the whole estate of their religion. Therefore good king and my brother,
said Mermont) it not behooves (to whom Mahomet has given power of
controlement) to imprison him and k^^pe him safe from further defacing of his
templ^s. But if by any maanes he will again be converted to our faction: then
assure thee, so strange is his resolution, that we shall be monarchs both of
France and all Christen dome, with most easy adventures. All this while
Meruin was dancing without thought of infidilit^e: courting most honorably
the beautiful Singlay, whose heart with his excellency was even then made a
receptacle of loves brightest fire, and she was inflamed with his love: so much
prevailed the gift Galliana had given him at his first bearing. Thus we will
leave to speak of them, and pursue the discourse of Mermont and Butor.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
1 Huon Meruin was most traitorously imprisoned, and the description thereof. 2.
How by the persuasion of Mermont. Butor went with 100000. Pagans to Montment.
3. How Minea advertised Gautier and the other Christians.
WHen Butor had understood the uttermost of Mermonts entreaties, he replied,
my dear brother, touching the actions of this vassal, be you as guardlesse,
as I am fearelesse: for this night when he is laid to his rest, and w^arinesse
shall summon sleep upon his eie-lids, with a band of men he shall be strongly
assailed, bound and conveyed into a care-keep^^g dungeon, which sometime was
founded by a ^oniurer devil, and devils commander, named Mutafier, where he
remained 200. years as I have heard credibly reported, because he sought to
supplant the wise Merline, and frame the world to his own liking, into this
vast place of misery for vengeance Merlin damned him: in which there is nothing
but horror, fear and desolation, the botomlesse river Orb making his current
over the roufe of the woeful mansion: into this, if once the vassal come,
there is no redemption, nor has any creature power of deliverance* for so
Merlin enchanted it, who bound the devilish Mutafier beyond the power of all
other coniuration: till such time, that by bloody vow, and execrable
protestation he swear ever to beat his hest and commandment, not daring to
wrong body or soul, without his authority. And then was Mutafier enlarged,
and ever after made free from that dungeon. Into this place shall this Meruine
be conveyed: neither will I rest till I see it fully brought to pass and
finished. After all revels were en^ed, torches were brought to co^uey the
princes to their lodgings: so every one severally departed; and Meruine was
brought into a most sumptuous chamber where after he was laid, and had locked up
his eie^lids with a sweet slumber, thirty Sarazens entered his lodging, and
armed not so much with courage, as the sleep* death-like sprinkled upon him, at
once assailed him, and bound him hand and foot, and blindfolded his eyes. At
which Meruin awaking was mightily amazed, but not knowing any remedy, was
patient forcibly. Then began the vassals of shame to remile him, saying:
Traitor thou shall curse the time that ever thou renou^ced Mahomet, or bathed
thy sword in the blood of a pagan: for hence springs thy ruin, and their
delieuerie. Then came Butor, who caused him to be cast into the forementioned
Dungeon, where he was chained by the hands and feet, and received his
judgment, that he should never be free from that calamity, till ^e renounced
the eternal God of the Christians. (...) which he made answer: Taritours, and
no kings my God will I never forsake for affliction: neither shall my life
endure to think wearisome these torments which I ind^re for my Savior, whose
love I will not leave for all the worlds triumphs, my soul being dear for
these dear oppressions. At this Butor departed, leaving Meruine accompanied
with none but sorrow only, with whom he consor^ed the space of five years
in extreme misery. Now was the gift given by Gratiana at his birth fully
accomplished, and he pent in that prison where tears were pitiless though
incessant: after many bemonings he made his prayers unto God, and besought him
to have mercy on his af^^ictions. Then came the devil Mautafier, and
transforming himself into many likenesses, tempted him wieh damnable
protestations, promising if he would renounce his baptism, to redeem him from
his woefulness. But his faith resolved was ever immovable, so that Mautafier
^eeing his perseverance, left to expostulate with more temptation. Here we
will leave to speak more of him, or his wretchedness, and discourse a little of
Morgua his mother, of Meruina his godmother, and Galiana, that princeliest
Fairies that governed in Faeria, whose grief abounded for the imprisonment of
Meruine, inueying most mightily against Gratiana, whose gift made him subject
to this infortune. After many complaints Morgua said to the other ladies:
Princesses, you understand the wretchedness of my sons case, even for virtues
sake consent to sweeten some ho^re of his bitterness, with delight which I
have devised. We three will take each of us an instrument of music, and go
into his dungeon (the cloister of carefulnes) every day an hour, at such time
as Mautafier shall be absent, and with some chanson of delicacie minister joy
among his sorrows, concealing our selves from his eyes, only enriching his
ears with melody. To this the Ladies gave a free consent: so that doing
accordingly, they entered unseen into the prison. At whose approach, a most
strange light spread through the dungen, in so ample manner, as it there had bin
an hundred torches burning. At which divine action, Meruine was woonderfully
amazed: Amazed only to see that he saw nothing. Iustantly after the light, the
Fairies began to play heavenly notes (the moving air of celestial music)
that it was impossible for sorrow to abi^e where such sacred tunes were
recorded: and he in whom languor p^otested to have tenu^e of fee-simple,
proved the ^lea ^alse: and that at all he had in him no interest. Afte^ they
had thus played, and Meruine had shakt hands with extre^^^^e, they returned to
their own habitation, not ^ayling (...) day th^s inuis^bly to visit him, to
the high amazment of his senses.

2 But again to return to the traitorous king Mermont: I^ chanced that he
came to king Butor, and in most earnest manner in^reated him to muster up his
people: and with the greatest power he had to march with him to Montment, for
that there lay Gautier of Denmark, his four sons, and almost all the flower
of Christendom, in expectance of Meruine, whom unawares they might ouer^hr^w
and bring ^o final destruction. ^o this Butor agreed (for ill by ill is easily
tempted:) and forthwith commanded Commissions to be sent abroad, for the
gathering together of his power. When there was assembled to the number of an
100000, he armed them and departed from Minor, traveling so restlesly both by
land and by sea, that in twenty days he came to Brandis, and by the will of
God, the autho^^ of happy fortune, the two false meaning kings lodged in the
house of Minea, where they held a solemn and tedious council how they might
enter Montment, and in despite of Meruine put to sword Gautier, and the rest
of the Christians. All which disputations came to the ears of Mynea, who
drawing aside the Lord Chamberlain of king Mermonts household, in humble-maner
entreated of his lordshippe, to know where, or what was become of the most
famous^ Meruine. Madam (said the noble man) he is enclosed in a place from
whence he shall never find deliverance. And then (as if he were with child of
those troubles) he discoursed all the estate of unfortunate Meruine, both the
reuoca^ion of his first religion, his true parents, and kingly pedigree, his
conquests and unlucky betraying, and withal, how the most principal of his
aliance were gathered together at Montment. expecting the espousals between
him and Berea, and how the king his master, and Butor, meant to prenent them
with a sudden and unlooked for slaughter.

3 When Minea, not without sighs, had heard him comment of these actions, she
smiled, least her looks should be blabbes of her intentions: and then taking
leave, departed from him, and went to her chamber, where immediately she
indicted a letter, that contained what her ears had received: and delivering it
to a most trusty messenger, gave him especial charge to bear it to Montment,
unto Barbin the merchant. All which the messenger effected, not ceasing till
he came unto the kings palace in Montment, where finding Barbin, he said:
Reverent sir, to you I am sent, from the virtuous Lady Minea, that so entirely
loves Meruine, and from her present these lines to your judgment. When
Mathaburna heard him name Meruin, she started, and inquired what tidings. To
whom Barbin made no reply, but delivered the letter to Gautier, who read it:
which contains this that follows.

To the Princes of Christendom* health*
KNow (excellent Lords) from me uncomfortable Lady, that in vain we expect
the return of most absolute Meruine, whom henceforth I fear again you shall
never see, the grief whereof is burdenous to my weary soul. And further, be
advertised, that it behooves you to stand upon your best guard; for that
forthwith you shall be infinitely assailed by an hundred thousand Pagans,
conducted by Mermont, and Butor of Tabarie, who solemnly have sworn your
death on their religious Alcheron: look then to your selves, and love her that
in dangered her life to do you services.

Minea of Brandis.


When Gautier had read the content^ of this letter, than at that instant he
was nere more vehemently perpl^xed, tearing his garments, and making despair
and wrath one entire body: but better to be resolved, he asked the messenger
if certainly those ti^ings of misery were true or no. Yes my good Lord,
replied he, and the mighty host is even now at Brandis. Then arose Jacob and
said; Princess I am a witness of the incomparable love the Lady Minea bare
to exquisite Meruine: wherefore I know she writes nothing but truths
fearfulness. The began every one to sorrow for Meruin: but far above all
and beyond conceit, were Mathaburnas lamentations, who wringing her hands,
breaking the golden threades of her celestial hair, and the sacred vestures,
that shrouded the paradise of her features, she cried: O sorrow* immortal
sorrow, what shall I demand? misery, or death? both are too little. True God,
in whom my faith so lately is grounded, give counsel to my woes, for my heart
is lost: O more my life, nay most my spirit, nay above all that, the most
sweet, most wise and, most lovely creature ^f the world. Hark heavens what I
vow before you, if his love fail, my love shall have ending: for but him, not
any shall harbor in my conceits: if he die, I die: if he live, he shall
find me such as he left me. Thus tormented she her self: but alas, such are
her hard stars, that before she see him, she shall be compelled to die, or
deny her religion, which indeed she did: yet it was but woman's faintness, as
hereafter shall be at large declared.

FINIS
MERVINE; The second part of That most famous, worthy, and ancient Mother of
all Histories, the exquisite History of Prince Meruine, the son of Oger the
Dane, who conquered Jerusalem, Babylon, and diverse other Cities from the
Pagans, with many memorable accidents of wondrous consequence.

Qui sera sera.



AT LONDON Printed by Ralph Blower and Valentine Sims. 1612.

The Printer to the Reader.
IT is a common custom among Writers and Translaters (in a well penned
prologue, just like an old Song, whose burden goes to, (I beseech ye bear
with us) to solicit their Readers for so much favor as to use good words,
and have patience, to omit defects, censure mildely, and so forth. Now I
acquainted with none of these veins for excuse, and indeed thinking them all
in vain, (in the Translators absence) I keep the form of an Epistle, though
follow not the fashion: only entreat those that delight in Sories, to look
on the delights in Meruine. Which if they vouchsafe for my profit, I will
venture more for their pleasures.

The Table of the second Part.
HOw Mermont, Butor, and the Pagans imagining to enter unawares within
Montment, were enclosed by the Christians. 2 Of their discomfiture, and the
great battle wherein Bertran did wonders. Chap. 1. Gautier the Dane with
20000. followed Butor and Mermont to Minor: 2 of the skirmishes and taking of
Nubia, Turquants death. 3 Bertrans policy of suprizing of Minor. Chap. 2.
Bertran passed all the gates, and Drohes with him also: 2 of the prowesses they
showed against the pagans: 3 how they were taken prisoners; and put to the
keeping of the fair Singlay. Chap. 3. Gautier raised his Siege from Minor, and
came to Nubia, where he repaired his Army: 2 how from thence he came to
Luternia, where he found Iocob, who discoursed the fortunes of Montment: 3 how
Gautier went before Montment, and took it again by means of Jacob. Chap. 4.
Of the gallant life that Bertran and Drohes led in Minor: 2 of the Tourney
which was ppoclaimed for the love of Singlay: 3 of the private wonders Bertran
did. Chap. 5. Marant accused his sister Singlay: 2 how Bertran made the pagans
believe he would renounce Christianity: 3 how he undertook to combat against
Marant. Chap. 6. Bertran and Drohes (under the pretense of paganism) brought
forty thousand pagans before Montment: 2 how the most part of them were there
confounded and put to the sw^rd. chap. 7 An Ambassador came to Gautier, who
brought him word, that the Emperor Charlemaine had destroyed all his country
of Denmark: 2 how Drohes went to deli^er Meruin: and how Gautier arrived at
Maiance. chap. 8 Of the great battle which was betwe^ene the Emperor and
Gautier, in which Charlemaine was taken priosner: 2 how Loys the son of
Charles came with a great power against Maiance to revenge his father. chap. 9.
Barant (surnamed the Cruel) departed from Montment with three hundred thousand
Soldiers, and passed the Seas toward Maiance: 2 how Charles and Gautier made
a peace, and joined against the Pagans. chap. 10 Bertran and his brethren, Loys
and the other Christians issued upon the pagans: 2 the deaths of all the famous
christians except Loys: 3 of the battle between Barant the Cruel, and
Bertran of Denmark. chap. 11. Loys came to Maiance and reported the woeful
estate of the Christians, and the sorrow Gautier made for his sons, 2
Singlayes sorrow, and message Barant sent to Charles; together with the
answer: 3 how Barant ^lew one of the messengers. chap. 12. The Christians gave
battle to the pagans, in which turmoile the good King Gautier was ^laine, and
his host overthrown: 2 Charlemaine is forced to retire, and issues out the
second time, 3 The taking of Loys, and Duke Naymes priso^ers. chap. 13 Drohes
and Adain travailed so long in unfrequented places, till they found out the
true means for Meruines delivery: 2 how Drohes combated with a Griffon for
his love Adain. ch^p. 14 Drohes spoke to Robaster touching the delivery of
Meruin: 2 of Malabeon of Luron Robasters father that gave counsel^ in the
action. chap. 15 Robaster deceived king Butor: 2 how Meruine was delivered out
of prison, and went to the palace where he ^iue Butor, his queen, and diverse
other pagans: 3 and of the great battle he maintained. chap. 16 Meruine
Robaster, and Drohes arrived in a wood amongst robbers: 2 of the dangers they
were in: 3 how Malabeon aided them: 4 how they ^lew the thieves. chap. 17
Meruine and Drohe^ went to Brandis, and converted the Country: 2 how they came
before Montment, where (in the Battle) Drohes was taken, and brought into the
City: 3 how Mathaburna (before the pagans) menaced him. chap. 18 The city of
Montment was taken by the means of Mathaburna: 2 The delivery of Drohes out of
prison, and other accidents. chap. 19 Barant challenged combat of Charles
himself alone against three or five: 2 how he ou^rcame all the fi^ chap. 20
Meruine in countred Baham the son of Belmarine with 10000. pagans who were
forraging, who were all conquered except three: 2 how Baham renounced Mahomet:
3 how the three that escaped reported the action unto Barant, who slew one of
them for bringing such evil news. chap. 21 Barants hundred thousand were
overthrown by Mer^in^ 2 how Bertran then came with all his host, except thre^
hundred, and marched against the Christians. chap. 22 The single Combat betwixt
Meruine and Barant, and of Charles and the other Christians* and the overthrow
of the pagans. chap. 23 Meruine married Mathaburna: 2 And of the great
solemnity at Maiance for joy thereof. chap. 24 Muta^ier deceived the Fairie
Gratiana, and begotte of her a monster named Orke, who had three heads: 2 And
of other accidents. chap. 25. The king Turniquant of Oriam assembled a great
number of his people* and went in aid of the Orke: 2 how he destroyed all
Normandy and Britain: 3 and of other occurents. chap. 26. King Charles had
intelligence of the King of Englands coming: 2 of their assault on both sides:
3 how Meruine came* who had reconquered again all that the Orke had won: 4
how Mathaburna gave charge, that no man should speak of the wars before
Paris: 5 how an Angel appeared to Meruine. chap. 27. Meruin undertook Combat
against the Orke: 2 of the Fight, and the Orkes death, which brought rest to
the Christians. chap. 28. Meruine took leave of Charles and departed: 2 how he
went to Jerusalem, and thence was conveyed into Fairi^^. chap. 29.
The second part of The most ancient famous mo her of Histories, the exquisite
History of Prince Meruine, the son of Oger the Dane, who conquered Jerusalem,
Babylon, and diverse other Cities from the Pagans, with many memorable
accidents of wondrous consequence.
CHAP, I.
How Mermont, Butor, and the Pagans imagining to enter unawares within
Montment, were enclosed by the Christians* 2 Of their discomfiture, and the
great battle wherein Bertran did wonders.
GAutier having receued these tidings (the happy armo^r by the which they were
preserved from a shameful death) gave the messenger in guerdon of his pains,
a cup of gold, desiring him to recommend the perfection of his services, to
the most kind and loving Lady Minea, whom he would honor and adore: and after
other complements, dispatched him, and departed. Butor and Mermont, the waking
Dragons of impiety by this time were departed from Brandis, and now by sea
were come to the port of Luternia, two leagues from Montment, the wh^^st the
christians armed themselves to encounter them, having intelligence by their
espialles that passed to and fro of their near arrival: and Bertran coming
to his father, besought his majesty to deliver him a regiment of the oldest
(...), whom with himself he would lay in ambushment in the woods. Bontbras till
the Pagans were passed by, and then at such time as the maine a^my should
charge them in the faces, he behind would equal the encounter, and not doubt
but to put all to the sword in a moment: his counsel was held current, and
consented unto. Now came the pagans marching with silent carefulnes, thinking
half in a ^l^mber to surprise the city, but they were prevented, for Gautier
met them with a well ordered battle: the proportion consisting of three
batallions, the first conducted by Guyon, containing five thousand, the second
by Huon of Bordeaux, being five thousand, and the last by himself also five
thousand, so that the maine was fifteen thousand, besides ten thousand that lay
obscured with Bertran. As the Pagans passed by the wood, Bertran took a perfect
view of them, and smiling, he said unto Drohes who was his companion in that
stratagem, Behold with what have these Pagans post to their misery, see see
Drohes, do thou s^e that gallant beast the foremost is mounted on? by him
that gave me life, this day I will give him thee for a present, a seat
worthier of thy seat than an infidelious miscreant. At these words Drohes
looking carefully, saw Butor mounted on the brave mare Mordant, sometimes the
delight of Meruine, which with grief made him stand as if he ahd been
thunder-strucke, till rage appeasing sorrow he said; To arms, to arms,
prince Bertran, let me die if I do stay any longer, and see a traitor in
triumph ride on the gallant Mordant, worthy none but her master invincible
Meruine. This said they mounted upon their horses, and sounding a Cornet,
which was a signal to Gautier of their coming, issued out of the woods, and
charged the rereward of the pagans through and through, which Butor beholding,
commanded an alarm, and said, Courage gallant resolutions, and be not abashed
for this handful of christians, whose pride, not prowess makes them
desperate* and at this they turned upon their enemies, where one might have
seen Bertran bear honor from every other creature, and coming to him that
rode on the gallant horse he had promised Drohes, with the first blow be smote
him dead from his saddle, then taking the steed delivered him to Drohes,
saying, My promise this day is performed, and my word justified: at that Drohes
with humble thanks dismounted, and mounted on his new gift, then they two
thrust themselves among the pagans, Death like a gentleman usher passing before
them, giving to the battle, a fearful, and miserable beginning.

2 Gautier, that on their faces should, now on their backs was inforst to
charge them, in which shocke Huon showed his prowess to be most invincible, in
that Might it self wanted might to resist him, he slew infinites, and left
innumerable wounded amongst the rest he slew the nephew to king Gautier, whose
death whilst his uncle pursued to revenge, he made forfait for his own life.
Dreadful, and somewhat doubtful was the battle a long time, because the
pagans were an hundred thousand, and the christians, but five and twenty
thousand, who notwithstanding by their wisdoms (the best weapons in warefare)
in the end became conquerours. Marvelous this day were the acts of Bertran,
making Conquest in love with her self, because he loved her. Guyon his
brother was not short of infinite praises, who in the heart of the battle showed
himself lord of al^ hearts, and incountring a kinsman of Butors, he slew him,
at the fight whereof a whole band of Sarazens assailed him crying, thou die
this day, no valor shall release thee, and then rushing all with one fury,
they bare him from his horse and took him prisoner: but as they were intending
to present him to king Butor, Bertran that then was commen into the strength of
the battle, and by the tumults of the pagans, suspecting they had taken some
prisoner, all enraged and grieved he turned to the prease, making every
hinderer of his way a companion to his grave, till he saw them who led his
brother Guyon bound in honors dishonorable fetters: which when his eyes
affirmed as true witnesses, led by a virtuous ^unacie, he ^lew in among them,
and struck him that held his brother such a blow, that he claue him to the
breast, after him, another, and another, til Guyon was at liberty, then giving
him an excellent sword (the present of delight) they two brothers began a
strong battle against fifty Pagans. Guyon in revenge of his wrong clothing
his sword in the heart blood of the Pagans. By this time came posting by them
the Seneschall of Iabary, whom as Bertran was about to encounter, he said to
prevent him: B^y, de^ist, and let me pass by thee, for I will adiourne thine
ill fortune, till I have slain him who has killed my brother, and then if thy
life be weary I will end thy breathing. Pagan, said Bertran, thou and thine
intents are so far asunder, that I must needs talk with you before your
pass so goodly a iourey, and then turning aloft his sword, he assailed the
Seneschall with such delicate virtue, that in an instant he sent him to sleep
with his great great great grandfathers father, then arresting his horse, he
gave him to his brother Guyon, who mounted thereon in the battle did most
maruelious actions, crying, Honor for heaven and Denmark, which words gave
life to their soldiers, and revived the half dying wounded, so that he Pagans
unable to resist any longer, betook themselves to flight, and were utterly
discomfited: which when Butor beheld, and comparing his huge host with their
slender train, he called Mermont and said* My lord of Montment, I see it is
impossible by fortitude to regaine your city, so highly are the Christians
enraged and so miserable the chances of our evil fortunes. It is true, it is
very true, answered Mermont, the Sunshine of our glory is wained, therefore
let us fli^, till Time prefer better adventures. This being spoken, they
betook themselves to flight toward the sea coast, which their army beholding,
like distraught men flew here, and there, and every where to save their lives,
whilst Bertran, his brothers, Gautier, and Huon follow the chase, putting to
the sword all that were overtaken* so that of an hundred thousand that were at
the beginning of the flight* there escaped but four hundred, who with the
kings entered into their ships, and betook themselves to the Sea, railing and
cursing the great courages of the Chris^ians, who after the chase ended
returned to the place of battle, where it was admirable to behold the slain
multitudes, who lay one upon another swimming in their own bloodes, whose
current was mighty, like to a flowing river: amongst the Pagans was found
unspeakable riches, which gathered together* the Conquerors returned
victoriously and triumphantly into Montment, having lost of their own army but
only ten thousand, they were royally received of Mathaburna, who all that day
had prayed for the rare success of their good fortune, because she feared it
the Pagans had prevailed, either her life or happy days should undoubtedly
have quailed. Gautier by certain prisoners he had taken, understood all the
manner of Meruines imprisonment in Minor, whither Butor and Mermont were fled,
wherefore he protested before God and his holy saints to follow them, to which
end he sent proclamations round about the realm of Montment, to sommon all the
princes thereof in his aid, and the rescue of the most worthy Meruine, whose
love was so infinite in those parts, that presently there was numbered twenty
thousand absolute approved knights known most valiantly courageous, which with
exceeding joy Gautier with himself embarked, taking also with him diverse Pagan
prisoners to conduct him the way to that receptacle of horror, that Academie of
misfortune, damnable Minor.

CHAP. II.
1 How Gautier the Dane with twenty thousand followed Butor and Mermont to
Minor. 2 Of the skirmishes and taking of Nubia, and Turquants death, 3 Bertrans
policy for surprising of Minor.
GAut^er the Dane, his four sons, Huon of Bordeaux, Drohes, and with them
twenty thousand redoubted men at arms, being aboard their ships, hoysed up
sails, and knitting all their hearts in one thought, protested in the sight of
God to pursue Butor so incessantly, that if he took but a breathing rest in
any place, they would overtake him and bid him new battle; so on they sailed
til they came by a goodly city called Nubia, whose governor was king Turquant,
who at that instant had left the town to conduct and convey Butor on his way,
to whom he was alied by a knot of affinity, Mermont and the other pagans being
passed by a week before.

2 When Gautier understood whose town it was, and unto whom it appertained,
he immediately landed his men* and vowed to assail it, the which he did,
taking it with small or no loss to himself, but infinite to his enemy* for he
put man woman and child to the sword, that refused to be baptized. Which done,
he drew out of the new baptized, a regiment of the best reputed, and left
behind a garrison of his own soldiers to fortify and keep the City, and
then departed on his way toward Minor: in which expedition he was so sp^edy,
that he attained a wood but six leagues from thence: where, as his army was
reposing, they might behold the king of Nubia returning from the conduct of
Butor, and with him five hundred soldiers, whom when he saw, they swore,
unless they were Christians, they should never escape them. Which a citizen of
Nubia hearing, said, My Lord, it is Turquant our late king, that even now is
returning homeward from Minor: At that^ word Gautier set his men in order to
charge him. Whilst Turquant surueying them fetched a d^epe sigh, and said,
Princes, this day I fear we shall espouse our evil fortunes, for I see men
prepared to give us battle, yet are their nations and colors unknown to us:
yet* what, or whosoever they are, we must and will be our defenders. These
words were spoken so faintly, that his army like men half dying, cried for a
tru^e, saying, they were but reeds, and unable to endure the storms of so
great an army. But as they were in speaking, Gautier set upon them and flew the
most part, the rest flying about the fields here and there for succor, which
they found no where: the sight whereof was so irksome to king Turquant, that
in a mad rage he struck a Christian, even in the presence of Bertran, such a
mighty blow, that he fell dead at his feet. Which when the virtuous prince
beheld, he assailed the pagan so courageously, that with the first blow he
divided the union betwixt his head and shoulders: then forthwith were the poor
remnant of the pagans taken prisoners, who for their lives safety, promised to
receive their souls safety, I mean b^ptisme. Then demanded Gautier, where
they had left king Butor and Mermont, and they told him in Minor, preparing an
invincible army to return withal to Montment. By the health of my soul said
Bertran, I Will block up that way, and, if I live, feast my self in his palace
at Minor. Alas sweet son (said Gautier) how shall we possibly be so happy,
when the entrance of our passage is but five foot broad, and that most
dangerous? Dear father, answered the Prince, esteem not fearful
descriptions, for I have invented how and which way, to make both our selves
commanders of the town, and princes of their destructions: and thus it is.

3 I will arm myself in the armor of this dead king* and mounted on his
horse, spread out his now unfortunate colors, and with such like company as he
was attended with, I Will march toward the town, into which I know I shall enter
easily, because they will imagine me to be the king of Nubia: which I will no
sooner have effected, but I will guard the gates with such careful resolution,
that famoused, so that in all the haste it was put in practice, and five
hundred Christians of the best respect were armed both your Highness and your
army shall have easy passage. This stratagem was much commended, and his
wisdom with the Pagans armours, amongst whom was Gautier, Huon, and Drohes.
When they were come within three leagues of Minor, Gautier left the gross sum
of his army, and with the five hundred marched till they were passed through
the first port of the city, which was governed by Aroufle, who taking Bertran
that marched on the head of the troop for the king of Nubia, said: My Lord,
will your Majesty return again? And Bertran answered, he would, for he went
but only to speak with the King Butor his kinsman, promising him at his
return, a gift should for ever make him rich: the pagan gave him humble thanks
with doglike reverence, and so let him pa^se. And when his army was gone by, he
turned to Aroufle and drawing his sword, said: Traitor, this is my treasury,
and here com^s the reward I promised, and with that (...) st^ucke him with such
virtue, that well might have cleft a rock of Ma^ble: but to the pagan it (...)
no hurt at all, because he was clothed in the hide of a serpent, which
sometimes was the armor of invincible Robaster, who now lived a Hermit in the
woods there adjoining, where he continued ever since he forsook the fair
Guerin of Montglai^e at such time as most famous Charlemaine came before
Vienn^a, which by fair Guerins means he conquered, for hate whereof Robaster
would have slain him: but that Guerin guarded him from mischief, for grief
whereof he was so enraged against her, that he swore never hereafter to do her
service, and so led by coffeehouse, came into those woods, and there
building an hermitage* lived, and was fostered by his father Malabeon, casting
away his serpents skin* ^s intending never more to be seen in battle: yet
he misconceiued, for he must be the ayder of prince Meruine, as you have heard
before, when shall be the will of the heavens. But letting these digressions
pass, we will return to Bertran, who after the first blow, she pagan took a
bar of iron, and with it gave him such a requital, that he made him reele, and
almost fall from his he^se, had not Drohes vpheld him, to the no little stain
of Bertrans remembrance, who calling again his strengths together, gave the
Sarazin such a blow that he bowed one of his knees to the ground in submission,
yet his body unwounded could no way be tainted. Drohes beholding this, charged
the pagan, and brake his lance, but did not hurt him: Huon did as much, but as
little prevailed, to their wonder, and his greater pride. Bertran at this
amazed, dismounted himself, and closed with the pagan: whom by clean
strength he threw down to the ground backward: then alighted Drohes, and
lifting up the head of the serpent, with his sword made a passage through his
body, by which his soul fled downward to eternal darkness.

CHAP. III.
How Bertran passed all the gates, and Drohes with him also, 2 Of the prowesses
they showed against the Pagans, 3 How they were taken prisoners; and put to the
keeping of the fair Singlay.
When the pagan Aroufle was slain (a charitable deed for Christendom)
Bertran threw him into the river Orb, and then marched on the narrow way till
he came to the second port, which he likewise passed, killing the guard
thereof, and throwing them into the river, but when Gautier saw with
considerate eyes, the straitenesse and danger of those passages, he persuaded
the Princes to retire, saying, Honor lost his honor by daring beyond the
conceit of power: those ways in which none hardly could go, but endangered,
were tell tales of their destructions, therefore while^t time was, wished them
to use the time of their deliverance. My gracious father said Bertran, I
beseech you be not so suspitio^s, for if my self alone, and but ten with me
pass, of my life the Town shall be surprised. It is too great a masterie
said the king, therefore be councelled and return. For shame my gracious
father (said he) let us not, having gone thus far, return scared with
imagination, the city will take me for the King of Nubia, and that ^hadowe
will defend us. At this both Drohes and the rest cried, Forward young prince,
this day we will be thy followers, and then they passed to the last gate, at
which Bertran knocked desiring entrance, saying it was shame by day to keep
their City thus restrained: and for his own part* ere his City of Nubia
should be feared, he would hazard ten thousand dangers. When the Porter
heard Bertran, he went up unto a lowpe-hole, and seeing the christians so well
ordered, said to himself, there shall no more en^er but the king of Nubia
himself till I have advertised King Butor my lord and master, and then
descending, he opened the Portall, desiring Bertran to enter: who said,
Uillaine, why do thou not open thy gates for my train to follow me? Noble
king of Nubia (said the Porter) be not displeased, for my deed is my Kings
commandment, which broken* my life is forfaited, neither may I suffer any to
pass, be he of his nearest lineage, but if it please your Majesty I will
advertise his Highness and bring you answer. Do said Bertran, and tell his
Mightiness I am returned to discourse of some private things I forgate at our
departure: at this the porter closed the gates, and went to the palace, where
he found Mermont, Gontor and Butor his sovereign, to whom he declared the
back return of the King of Nubia and his train, and his desire of entrance.
Of my soul (said Butor) he has incountred with Gautier* amd is thus chas^d
back again go let him enter, but first sommon all my men at arms, to be in
readiness to prevent pals destiny, and (...) but one besides himself only have
passage in. At this away (...) the por^er, told Bertran the Kings decree,
nevertheless ^ffe^ing him to pass, having before appointed certain soldiers
aloft to let down the port^ullis when the King and other were gone by, Bertran
and Drohes alone entered, and then the iron gates were closed, which bred small
contentment in Bertran, who drawing his sword gave the porter such a blow, that
h^e claue him down to the teeth.

2 Those aloft seeing their companion slain, they said not a word, but
fortified the Gates, with all that was in their power, so that Bertran and
Drohes now were locked up in the town, for whom the christians sorrowed
exceedingly, but they most valiant in the most extremity, trotted up the
streets most courageously, Bertran saying to Drohes, come, let us to the Kings
palace if none gain stand us, if any do, be our swords his b^^^all, for so
shall w^e either save our honors, or escape danger. This said, with their
swords naked in their hands, they passed toward the palace, sending all
they met, either to hell or heaven: which seen, was poison to King Butor, who
now commanded all his men at arms to assail them, which they did with an
entire fury: but Bertran and Drohes turning their backs to a wall adjoining
to the palace gates encouraged one an other to embrace no mercy, but their
death, and that to be bought at an infinite value, and withal, so defended
themselves by offending their enemies, that the proudest stood in awe, and
durst not approach them: in this skirmish Bertran slew Berabem, after him the
chamberlain to Butor, in like manner a third, a fourth, till the number
infinitely multiplied: Drohes was not short, but every way equalles his
actions, whilst Mermont in wonder said, Ha Mahomet, this is not the king
Nubia, for Nature has not lent him so almighty a spirit, rather they are
some di^^ls, or devilish enemies. At this came Butor amongst his men and
said, Princes and my countrymen, here shall my love die, neither will I
henceforth count of you if you deliver me not these two dead or imprisoned.
Scarce were these words fled from his lips, Gontor with a lance in his hand
ran against Bertran, but missing him, ^lue his horse under him, so that
falling to the ground, he immediately arose again with his sword in his hand,
and stroke a pagan dead under him, ^y this time the Sarazins so multiplied,
that Drohes horse was killed also: and then standing against the wall, they
maintained a fearful foot combat like two foaming boares against a kennell
of hounds long hunted. Cruel was the fight beyond measure, so that the pagans
stood amazed, yet had not God in pi^tie beheld them, the two princes had there
ended their li^es, not praises. So hideous was the noise the pagans made about
them, that the Queen and her fair daughter Singlay came to behold it, who
se^ing the not to be conquered resolution of the two christians spirits most
highly este^med them: the Queen said, Fair daughter, behold two
incomparable creatures, worthy this day to be immortally renowned, was ever
seen so ^ew prevail against so many?

Madam (replied Singlay) it is the King of Nubia (...) acts these wonders of
knighthood. It Is true (said the Queen) for which I am ashamed that thy father
and his host should thus p^^tiles assail him: would God he were in my
chamber, to the end he might defer his evil fortune, and renew his peace
thus unhappily broken. Thus discoursed the Ladies of the Christians who had now
slain so many paga^s, that not any could come nere them for the dead bodies,
till Mermont tried, Fie cowards, fi^, how long shall two thus mightily prevail
against us? and then with his sword in his hand coming to assail them,
Bertran incountred him with such a blow that* ^^bent him on his kn^es, and had
withal slain him, had he not retired backward.

The battle already had continued an hour and a half, which vexed Butor:
who swore he never saw so much magnanimity in an host of 20000. as in those
two single persons; and then calling Mermont he said: My Lord, these two will
destroy my City if I find not remedy, counsel me, for my care exc^edeth.
Your Majesty (said Mermont) must assemble together an Army of your men, who
(laying weapons aside) must rush desperately upon them, and even with the
confusion of force overthrow excellency, for otherwise (as you have well
s^ene) they are invincible.

This instantly was put in practice, and compassing Drohes about (like the
ouer-flowe of many waters) they boar him to the earth, and took away from
him all means of resistance. But Bertran so courageously withstood them, that
whosoever touched him, never after had sense of touching. Infinites he slew and
wounded* at length retiring by degrees, he recovered a pair of stayres, that
ascended up into a chamber, up which he went: and entering into the chamber,
protested to keep it: and whosoever entered should pay a lives forfaite. There
remained Bertran peaceably for a little time: the whilst that Drohes was
brought to the Palace, where he was disarmed: whom Mermont at the first ^ight
knew exceeding well, and said: Drohes, now thou beholdest thy mischief, and
life has no longer indurance yet we entreat thee, tell us what Knight is he
that bears the Arms of Nubia, for whatsoever he be, his life is forfaite
for his evil doings. Traiterous King Mermont (said Drohes) thou have adjudged
what best to thy self appertains, who having received holy Baptism in the
house of the Diuinest, falsely forswore thy own Royalty, baser than the besest
abject under heaven. At those reuilings, Mermont cried, away with him, and cut
off his head, unless he make known his confederate in this mischief. When
Drohes saw there was no mean left him, but either to acknowledge Bertran or
deny himself, he said, Stay, and I will name him unto you. Then raising his
voice, that every one might understand him, he said: Princes, it is the most
wise and absolute valiant Bertran the son of Gautier, whose conquests stretch
far beyond these Clymates, and whose death the infants unborn hereafter shall
bewail if he miscarrie. When Butor had heard his words, he commanded him to
be strongly imprisoned: which was done. Then the Kings consulting together,
Mermont said: My Lord of Minor, now remains under your arrest Prince
Bertran, so famous for his valor, and renowned for the descent of his royal
pedigree: it behooues your majesty to be most circumspect, because at this
instant you have in thrall the triumuirate of virtue, the itj. famous flowers
of Knighthood meaning Meruine, Bertran and Drohes. These words when the
beautiful Singlay heard, she whispered unto her own thouhgts, and swore by
Mohomet, that if her power were powerful, there should no evil befall prince
Bertran, more than the burden of her best love, because his valor was more
than ever her eyes had seen before that instant time. Whilst thus she was
talking to her thoughts, all the princes and Barons went out of the palace,
gathering all the force that they could together to assail Bertran, who having
barrocadoed and fortified the doors of the Chamber, went with his sword to
defend the windows: where the first that scaled them, be sent with a blow dead
to thearth. Which Butor beholding, and grieuing to behold* commanded to fetch
faggots, and to burn the house, choosing rather loss of wealth than will: the
which was performed in an instant, the sight whereof brought the wits of
Bertran to astonishment.

3 But ere the fl^me took any effect, Singlay fell at her fathers f^ete, and
besought the obtaining of a reasonable petition: whereto the king consenting,
she said: Then my Lord, spare this noble Christian, and it to me he will
submit his person, let me be his guardian, and I doubt not but easily make him
adore Mahomet. Daughter, said the king, thou art gracious in my sight* and thy
suite is granted: and if it be possible, bring him to honor the shrine of our
Prophet. Joy would not let the virgin stay to be ceremonious in thanks, but
she went to Betrran, and persuaded him to lay away his arms, and yield to her,
who had undertaken for his safety: showing the danger otherwise of his
fortune, and the pitiless regard of fire when it prevailed: adding to her
words private tears, the witnesses of her secret good meaning. When as
Bertran had beheld Singlay, and surueied her beauty, virtue, and maiesticall
carriage, when he had noted the gracious aspects of her eyes, and the
loue-inticing pity of her countenance, immediately he was inamoured with her
perfections, and wi^h honorable sweetness returned her this aunswers.
Madame, so sacred is the beauty of thine heavenly eyes, that even me and my
heart thou have taken prisoner: well may thou command me, whom thou have
inthralled, and would God (were the time so gracious) that not here but in
France I might do you service: but sacred Madame, though my case be desperate,
yet do me a favor for charity, tell me whether my companion be dead, or
breathing with the living? Fair prince, quoth she, he lives without hurt,
though without freedom, and is in my prison, where your self in peace shall
live* if you submit to my mercy. Bertran at this conquered with Beauties
Oratorie, gave up his sword into her silver hand, protesting that no fear of
death made him yield, but only the commandment of beauty: to which beauty
and her pity he surrendered his life and fortunes. Bertran now unlaced his
helmet, and put it off whose former labor had raised so cheerful a blood in
his face, that Singlay esteemed him singular in every perfection, and Loud,
ready at her elbow, doubled her wounds, and redoubled her affection: wherefore
she said: Come young prince and follow me, but I pray you speak to my father
gravely and humbly; so shall your thraldom be less straight, and I more able
to do you service. He consented to do what ever she would command him: and
thus they came before Butor, whose first salutation was, that immediately he
should loose his head, if he fell not down and adored Mahomet: and Bertran
enraged gave a reply contrary to his promise, saying: The threats of the
damnedst devilish pagan in the world should not make him forsake his God, nor
think^ one reverend thought o^ their false man-deceiuing and devilish
protector. When Singlay heard him speak with this spleen of malice, she wept
bitterly, fearing lest her father (who was subject to passion) should subscribe
his will to her Loves funeral* which to prevent, she came and desired her
father to leave argument, and to refer him to her, whom she doubted not but
quickly to change from his purity, and make him a religious Sarazen. Daughter
said the king, I agree, but be you watchful lest he escape: for we have had
toon extreme trial of his valor. With virgin reverence she thanked his
Majesty, and forthwith carried Bertran unto her prison, wh^re Drohes was
hugely perplexed with tormentings, and bound hand and foot with fetters: but
toone she took them off, and having them both in her custody, like a bondslaue
to her thrall, sweetened their servitude with her service. But letting them
pass, we will speak of Gautier, who all this while was before Minor,
continuing a siege against it the space of itj. years: but all was to
bootelesse purpose, for he lost many and gained nothing, the city was so
impregnable. Wherefore holding a Council, it was thought expedient to raise
their siege, and return back unto Montment, which they did, burning with fire
before they went, the four straight passages of Minor: and that was all the
revenge they had for itj. years trouble. Great was the have Gautier made to
come to Montment, where he had left his virtuous wife Claretta and Mathaburna:
but when he came, he found all his hopes ouerturned, for in his absence the
cruel king Gorbant had bin there, taken the town, put Claretta to death, and
Mathaburna too, had not faint womanish fear made her forsake her God, and fall
once again brfore Mahomet. Beside, she did one other deed of great ilnes,
that after was a torment to her: and that was by the means of Mordant, she
trod upon the Crucifire and the Image of the virgin Mary: for which with this
curse she was punished, That she would commit high treason against her son
Orient, which she did: for when his wife was delivered of seven sons, she made
them away, and persuaded her son she had brought forth seven dogs; for which
the Ladies life was hazarded, till God the reuealer of truth, making the
truth known, Mathaburna was burned deseruingly, as you may read in the
history of Godfrey of Bullen. But leaving those latter deeds, we will again
return to our purpose.

CHAP. IIII.
1 How Gautier raised his siege from Minor, and came to Nubia, where he
repaired his army: 2 how from thence he came to Luternia, where he found
Jacob, who discoursed the fortunes of Montment; 3 How Gautier went before
Montment, and retooke it again by means of Jacob.
GAutier and his Army went before Minor, and marched to Nubia, where he
selected out ten thousand choice men to repair his losses. At which time (with
great humbleness) Huon of Bordeaux took his leave of the King, and departed
to the great grief of all the company: and of him we will speak nothing
more at this instant.

2 The King at that same time departed from Nubia, and came to Luternia, where
he reposed himself the space of four days: during which time Jacob the
Merchant came unto him and saluting him with a most piteous and fearful
countenance, said; Sacred Lord of a holy Lineage, what shall become of us
most miserable creatures, since the valiant Meruine is nnot home returned? Alas,
alas my Lord, Fortune has doubled her fortunes upon us* for in these last two
years of your absence, the fatal King Gorbant of Samaria (who was overthrown
before Damascus) and Bandus, came and laid Siege before Montment, have taken
the City, put your Highness Wife to ^eath, and converted fearful
Mathaburna to her former relig^on. When Gautier felt there thunderboltes strike
upon his soul, and the death of Claretta named, both he and his Sons fell
into a great agony of coffeehouse: vowing to God and their souls a deep
reuengement for that monstrous murder; and so forthwith marched toward
Montment But Jacob (staying behind) assembled together four hundred
Christians, whom he conducted after Gautier with such have, that he ouertooke
him before he had fully got sight of Montment; which instantly they had entered
without resistance, had not a certain Pagan espied them: who running into the
city, gave king Gorbant warning of t^eir approach. He (upon the first notice)
mustered all his barons together, and issued out to meet the Christians, who
then were within a league of the town walls.

3 The Pagans being ordered in battle, said amongst themselves: Alas, alas,
these Christians are come to their funeralles: for since Meruine is dead, it is
impossible for them ever again to see a day of conquest. They were to the
number of an hundred thousand, and thus quartered: Griffoy bare the ensign of
Mahomet, and had thirty thousand, King Bandus had other thirty thousand, and
Griffoner with a regiment to second him; Gorbant with the rest went before. The
Christians had ordered themselves, though not so huge, yet full as strongly:
and thus Gautier, after encouragements to his sons, put spurs to his horse,
and gave the first charge on the Pagans, and the first he incountred he bare
dead to the ground* the second he cut off by the head, after him an other, and
an other, and desi^^ing til x. fell by his sword before him. At this began a
clamorous noise (greater than thunder from heaven,) and the battle was
mightily confused, Gorbant if his arms had been excellently employed, his
virtue in valor had inherited alittle better than excellent.

By letting his deed pass, we will speak of Jacob, who following Gautier with
four hundred Christians, and seeing the fearfulness and hugeness of the
battle, said unto his soldiers; Gentlemen, this day it behooves us to be
most circumspect what we take in hand, you do see the rare mightines of the
battle, and the equality of puissance: let us then advise our selves what way
is best for our general profit, which (in my conceit) is this, Whilst the
two armies are thus equally busied, we will assault the town now utterly
undefended, and making our entrance therein, put man, woman and child to the
sword, that will not fall down and adore the name of Christ Jesus. To this
(with clamours) they all agreed, and forthwith entered the Town which was left
unguarded, and began to put to ^he sword all with whom they incountred. But
the fearful people soon rendered to mercy, and accepted a second baptism.
The Jacob went to the castle of Turgon with his followers, where he found Guyda
and Barrant her little son, surnamed the Cruel, and Berea: to whom Jacob
said, Madame, great and infinite are the mischiefs that hang houering over thy
head, if so soon thou have forgotten prince Meruine, and renounced the
Christian true law of salvation. Ha Jacob (said Mathaburna with a weeping
face) chide me not, for in my heart I adore nothing but that true God of my
salvation: what else I have done, this life (which only I love but for his
love) has with carfulness drawn me hereto. You make me proud quoth Jacob, with
these words: know then, I have taken (with these my followers) both the town
and this castle: wherefore I will leave two hundred to guard you, and with the
rest return to the great battle.

This said, he took his leave, and (after safe order taken for the Town and
Castle) he returned to the tumult, where he showed himself to be a most
resolved and courageous gentleman, whose resolution when Gautier saw, he
commended exceedingly* with promise of great honors. My Lord, said Jacob, my
beginning has been better than my proceeding, for I have taken both the
city, and Turgon. Wherefore if you doubt your success, you may make your
retraite therein, for it is your own assured. When Gautier heard this he
daunced for joy, and in that place created him knight, kissing his cheek, and
praying for his endless good fortunes. Jacob so proud with these honors, that
the first pagan that he met he sent dead to the ground, and then rushing into
the heart of the army, made wondrous destructions: which king Gorbant
beholding, enraged he ran against him, and gave him such a blow, that he
felled him to the earth: by means whereof the good Jacob was taken prisoner,
and now came the battle to the extremest hazard, for the Pagans being an
hundred thousand, and the Christians but twelve thousand, the greater number
prenailed, wherefore Gautier commanded a retrait to be sounded, and so retired
into the city: at the sight whereof Gorbant tore his hair and was madly
enraged, not leaving to assault the town on each side, but in vain, for in
his despite it was strongly maintained. When as arms and fury was laid at
rest, Gautier went to the palace, where reposing himself he made inquiry for
Jacob, but not any could tell of him or his fortune. Good God said he! shall we
loose that good knight? is it possible that virtue should so soon vanish? and
with that he shed tears for affection. This while Guyon went to Guyda, and
taking her by the hand, said, Fair Lady, how comes your fortune to hale you
into this coast? and whose is this infant you bear with you? Ah Guyon said
she* it is my son: but I pray you, how does your brother Bertran? O he was
mightily false to me at Damascus, when leaving me along he esteemed more his
sword, than mine honor, for hateful revenge whereof I instantly married king
Gorbant his greatest enemy. Thus she discoursed her adventures to Guyon,
whilst her husband and Griffoy without the city, stood tearing their hairs
for their losses. After some consultations held, they sent for Jacob, and told
him that if he would go to Montment and persuade Gautier to send him forth of
the city his wife and young son, he would deliver all the christian prisoners
that were that day taken. Jacob glad of these words (for he mightily feared
death) said, willingly I will perform thy desire, so I may have sufficient
pledge for the truth of thy promise. Then Gorbant called Bandus, Griffoy, and
Grifoner, and sent them for hostages of his word: so they came into Montment,
and finding Gautier in the palace, Jacob delivered the message o^ Gorbant,
which was most welcome to Gautier, who delivered to Jacob, Guyda, and Barant,
and detaind the pledges for his return, who coming to Gorbant with a comely
reverence, delivered them to their lord, who on the other part deliu^red unto him
all the Christians that were prisoners, whom he brought triumphantly into the
city, and enfranchised the hostages, who solemynely swore by Mahomet, never to
raise their tents till they had once again made themselves commanders of the
City: but their dowes were witnesses against them, for Gautier night and day
so souldier-like defended the town, that all their assaults proved utterly
frustrate: and so we will leave a while to speak more of them, and return to
Bertran and Drohes, whom we left imprisoned at Minor, and had so continued
three years, during which space they were by the beautiful Singlay both
regarded, fau^ured and esteemed, having their desires accomplished as soon as
they could desire, so mightily did she love Bertran, and so willing she was her
will should make it manifest, only their escape that could not be invented, so
great was the envy of the nation against them.

CHAP. V.
Of the gallant life that Bertran and Drohes led in Minor. 2 Of the Tourney
which was proclaimed for the love of Singlay, 3 Of the private wonders Bertran
did.
IOyously, and even in the height of contentment lived Bertran and Drohes
prisoners in the city Minor, seruiceably attended on by Singlay, and a Lady of
hers named Adain, whose secrecy exceeded the priuatest conjecture. Singlay was
the love of Bertran, and Adain the love of Drohes, for whose sakes they
effected whatsoever could be desired. In this same time there arrived at Minor
an Ambassador from Montment, who reported to Mermont, the taking of his city
by Gorbant, and the loss of it again to Gautier and his i^j. sons, which when
he understood, he went to Butor, and held a council how they might recover it:
and in thend agreed to crave aid of all the pagan kings at that time suruiuing;
which they did, and gained infinites, amongst which came one gallant Gentleman
the son of king Belmarine of the age of eighteen years, who brought with
him eighteen thousand, and had to name Baham, exceeding wise, and highly
renowned for deeds of arms, and feats of renowned chivalry, he was mightily
inamoured with the beauty of Singlay, and demanded her in marriage, but she
neglected his suite, having no other thought, but what she borrowed from the
most excellent Bertran. But Baham not omitting any thing that might inflame the
coldness of her affection* caused a solemn tourneament to be proclaimed
before the chamber of his hearts mistress the fairest Singlay, to the end
that she might behold his prowess. Thither resorted many redouted pagans to
the iusts that were in the honor of Singlay, the whilst Marant her euer-hating
brother tormented his thoughts, with busying them to find out the reason, why
she disdained a man of so good a perfection: and in the end concluded, that of
necessity. she, either loved some pagan prince, or some christian, for she
was a woman, and women will love, and no doubt but she was in love. With that
Bertran entered into his mind, who then was his sisters prisoner: so that he
swore by Mahomet it was so, and no otherwise: wherefore upon the day of the
tourneament the traitor privately hid himself in his sisters chamber, not
seen of any one.

2 Even now were all the Pagans armed that came to that gallant sport of
honor, and all the Ladies flocked to the windows, to the end they might
behold the adventures; amongst whom Singlay would not consort her self, but
said, for that time her chamber should be her scaffolde* thither she went, and
thither she brought Bertran and Drohes, to behold and laugh at what her self
derided: no sooner was Bertran in her chamber, but taking Singlay in his arms,
he cast her upon a rich embrodered cowch, where h^ made love rich with the
richest of loves pleasures, and saidee Goddess that guidest loves world in my
bosom, let the combat of our ^ffections equal or su^passe the pagans
con^lict, for we are his knights and his absolute champions, they without, but
shadows of foolish ceremonies. This said, he loc^^ her in his arms, and with
kisses and those delights that ^xceede kisses, wooed till they both were
conquered. Drohes on the other side was not behind with his triumph, making
Adain blush and swear she was by loves power conquered. Alas, alas, a^ this
while they little imagined the trai^our Marant to be in her chamber, who like a
dumb mischief lay and noted all that passed between them. Now having done
dalliance the Ladies went to the windows to behold the iustes, and the two
Knights behind them, crying aim to others virtues, till such time that a
Herault at arms ran crying up and down the field that Belmarine Baham had
vanquished all comers, and to have to equal in the deeds of knighthood. When
Singlay had heard the king at arms make this proclamation, she smiling said to
Bertran, Look what a gallant prince I have refused for your love, drawing upon
me the wrath of my father for neglecting his offer, whose equal for chiual^ie
lives not betwixt this and Brandis. Bertran to this speech made no reply, but
the aid of Adain, who for Drohes love would hazard any thing* he withdrew him
self, privately got armor, and an excellent horse, on the which being
mounted, he trotted to the place where the iusts were solem^ized: whose first
approach Singlay severely noted, and called to Bertran, but Adain told her he
was gone to his solitary chamber a little troubled in heart, intending for some
hours to give repose to his unquiet: at that Singlay turned her sweet speech
to Drohes and said, See fair Knight what a comely champion is newly entered the
Lists, believe me, this person promises wonders, but his bad furnitu^e says
he should be pnre in virtue* believe me, I marvel whence he came. Madam
(said Adain) that best knew the adventure, the foulest Muscle has the richest
pearl, and a Diamond set in iron, is more precious than a perle in gold with
the curio^sest workmanship, the poverty of his Arms may cover a virtuous
spirit, and he may prove more redoubted than the best in the assembly,
therefore do not blame, but attend his fortune. Neither do I, (said Singlay)
yet give me leave to smile at the attempt, for his had furnished estate must
needs cause laughter.

3 As they were thus talking Baham of Belmarine set ^oorth himself to the
iusts, but would not run against Bertran, because the bands of his furniture
was an assurance (as he thought) of no defense, and his death nor price of
honor: yet notwithstanding Bertran thrust himself forward: which Boham seeing
said to his companion, there is not remedy but I must encounter yond silly
half armed creature, wherefore I will only overthrow him from his horse, and
that shall be his penance. Which said, he put spurs to his beast, and
Bertran on the other side met him with such an encounter, that lighting upon
Bahams breast with his lance, he ouertheew horse and man to the ground
backward; at which the Ladies laughed exceedingly, and Singlay seeing the blow,
laughed much more than any other, and calling Drohes said, Tell me sweet
knight how shall I take this to see a poor half armed villain overthrow my
love, he that has protested these Arms in mine honor? Madam (said Drohes)
he is a villain that villaino^ly effectteth any thing, but this poor vassal
has done it wi^h such virtue, that of force he must be a Gentleman: and surely
he that with such poor accomplements brings to pass such wonders, what would
he do were he royally adorned in complete perfection? It Is true, it is true
(said Adain who drawing Drohes aside, reported to him, that it was a Bertran
and the occasion of the adventure: at which Drohes changed color and was
somewhat grieved, so that coming to Singlay he humbly desired her that he
might be armed* that if any mi^chaunce should befall them, that he might be
able to defend her, she i^stantly consented, and he was armed, vowing if any
cross chance befell Bertran, he would be his partaker. Bertran by this time
had overthrown three Kings, and Baham that was remounted, whom Bertran twice
had overthrown, swore by Mahomet the third time ot try his success against
the poor armed creature: which doing, Bertran overthrew him with such
vehemency, that with the fall he brake one of his legs asunder, leaving him
on the ground dead to al men's imaginations, so that the Heraults with one voice
cried the poor armed knight is the most valiantest knight in the world.

When Singlay heard this honorable exclamation, she desired Adain to call
Bertran to behold the poor Knight: she replied that he was at his rest, and it
would offend him to be disturbed. Now whilst every one was busied about
Baham, Bertran departed out of the listes vnperceyued of any one* but only
Adain, who went unto him and helped to unarm him, and brought him to Singlay,
who fearful of his health, asked him how he fared. Madame said he better
than before. I am glad (said she) but I am sorry you were not here, where you
might have s^ene a man all in rusty broken halfe-arming armor, that ha^h borne
away the prize, and wounded Prince Baham. How Madam (said she) wounded Prince
Baham your Ladyships love? What, he with whom not any may* compare? O
miracle! By my life (said she) it is most true, Baham was thrice most
villainously overthrown. O Madam (said he) the royal habit makes not the
rich man* nor rich Arms a valiant Knight: and those that o^tenest show the
light of countenance, seldom have the sun of Spirit. This do I speak to
show, that an unlikely man virtuous, is worthier than an adorned dull
spirited. After many other speeches uttered, they rose and went unto the
prison, and the traitorous Marant, when he saw his time issued out of the
chamber, and reported those things which after returned to such mischief upon
himself, that is was the end of all his glory.

CHAP. VI.
1 How Marant accused his sister Singlay, 2 How Bertran made the Pagans believe
he would renounce christianity, 3 How he undertook to combat against Marant.
MArant was no sooner come from his sisters chamber, but he went to the palace
where all the pagan Princes were, and after humble reverence done to King Butor
his father, he took him aside, and discoursed all that had passed betwixt his
sister and Bertran, or Drohes, and Adain, and the whole occurrents of that
days action. Marant said the king, shall I assure my self this is true thou
reportest? With that he swore by an infinite number of oaths* that it was most
true; and in the midst of his protestations Adain passed by that way, and heard
him, which bred not little sorrow in her soul, who coming to Singlay, told
her, that both they and their loves were no less than dead, for all their
actions were known to the King her father, by her cruel brother damnable
Marant. Singlay at the first was vehemently pensive, but in the end, taking
resolution to her, grew careless, and gave her incoragement, saying, I have
advised my self of a mean for our delivery, I will persently go to my bed,
and with tormenting agony comp^alne my self and say, that my brother Marant
would n^edes make wrack of mine honor and defloure me, which for that I
would not consent unto* I will affirm he has sore wounded, and shamefully
entreated me* and to make it the more credible, I will all to be so^le my face
with blood, and you also shall do the like, affirming, that because you came
to my succor, therefore he inflicted this extreme misery. Madame (said
Adain) better cannot be invented. Then Singlay (taking a strong thre^ bound
her fingers and pricked them, making abundance of blood issue forth, with which
she stained the excellency of Nature* pu^^ing in practice all her
determination. And then she sent Adain to their Loves to advertise them
thereof; charging them, that if the pagann did examine them, they should feign
to deny their Christian Religion. Adain did all her commandment, and the
Knights consented: then she returned to Singlay, who lay in her bed all
bloody, faining those infinite gestures of sorrow, that even Sorrow himself
was deceived with her languor. Adain seconded and kept the burden to her
distempera^ure, making so just a concord, that no eye could discern their
disssimulation. By this time King Butor (incensed by Marants speeches) had
called the Queen Mother, and told her of all what he had ever heard; desiring
her to go unto her Daughter and try her, and return her answer. The Queen
(sighing at these speeches) went to the young Ladies chamber, whom she found
almost frantic with sorrow, and brought almost to talk idly with the
tediousnes of weeping: when she beheld her, when wondered, and desired (without
fiction) to know the true cause of her torment. Ha Madam (said she) the cause
let me conceal, for ^will mad both you and my father: Alas, alas, one of the
nearest of my Kin is the wounder of my fortune. At this, the Queen grew more
destrous, and commanded her to report the truth without fear. Madam (said
Singlay) be not then offended, and I will speak what to none (but your selfe^ I
du^st speak: and then she reported from point to point as before she was
determined, How her Brother Marant had enforced her, and slain her honor, at
such time as the Iustes were held by Baham, and at his departure swore by all
the Gods, that if we exclaimed* his sword should make us for ever speaking. To
you Madame have I opened the wound of my shame, for Gods sake be careful: and
good Lady Mother with all speed send me Calyph the Arch-flamine to confess
me, for death (I know) is my portion, and I desire to dye purified, though not
unstained: ^dd as she thus spoke, there flewe head^ong from her heart such
profound heart-wounding sighs, that the chamber ecchoed her lamentations. The
Queen (calling to mind the absence of Marant at the Triumph) instantly gave
credit to her speech, and swore he should dearly r^e his villainy: wherefore
going to the King, she omitted nothing, but doubled her reperts with most
vehement persuasions of likelines. The King seemed hardly to believe, that
nature ^o it self would be so monstrous, and therefore went with Mermont to
her chamber and beheld her; where she consorted so many tears with so many
sighings, as was able to pierce a wall of A^amant: yet the King charged her of
counterfaiting falsehood, and that her deceit was but to smother the villainies
she practiced with the Christians. At these words she powered a flood of tears
from her eyes, and bade his Majesty think as he pleased: but Mahomet (in whom
she affied) knew her innocence. At this the kings departed, and sent for
Marant, whom they accused of this high treason against kind and nature. But he
with vehement oaths denied it* offering to combat against an host of men that
durst accuse him; auerring beside his former accusation to be true, for his
eyes had beheld their villainy: and that also he desired to maintain by sword
or combat in the presence of all his Princes and Barons This resolution was
commended, yet was he commi^^ed to prison* till Singlay was examined: who
being sent for once more before the King* was charged of her former guile: and
demanded why she entertained the Christians into her private chamber? To which
she replied, Dear father, it was your Majesty's pleasure that they should be
in my guard to see if I could persuade them to renounce their opinions, and
become obedient sustainers of our Law: to which end I often sent for them, and
argued in private, and have now fully effected your Highness will, and brought
them utterly to deny Christianity.

2 Butor (whom these speeches made more then well pleased) expelled wrath from
his countenance, and said; Fair Daughter, if thou have done thus, thou have
won my love for ever. Then forthwith he sent ^^nne Knights to fetch Bertran
and Drohes before him, which they did: and as they went, at every protestation
they made, they call Mahomet their God to witness, and the pagans hearing them,
shouted for joy of their conversion. When they came into the Palace before
King Butor, they fell on their knees, and Bertran first said; Mahomet our great
god defend your Majesty: Know then sacred King, that I am come a reporter of a
great miracle, which our God Mahomet wondrously hat^ revealed, and thus it is:
This night in a vision appeared our h^ly prophet Mahomet unto me and in this
manner spoke: Bertran, I do greatly rejoice in the conversion, be strong in thy
faith, and continue my exalter: for reward whereof, when thou risest, go thy
way unto Butor, and say that I command him to give thee in marri^ge his fair
daughter Singlay, whom the traitorous Mara^t (during the time of the Iustes)
most (...) would have ranished: and behold, that thou defend her against his
traitorous practices with those same a^^es, with which in the Tourney I brake
the leg of Baham, and overthrew him three several times to the earth, because
(by his pride) he aspired to enjoy Singlay. ^ell him also, that before I
departed, I overthrew all whosoever set their puissance against me, whilst
that the whole malti^ude cried: Honor to him in the broken armor. This being
said, inuisibly he departed: and what he gave me in charge* I have delivered to
your Majesty. When Butor had (...) him he said unto Mermont: By Mahomet
Bertran has said most true, for it could be no other but Mahomet that this day
so wonderfully prevailed; let all things be as he will, for it is our great
gods pleasure, who (I know) is incensed against Baham and Marant.

3 Then calling Bertran, he asked him if he would combat for his daughters
innocence? Most willingly said he, and chiefly when my God commands, who
will be a rock of defense in my just quarrel. This said, the king went to his
daughter, and embracing her, he had her revive her spirits, for she should have
Iustic^, and if (...) brother were faulty, he should die like a traitor: for he
preferred Right before Nature. Then was Marant brought forth, who utterly
denied the crime wherewith he was accused, de^^^ing no other proof but his
sword and Justice. The place of battle immediately was appointed, and they
commanded to be armed: wherefore Bertran besought the king, that he might have
his arms and sword delivered him, which was done to Bertrans exceeding good
contentment, who in his private soul made a solemn prayer to the true God of
life to aid him, and not to be offended at his disguising, seeing that with
Infidels faith is least to be regarded. Now when he was at all points
prepared* Drohes said; Courage Prince Bertran, for two such as Marant this day
shall not prevail against thee: he is perfectly known a traitor, and his
treason against Meruine is yet a testimony: let that be thy hearts quarrel,
and that shall give thee honor with victory. It Is true, it is ture, said
Bertran, and I have writ it on the table of my memory. Then mounted he on his
horse, and Drohes delivered him his lance: then be trotted to the Listes,
where he found Marant armed at all points, and expecting his coming. At whose
approach Butor descended, and asked if their causes were just, or no? And they
both answered they were. Then the trumpets sounded, and they charged each
other; Marant brake his lance, but Bertrans blow came with such f^rie, that he
struck him from his horse to the ground backward: then, having finished his
careere, he turned with his sword in his hand against Marant, who as yet was
not risen, and said: What Marant, will thou endure any more of this battle? O
no, said Marant, who then was newly risen: yet I pray thee hear what I shall
say. Speak quickly then said Bertran, and I shall attend thee. Prince Bertran,
said Marant, I pray thee even for mine honors sake, feign thou have seen our
God Mahomet, and that he commands a truce between us, and thou shall have
both my life and power at thy commandment: then will I make thy peace with
the King my father, thou sh^lt espouse my sister, and I will live and die for
ever thy v^ssaile. As I live, and by Mahomet, quoth Bertran, most willingly I
will, if thou will so far prevail with thy father, that he will deliver
Prince Meruine from his monstrous infortune. Alas answered Marant, it is
utterly impossible, for the prison wherein he lives is such yea and so strange,
as there is not any so subtle or fortunate, that can approach it, unless they
speak with his keeper, who is no man but an ayrie devil, with whom only my
father has conference touching his imprisonment. When Bertran heard him say
thus, he whisperd to himself: By heaven these pagans are all diuelles,
therefore I will not take one of them to mercy: whereupon lifting up his sword,
and thinking to dispai^h the traitor, he stayed his hand and descen^ed from his
horse, lest Marant should slay him under him and Marant in the mean space, got
the ^^uncheon of a lan^^, think^^g therewith to thrust him through: but he
failed by (...) of Bertrans return, who with his sword gave him such a blow,
that he felled him to the ground, and then leaping upon him, he disarmed his
head from his shoulders* so that his soul forsook her vn^allowed mansion: and
in that same moment, both it and his body were miraculously borne thence into
hell to the ^earefull terror of all the beholders, who concluded him to be
execrable and damned* This finished, Butor came and embraced Bertran, gave him
Singlay to wife, doing him all the honor possible: Mermont did as much, and all
the other Pagan princes, making a festival for his conversion in religion.
Great banquets were made, and Bertran was set at the Table next to the king,
who vaunted, that now there was not a kingdom in christendom which he would
not conquer. Then kissing his daughter, he blessed the time of her generation
saying: Now she should be the Empress of the world, for her husband with
twenty thousand gallants he would give him, should presently go conquer
France. She was proud to hear those speeches, yet neither in show nor in words
would express it; but protested, that if it had not bin Mahomets
commandment, she never would have married. Then was Caliph the Flamine called
for, who incontinently married them, according to the old profane customs of
Mahomet.

CHAP. VII.
1 How Bertran and Drohes (under the pretense of Paganism) brought forty
thousand Pagans before Montment; 2 How the most part of them were there
confounded and put to the sword.
THus (under the veil of infidelity) Bertran and Drohes abused the Pagans,
who verily imagined, that they had renounced Christ Jesus: but it fell out
far otherwise, as you shall understand. When Bertran had espoused Singlay,
doubt not of the Royal solempnities, which continued for the space of eight
days: at the end whereof, Butor delivered to him forty thousand resolved men
at arms, and desired him (with all expedition) to go aid the mighty king
Gorbant, who had for three years laid siege against Montment, but could not
prevail. To this he willingly condiscended, swearing withal, that he and
Drohes also would exalt Mahomet, where yet never any God was adored: but my
Lord, quoth he, I humbly beseech you before I go, let me see the prisoner
Meruine, and on my life I will also convert him again to our true religion. My
son quoth Butor, desire it not, for it is altogether impossible, because, it
I do grant, it is my death; in that I ^aue promised so much to the devil
Mutafier, who daily administreth unto him, and effects what is fit for his
being. Then said Bertran, I will no more desire it, so mustering up his men, he
departed from Minor, Singlay, Adain, Drohes and Mermont going with him, hoping
of that which was without hope, I mean to regaine his city. So continual
was their march, that now they are come to Brandis, where they rested
themselves that night, in which Drohes asked Bertran, what course they should
take to destroy those dogs, those unbelieving infidelels: Instantly said
Bertran, I know not, but we will privately give my father notice, and he shall
come to our succor. When Adain heard them who was niece to king Gorba^t, she
said: Princes write your Letters and upon my soul I will safely deliver them,
and in this manner: Know that king Gorbant is mine uncle, and I ever have bin
right dear in his sighs: to whom I will declare that I am sent in private to
understand the state of the christians in Montment, and how that you are
coming by sea to succor him. I know he will believe me, and (without
contradiction) let me pass careless of any thing. Then more, I will persuade
him to march forth to meet and receive you: which done, I will pass into
Montment, deliver your letters to your father, and make my return (with all
speed) back again. They all highly commended the stratagem and dispatched
her away only with one Attendant, who was a Pagan. All whatsoever she promised
she performed, and abused Gorbant with false joy, went unto Gautier, delivered
the letters* and was royally received Then did Gautier go with his three
sons to counsel, and thus concluded; That they would send to Gorbant, and
faigne to deliver up the town, on condition that they might have leave quietly
to pass into France: making him believe their poverty was so great, they
could no longer endure wars fury: which when he understands, he will fall
to his regardlesse humor. Then shall Bertran and Drohes cause great Feasts and
Banquets to be made: during whose Cupp^^ and Triumphs we will with all our
powers issue forth; and if fortune favor us, make an end of our bad fortunes.
This agreed upon, they delivered it to Adain, who taking her leave departed. In
the mean sapce, Gautier dispatched other letters to Gorbant, who had then (with
all the royal triumph could be invented) received Bertran, Drohes, and the
other Pagans. At which feast, Guyda took her son Barant aside, and said;
Dear sons will thou not accuse me, and I will tell thee a secret: which save
to thy self, shall never be known to any creature living? By Mahomet Mother
(said the youth) I will not. Then know, said she, that this famous prince
Bertran, whose sunne-light staineth all the gallants about him, he even he, and
not Gorbaut, is thy father; he begot thee of me at Damascus, long ere I saw
king Gorbant: and for leaving me in that estate, I took displeasure, and
wedded as thou see. Madame (said Barant) he is a villain, and has done most
damnably: but if he believe not in Mahomet our God, ere long time I will be his
murderer, because he shall not scandal me with the name of a bastard. Turning
these speeches Adain came and saluted King Gorbant: after her Gautiers
Ambassador, who presented his Lords letters. Which when Gorbant had read, he
cried, Pagans rejoice, for before two days be compassed, we will be
commanders of the city: Gautier offers to deliver it, so he may safely
return into France, but it is not our pleasure, for neither he, nor any of his
adhe^ents shall escape unpunished. Thus did king Gorbant boast, who little knew
the news that Adain brought, who privately delivered a letter unto Bertran from
his father: which when he had read, he showed it to Drohes, then they two agreed
to arm themselves under their dublets, which they did, and then went into king
Gorbants tent, desiring, that for the happiness of the news there might be a
festiual proclaimed, and solemn banquets and Iubilies made through all the
camp, with proclamation, that for that day no man, on pain of death, should
put on an armor, or wear a sword, but consecrate all his deeds with mirth to
Mahomet. Gorbant though this motion convenient, and forthwith sent his edicts
and proclamations abroad, which were fulfilled.

2 Gautier the holy Dane all this while was within Montment preparing his host
in a readiness, only staying the return of an espiall, whom he had sent to
bring him word when the Pagans were set at dinner: Long it was not but he came
and ^ad him in the name of God issue forth, for the Pagans were all set and
triumphing, careless of all manner of danger whatsoever. This being said,
Gautier left the city, having in his army but only ten thousand soldiers,
which was all his remainder, and made so great haste, that they entered the
Pagan camp, to the dismay of their adversaries. Gautier with his sword naked
entered into Gorbants tent, and came close to the table where Bertran sat, who
when he beheld his fathers arms, overthrew the table, and catching a battle
axe in his hand which was there, he struck king Gorbant such a blow betwixt
the neck and the shoulders, that he divided his head from his body. At which
fight all the pagans were amazed, but Griffoner of Damascus cried, Bertran this
day, by treason, will be our destruction: and then taking Barant and his
sister, he fled away with twenty attendants, whom we will leave to their
flight, and return to the battle, which begun in Gorbants tent, and so
generally through all the camp, in which scarce a Pagan or Sarazen suruiued:
mighty was the resolution of Bertran, and glorious to behold his valor, whom
none durst encounter, and from whom none escaped. Mermont, who before time had
lost his hand, seeing this immovable misery, cried, Woe and alas we are all
betrayed, ha lovely Singlay, thou and this Adain are mistresses of our sorrow.
Now by the heavenly virgin, quoth Singlay, thou have but thine own deserving,
for by treason thou betrayedst virtue, and, than thy self there is not a
greater traitor: remember it is now twelve years since thou did mock
Christianity, to which I am converted, and most falsely betrayedst the most
exquisite Meruine unto a tormenting hell that has no ending, record that
mischief, and confess what thou deseruest. As she was thus speaking, Bertran
rushed in upon Mermont, and said: Uillaine, now shall thy life render me
account for the loss of the worlds pa^agon, excellent Meruine, and then with
his ax he claue him to the shoulders. Griffoy this space accompanied with many
Pagans, fled to the sea for safety, whilst the Christians ranging in their
tents put all to the sword that remained. In brief, in this battle was slain
above an hundred thousand Pagans, and but three and twenty christians, and they
of no other esteem than private soldiers: the christians also took v. hundred
prisoners, so that of all the heathen army escaped but four thousand, which
fled away with Guida that sorrowed most ex^remely for the death of Gorbant her
lord and husband, and had no contentment but the escape of her young son, who
swear in his infancy by Mahomet, that the time should come he would be
revenged of Bertran, both for this, and his mothers ancient abuses, which
indeed came to pass, for he lived to be both the death of his father, and all
his famous uncles. But let that pass til fitter opportunity of discourse: now
it fell out, that after this discom^^ture, the Christians did return to the
Pagans pauillions, where they found infinity riches, which were so equally
divided, that the poorest soldier got the title of a rich Merchant. After this
they went into the city, and made great feasts and triumphs then in royal
manner was Singlay, Adain, and all the other prisoners baptized, and Gautier
took an oath to pursue his enemies, even to the walls of Damascus, but he
failed, as you shall see in the next chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
1 How an Ambassador came to Gautier, who brought him word, that the Emperor
Charlemaine had destroyed all his country of Denmark: 2 How Drohes went to
deliver Meruine: and how Gautier arrived at Maiance.
IN the first part of this history ye may remember, how discontentedly
Charlemaine departed from Meruine and Gautier, for the hate of Huon of
Bordeaux, whom Gautier then amongst his sons maintained, and how he vowed in
despite of Gautier, to make all Maiance and Denmark l^ment that ever they
knew him. Which indeed he did, so mighty was the malice then reigning in him.
Wherefore the noble men of that country dispatche^ an ambassador unto Gautier,
to give him to understand of their troubles, who arriving at Montment, and
coming into the palace where he found his king, he ^ell upon his knees, and
after ^uch holy reverence as belongd to his estate said: My sacred and
imperial sovereign, know that the nobility of Maiance by me salute thy
Highness, and give thee to understand, that the great Charles of France, in
despite has ruined thy country, and banished from thy court all by royal
coun^rymen: wherefore by me they entreat your Majesty, with speed to return
and stanch the wounds yet freshly bleeding else hereafter it will be too late,
and thou utterly dispossessed of a kingdom. When Gautier had heard this
message, he rowzed himself, and with a frowning gesture rep^ied, As I breathe,
I will not sleep out this injury, but come with such an host as shall make
Charles dearly repent it: and then he caused proclamation to be made through
all the city, that every soldier on pain of death should in the morning be
ready to be embarked for Maiance, which was performed; then he called Jacob,
giving unto him the government of the city and sad Mathaburn, a leaving a
sufficient garrison* and taking an oath for his trust and ^ealtie.

2 To be brief, every one in the morning was ready to depart, but only Drohes,
who refused, and said to Gautier, that he had vowed never to manage other
action, or embrace one quiet thought till he had found the mean for Meruins
delivery. Which when his love Adain heard, she said, she also in that would be
his companion. But he gainestoode her, saying the pain would be too mighty.
But she would not be refused, though he judged truly, for she was slain by
Griffoy. as you shall hear in the story. Gautier seeing their resolves, gave
them leave, and so departing from them embarked himself, to whom the wind was
so prosperous that he arrived in safety near to Maiance, where he found Dion
of Nantuell his near kinsman, who though he had lain long sick, most
joyfully received both him and his sons, declaring what evil Charles had
done since his coming: all which Bertran vowed, or to mend or to revenge. Then
sommoned they all their friends and kindred to their aid, amounting to the
number of twenty thousand, all of the line of Oger, which with those that
Gautier had brought, made the army thirty thousand and better, then duke
Dardain advised them to send ambassadors to Charlemaine, to request restitution
for the wrongs before passed, which if he refused, the^ to pursue them with
revenge even unto the Loure in Paris. To this advise they accorded: yet Bertran
would not leave, but marched day and night til he came within the sight of the
French army, executing as he went all whom he found traitorous or false to
their country, intending to raise the siege which Charlemaine held before the
castle of Nantuell: but a traitor of Maiance understanding it, went before,
and advertised the Emperor: which as soon as he understood, he called the
duke of Dampmartin Naymes, and the rest of his nobility to council, in which
consultation, duke Naymes persuaded all peaceable conditions, laying before
their eyes the profits of their concord, and the ruin of christendom by
their fatal warrefare, withal, telling the empe^or, that the most of his own
barons were descended from Gautiers pedigree, and in nature would aid him
before he should miscarry. Charles grew enraged at his words, and swore by the
God of paradise to put all those to a shameful death that offered to stir
their feet before two months were expired, or aided him not to lay waste that
fatal country. Thus spoke Charlemaine, but the good Duke Naymes left not his
persuasions, till there was a truce taken for ij. years: during which time
sprung a new warrefare that wounded all christendom, by Barant surnamed the
Cruel (whom Bertran begot of Guyda) now 5. years old, and by the pagans, that
crossed the seas, came into Christendom: of which Barant made a piteous
slaughter house, in that none was able to endure his force, as you shall hear
hereafter. In the mean space we will to our former occurrents

CHAP. IX.
1 Of the great battle which was between the Emperor and Gautier, in which
Charlemaine was taken prisoner: 2 How Loys the son of Charles came with a
great power against Maiance to revenge his father.
THe two years expired, for which the truce was before taken, betwixt the good
emperor Charles and Gautier; by the means of trai^erous conspira^ors, which
were about the Emperor new seeds of coffeehouse were sown, and he
commanded all his barons to attend him to Maiance, of which Gautier was
advertised, who desired all his friends, to be heedefull of their evils. Now
departed the emperor from Paris, vowing never to return into France, if he
brought not Gautier and his sons to their funeral, and soon arrived within
two leagues of Maiance. Which when Gautier by his espialles understood he
mustred his friends, and marched to meet his enemies, whose power was divided
into ten bata^llions: and when he was commen within sight of them, after
speeches of encouragement, bravely they charged each other, and came to handy
blows, Cruelty and Terror coming from hell to learn more misery than had
bin seen in former ages: great was the resolution of Charles that day, who
slew ten in a breathing moment, none escaping whom his sword blessed* Gautier
on the other side was not behind for true magnanimity, neither Bertran or any
of his brethren, who like mad man made havoc of all with whom they
incountered, anon Bertran met with the emperor, and with a batle a^e which he
bare he stroke him such a blow on his helmet that he feld him from his horse,
and that with such heavy virtue, that for all the gold of the earth he was not
able to rise to regaine liberty, but force perforce was taken prisoner: which
the Duke of Britain seeing, he cried, Courage great king, and thou shall soon
be redeemed, with that he and all the flowers of France assailed Bertran, who
so bravely defended himself, that in that conflict he flew the Duke of
Britain. Many times was the Emperor remounted and vnmounted, so infinity
courageous were the four brethren. Gautier their father in an other part of
the field made many horses maisterlesse, and many masters senseless, so
fortunate was his sword, and so lucky his resolution: this battle continued
exceeding long, christians against christians, self law against self law, and
colors against colors. The King of England, who came in the aid of Denmark
that day did wondrous deeds of Knighthoode. But king Charlemaine frantic of
see his loss, ranged here and there till he met with Thyerrie, the son
of Gautier, whom with Joyous his good sword he s^ue at the first encounter.
Bertran lion-like affrighted the amazed flocks of the French men before him,
only to find Charles, and no other; whom so soon as ever he encountered,
he felled from his horse with a blow, and there presently had slain him, if
his father who was always exceeding wise had not withheld him, saying, it was
a sin most capital, to slay the brauest champion in the world, or touch the
blood of the holy anointed. Wherefore taking him prisoner, with a strong guard
they conveyed him to Maiance. The Frenchmen no sooner saw their king surprised,
but they be^ooke themselves to flight. At which Gautier rejoiced, and disdained
to pursue them, but forthwith went to Maiance, where he made processions and
triumphs for his victory, and the taking of the famous Emperor Charlemaine;
to whom (being before him) he said, Sacred and high esteemed king of France,
immortal are the wrongs which I have indur^d by you, and justly has the King
of Kings inflicted this deserved shame on your dishonor, both for these iniust
actions, and for exiling (without cause) the jewels of thy kingdom from their
na^iue coutries: Know therefore, thou shall never escape from this thraldom
till thou have made me a sufficient restitution, and wep^ thy wrongs from thy
souls bitterness. By my Crown, said Charles, I will never do it, and if
thou do not deliver me, thou act unjust, because thou art sworn my liege
man and subject. As thus they were arguing an esquier entered into the hall, his
eyes blubbred with weeping, who turning himself to Gautier, told him of the
death of Thierrie, which Bertran no sooner heard but heauing up his battle axe,
he thought, and had ^^aine King Charles, bu^ his father catching him in his
arms, withheld him, saying; fie son, fie, why seek thou to kill the good
Emperor, or to s^aine thine honor by killing in cold blood? Thy brothers
death was the chance of war, and his grave is honorable, where thus to kill
the Emperor were ignominious and slaughterous. Yet this I do protest, I will
imprison him during his life, if better persuasion counsel me not to the
contrary. This being said, king Charles was enclosed in a strong tower, and
with him four and twenty other prisoners. Which done, Gautier caused Thierry
to be solemnly interred and all the rest that were slain with him in the
battle; the whilst Duke Naymes and those that escaped by flight, repaired
home to their own countries.

2 The Duke Naymes as soon as he entered into Paris, reported to Loys (the
Son of Charlemaine) the imprisonment of his Father; who (from the torment of
his angry spirit) protested to dye, or revenge his Fathers dishonorable
indignity. To which end, he dispatched his Commands through all the Cities
of France, and mustered an Army to the number of an hundred and fifty thousand
resolved Soldiers, with which he departed from Paris and came to Deep, where
he took shipping and made for Denmark. Where we will leave him, and speak a
little of Barant (surnamed the Cruel) who by this time was grown so mighty,
that not any Horse had ability to sustain him; and yet the tyranny of his
mind did exceed the monstrousnes of his body, for he caused his own Mother to
be beheaded, because (in a discontenter humor) she called him Bastard: at which
inhumane slaughter, many repined, but he slew them eaeri^ one that did but give
a show of displeasance; so that through his terror, all the Pagans became
obedient to his will. With a great Army of men he went before Montment, and
won it both by assault and devilish art: for the same night that he slew his
mother, the damned Fiend Mutafier appeared unto him, and made a co^enant with
him, that he should never (for any thing whatsoever) renounce the law of
Mahomet; to which he willingly agreed: for joy whereof, Muta^ier triumphed and
said he should be the destruction of all Christendom, promising that he should
never die by the hand of any man having been nursed by the milk of woman. This
promise made Barant proud: for he imagined that there could not be any infant
brought up without the milk of a woman; wherefore he held and reputed
himself ever invincible. When Barant the Cruel had taken Montment, he put
Jacob to death, and all those that trusted in the true God of all things, whom
Mathaburna again denied, as ye shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. X.
1 How Barant, surnamed the Cruel, departed from Montment with three hundred
thousand soldiers, and passed the Sea toward Maiance: 2 how Charles and
Gautier made a peace, and ioy^ed against the Pagans.
WHen Barant had brought all Montment to his subjection, he went to the
Palace, where he found the most beautiful Mathaburna, and demanded of her,
whether she would adore Mahomet or no. My good Lord (said she) I never refused
him, for he has always been dear in my heart, and his temple have I
reserved in my bosom. When Barant beheld with what a comely grace her speeches
were delivered, and noted the excelling beauty, that reflecting from one eye
to another, he became mightily enamored and in love with her favor; so that not
able to smother his desires, bluntly (like a will-wooing moouer) he said;
Madame, your excellencies make me wonder, that never before believed there was
such a thing as admiration: in brief, I love you* and if you will let me
espouse you, I will make you Queen of France, and give you the World for a
Dowry. My Lord (said she) I humbly thank you, but no Espousalls shall be so
welcome to me, as the Conquest af France, and the death of Charles who has
been the ruin of so many of my Kindred; and on whom incessantly I pray for
some strange vengeance to fall, so incessan^ is the hate I bear him. Fair
Madame (said Barant) you are exceeding wise: and here I promise you before
Mahomet, whom I call to witness of my Uow, within this short space, I will either
give him into your own hands to take vengeance of him, or dye in attempting
your pleasure. I beseech you my Lord do so, said Mathaburna: whose heart was
clean of a cantrarie opinion, wishing rather to him and his confederates worse
torments than Hell fire, before that Charles (in thought) should be
discontented. Thus she whispered to her self, and then speaking alowde,
said; Yet have I one other suit to your Lordshippe, which is, if you can fi^de
out a Knight whose name is Meruine, bring him to me, that I may revenge my
self of a notable wrong he has done me: and then will I not only be your
Love, but your vassal, and you shall wholly dispose of me. This Request he
swore upon his life to perform. As these speeches were uttered; there came
into their presence a Sarazen forth of Denmark, who for fear had received
Baptism, that falling on his knees, reported to Barant all the great battle,
and the success which passed betwixt Charles and Gautier, and of the Emperors
imprisonment: telling him, that if his Highness were in France, there was no
let, but that at his pleasure he might conquer the whole Nation, since civil
Dissension had broken the sinews of their Concord. At these words, Barant was
so much ouerioyed, that regardlesse of any manner of thing, he would needs
kiss Mathaburna: but she repulsed him, saying; No man under heaven should
touch her, until she were espoused, according to Mahomets law. This disdain
did very much inrage him, so that through his passion, he had stricken her, if
a Lord of his counsel had not withholden him, whom he right highly esteemed:
which Lord chid him for his rashness, in offering to kill her whom his heart so
much loved, and one of so wise and divine be^iour. Amend my Lord quoth he your
fault, and for very shame ask pardon. At these words Barant went unto her, and
demanded if she would forgive him. Yea my lord quoth she, when you bring
Charles and Meruine to be my prisoners. Thanks gentle Lady replied he, and
forthwith he caused a trumpet to be sounded, and sommoning his army, departed
toward Maiance, where by the aid of devils and furies) he arrived at the Port
ten leagues from the city: where he began to sack, burn and destroy all
the Country as he went, showing himself a monstrous devilish tyrant, and no
man. The poor Countrymen that saw their houses burning, and their wives and
children dying, ran to Gautier, and told him of the hideous ruin which the
Pagans made in the Country, laying it waste like a forsaken wilderness, their
number being greater than any eye could account. These amazing words raised the
blood from Gautiers heart into his eyes, and thence distilled in drops of
salt water, so that tormented with sudden fear, he called for his Lords and
went to counsel: during which consult, arrived before the City, Prince Loys
of France, and his French army, who did pitch their pauillions close to the
walle^, being at that time ignorant of the pagans commings.

2 It was thought most convenient by Gautiers counsel, that the Emperor
Charles should be delivered, that with his aid he might help to beat back
the Pagans: which was performed. And Gantier with honny-dipped words entreated
the Emperors favor, saying; he thought the heavens were displeased with their
disagreements, for that within those days) there were arrived in his kingdom
above three hundred thousand Pagans, who had already conquered Mequa,
Jerusalem. Babylon* and all those Countries before (...), by Meruine ^o
famously conquered: and that now his fortune was in the balance of Mischance
or Honor. When Charles had heard his words and marked his humblenes, then pity
expelling all rancor from his ^reast* he embraced (...) and his sons, and
took a (...) oath of perpetual amity: for my wh^^^of, all the ti^y rung with
clamours* and every one triumphed above measure. ^his done, Charles walking on
the city walls, saw from the battlements* the tents of the brave French men:
which knowing, he said unto Gautier; I believe that Loys my son is in yonder
army: (...) if (...) not deceived, I see the shining of his colors. It is most
true said Gautier, and I am very glad of his coming, for his aid is a
welcome hope to our doubtful adventure against these damned Pagans, whose
General is none other but a mortal devil, as far from pity as piety, and
both to him utterly unacquainted. Then Charles calling for his horse,
accompanied with the Count of Dampmartin, and the Count of Anioy, he rode
forth to his sonne^ tents, where after royal entertainment, he declared the
peace that was concluded, the reasons, and the general good that should
thereby be gotten. Then he, his son, duke Naymes, and the rest, returned into
the city, whom Gautier and his sons met in most solemn order, and conducted
through the streets, every one doing honor to Charlemaine: and so brought him
to the palace, where with unspeakable joy they reposed. After them the whole
army marched, and were received and lodged in the City. Then the Kings and
Princes went to counsel touching their weighty wars affairs: in which it
was concluded, that the town should be victualled and manned for many years,
so the tediousness of siege should not prevail against them. Also it was
agreede, that Prince Loys and Bertran with twenty thousand should lie in an
ambush, that when the Pagans had pitched their Tents before the town, they in
the dead of the night should assail them; and either overthrow or disseuer the
army. All they conceived ^it, they put in practice: and the ambush was laid in
a great wood, by which of force the Pagans must pass, who abo^^ high noone,
came marching in such invincible troops that the ways hardly could contain
them* In the last rank of all marched a king whose name was Gamart of
Mo^tiurne, and king of Iuerne the great: with him marched a gentleman of his
country, who was almost all naked, and the king himself had his head and feet
bare. These carried in their hands boughs which they used in battle, and no
other weapons: their strength is their swiftnes, for they run faster than
hares when gray hounds pursue them.

CHAP. XI.
How Bertran, his Brethren, Loys and the other Christians is^ued upon the
Pagans: 2 the deaths of all the famous Christians except Loys; 3 of the
Battle betwixt Barant the cruel, and of Bertran of Denmark.
AFter this naked nation was marched by, (which were the rereward of the
battle) the Christians mounted on horseback, Prince Bertran being the first;
who (holding his batleaxe in his hand) charged the Iuernoys, and in a breath
space put them all to the sword, except those which (to the amazement of the
Christians) ran not, but flew to Barant, and cried; Turn thee Prince, turn
thee, for the Christians are amongst us. At this, Barant turning, commanded to
sound Alarm, and with an host of Elephants (whose very weight made the earth
tremble) answered the charge of his enemies. Now were the Christians and the
Pagans mingled together, and began a Battle, huge, fearful, and wondrous
uncertain. Famous Prince Bertran (like a Tiger in a flock) made havoc of
the Pagans, and (at the first encounter) slew a Kinsman of Bahams, whose leg
he brake of Minor. Three other Pagans at one instant charged prince Loys and
unhorsed him; who being nimble, rose again, and miraculously defended himself
with his sword: yet had he been taken Prisoner, but that the County
Dampmartin rusht in to his Rescue, overthrowing three pagans at one blow.
Bertran beholding this tumult, brake the Raukes that stood before him, and came
to Loys; yet the Pagans were so abundantly infinite, that they killed his horse
under him: at which though he grieved, yet was he not abashed, but coming to
Loys, bad him be of good courage, for he would not leave him till he saw him
newly remounted. At these words (with his axe) he slew a pagan, and taking his
horse (in despite of his Enemies) mounted Loys. Then increased the fierceness
of the Battle, where the pagans dyed so fast, that the ground was covered
with their bodies: at which, Barant (named the Cruel) cha^ed most wonderfully,
and protested to bury himself there, if he buried not this dishonor in the
glory of the Christians.

With this he divided his Army, and enclosed his Enemies round about on
every side: whose hearts (lift up to heaven) cried to their Divine helper for
succor; being but a Fish pond to the great Ocean of their Adversaries. Guyon
and Florion (missing Bertran) raunged about, and found him on foot with the
Count Dampmartin and prince Loys: to whom they said, that all their lives were
forfeite, and there was no way to save their honors but death, being now
enclosed on every side. Which when Loys heard, he said; Ha Charles, this day
shall thou be Sonlesse and comfortless. ^ut Bertran (into whom Fear was
afraid to enter) encouraged him, and said; Why prince thou art well mounted,
fear not then, for this day we will be Conquerors: with that he slew another
Pagan King who pressed near him, and upon his horse mounted the Count of
Dampmartin, saying he would furnish himself presently, which he did by the
death of another Pagan. Then he desired his Brothers, not to forsake, but
follow him, for that day he would be such a lusty Wooer, that Conquest should
not choose but wedde with him. They swore to do his desire, and then the
battle was more dreadful than ever it was: for by this time the Christians
had slain thirty thousand of the best approved Sarazens, at which sight
Barant grew mad, and raylde both against his Me^, Mahomet, and Jupiter.

2 This done, he flew like a Tempest amongst the Christians, and ouerthrewe
all with whom he encountered: an hundred he brought dead to the ground without
respite* from whose sight the Christians fled as from the devil, calling on
God, and blessing themselves with prayer and crosses Piteous was the sight to
behold, for they could fly no way but into danger* ^o strongly they were
enclosed* in so much, that of twenty thousand which they were in the beginning,
now there remained but ten thousand, and they unable to endure Battle, so
irresistable was the prowess of Barant. Which bloody confusion when Bertran
saw, his man^y heart relented, and honorable tears issued from his never
before so stained Beauer. Loys was much more heartely sorry, and millions of
times wished himself within the Walls of Paris: wherefore he said to Bertran;
Ha Prince, this is our doomes-day, and here must all our ^ames take their
burial: O, knew my royal Father our misfortune, I know we should in a trice
be rescued. Why Prince (replied Bertran) will you go to him, and see if you
can procure it? Willingly (said Loys) if it were possible to pass. To pass,
said Bertran? why pluck up thy spirits and do but only follow me, and I will
make the way easy enough for thee: which indeed he did, putting all the
Pagans to death that were obstacles or lets in his way. When he was got
through the host, and put Lois into the wood he said, Fair prince, commend my
souls love to the emperor Charles, my father, and the fair unfortunate
Singlay my wife, and tell them, this day I have bound my self, either to see
the utter ruin of paganism, or to die in defending our most sincere and holy
religion. Fair prince (answered Loys) I will do thy message, but I had much
rather thou would go with me, because this day the field is no field but a
^laughterhouse* Not to be deified (said Bertran) will I forsake my brothers,
and so taking leave, Loys departed toward the city, and he again to the
battle, raging up and down till he found his brethren, who were most
mightily oppressed, till by his pr^wesse he redeemed them: which no sooner was
done, but Barant the Cruel, with Entrant the good sword of prince Meruine in
his hand, which the devil Mutafier had delivered him, and with which (in that
moment) he had slain ten noble christians, came and opposed himself against
Bertran, who with his battle axe gave him such a blow on the helmet, and with
such power, that slipping down, ^ut the horse neck in sunder, bringing Barant
ashamed to the earth, who before never had felt a blow of such puissaunce, so
that calling to Bertran he said, I beseech thee christian, tell me what thou
art, whose virtue I wonder at. My name (said Bertran) was never hid for fear
of any Pagan, know then, men call me Bertran of Denmark: when Barant heard
this, he knew he was his father, where fore he commanded all his soldiers to
retire from him, because he would with him try fortune in single combat.
Which when his men had done, Barant said, Prince Bertran, you remember your
imprisonment at Damascus, your love to Guyda my mother, whom traitorously you
forsook and left with child of me who am your son: and you can not forget
your vows: now shall all they, nor your valor avail to deliver you from
death, unless you do fall down and adore our great God Mahomet. When Bertran
had heard him, and being enraged with so vile a motion, he said: Thou art not
my Son, neither will I ever acknowledge the begetting of so profane a
Devil: and with that lifting up his axe, h^e struck him a marvelous great
blow, which began the fearful combat betwixt the father and the son, in
which was showed the wonders of resolution; whom in that fight we will leave,
and speak a little of the other christians who were all slain save three and
twenty, which yet suruiued, though mightily wounded. Guyon amongst the rest was
deadly wounded by Barant, yet endured as if he had been immortal, till the
blood falling into his eyes deprived him of his sight, yet notwithstanding, he
would not leave fighting, but struck here and there, killing all that came
near him: in the end, he assailed his brother Florion with such a merciless
blow that he feld him down to the earth, who in falling cried, Ah brother
Guyon, thou have slain me whilst I regarded not thy fury: woe and alas cried
Guyon, what have I done? sweet brother forgive me, for the blood of my
wounds has closed up mine eyes, and I did not nor could not behold thee, my
self am likewise wounded to the death, and mine hours are shortning. This he
said, yet would not leave fighting whilst he had breath to breathe a minute,
but sat firmly on his horse till there was left alive but ten Christians:
then came a pagan and ran his lance through Florions body, who said, Now is
my death certain, yet will I not die unrevenged, and with that struck the
Sarazin that he claue him to the girdle, saying, Thus dies the son of
Gautier, himself by himself revenged: then fell ^e down* there being at that
hour but six breathing christians, who^e names were these* Guyon that had his
(...) wound upon him, and his sight forsaken; Florion that likewise was at his
last breathing; the Count Dampmartin; the (...) Dardaine; the Duke of Aniow;
and Bertran that then with his son Barant was combating, the former five
endured long, but in the end, they were all dispatched, so that of twenty
thousands there was left but only one, and that was unfortunate Bertran.

3 Admirable was his and Barants combat, all the ar^^y (...) their
resolutions, and vowing amongst them selves never to part them till those of
them had left his life: very variable was Fortune betwixt them, the son now
triumphing at the ^athers decaying, and the father immediately smiling at the
sons misfortune* so long lasted this battle, and so much unnatural was the
conflict, that the day ashamed, forsook the heavens; then ran the pagans and
fetched torches, and made such fire works, that the night was as bright as the
sunshine, half of which they spent in dreadful and doubtful wars: the son
offering the father mercy, if he would adore Mahomet, the father proffering to
the son forgiveness, if he would renounce blasphemous Mahomet: but both of
them being of contrary resolutions, they (...) afresh to their fearful and
fatal combat: and Barant vow^d, if he conquered his father, that he would
make himself monarch of all the whe^^ world. As he was thus protesting.
Bertran gave him a blow on the head, which brought both his kn^es to the
ground: but starting up suddenly again, he sent it back with such a violent
requital, as mightily vexed and enraged Bertran, that thinking at one stroke
to finish the conflict, he gatherd al his strength together, and st^oke him so,
that he br^k^ his axe in pieces, so that left without defense, he closed with
Barant, whom by his strength he overthrew: but the Pagans ran in and pulled
Bertran so, that Barant go^ upon him, an^ ^aue him diverse mortal blow* Then
Barant pulling on his helmet he said, Father, now be wise, for this is the
la^^ moment, in which your life is forfeited* if you will not adore Mahomet,
and renounce that God which ever thou have esteemed. Traitor said Bertran, and
thou bastard son of a defiled curtezan, think thou death can make me deny my
Savior? thou art deceived, thou art deceived. When Barant saw his constancy,
he drew forth his dagger and stabbed his father four times, who cried, thou
only great God of Is^ael and Savior of the world, forgive mine errors, and
receive my soul into thy bosom, with that Barant struck him through the
heart, and so he departed this life. Then stood up Barant and said to his
army, Behold Princes, now ought you highly to esteem me that have slain my
mother and my father, to the end I might make mighty your religion, therefore
take up this dead body, and bear it with me, to kill the heart of old Gautier
with consuming sorrow.

CHAP. XII.
1 How Loys came to Maiance and reported the woeful estate of the Christians,
and the sorrow Gautier made for his sons. 2 Singlayes sorrow, and the message
Barant sent to Charles, together with the answer. 3 How Barant slew one of the
messengers.
THe young prince Loys, who in the battle had received many great wounds, was
now returned to Maiance, and with a very heavy countenance (the first report of
misfortune) came unto the Kings palace, where he did find the Emperor
Charles his father, who looking on his sad looks, asked what was become of the
christian a^my? for (said he) thy looks are heavy and uncomfortable. It Is true
my lord (said he) and that would hold me longer, but falling to the ground, he
swowned: at which Charles cried out with amazement, whereby Gautier and his
nobles came forth, who recovered Loys, and laid him on a bed, who calling his
father and the rest about him, declared al what had passed in the battle
during the time he tarried, and how the whole army of twenty thousand were
slain by the pagans, O peace young prince (said Gautier) kill me not with thy
words, flatter my death a little, and say not that all my sons are (...). My
Lord (said Loys) doubt not but they are al slain^, or before I left them, we
were all enclosed round about, so as it was impossible for any to escape, only
my self had fortune, which fortune, I begd from Bertrans sword, who with very
much danger to himself hewed my way before me.

2 Gautier hearing this, tore his garments, rent his hair, and ^ringing his
hands, made such piteous and lamentable lamentation, that the air resounded
with his outcries, and all that saw him, became part^ers of his heaviness.
Yet a great degree above the dgree of his perfit^ woe ascended the immortal
afflictions of the most excellent Singlay, Bertrans unhappy wife, whose tears
are impossible to be described, and to whose woe none can find an equal
epytheton. O heavens (said she) O time, O hard hearted providence, wherein
have I offended, that to my life is adjudged an endless torment? Speak,
speak you adamantine destinies, why have you robbed the world of her renown,
and me of my glory? O that I had time enough to rail on you, or that by
railing the time of your powers might be expired. Ah miserable wretch that I
am, left all (...) and desolate, who now shall sustain mine anguish, or pity
my mournings? Alas, none but Death: come then gentle Death, I mean not the
slow footed death which attend the footesteps of nature, but the grim Death,
sudden death, the page to untoward mischief, come thou and be my comfort,
thou which have ^houghts wings, come quickly, and be not ^ardy, or thus in
despite will I pull thee into my bosom; and with that taking a knife which
hung at her girdle, she had stabbed her self to the heart, but that a squier
of Bertrans standing by did hold her, chiding her desper^^e thoughts, and
persuading a more temperate resolution: she seeing her will broken, swowned,
and reswowned, so that by the help of the Ladies, she was conveyed into her
chamber, where she reposed. Generally ran this sorrow over all Maiance, and
every one wept the loss of the princes. During these days of mourning, the
porters that guar^ed the gates (...) the city grew amazed, for on a sudden
they saw a numberless host of Pagans begirt the town round about, and pitch
their pauillions in the face of the City: the news whereof they forthwith
carried to the sad king, which hardly was delivered, but word was brought there
were two Turks royally mounted, who craved access to deliver a message from
their mighty Lord Barant the Cruel: they had entrance granted, and were
brought to the palace before Charlemaine, Gautier, Naymes, and the twelve
Peers of France, where after some proud reverence one of the Turks thus
spoke, To thee King Charles of France my Lord and Master prince Barant the
Cruel sends this message, If thou like a votarie bare footed, thy hands
bound, and acorde about thy neck, accompanied with Gautier in like manner,
come and fall down before him* submitting your selves to his mercy, and
renounce the God whom you worship, that then your peace shall continue;
otherwise, he voweth never to depart from this country till he have made it
more waste than Gruntland, or the frozen mountains in Scythia. Pagan (answered
Charles when he had heard the message) if thy Lord do that, I shall be sorry,
but tell him from me, that to morrow I will give him battle, and fear not,
but before night to make him run headlong into the Sea for his safety. This
is all, and this deliver.

3 At this the pagans departed, and came to their Lord Barant who seeing them,
asked if Charles would accomplish his pleasure; No answered one of them, but
voweth to morrow to give you battle, and in the greatest scorn^ that may be
esteems your Highness threatening; as for the law of Mahomet he said it
was damned, and he esteemed it ^aser than the basest earth he trodon. Uillains
(said Barant) heardst thou him revile our religion, and did not kill him?
By Mahomet thou shall pay for thy cowardice, and at that word he struck him
dead to the ground with his punyarde. The other Ambassador seeing this, ran
amongst the Pagans and hid himself, swearing if he escaped now, never
again to go on any messages of Barants. Now by this time began the day to put
on the nights apparel, and they went to their restes till the next morning, at
what time they arose and armed themselves to receive battle. Charlemaine on
the other side was as mightily troubled, who by the sound of trumpet gathered
his army together, and marching out of the town, he divided his host into
five battallions, every one containing at least twenty thousand Knights and
vpwardes.

CHAP. XIII.
1 How the Christians gave battle to the Pagans, in which turmoile the good
King Gautier was slain, and his host overthrown, 2 Charlemaine is forced to
retire, and issues out the second time, 3 The taking of Loys, and Duke Naymes
prisoners.
WHen Charlemaine was commen unto the place of battle, advised by the duke of
Naimes, he sent ten thousand of his soldiers back to defend the city,
for fear of some secret stratagem, and then sounding all his trumpets, and
making a fearful noise, they gave a brave charge on their enemies, crying.
Saint Denis, and our right this day: and in that first onset they ^iue of the
pagans almost an hundred thousand; but they so infinitely abounded, that the
christians began to stand amazed at their numbers. But Gautier, who looked
for nothing but for revenge for his sons deaths, stayed not at any thing, but
meeting with a king whose name was Bruant struck him dead to the earth* after
him, an other, and another, and then out drawing his fair bright Sword (his
lance being broken) he ^utte off King Danemons head, and then rushing
depserately into the prease, he put to death all that encountered him. This
while was the good king Charles amongst the pagans, where he killed king
Feragu, and diverse others of famous estimation, but in the end he was enclosed
round on every side, where he defended himself miraculously: yet
notwithstanding, if it had not been for the Duke Naymes and diverse other
gallants of France, their king perforce had been either slain or taken, who
seeing their succors, ^reuiued new spirits, and fought like a god of Conquest
Barant the Cruel was not this while idle, but slew the Christians by two and
two together, so that the most resolved in the army durst not abide him, but
began to convert retrait to plain flying. Which Gautier with grief
beholding, demanded a reason for their faintness: to whom a French man made
answer, there was a devil in the Pagan host, whose fury was not possible to
be endured. Gautier desiring to see him, the French man with pure fear brought
him to behold him, to whom Gautier cried, Traitor, stay, and give my sword
account for thy murders, and so saying, he struck him upon the headpiece so
strongly, that the blow glauncing hurt Barant in the thigh; at which the tyrant
(being highly enraged) turned and said: Uillaine, thou have hurt me, but thy
life shall be my plaster, and at that word lifting aloft his sword, ^e cut off
one of Gautiers hands and the sword that was grasped in it* which when the good
king saw, spur^ing his horse, he overthrew both Barant and his hor^^ to the
earth; in which mean space, a Pagan coming behind him, gave the Christian
king such a blow on the helmet, that he claue him to the chaps, and he fell
down dead without motion. Then began the christians to fly here and there
about the field for safe^y, at which confusion, Charlemaine sighed and after
many holy prayers (...) thrust himself amongst his enemies, more (...) than
before: of his army was not left alive but five thousand, and the most of those
flying, and not fighting ^ the which duke Naymes perceiving, he persuaded the
Emperor to let a retrait be sounded: which as he was intending to have done,
one brought to him word that Gautier was slain, so that both grieved and
enraged, he flew upon the king of ^artaria, who but then had slain a
Christian, and with the first stroke claue him to the collar.

2 The dying battle at this seemed to recover, but yet could it not continue,
so weak were the ouer-maistered christians: wherefore the sun having gotten
the middle point of the heavens, Charles made a retraite be sounded, and
returned into the city: which Barant beholding, he present^y caused engines to
be made with which he cast into the city Bertran at all points so armed as he
was when he lived* the sight of whom, renewed afresh b^th, the grief of
Charles, and the rest of the City. This done, with the same engine, he did
cast huge stones and rocks into the town, killing diverse of the Burgers as
they walked in the streets: whereupon the rest went to the Emperor, and told
him, they had rather issue forth, and die fighting, than live in this danger of
continual fearing, and so they then ^hewed what huge stones by engines were
hourly thrown upon them. Friends quoth Charles, all your wills shall be
satisfied. And with that* he issued with all the power of the city the second
time: and first assailing the engina^^ they t^re them in pieces to the earth,
and put all those to the sword that used them; and then making toward the
army, they overthrew their Tents, and cast down^ their pauilions, putting a
vrry great number of pagans to death in a moment. Now entered Charles into the
Tent of the king of Danubia, whom he slew, and passed on wi^h exceeding great
triumph, until the Pagans making an hideous cry, raised up all the Camp: who
flocking about the Christians, begaune an intolerable battle. In this stir
was king Charles overthrown, and had been taken but for duke Naymes once
again, who in despite of the Pagans, remounted his Sovereign, and told him
there was no other way for safety but ^light: unto which Charles did accord,
and thereupon retraited toward the City.

3 But before he could regaine the gates, his Son Loys, Naymes, and diverse
other Christians were taken prisoners: which when he understood, he would have
tur^ed again to their rescue, but his Nobles would not suffer him; because
they prised his life as a holy relic: and for that cause force perforce they
brought him to the palace, the most discontented King then living, whilst the
Pagans themselves carried Loys and the rest to Barant the Cruel: who taking a
stormy view of them, first asked duke Naymes what he was. My Lord quoth he, my
name is Tristram, a Burgess of this City, this is my Son, these other are my
kinsmen, all at thy mercy. Yet if ransom may deliver us, I will give to you
an hundred tun of wine, and an hundred Quarters of wheat, all which I have
ready in my house in Maiance, of which king Charles has no notice; for and if
he had, he would seize it, and leave me nothing. Barant was glad of this offer,
because his victualles were spent, and he had reinforced two hundred thousand
Pagans, so that he accepted the ransom: yet did the Duke desire hostage for
the performance of their delivery, which he had: and then went he to the City
to Charles, whose sorrow smiled to behold him, and told him what was done,
which the Emperor highly commended, and forthwith caused theransome to be
delivered* which when Barant had received, he sent Loys and also the rest home
to the City, whom Charles with very great joy of heart received, and sent
ba^ke the Pagan hostages.

But it happened (presently after) that there fell such a wondrous Famine in
the city, that they were enforced to eat their horses, and other Beasts of
the vilest loathsomeness: and in the end, (by extreme scarcity) they grew
into such lamentable need and miserable poverty, that they had surely
delivered up the Town to Barant, had not God (of his infinite mercy)
myraculously sent princely Meruine to be their Aydour. Of whom I would
speak, but that first I must write of Drohes; who (as you have heard) departed
from Montment, accompanied only with his Love Adain, and swore never to lend
rest to his labors, till he had found means for Meruines delivery, whom in
all the world he esteemed most dear: of which he gave sufficient testimony,
as you shall hear in the History.

Chap. XIIII.
1 How Drohes and Adain travailed so long in unfrequented places, till they
found out the true means for Meruines delivery: 2 How Drohes combated with a
Griffon for his Love Adain.
DRohes and Adaine(after they were departed from Montment) clad themselves like
Pilgrims, and in that humble manner on foot began their weary journey, to
find out means for the ever esteemed Meruines delivery. So long they
traveled, till they came into a vast uninhabited Wood, where repaired a
certain Hermit (as was before declared) to Drohes; with whom he desired to
speak. So long they wandered in the Wood, till at last they came to a delicate
Fountain, where they ^ate down to repose, and (with such simple viands as
they carried about them) they broke their fasts: in the midst whereof came
unto them three Uillaines, who continually used to rob all those which passed
by that way. The first of whom said to Drohes, Is this thy Wife thou carriest
up and down this Country? She is, said Drohes. And whither intend you to go
with her, quoth the other? Sir (said Drohes) to Saint Katherines, where our
Journey shall have his ending By heaven (replied the first again) I know thou
artfull of gold, which thy devotion has got from charitable giuers; there is
no other remedy but we must be thy partners: and, with that, offering to
st^ike, Drohes, rose lightly up, and with his palmers staff gave him such a
blow, that he sprinkled his brains about the Field. The other two (seeing
their companion slai^e) assailed Drohes, who wonderfully defended himself. In
the end, Adaine with her Palmers cudgel, struck one of them behind, so that
she felled him to the earth: and Drohes slew the other. Then turning himself
to Adaine, he lovingly embraced her and praised her feminine resolution* of
which at that instant even as he was speaking* he perceived him whom Adaine had
struck to revive again: wherefore taking him, he said; Uillaine, thy death is
certain, unless thou tellest me truly what country this is, and whether
thou have any more consorts of this damned quality? He (whom fear of death
did terrify) thus answered; Good Sir, the very truth is, we are full fi^^ie
in all, who are governed under our captain Raoult, sometimes of Ro^q^ilon: who
(banished from France) brought us into these parts, where we live only by
rapine and the spoil of passengers. Then tell me said Drohes, which is my
readiest way to find out the Heremite that continues in this wilderness. Sir
answered the villain, you must keep along this way till you come to a great
rock, then turning upon your right hand toward it, you shall find out the
Hermitage. This said, Drohes told him theft was not pardonable, and with that
beat out his brains with a cudgel, and there went and found out the hermitage,
and knocked at the door, till the ancient Hermit coming forth, demanded
what he would: Right reverend and grave ^^r quoth Drohes, we are Christian
Pilgrims. When the Hermit heard they were Christians, he lovingly embraced
them, and bade them welcome, because that he never had seen Christian in that
place before, asking them, whither their journey bore them. God sir answered
Drohes, our steps are uncertain, for I travel to find out some means for
the delivery of the only excellent creature of the world, incomparable
Meruine, who traitorously is imprisoned at Minor, under the guard of a devil:
and for that cause am I come to thee (divine man) to learn means for his
restitution, because Experience has made thee to be wise in all things,
especially in matters of very great secret. It is true, quoth the Hermit, yet
in this I can say nothing at all, but I will, and if thou be so pleased, send
thee unto a place where (as I do verily imagine) thou shall understand any
thing: and thus it is, Thou must go into Judah, and inquire for the Hermit of
that Country, and to him tell thy desire, and he will gladly resolve thee; for
he is a great Clarke, a great Prophet, and a man of great excellency. Drohes
gave him many ^hanks, and then (taking his leave) went toward Judah: whither by
his travel he soon arrived, and came into the Forest where the Hermit lived;
wherein as he wandered, he was set upon by two cruel and ravenous Bears, but
in the end he ^^ew them, so great was his courage and resolution. And then they
traveled forward until they had found the Her^ite; who (being set in the
portall of his Hermitage) Drohes reverently saluted. The Hermit requited his
salutation, demanding whither they traveled: To you quoth Drohes, who are the
wonder of this age for divine wisdom: and this (reverend sir) is the very
cause of our wandering; The only accomplished man of all the world, and he
whose presen^e was my life, rare Meruin my companion, has most treacherously
been imprisoned in Minor now about five years, and only guarded by a flend of
hell, whom no mortal strength can vanquish: now my desire is to know some
means for his delivery, without whose redemption my life shall consume in
sorrow. Pilgrim (said the Hermit) I understand all that thou seek;
wherefore, for thy loves sake, which I find to be so perfect, I will do mine
endeavor: stay here then till my return, and thou shall have thy seeking.
Then went the Hermit into his study, and began to conjure, till a spirit
appeared unto him, and demanded his will. Tell me quoth the Hermit, where is
Prince Meruine prisoner? and by what means may he be delivered? He which will
have him restored answered the spirit, must go into the I Will of Dordon, where
dwells an Hermit named Robaster, it is he that must deliver him: for it was
predestinate to Meruine in his Birth, that he should be imprisoned, till he
were delivered by a man whose mother died before he was borne, and that is
Robaster. More of this I cannot, nor I will not report unto thee: and then the
spirit departed with such a tempest, that all the corners of the spacious Earth
trembled.

Then came the hermit to Drohes, and told him what he had understood by
Magic, giving him withal this caneate, that when he came into that I Will, he
should be well and sufficiently armed, for that there was ther^in a Griffon, an
invincible monster, whose hugeness was incomparable, and who had power to fly
swifter than an Eagle, who suffered not any to come into that I Will, but he
destroyed them.

Grave Father (said Drohes) I most humbly thank you, and will from henceforth
(for this unspeakable and incomparable good turn) be both your Knight and
your Beadesman. Then taking his leave, he and Adain departed toward the I Will
of Dordon, and at length came to a great River that descended into Orb, which
passes unto Minor* King Butors chief City, where the Princely Meruin lay so
trecherously imprisoned. Over this Stream (for their passage money) he and
Adain were conuayed, and thence came to a little Uillage, where (during the
time of their small repose) he caused a new Palmers staff^ to be made for him
of great Bars of iron, with pykes half a foo^e in length: and then (being
ready to depart) he said to Adain; Thou art too exceeding vehement thus to
pursue my footsteps, I beseech thee (at my entreaty) stay here till my
return. But she by no means would consent, saying; in all things she would be
partner of his fortune: then they departed together, and came into the I Will of
Dorbon.

2 Into which they had scarcely entered ere they discovered a Griffon, who no
sooner had set his eyes upon them, but h^e came toward them: and first
thinking to take Drohes, Drohes with his staff gave him such a mighty blow
as might have felled a Lion, but he esteemed it not: then Drohes (with one of
the pikes) stroke him thorough the foot, that he cried extremely; yet
notwithstanding, again he came against him, thinking to fly away with him;
but standing in awe of his staff, would not, but mounting aloft, fell upon
Drohes like a mountain, and with his gripes wounded him so that he fell to the
earth, and lay in a swound, till Adain cried; O arise my Lord, for the monster
returns. At these words Drohes awaked, and holding the point of his staff
over his head, the Griffon durst not assail him. Wherefore Drohes thinking in
houering to kill him, he struck so vehemently, that missing, his staff entered
more than two foot into the very ground as by no means he could get it out
again. Which the Griff^^^ seeing, descended to have borne him away: but Drohes
held the staff so fast in his hand that he could not. Adain beholding her Lord
in that danger, struck the Griffon on the wing such a blow, that leaving
Drohes, he returned to Adain, seazing upon her, bore her through the air: but
as the story says, ere he descended to the ground she was dead, so
grievously did his talla^s gripe her to the heart.

CHAP. XV.
1 How Drohes spoke to Robaster touching the delivery of Meruine: 2 Of
Malabeon of Luton Robasters father that gave counsel in the action.
THe monstrous Griffon when he saw in his ^^ght Adain dead, he presently
devoured her, for whose loss Drohes sorrowed extremely, and mingled with his
moanes many sw^wnings, and many bitter lamentations. During which, Robaster
coming by, and hearing him make great moan, now for Adaine, then for Meruine;
he took compassion of his woes, and went and saluted him, saying: good sir, I
have heard your outries, in which you exclaim for the loss of a wife, and a
perfect friend; be comforted man, for destiny is unremovable. When Drohes
heard Robaster he lifted up his head, and with humble reverence he demanded of
him his name. My name quoth he is Robaster, who has bin the death of many
Pagans, yea and of many Christians also, for which, now does my soul endure a
mortal penance. Drohes hearing this, amongst his woes re^oyced and said. Ha
Robaster, thou art the Star which have led me hither, and in thee is the
power of all my joy and happiness. Then Robaster taking him up, for he was
very sore wounded, he presently led him to his hermitage, where Malabeon his
father was, and cured him: but Malabeon went inuisibly, for such was his power,
and only he was seen to his son, and to none other. When time of repast
came, they sat down to meat, and Drohes smelling a delicate perfume,
demanded what it was, and Robaster told him, that they were certain rare
waters the which he kept in his chamber, which if he pleased, he would show
him; thence he brought him into his chamber, which resembled an earthly
paradise, so rare was the exquisiteness thereof, all being done by the art of
Malabeon, the which Drohes in admiring, praised beyond all measure, and
Robaster, that took no small delight in Drohes, told him he should command
any thing he saw, or wherein his help might do him service, he vowed he
should find it most willing and ready. O quoth he, will you not hereafter go
from your promise? Not for the world quoth he, Then will I take you at your
word quoth Drohes, know then that for these five years space, the only glory
of the world, the miracle and mirour of Knighthoode, has been by corrupt and
false treason, detained and kept prisoner in Minor, from which place it is
utterly impossible that ever he should be delivered, except by the handiwork of
almighty God, and your good help, because a devil of hell is his guardian,
near unto whom no man dares to approach, so cruel is his wrathful
indignation. Wherefore I humbly pray you, that in regard the life of Virtue
lives in your power, be dei^^ed in the hearts of men, for attributing unto her
a most happy restitution. How I pray you do you call the Knight, quoth
Robaster? Oh answered Drohes, it is renowned Meruine the son of Oger of
Denmark, and the right beautiful* and virtuous Lady Morgua, I have heard
quoth Robaster, of one son of Ogers, who was slain by Charles the son of
Charlemaine, who was called by the name of Baldwine, but of Meruine I never
heard before, nor of any of his actions.

2 Then spoke Malabeon his father, and said, Son, it is very true, that Oger
begot the valiant Prince Meruine of the Fairie Lady Morgua in the Fairie land,
which I know right well that was present at his baptizing, as the Fairie can
well witness with me, who stole him from his mother, and for grief thereof,
knowing herself to be damned, suffered a devil to beget on her a monster with
three heads, that hereafter shall bring all Christendom to a most woeful
heaviness, until by that famous and worthily renowned Prince Meruine he be
brought unto some shameful end, whom it behooves thee to deliver, because now
the date of his destiny is expired, and if he be not the sooner redeemed, all
Christendom will be utterly ruinated by Barant surnamed the Cruel, against
whom no creature is able to endure battle, except Meruine, in whose hands the
tyrants life is contained: Father quoth Robaster, by what manner of means may
I work his deliverance? Uery easily answered Malabeon, for I will first go
alone to Minor, and waiting the coming out of Mutafier (who shall not see me)
steal privately away the keys of the prison, and then returning for thee, by
the help of the highest Son deliver him. Good father said Robaster, help us
in this holy deed. I will dispatch it and return quoth Malabeon, before the
day go down. Drohes hearing this, overcome with joy, embraced Robaster in his
arms, and asked if he ever saw his father. Yes said he, but besides my self,
not any creature. In sundry other discourses they continued until Malabeon
returned from Minor with the keys, and bade them arise, for now was the time
to go and deliver Meruine, for behold, here are Mutafiers keys. When the two
barons heard this, they leapt for joy, and Drohes marvelled that he was so
soon returned. Stand not amazed (said Malabeon) but let us be gone, for if
Mutafier shall chance to return, and find his keys taken away, it may be he
will do the prince some injury. Alas said Drohes, how shall we be able in a
moment to go more than an hundred leagues? Care not (said Malabeon) only arm
your selves and do but follow me, which they did, and then casting pilgrims
weeds over them, went so that no man could possibly perceive their armors, and
at the last came to the river Orb, over which (by the help of Malabeon) they
passed upon a little planke of wood, and then came unto the view of Minor,
where Malabeon commanded them, that as soon as they should come before Butor,
that they should feign themselves to be come (...) countries, and that they
should say, that Barant the Cruel had by his prowess taken both Charles and
the twelve peers, assuring them that he would stand by them, and give advise
in every action.

Then afterward in the very dead of the night, at what time every creature
shall be at their rest, we will go to the prison and set renowned Meruine at
liberty before it be midnight. This being said, they went forward even to the
city gates, where they remained until the next morning that the Sun was
risen, devising within themselves with what speeches to entertain king Butor:
and when they perceived the day began to appear, they knocked at the gates,
and desired entrance: but they answered, that without the kings Majesty's
knowledge, he durst not suffer any man to enter. Then said Robaster, go to the
king and tell him, we have brought him news which will make his Highness
joyful, and at thy return we will give to thee three pieces of silver: Thou
speak well quoth the Porter, and went his way and told the King, who very
well remembering the entrance of Bertran and Drohes, was ever after circumspect
of every man's entrance: wherefore causing about thirty of his best approved
Knights to arm themselves, with them he went to the gates, and received in the
two Pilgrims, and presently remembered Robaster, for that he had before time
slain a monstrous Serpent which had greatly wasted his country, for the which
king Butor had promised many a time and often to give him what gift he would
desire within compass of any reason.

CHAP. XVI.
1 How Robaster deceived king Butor. 2 How Meruin was delivered out of prison,
and went to the palace where he slew Butor, his Queen, and diuer^ other
pagans. 3 Of the great battle he maintained.
MOst honorable was the entertainment that Butor gave to Robaster, imagining
that he was come for the gift which in time past he had promised, but it was
not so, and he feasted him and Drohes (who by reason of his disguise, he knew
not) sumptuously: but Robaster he would not eat any thing, but passed the time
in telling of strange news, and in thend assured him that prince Barant the
cruel had taken the emperor Charles and his xij. peers prisoners. At which
tidings Butor much ioyd, and kissing Robaster for his speeches, and putting his
hand under his feet, did him vassaile-like reverence, whereat Drohes smiled to
himself. Thus was Butor deceived by Robaster and by Drohes.

2 Now when the evening drew on the blackest curtins of the night, and every
one betook themselves to their rest; the King gave cammaundement, that
Robaster and his companion should be delicately lodged, which was very justly
performed: but as soon as old Malabeon knew that dead sleep had arrested the
thoughts of every one, he came to the two christians saying; nowel arise if you
will deliver Meruine, for I have the keys of the prison. At that word they
arose and departed, the Moon shining out the pleasantest beams of her
countenance, and came to the door of the dungeon, where staying Malabeon
opend the doors, and then said, fair son, stay thou here till we return,
and guard this passage. I will (said Robaster) and swear, that if there come
but 100 they shall not escape me. Them entered in Drohes and Malabeon, who heard
the music which the Fairies made thrice a day, to reui^e the spirits of
Meruin (as was before written:) at which Drohes wondered, until Malabeon told
him what it was* and the occasion thereof: the music ceasing, they went to
Meruine that lay in most intolerable martiredome, who as soon as he saw
Drohes, he maruelld; but Drohes ouer-ioyed with his sight, came to embrace him,
but could not speak, so full was his heart with ouer-pressing joy: but having
gotten a little liberty for his tongue, said, Thou wonder of men, behold
Drohes thy true prisoner, who is come to find means to deliver thee from
imprisonment. When Meruin heard him, he embraced him, and doubled kindenes upon
kindness. Then Malabeon, by virtue of an herb he had brake off his fetters. And
Meruine seeing himself delivered; asked Drohes what he was that vn^eene ta^ked
unto him; and Drohes at large discoursed altouching Robaster and Malabeon his
father, who were indeed the true actors of his delivery, for without them his
bondage was eternal. These speeches Malabeon broke, and told them they m^st
depart, for why, the hour approached, in which Mutafier was accustomed to come
unto the prison. By my Savior (said Meruine) I would he were here, for of all
the Devils in hell, I desire to combat with him. This being said, he arose
out of the dungeon and came forth, whom as soon as Robaster saw, he called
to mind Prince Oger, and said, Believe me^ princely Meruine, I was hardly
persuaded that Oger had a son; but now I assure my self by thy countenance,
for one hand is not so like an other, as you to his excellence. After this
Malabeon brought Meruine into the chamber where his armor was, which he
presently put on, but his sword was not there, which somewhat grieved him, but
in steed of it Malabeon gave him a mace of yr^n, and then they departed to the
kings palace, where they found every one asleep, so that they vnforbidden
went to the Kings bed chamber, where breaking op^n the doors with their ^e^te
the King awaked and offering to rise, Meruine rushed unto him and said; Damned
traitor, and thou stain of kingdoms, behold here Meruine the son of Oger,
whos^ very soul thou have tormented, is now come to take account of thy
treason, and in so saying, he struck him with his mace such a merciless
blow, that in his bed he slew him: and Robaster at the same instant killed
his Queen also. Which done, they passed from chamber to chamber, and put to
death all the pagans they found of what estate soever, During all this
fearful night, not any creature escaped, but only one base pesant, who
running into the City, gave a general allarum, crying, Treason to the kings
sacred person. At which clamours all the town rose up in arms and came to the
palace, where they found the Christians, who flying amongst them began a
dreadful battle: and Malabeon by his excellent Art, made such a light, that
the palace was as bright as day to to the Christians, but hell-like black to
the Pagans, who by that means being slain by their enemies, ^^ue also
themselves by their ignorance. Drohes set forward with desire of ceuenge, was
got into the thickest of the Pagans, but th^^^ numbers were so infinite, that
all his prowess was much too little to have saved his life, had it not been
for Malabeon, who cried to Robaster and Meruine to succor Drohes or he was but
dead* at that they turned about, and preasing into the throng, there was not a
pagan that durst abide or endure them: so that all three joining themselves
together, they made ha^ocke of their enemies, only one thing greatly bred
their trouble, which was the casting of scalding water out of the windows upon
them, but yet notwithstanding, they slew so many that the streets were paued
with their bodies. Then came Malabeon and said, Princes, now is the time to be
gone, therefore sheath your swords and retire: why quoth Meruin, or for what
cause? Because said Malabeon, Mutafier even now is in coming, and when he
shall perceive this slaughter, he enraged will set all the city on fire with
unquenchable flames, so that we, nor any pagan shall escape the mischief. Thus
forward the Christians departed, fighting all the way till they were without
Minor, and without the straight passage, then retired the Pagans, but were no
sooner reentred but Mutafier came, who when he missed Meruine he became madly
enraged, and with the frenzi^ of his anger set all the City on fire, so that
not a Pagan escaped from burning, but only one, who then was without the
City, and immediately bare those sad tidings unto Barant the Cruel, who
little or nothing esteemed the discourse. Meruine and his companions being
within ^ight, marvelled at the hugeness of the fire, till Malabeon calling his
son, hade him conduct the princes, and aid them in every thing, for of force he
must pass into the Fairie land, to hear a cause betwixt two of his aliance,
that then were at di^^^^tion, and so he departed, and Meruine and the rest
marched on their way.

CHAP. XVII.
1 How Meruine, Robaster, and Drohes arrived in a wood amongst robbers. 2 Of
the dangers they were in, 3 How Malabeon aided them. 4 How they slew the
thieves.
THe three Christians, after the departure of Malabeon traveled all the day
without finding any house or place of harbor, in the end, they came into a
thick wood, where they traveled a long time, till in the end sitting down
under a chestnut tree, they said to themselves, that unless some adventure
called them forth, they would rest there all that night: but their repose was
very short before x. outlaws that lived by robbing came out and espied them, so
that one said to the rest, behold yond itj. weary ones, on my life they are
full of gold, wherefore let us take them and carry them to our Castle, where
our master Bar will be proud of them. This said, they advanced themselves,
and saluted the Princes, who steadfastly beheld till one of the thieves said,
Gentlemen you are well found: and gallants said Robaster, who rose withal, you
are as well met, what is your pleasures? Our pleasures are, said one outlaw,
that if you have store of gold, you divide it amongst us. We have quoth Robaster
enough for our selves, and for xx. such as we be, only we lack lodging, which
if you will be so kind as help us with, then command our purses. Gentlemen
said the thief, if you will follow me to a castle hard by, you shall have that
and what besides ye will desire. Thy words are sweet quoth Robaster, ride then
before and we will follow thee. Come said the thief, who thought to take them
prisoners. And then they passed along with the ten Outlawes and the three
Christians: and as they rode, Drohes persuaded them to be advised, for the
Uillaines were not guilty of one good thought toward them. It Is true quoth
Robaster, but it is no matter, for we three being together, were we in hell, in
despite of all the devils in hell, we would give our selves freedom: they do
think to have gold, and for mine own part (since I was borne) I never bore
one cross about me. In sadness said Meruine, then I am thy companion, for
just so well am I stored: but it skilleth not, for their imagination will give
us entertainment. By my soul quoth Drohes smiling, as bare is the payment our
host shall get at my hand. Thus making sport at their wants, they followed the
thieves to the castle Malfeaus, where alighting they ascended up into the hall,
where hanged all the shieldes of those hapless Knights, whom in the house were
murdered. Believe me quoth Meruine, this a right beautiful place, what is he
that is lord thereof? His name (said one of the Outlawes) is Bar a prince of
great possessions. Then came an other, ^aying; Gentlemen, it is the custom of
this house, all lodgers here deliver up to me their weapons till their
departure. Friend quoth Meruine, not ours by any means, for we love them so dear,
that we lie with them, eat with them, walk with them, and nothing but death
can part us and them. It seems then said the thief, you suspect some
mischief. Mischief (said Robaster looking about) let me see him that is so
hardy as not to tremble if we frown upon him. Why (quoth a villain again,
think you we are not enough to master you three? Yes, yes. Then were the castle
gates locked up, for all the villains were entered in, and Bar their captain
used the princes very kindly, setting them by his side at the table, where was
store of all meats, yet Robaster would neither eat nor drink any thing:
wherefore Bar asked him if he did it for penance. Yea sir quoth one of the
thieues, it is for the good men he has slain, and for the robberies he has
done in his life time. Robaster, hearing him, snatched up a knife, and threw it
at him, but missing the villain, it struck half a foot into a table: which
Bar seeing was much grieved, and desired Robaster to be patient, and amends
should be made him. Then came the vassaile, and kneeling, asked him forgiveness:
which (after some ceremonies) was granted on condition he should loose one eye,
for calling him murderer. Bar that then durst not deny a^y thing, agreed, so
he lost an eye, but vowed ere midnight to be revenged. Supperended, and the time
of rest come, Bar brought them into a fair chamber, with one bed in it,
saying to Robaster: You shall lodge here, and these other in another chamber
not far off. How, quoth Robaster shall we be divided? by heaven we are all one,
and will not be separated. Sir quoth Bar, I have no chamber with three beds.
Fetch iij* q^ Robaster. I willl said Bar, who durst not deny any thing: so
two beds more were brought in.

2 As soon as he was gone, Meruine locked the doors, and then began they to
disarme themselves: which the thieues perceived through a ^hinke that was in
the wall of the chamber. When they were laid, they fell soundly asleep,
insomuch that they snoared. Then retired all the thieues like unto thieues
indeed, being wonderously aghast and fearful, offering sometimes to turn
back again, imagining that the princes sleep was but fained and counterfeit.
At the last percei^ing they slept indeed, they much the more boldly set
forward, having all resolved amongst themselves, and each to other sworn the
death of the Christians. But the damned Captain of this wicked crew bade them
first seize the Princes weapons for their more securenes: which accordingly
they did, and then they went five to each beds side with their naked swords
in their hands, being ready to give the dismal strokes of their
unhappiness: had not God delivered them strangely: and thus it was as the
History reports.

3 Malabeon being in the Fayrie Land, by the will of God remembered his Son,
and instantly he had knowledge both of his and his companions dangers:
wherefore (in a trice) charming himself into the Chamber, he put under each of
their beds an herb, which had this virtue, that it made them believe both
the Chamber and the bed were on fire: then making a fearful noise the
Knights arose. Which sodainnes so frighted the thieves, that they ran back,
leaving the armor and weapoes of the Princes they had before stolen: who (by
the seeming ^^er-l^ght) discovering their danger and arms, armed themselves
and took their weapons into their hand. Then said Malabeon, quickly slay these
thieves, for if God had not defended you, this night, all three had been
murdered.

4 When they heard the voice of Malabeon, they did as he bade them: for in that
hour they began a ^^ecce combat because the villains were stout and valiant:
but in the end Meruine slew 25. and Robaster and Drohes the rest: so that not
any e^caped but only one, who running under a bed, imagined to hide himself
from death: but Robaster perceiving it, pursued him; and when he saw his
fortune disclosed, he fell upon his knees and craved mercy, promising to amend
his life, and to show them the goodliest horse of the world, which he would
give for his ransom. Meruine gave ear to those words, and said; Friend show
me tha^ beast which is so si^gular. Then they four lighted a torch and went
toward the stable, which was locked with three lockas, all which he opened and
went in: whom he showed them the horse, that had before him twenty bars of
iron, and behind him as many. The horse no sooner saw the knights, but he
neighed. How quoth Meruine, shall we come to this horse? Sir said he, see you
these holes that lock these bars, there was never yet man that had power to
undo them. Meruine hearing this, laid his hands upon the lock^s, and they all
fl^w open: there was also a written scrowle, which Meruine took up and read,
containing this matter.

MEruine, I salute thee with this gift: Know thou, that I am a witness of thy
birth, and held thee at the Font in the land of Fairia: wherefore this noble
horse (which is the brother to Baucant) I give unto thee, whose name is
Passant. Neither do thou change it, for he is the exquisitest in every point
that ere was bred under heaven. He is old, but yet as good as if he were young,
because his last days service shall be as good as his first. Also I beseech
thee, that the first son which thou shall have, after thy marriage, may bear
my name: which doing, thou shall lock my love unto thee, and be blessed from
heaven.

Written by thy Godfather: King Orient.

Thus was the Letter written, and Meruine rejoiced, who going to the horse the
horse was proud: then Meruin espied his furniture, which he put on: and as he
was in trimming him, the thief came behind him to show light to Meruine, but
he could not so quickly pass by, as Passant with his heels struck him dead
to the ground. At which Meruine was displeased, till Malabeon said; prince, be
not offended for this, for he was a thief and a murderer, which Passa^t
knowing, struck him; for his understanding is mighty, and he was bred in
Fairia: misdoubt not then, for he will serve thee princely: and here must
Robaster tako leave of thee, for he may go no farther with thee. Then Meruine
embraced Robaster, and gave him in^^nite thanks for his deliverance. Thus
parted Malabeon and Robaster, who with all speed came back to their Hermitage;
where we will leave them, and return again to Meruine and Drohes.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 How Meruine and Drohes went to Brandis, and converted the Country: 2 how
they came before Montment, where (in the Battle) Drohes was taken, and
brought into the City: 3 how Mathaburna (before the Pagans) menaced him.
AFter Malabeon and Robaster were departed, Meruine and Drohes ^^ayed in the
Castle till it was bright day: at what time Meruine mounted upon Passant, and
Drohes upon another horse; ^ourneying till they came to Brandis, to the house
of Minea, who when she beheld Meruine, O how her joy exceeded in exceedingnes*
she ran and embraced him and kissed him, and lastly, told him of her* and her
husbands conversion to the true Faith. All which pleased him wondrously; and
he desired her to be most constant in her opinion, and to persuade all she
loved to the like resolution; for whosoever did not bel^^ue so, should dye the
death. In brief, that Lady so labored, that Croysant came with 400
Christians to Brandis, and presented them to Meruin, who gladly gave them all
kind acceptance. Then went Meruin to the Castle to the Count, whom they found
set in the great Hall at a Table by his Countess: to whom (after Meruine had
caused a trumpet to be sounded) he said; My Lord of Brandis, we are come to
know thy disposition, whether thou will adore the true God of heaven and earth,
the Savior of the world Christ Jesus. A Saracen that stood by* hearing these
words, drew forth his knife and thought to stab Meruine: but Drohes prevented
him, and with his sword gave him such a blow that he claue his head even to his
tenth. At this began an alarm in the hall, and on the other part, Meruines 400
Christians gave alarm to the City, and put all to death that believed not in
Christ Jesus, and be converted. When the County Brandis (whose name was
Fourquer) saw both his own danger and his Cities desolation, he came and
kneeled down before Meruin, promising faithfully to convert, and be baptized.
Then Meruin raised up the County, sounded a retrayte, and made every one
sheath hie sword, and then went into the city, and put all to death that
would not be converted; in the end, they all most humbly received Baptism. It Is
vain to spe^ke more of Brandis or her country, they were all conue^^ed, and
baptized: and in the Country all round about they builded Temples,
Monasteries, and religious Houses, in which God continually was served.

2 Then Meruine mustered of that Country ten thousand, and marched toward
Montment, and the Count Fourques went with him, for he had sworn never to
fail him in any conflict. In four days space they came to Luternia, and
thence marched toward Montment, where Mathaburna remained; whose laboring
thoughts continually were with Meruine: who now had marched till he came
within sight of Montment. But an Espiall (having beheld their Army) went unto
the Town, and gave notice especially to the fierce Pagan Bruant, whom Barant
had left his Substitute; whose hugenes no horse was able to support, and his
strength equalling that greatness* To him he told, how Prince Meruine was
returned with a great Band of christians, and were hard at the city walls.
Mathaburna hearing her Lords name resounded, her heart daunced; yet she durst
not for her life discover her ioyfullnes, but fained her self sad, (as she was
indeed, because she durst not be merry when she was best pleased) and said;
Brurant, let us be careful lest these damned Christians enter the city, for
this vilde Meruine is merciless: therefore I beseech you, let the keys of the
city be every night brought up into my chamber. Brurant agreed theretoo.
Then said Mathaburna, I will Brurant, that you issue out upon the wretches,
that they may not vaunt that they lodged before our city, and were not bidden
one Skirmish. To that motion he was willing, wherefore (arming 20000) he
sallied out of the gates; whom Meruine and his Army courageously encountered,
himself throwing ten dead to the ground before any other Christian
approached. When the Pagans beheld his fury* they were amazed, and said one to
another; If all the Christians be like to this, it is in vain we strive
against them. During the Battle, Mathaburna stood on the top of Turgon to
behold her Lord, whom she knew by his blows and death that followed them, and
also by an old Favor of hers which he did wear in his Helmet. The Battle
continued very strongly, in which Meruine showed wondrons Chivalry; Drohes,
Croysant and Fouchier not being short of any Knightly resolution: but on the
other side, Brurant (who was on foot) made mighty slaughter of the
Christians; at which Drohes was enraged, and with a strong lance charged upon
the Turk, but did him no hurt, at which Drohes wondered; but the Turk sent
him back such a token with his sword, tha^ he cut away one quarter of his
shield, and the head of his horse also, insomuch that Drohes was feign to
descend to the earth to begin a foot combat: but the Turk (who was of
strange ^or^e) took him up in his arms, and in despite of all men bore him
into Montment, delivering him into she custody of the Pagans, and then
returned again where he saw Meruine make a mighty slaughter of his soldiers
that now were flying to seek safety: whom as he incountred he said,
Cowards, whither will you? turn, or ere night you shall all repent you. Sir
(said one of them) death is worst, and that we are sure of, if we turn to
yond puissant mighty one. Which (said Brurant)? show me that Gallant. I will
do that (said one of his Soldiers) so you will let me come behind you. And
then he showed him where Meruine was, to whom he went; and offering to strike
him with his axe, the horse Passant (seeing the blow) retired, and instantly
turned again, whereby Meruine gave the Turk such a mighty blow, that if his
sword had not broken he had there fi^ished the Battle: then he took the
pomell and hilts, which he cast at him so vehemently, that he brought him on
his knees; and then taking his iron mace from him, with it gave h^^ such a
blow, that he felled him to the earth.

Then came an infinite number of pagans about him, who raised him up, and as
soon as he was come to himself, he cried, Let us fly soldiers, let us
fly, for it is impossible to endure these strange blows. Then ran the
Pagans amain toward the town, and the Christians pursued them, of whom in
the entrance they ^^ue abundance, notwithstanding yet the Sarazens got into
the town and closed up their gates, at which Meruine was displeased, but would
have been much more grieved, had he known that Drohes had bin taken prisoner.
The christians went unto their pauilion^ having lost but seven hundred, and the
pagans eight thousand.

3 Brurant brought to Mathaburna the Knight Drohes, with this speech, saying,
Madam, behold here is one of the christians that has been our scourge this
day: pleases your Ladyship to keep him, and present him to prince Barant my
Lord and Master, your royal love: that will I not (said Mathaburna) but before
to morrow in the morning dispatch him of his life, I know his name to be
Drohes; and pleased it Mahomet, that as I have him, I had that disloyal
Meruine, who against my soul made me be baptized, I would present him to my
royal love Barant, that he might take of him a never to be eq^alled
vengeance. When the gentle Drohes heard her, he answered; What Madam, are these
speeches your own, or unkindly borrowed? I tell you, Meruine for the world
would not thus unkindly forget you, but loves you as his own salvation. Peace
(said Mathaburna) speak not to me, for thou shall know that in despite of
what thou have spoken of Meruin thou shall be hanged. Then calling a pagan to
her she commanded him to imprison Drohes, and to bring the keys to her
presently: which immediately was done: and Drohes alone, began to exclaim
against women, and to curse their sex, for the inconstancy of Mathaburna.

CHAP. XIX.
1 How the city of Montment was taken by the means of Mathaburna, 2 The
delivery of Drohes out of prison, and other accidents.
SMall was ^he hope of life retained in Drohes after he was imprisoned, and
the keys carried to the Lady, that swore in the morning he should be carried
to the gallows. Madam (said Brurant) do your own will for my Lord Barant at his
departure commanded me to obey you in all things. It Is true, replied she,
therefore see my commandem^nts be effected, and to her self swore all the good
possible for the christians. Meruine by this time having missed Drohes, made
inquiry for him, but no man could tell any news, wherefore he caused
diligent search to be made, till a squire came and reported that Brurant had
borne him prisoner into the city. At which words Meruine tore his hairs,
lamented, and swowned till Croysant came and persuaded him to be appeased: for
Mathaburna being in the city there could no mischance befall him, for he knew
that she was Lady and mistress of the town, and the proudest Sarazin durst
not disobey her. This gave some respite to his mones. Yet he went and threw
himself upon his bed, and would not be fully comforted. In the end he fell on
his knees, and made a vow to the God of heaven, that if it would please him to
restore his dear friend Drohes, he would never sleep on bed, exchange
apparel, drink wine, nor eat flesh, neither espouse wife, till he had
passed the seas, and slain, that inauspitio^s stone of religion false Barant,
the ruin of christendom. This spoke Meruine so effectually, that his desire
was granted (as you shall hear.) The beautiful Mathaburna whose busy
thoughts were virtues agents, when all the Pagans were laid at rest, she took
the keys and went to Drohes whom she no sooner saw but she embraced, and
with Joys tears demanded how Meruine did. When Drohes had heard her he
stood amazed and said, ah inconstant Lady, thou have slain me with thy
change and art unworthy to speak of him from whom thou art changed. Suffice
it I know thine intent, and my death is welcome. Mistake me not fair
Knight, (said she) for by my past thoughts I protest he is the God of my
desiers, what I did, was to deceive the Pagans, who are waking Dragons that
never sleep about me; therefore I pray thee tell me how he fares, and be
not offended at me. Drohes then resolved of her truth replied: Most gracious
Madam, he is troubled in nothing, but only for thy want, whom above all
things he desires, only I do know mine absence is no pleasure to him, and
I do know that he will put his fortune in danger for my delivery: therefore
I pray you, good Lady, let us advise how eas^iest he may be master of the
City, lest in daring too too boldly we repent his hazard.

2 All is done already, said she, therefore come forth and follow me, then
she conducted him where he was armed, and then bade him come away with three
hundred of his best Knights, and I will here attend his coming. Drohes
effected all her wish, and in brief, brought the Prince where the Lady
attended; and whosoever had (...) their meeting, would have marvelled, and sworn,
that than Love there could not be a greater godhead. He living in her, and she
in his bosom, either embracing the other with such entirenesse of spirit,
that as they had but one heart, even so they seemed to have but one body,
until Drohes calling Honor from Loves combat, told them they might
hereafter consume ages in their happiness. But now it was fitter to think
upon the death of the pagans. It Is true, it is true, said Meruine, and then with
all speed they entered, and Meruin desired Mathaburna to guide him to Brurants
chamber, that I may confess him with this iron mace before he pass to his
grave. Then she led him to the door, and said, even here he sleeps, if you
can open it. That shall soon be done (said Meruine) and then with his heavy
mace he gave such a blow, that the d^^re brake into many pieces into the
chamber. When Brurant heard the sound, he said, what devil makes this noise?
You are deceived, said Meruine, it is a charitable chaplain, that is come to
set you the right way to your grave, if you refuse to be baptized, I had
rather, said Brurant, loose my head: Thine own mouth shall be thy judge, said
Meruine, and then heauing up his mace, he slew him as he lay, which seen to
Mathaburna, with a smile she asked Meruine how many he had confessed in that
manner, as he passed through the country. A world madame said he, and then he
passed from chamber to chamber, and left not a breathing soul which refused to
be baptized. To be brief, there was not a pagan left, which came not creeping
on his knees* and begged that he might be baptized. This done, Meruine caused a
most royal and triumphant chariot of gold to be made, in which he caused
Mathaburna to ride and march with him through all ^he country of Surry. And
when those of the thowne of M^qua vnde^stood of his coming, they met him with
the keys of their g^tes three leag^es from the town. There after they had
rested four days, he marched to Jerusalem. In brief, after he had converted
that mother of cities, he went to perform his vows, and visit the holy
sepulcher, which also Mathaburna did. Thence went they to Babylon, which he
conquered by assault, and caused all to be baptized. To be short in my
discourse, in less space than a year and an half, he brought to the
knowledge of Christian religion more than an hundred mighty cities, all which
cities he held under his government, and from every one of them took the
expertest soldiers to furnish up his host, so that now departing from
Babylon, he returned to Montment, and then he embarked himself for France: in
which journey we will leave him, and return to speak of the emperor Charles,
and of Barant the Cruel, who continued his siege against Maiance.

CHAP. XX.
1 How Barant challenged combat of Charles himself alone against three or
five; 2 How he overcame all the five.
YOu may remember how Barant the Cruel kept king Charles in Maiance, who was
both besieged with dreadful war and with worse famine, wanting both men to
^ight, and fortune to supply, being as then in the town thirty persons, and
when Barant perceived that the French emperor durst no more give him battle,
he armed himself, and full of pride, he went and challenged Charlemaine to
send forth three or five of the renowmedst knights he had, to combat with him
alone: and if they could vanquish him, then his unrest should have ending;
otherwise they should be thralls to his mercy. Charlemaine at this offer stood
astonished yet pondering well, he promised in seven days to give him an
answer: in the mean space he consulted with his barons, but never came to any
conclusion: the last day, as they were in consultation they might hear Barant
crying at the port, Where is this Charles of France? where are his champions?
What, shall I be combated with, yea* or no? As he spoke these words king
Charles came upon the walls, and told him that he should, for five knights
within were ready for the battle, only he desired hostage for performance of
the articles: to that Barant accorded and sent into the city two noble Pagans,
whom the king caused to be imprisoned: then issued out of the city armed,
himself, duke Naymes, the Prince Loys, young Dion of Nantuell, and Andri of
Holland, they all marched on foot, for the famine had not left them a horse to
ride on, and being come into the listes, Barant entered mounted and armed
exceeding royally, who seeing them on foot, demanded why they were not on
horseback* answer was made by Charlemaine, That they had not an horse loft
alive within the City. By Mahomet (said Barant) I will not loose so much
honor as to combat with men half armed, and therefore instantly sent for the
best horses of his camp, and mounted them, and gave them lances into their
hands, and then sounding trumpets, they began the battle.

2 Most terrible was the first encounter, where the christians running all
together broke their sta^es with such fury, that they overthrew both Barant
and his horse together, but he quickly recovered himself again, who enraged
for the death of his horse, went against the christians with Entrant naked in
his hand and at the first blow stroke Andri of Holland dead to the ground,
which seen to Charles and the rest, all at once bravely assaulted him, but
with Entrant the defended himself like a man of immortal resolution:
intolerable was he fight on every side, and many prayers Charles made unto
heaven, but the ears of the Almighty were stopped against him* because of the
civil dissension he causlesse began in Danmarke. By this time Barant struck
prince Loys with huge force on the helm; but the sword turning in his hand,
lost his pewer of doing evil, only glauncing by his shield it fell upon his
horse, and cut his head from his body, so that Loys was forced to fall, and
that so unfortunately, that the horse falling upon him he was not able to rise
again for the worlds riches: which was worse than death to Charles, when he
beheld it, whose fortune was like his sons mischief, for at the next blow
he cut off the head of his horse, but the emperor in a trice recovered his
feet again, but withal was sore wounded in one of his thighs, and that so
mortally that he was forced to withdraw from the prease; which to duke Naymes
was worse than poison, who followed their footesteppes in misery, being
stricken from his horse, and intollerably wounded: to Dion the like evil
chanced, whose horse flaine, himself was taken prisoner; and with him the other
three, whose wounds left no force to rule their weapons. To be brief, they
were all imprisoned in Barants tents, who triumphed at his own glory, which
he thought worthy a godhead: but within four days after news was brought to
him of Meruines army, which was then within ten leagues of his camoe.

CHAP. XXI.
1 How Meruine incountred Baham the son of Belmarine with ten thousand pagans
that were forraging, who were all conquered except thre^, 2 How Baham renounced
^ahomet, 3 How the three that escaped reported the action unto Barant, who slew
one of them for bringing such evil news.
MEruine (says the history) traveled with so earnest desire, not taking
rest, that he came within ten leagues of the host of Barant the Cruel, at
what time an espiall came to him, and gave him intelligence of an army of
Pagans to the number of ten thousand that marched not far off toward Barants
camp, bearing thither abundant store of all manner of provision, which he no
sooner did hear but he told Drohes that it behooued them to be partners of
their banquet; whereupon he marched to a wood, by which of necessity they must
pass, and when they were come within a cariere thereof, Meruine gave them a
brave charge, the sodainnesse whereof amazed Baham: but being enforced by
extreamitie, he encouraged his followers, and requited the onset. The battle
was hot for alitle space, but the intolerable blows of Meruine too too much
for any man to bear, put the poor Pagans to their wits ends, who seeking to
fly mischief, found themselves so enclosed with mischief, that they were
enforced to intertaine him as their best vnwelcommed companion: yet amongst
all, three escaped, who with the wings of fear were carried beyond fear; yet
fear being still in their bosoms, the rest were put to the sword, only Baham
su^^iued, to whom Prince Meruine offered many favors, if he would renounce
his false god* which he utterly refused: then Meruine with his sword stroke him
and felled him to the ground, and ^^ue his horse under him: Then flocked the
Christians about him, and had slain him, if Meruin had not been his redeemer.

2 When Meruine had saved Baham from the mul^itude of swords, he offered him
again mercy, if he would renounce Mahomet; Baham seeing his foo^e in the
door of death, and all hope fled from his knowledge, kneeled down to Meruin
and said, wonder of knighthood, I yield to thee, and give my sword which is
mine honor to thy disposing, vowing henceforth to renounce Mahomet, and al
false gods; in witness whereof my desire is to be baptized, Meruine rejoiced
at these words, and took him to favor.

3 By this time the three that escaped from the christians swords had so
hasted, that they were now come to the Pagan host, where they found Barant the
Cruel threatening Charles with death, if he would not renounce his God, and
fall down before Mahomet: to the which, the good emperor gave but a little or
a careless attention. When they were approached, they fell on their knees, one
of them saying* Never to be conquered prince and god of nations, know, we
bring thee heavy and vnspleasant news, for Baham of belmarin and his 10000
Followers whom thou had sent forth to forage about the Country, were
incountred with a heroical Christian, accompanied with an army of redoubted
Chiualiers; by whom he and his Army are all ^laine and discomfited: therefore
advise your Highness what to do, for not any man is able to withstand that
Christian; who is undoubtedly a devil sent from the depth of hell, and no
earthly creature. When Barant heard this speech he rouzd himself and (full of
more than lunaticke ang^r) with his fist he struck the messenger dead to the
ground, for being the author of such bad reportings: from whence rose this
Proverb, He is evil come that evil brings. The other two seeing their
Companion dead, fled from his presence, and concealed themselves. Gribouart
his Counsailour had chid him, for his rashness, and with sweet words laid a
^leepe his anger, then were they sent for again, and Barant asked if it were
true their fellow had sworn: and they swore by holy Mahomet it was. Then grew
Barants wrath so great, that he could not speak of a long time: in the end,
when his words had liberty, (after many outrageous cursings) he commanded
the messengers to be imprisoned, vowing, if the news fell out contrary, to
make their deaths a living example. Then he caused an hundred thousand to arm
themselves* and marched forth, to try if it were just or no King Belmarine
did conduct them, vowing to revenge (with the death of many thousand
Christians) his Sons misfortune. After their departure, Charlemaine and his
fellow Prisoners fell to argue of this occurrent, wondering what Christians
they should be* that should undertake this wonderful enterprise* As I live
(said Naymes) I cannot guess who it should be only this last night I dreamt*
that the famous Duke Oger was risen again, and come to deliver us. Then (said
Charlemaine) thus do I prophecy; God has delivered Meruine the Son of that
mighty one, and it is only he that must be our ransom. Thus talked they as
they were in prison of Meruine, who marched on so fast, that now he was come
within the sight of an hundred thousand, that passed on in a most tumultuous
disorder.

CHAP. XXII.
1 How Barants hundred thousand were overthrown by Meruine. 2 How Barant then
came with all his host, exeept three hundred, and marched against the
Christians.
WHen Meruine had taken a perfect view of the Pagan army coming toward him,
he divided his host into three battalions, and rode from rank to rank,
giving such encouragement, that like the meeting of long absent Friends, so was
war welcome into their bosoms. This while the Pagans like mad men came
running, one here, one there, and another in another place, in such disorder,
that joining with the Christians, they were slain like gnats, or newborn
infants. The cry of them was so horrible, that it was heard to the camp where
Barant lay, who instantly caused every man to be in a readiness, but swear,
not to leave his tents till he had news of the Conquest: but there remained
very few to bring tidings, death was so bitter amongst them. Of all the Pagans,
king Butifart was most worthy in arms, and made the greatest slaughter of the
Christians, till Drohes incountring him, at the first blow struck off his left
arm^, and at the next, claue his helmet and head down even to his teeth. And
then beganhe a second out-crie, which was heard even unto the City of Maiance*
the noise whereof added vigor to the Christian hearts; so that they spared not
any, but put all to the sword that durst abide an incountring, an hundred only
escaping, the rest slain or taken prisoners. After this Conquest, Meruine
called all his army together, and after prailes given to God, he commanded them
to sit down and refresh themselves with victuals: for he understood by one of
his prisoners, that at midnight Barant was minded to give them new battle.
When they had refreshed them selves, Meruine retired himself and his army unto
a fortified place, to which there was but a straight and narrow way for
passage: where having pitched his tents, he took Drohes aside, and said: The
reason why I have retired my self is, for that we are near our enemies, and
mine army consists of many nations, and by much more than I dare wholly trust,
therefore, since there is but this straight entrance to annoy us* you and I this
night will watch and guard it, and 20000 to second us, whilst the rest shall
take their repose quietly. To this Drohes condescended, putting every thing in
execution with great care. During the which time, the fugitive Pagans that were
run from the batt^^l, made such speed, that they came into Barants camp,
crying, O prince Barant, prince Barant, thou art much too slow in thy revenge,
for thine army is ruined, dead and conquered, the Christians undoubtedly have
gotten the god of war from Heaven, and no mortal man is able to endure his
prowess: for if he once strike, whomsoever he touches, he is but a dead man.
What is he quoth Barant, thou so extollest to be thus famously renowned? I know
not answered the Pagan, but I have heard them all call his name Meruine.
Charles standing by and hearing this, could not contain his joy within his
own bosom, but told the Duke Naymes; Now is thy vis^^n effected, and the
renowned Prince Meruine will give unto us free liberty. Barant on the other
part seemed to rejoice more than the Christians, saying; Now shall my fame
at^aine an everlasting Crown, for to morrow next before the midst of the
day, I will not leave of all his number one breathing Christian.

2 Then commanding a trumpet to be sounded, he presently sommooned al his host
together, and all his elephants, which were infinite in number, and with them
departed toward Meruine, leaving but only 300. to guard his Tents and the
Emperor, with the other prisoners. Barant himself marched the last man, and
swear by Mahomet, that whosoever turned his back for fear of a Christian, he
himself would slay him. Briefly to speak, Barant at last came where Meruin
had fortified himself with charriots and other carriages, himself and Drohes
guarding the entrance with 20000 soldiers, all on foot; yet with solempnity
protesting, that whosoever would enter, should for his daring presumption
forfeit his life for ransom. By this time Barants army came and assaulted the
charriots, and turned them over and over to make themselves a passage, at last
came to the entrance, where Meruine and Drohes were: who made such a slaughter
of the infidels as was hideous to behold. In brief* before the sun arose,
there were 40000 pagans slain, and not one christian. The sun being risen,
Meruine saluted it with great joy, causing all his trumpets to sound, removed
three charriots, and made way for his army to issue out, encouraging them so,
that he thought himself unworthy to live, that adventured not to die for the
honor of so heroical a Commander. Mathaburna all this while was guarded by
Croisant, and two thousand Christians, the rest all in a rout assailed the
Pagans, wounding or killing all with whom they incountred. Now began the
battle to be extreme and fearful, Meruine showing himself still
unvanquishable Meruine: 24. he slew ere his lance broke, and so many more with
his sword, all in a moment; he slew also the king Orband, and diverse other
kings. Amongst the Christians there was a young Gentleman of Jerusalem, that
with one blow claue a pagan from the head to the teeth; which Meruine seeing
laughed at, swearing to make him a knight, and did so. In brief, so coragious
were the Christians, that now the pagans stood amazed, and durst not come near
either Meruine or Drohes, so dreadful they were. All this while Mathaburna
wore out her time in praying for the happy estate of her Lord Meruine; whose
valor so far extended, that there was not a Pagan of account left to assail
them, but now began to take flight: the which Barant beholding, he railed on
Mahomet, till a certain king came to him, and said, O my lord, why are you now
leaden footed, or so ^low to enter into the battle? Look, look, how your
people are conquered, and only two are lords of this great triumph. Barant
would not hear an end of his speech, but like a hungry wolf put sput^es to
his horse, and charging his lance, ran in amongst the Christians with such
violence, that he threw him dead to the ground at the first encounter: but when
his lance was broken, he drew his sword, and with it did miracles upon
miracles, killing all that eue^ he touched* which when the Christians saw, they
began to flee from one side of the ^^eld unto an other: but still he pursued
them, making havoc of them. At the length (for their safeties) they entered
amongst the chariots, but he followed them crying: Where is the traitor that
has been the ruin of mine army? let him come and try his fortune with me.
And as he was thus in speaking, he behold Mathaburna, whom kindly he saluted,
and said: Lady, well met, assure thy self, this day I Will revenge my self and
thee of that monstrous villain, that has brought thee hither, and detaines my
love his prisoner. Thus spoke Barant that imagined the Lady had loved him. She
the poor soul, being in more than a fearful amazement to behold her horror
so near her. At this, Croisant and his company charged Barant, but in less
than an hour he slew half of them. Of which Meruine being advertised, with all
speed came to the rescue, saying to Barant; Traitor, thou have forfeited thy
life with too much hardines, and they daring is not pardonable. Barant (with
steadfast eyes ^^xt on him) demanded first his name. My name quoth he is Meruine.
Meruine said Barant, O execrable traitor: it is thou that have ^laine my men,
robbed me of my Love, and it is thou whom I look for, and of thee I Will be
revenged: yet if thy valor equal the fame that flies of thee, accord, that
thou and I, in single combat, maintain each against other our fortunes: these
articles agreed unto, That if I be vanquished, all paynim countries shall do
thee homage, and Charles with many other prisoners shall be restored: but if I
vanquish thee, that then thou shall fall down and adore Mahomet. Pagan quoth
Meruin, I s^e thine infinite pride, yet am I willing to perform thy will: but
this withal added, that thou send for Charles and the other Christian
prisoners to behold the combat, and I Will oppose to them Mathaburna, whom thou so
much desire. It shall be done quoth Barant, and then sounded a general retrait,
each army returning to their tents. Yet understand, that of the 200000 pagans
which were at the beginning of the battle, there was now but 7000; and the
christians that were 100000, now were but 24000, all the rest or the most of
them slain by the sword of Barant.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 Of the single combat betwixt Meruine and Barant, and of the death of Barant.
2 The delivery of Charles and the other Christians, and the overthrow of the
Pagans.
NOw were the Christians retired, and the pagans also, to whom Barant reported
his conclusion with Meruine, and therefore disarmed himself, commanding new
arms to be provided for him: Meruine on the other part did the same. When
Barant was newly armed again to his liking, he mounted upon his horse, took a
lance into his hand, and marched unto the lists, and with him Charles and
the other prisone^s, as Meruine had desired, who by this time (mounted on
Passant) with a lance in his hand, bringing Mathaburna on a palfrey trapt in
gold, came also into the lists. There found he Barant, to whom he said, See
Barant, this is the beauty of my life, for her sake this day shall thy fortune
or mine be buried. Thou art a fool quoth Barant, for were there ten such as
thy self, they could not be my conquerors. Barant said Meruine, let thy sword
be thine Orator; for in despite of thee, I give thee a shameful de^^ance. This
said, they retired either from other, and charging their lances, met with a
fearful encounter; Barant breaking his staff, and doing no further
mischief: but Meruine assailed him so courageously, that piercing his shield
through, he overthrew Barant to the ground, greatly astonished with the stroke;
yet notwithstanding in a veryie moment he raised himself again, and vowed by
Mahomet, that if he could but fasten hand on Mer^ine, he would make him for
ever charging staff again. When Meruine had performed his course, and was
returned, he ^^ied: Barant, either pay me for the lodging thou have taken
possession of, or by the holy virgin I Will have thy head for a gage. When Barant
saw he made a jest of him, he^ drew Entrant, giving Meruine such a blow on his
shield, that clea^ing it in the midst, he pierced his currats, and wounded
him in the body, but yet to little or no purpose, Meruine at the first drawing
knew the sword, and said: I pray thee Barant, tell me how thou gotst that
sword. By Mahomet quoth he, the master of my fortune, and he who will give me
conquest over thee, I mean the powerful spirit Mutafier, that has
calculated my stars, and assured me that no man shall be able to overcome me,
but he who never tasted woman's milk, it was even he that gave it to me: and
assured me at that time moreover, that the knight that owed it, should never be
delivered from a hellish prison, where he was in durance. Barant, Barant, quoth
Meruine, see thou this Mace that hangs by my saddle, assure thee in despite
of thy master Mutafier, it shall strike thy life from thy body, except thou will renounce Mahomet, and then thy peace and my love shall join together.
Barant madded with his words, took the iron ends of his lance, and swore to
Meruine, if he would not descend, he would kill his horse under him. Then
Meruine alighted, and swear that his dissension should cost him dear ^re they
parted, Passant bowing his knees to the earth, that his lord might alight the
more easily. Now stood they one against the other like two angry lions,
continuing a dismal and unconstant battle, no man being able to judge which
way Uictory was affected: in the end they closed together, and overthrew each
other, tumbling and striving til the day was shut up by the evening, and the
dark night appeared, at what time Barant requested Meruine to defer the
ending of the combat til the next morning, to which the prince agreed, because
that by the means of Mutafier that then dwelt in the pagans body, he was much
ouertoiled. When each army was returned to their tents, in the dead of night
Barant asked the reason of Mutafier, why he could not that day vanquish Meruine.
O Barant said the devil, be not offended, for he is the most valiant, wise,
resolute and fortunate champion of the world: and know, if it had not bin for
me, this day he had many times slain thee, therefore I charge thee, that to
morrow thou hold with him neither faith nor loyalty, but by any treason
whatsoever, seek his destruction, otherwise is he never to be vanquished, and
with all the power I am able, assure thy self of mine assistance. At these
words the devil entered again into the pagan: and the night having her
discharge, the clear day appeared, when according to his former order he came
into the field, and armed with Mutafiers promises, called out Meruine, who
sumptuously appointed, entered the listes, then they charged their lances, and
incountred each other, piercing their shields, and breaking their staves upon
their curaces, and that with such f^ri^, that they were both overthrown to the
ground. Passant feeling himself delivered of his master, went first to Barants
horse and strangled him, and then to Barants self, whom also he had strangled,
if Mutafier in a fearful shape had not showed him self unto him, and made
the horse fearfully fly away. By this time Meruine had stricken Barant to the
ground, but in a trice he arose and made requital of his sorrow, giving
Meruine such a blow with Entrant the good sword, that passing through the
helmet, it gave him a sore wound, and made both his knees to kiss the earth:
but when he recovered himself, he ran and closed with Barant, and by maine
power overthrew him, and in the fall laid hold on Entrant, which he recovered
from the pagan, then rising, the pagan took from him his ^ace, and then began a
new battle, till at last Meruine gathering all his forces together, and
turning Entrant aloft, stroke Barant such a blow, as in despite of all
resistance he claue his head.

2 Then fell Barant down dead, in whom the Devil challenged possession: and
then the Christians assailed the Pagans, whom in an instant they overthrew,
4000. being willing to receive baptism: no sooner were the pagans vanquished,
but Meruine gave all that they possessed amongst his soldiers, whilst in the
mean space Charles went to Meruine, and doing him all the honor he could
devise, said: Thou colume of our religion, and wonder of knighthood, to thee
will I surrender the crown of France, for, but thee, no man is worthy to
receive it. Emperor quoth Meruine, far be my thoughts from that imagination,
thy crown is thy birth right, and I Will be thy servant.

CHAP. XXIIII.
1 How Meruine married Mathaburna, 2 of the great solempnity at Maiance for joy
thereof.
AFter these speeches between the Emperor and Meruine, they raised their
tents and did march toward the city of Maiance, all the Clergy and Commons
thereof coming in processions to meet them, in which ceremonious sort they
entered into the city, being richly adorned clean throughout, and all the Ladies
and gentlewomen standing in windows to behold the bea^teous Meruine, who on
the one side, and the king on the other, marched with Mathaburna between them.
No sooner was Meruine discovered, but every creature both young and old cried
out in the pra^^e of Meruine their redeemer, and that so boldly, that Meruine
stood almost astonished at their clamors, that he passed on till he came to
the Market place, where he found many young Gentlemen and maids, who to diverse
well consorted instruments carrolled many excellent songs in the praise of
Meruine; thence they marched to the Palace, where lighting from their horses
they ascended up into the hall, where was gathered together all the excellency
of (...), playing so melodiously, that Meruine was ravished with the hearing:
of their banqueting, dancing, and other reuelles, I will not speak, but
pass them over to imagination. After the first nights repose Charles
dispatched his Heraults into France, to carry the news of these occurents,
charging every one both noble and unnoble, all Ladies married and unmarried:
also, all those whosoever had any skill in music, that they fail not, upon
pain of disobedience, but to appear at Maiance on the great feast of
Pentecost, where his Highness would keep an open and royal court. All his
will was done, and every one was present at the day, which was wonderfully
solemnized, Charles wearing his imperial crown on his head, so also did
Meruin, who by his conquest was king of Jerusalem, of Mequa, of ^abylon, of
Lilfort, of Damascus, of Mon^ment, and diverse other realms: but Mathaburna
that day ware no crown, because as yet she (...) not his wife, only she ware a
rich chaplet on her head, all inchased with precious stones. When dinner that
day was finished* Charles gave charge to all his Barons, that the next day
after, they should be in all their royalties, and to show their excellencies,
as well in feasting as in running at the tilte because it should be the wedding
day of the famous prince' Meruine. Then (notwithstanding that Mathaburna had
many Ladies with her) he sent all the Ladies of France, to offer her their
service, which they did. After this first day was passed with solemn
disports, the morrow after all the City began their joys, and in the
morning, Drohes, Croysant, Baham, Belmarine, and all the gallants of France
went and gave king Meruine good morrow, who rising, Drohes and Croysant made
him ready, adorning him with most rich abillements, imbordered with oriental
pearls, and inchased with most precious stones, as Diamonds, Rubies,
Carbuncles, Turkies, Emerauds, Sapphires, and many other. When he was ready, he
set the crown of Jerusalem on his head, and imediately he went into the
Emperors chamber, where he remained until such time as Mathaburna was fully
adorned after the French manner, whom for her beauties sake every one called a
second Hellen. Then came the king crowned, the Dukes, Marqueses, Earls, and
Barons, with crownets on their heads according to the manner* and brought in
the king Meruine, who no sooner saw his mistress, but his heart capered for
joy. Then after certain ceremonies they descended down into the hall,
whereall the princes of his army waited for him, then they went, and being
mounted on golden chariots rid to the great cathedral church attended on most
royally in this manner. First went fifty gentlemen most richly attired, five
and five in a rank; then an hundred who carried a hundred banners in which
were the arms of the Nations which he had conquered, and the last and the
greatest was that of Jerusalem: after these marched Fourchier earl of Brandis,
who bare Meruines golden spurs, clad in a vesture of gold: then Baham in like
ornaments with Meruines shield; suitable to them the King of Nubiaes son with
Meruines helmet, and lastly, in most rich imbosted armor of gold went Drohes
bearing naked Meruins famous sword Entrant; then came Meruine himself, Charles
riding on his right hand* and Loys on his left, after them the twelve peers,
the dukes, marques^es, earls, barons, and knights: and in this manner came he
into the Temple, Mathaburna following them in as great state amongst the
Ladies. When they were both entered within the Temple, the Archbishop of
Maiance married them* and then sang hymns and infinite praises, all the troop
offering up rich gifts for sacrifices.

2 After every several ceremony performed, they returned as they came most
orderly to the palace, where they banquetted, triumphed, and reuelled most
gallantly, which ended, the Knights went and armed themselves, and the Ladies
were carried to behold the Iustes, in the which Meruine would needs be an
actor, so also would Charles, and Naymes* Meruine at the first encounter
overthrew five and twenty, no man having power to sustain him: then came
Charles and humbly besought him to withdraw himself, else would their sport
be little, because his prowess, would put all men past running. I am well
pleased said Meruine, and then h^e departed, and came and sat with the Lady
Mathaburna beholding the iustes, which continued until evening, whose black
brows compelled them to give over. Then the tables being adorned they went to
their s^ppers, after supper to dancing, masking, and all manner of reuelling,
which being grown a little old there came bishops, who forthwith with the
Emperor and with the good duke Naymes conveyed the bridegroom to the Brides
chamber, where after many blessings and ceremonies they lodged him, who that
night (by the will of God) begot on her a son, whose name afterward was
called Orient. As soon as it was day light, Drohes entered into the chamber,
who appareled Meruine, and the Ladies of France that adorned Mathaburna: then
were solemn Masses sung, and other devises. The feast and triumphs continuing
eight days, at the expiration whereof Charles returned into France, taking
leave of Meruine, and so likewise did all the gallants of France, leaving no
more in Maiance but Meruine, his Queen, and his old soldiers, amongst whom he
divided all his nations, except Lilfort, where himself determined to reign:
to Drohes he gave Montment, and the country adioy^ing, delivering him an
hundred thousand to guard him to his kingdom, to Baham he gave Damascus; to
Croisant M^qua, and to every other Prince that had served him, other lands and
segniories. This done, he remaind in Denmark till his Queen was delivered of a
beautiful son, whom he named Orient, according to the Letter which he found
when he got Passant. And after that his son Oriient was once a year old
and upwards, he had a marvelous great and earnest desire to go into Iewrie,
to plant true religion in that country, which he did, yet it was a tedious
time before: wherefore for a while we will leave him, and speak of Gratiana
the Fairie, who fell desperate for her evil deeds toward Meruine.

CHAP. XXV.
1 How Mutafier deceived the Fairie Gratiana, and begot of her a monster named
Orke, that had three heads. 2 And of other accidents.
AS the story says, in that part, that by succeeding times, the Christians
living without wars (the remembrauncer of sins) they began to commit
diverse outrageous and damnable offenses, against the majesty of God, at the
which Mutafier triumphed, making their fall a staire to his glory: wherefore
he went to the woods, where that desperate fairie Gratiana remained, and
coming to a poor cottage, where she lived, he took upon him the likenese of a
woman, and knocking at the door, which the Fairie opened, desired^lodging for
that night, with her, to which Gratiana gave consent: so he stayed there
beating his thoughts how he might work some notable mischief. Anon as they
were set to repast, Gratiana asked whither she was traveling all alone
unaccompanied. Fair sister (said the Devil Mutafier) know that I and my
company have lived in a wilderness in great poverty, having nothing but bread
and water, till they all are dead, but I only reserved, for whom I sorrowed,
and thought to have led my life in continual solitariness, till two learned
Clerks told me, that such a kind of life was damnable. After that they
demanded of me, whether I were a maid or wife, or had in my life time
accompanied with any man, and I told them never, for which cause they blamd me
exceedingly, approving by the sacred Scriptures, that the woman that lives
without the knowledge of man, shall not see the fa^e of God. Many other things
they told me, until one of them for charity sake accompanied me, and took
my sins upon him. Alas q^ Gratiana, what shall I do? my sins are infinite*
I Will take them upon me said Mutafier. In brief, so earnestly he tempted her,
and begot of her a most ugly and deformed three headed monster* thence he
conveyed her into a vast and strange wilderness, where never mortal footstep
was before discovered, and there she was delivered of her aborti^e fruit, which
wa^ called Orke, because, in that desolate habitation was not to be seen any
thing, by iij. headed monsters called Orke.

2 This newborn monster had more then the strength of six men, two of his
heads looked forward, and the third behind him, every head had a beard, his
eyes were like melions, and in his mouths teeth three fingers long, and in a
monastery at Civil in Spain at this hour is his picture, which king Loys
caused to be drawn and erected there in honor of Prince Meruine, his sword
Entrant being kept there for a divine relic. This diuel-begot monster within
twenty days became so fierce and uncontrollable, that he overcame all those of
the forest, wherefore Mutafier his father gave him arms almost impregnable,
and commanded him to go into France, where if he found Meruine, he charged
him to bear him such deadly hatred, that he should not rest till he had
brought him to a shameful end: and also that he should spare no Christian till
he had laid the country utterly desolate: yet before thou go says he, go
unto king Turniquant of Orima, and entreat his aid to go with thee, which
his damned son did accordingly. But when he was once come within Orima, all
the Pagans came and hid themselves for fear of his presence. From thence he
marched toward the palace, where they locked up the gates, and told the king
of the Orkes arrival, who laughed at their cowardi^e, until he heard the Orke
cry ^o them to open the gates, or he would destroy the city. The King as then
was set at a table with his daughter Beat^ce who in private was brought to be a
Christian by her nurse, having instructed her in all the points of christian
religion.

CHAP. XXVI.
1 How the king Turniquant of Oriam assembled a great number of his people, and
went in aid of the Orke, 2 how he destroyed all Normandy and Bri^taine: 3 and
of other occurrents.
WHen King Turniquant heard the clamors of the Orke, he arose from the table
and went to the gates; where (seeing the hugeness of the Monster) a trembling
fear came over his body; yet (with fained speeches) he entreated him to do
him no hurt, and he would perform whatsoever he commanded him. I ask
nothing said the Orke, but that thou will be my subject, and I will conduct
thee into France; where I will utterly destroy the Country, if they will not
return and believe in Mahomet. When as Turniquant heard these words, he
exchaunged fear into reioycings, and made the gates to be set open, and (with
great honor) brought the Monster into his Palace, where the fairie Beatrice
was; whom the Orke (at the first sight) demanded of her father, and in
recompense he would give him the Crown of France. All the which Turniquant
was proud of, but the poor Lady went and lamented exceedingly. Now with all
speed that could be, the King mustered up his men, to the number of two
hundred thousand; with which the Orke and he passed (carrying the fair
Beatrice with them) to Jerusalem, which he so quickly conquered. Thence he went
unto Babylon, and did the like; and to all the other Christian Countries, even
to Montment, where they gave a strong assault, against which Drohes was not able
to endure; so the Town was taken: yet by the providence of heaven, Drohes
escaped, who flying into a Wilderness, consumed his life in great poverty.
Thus the Orke subverted what Meruine had planted; not leaving a Church or
Monastery, which was not utterly raced.

3 Thence (conducted by the devils aid) he came to Saint Michaels Mount in
France, and thence marched through Base Normandy and Base Britain; thence to
High Normandy, making all places both waste and desolate. The news whereof
wounded King Charles, chiefly when he heard the description of the Monster: yet
he assembled his Men at Arms to go against him; but not with such expedition,
but that the false Orke and the Pagans were first come to Montmarre, where it
was pitiful to behold with what cries the poor people ran into Paris, one
carrying his bed, another his coffer, some their wives, and some their children.

3 By this time Charles brought down his Army, and set upon the Orke and
Turniquant, between whom was a long and dreadful Battle. Charles slew a
number of Pagans with his own hand, crying ever, Saint Dennis and good
Fortune, this day shall the Pagans perish; the good Duke Naymes did as much,
and upon his Enemies showed wonderful feats of Knighthood, overthrowing here
one, and there another; so that it was excellent to behold the fall of the
Pagans. But this triumph endured but a moment, for the strong King Turniquant
and the false Orke (in less than an hour) overthrew every soul of them:
because the Parisians (upon sight of the three headed Monster) fled away, and
durst not one of them endure in Battle; so that the Emperor was compelled to
sound a Retrayt, and was the first that entered into the City of Paris, so
hideous was the beholding of the devils Infant, and all the Christians
followed: whom the Orke in pursuit slew five upon five, and twenty upon
twenty, to the piteous amazement of all men* In this Chase, the Orke had
entered the City, but for especial regard: but finding himself deceived, he
cried at the Ga^es; False traitor Charles come forth, and bring twenty with
thee against me alone* or if they be not ^now, bring thirty, and my self will
give them Battle. Thus triumphed he in his own pride: but before any long
time expyre, a single man shall bring his three heads to a Funeral: which can
be none other but the famous King Meruine, as you shall hear.

Charles all this while was mightily perplexed, and not causeless; for of all
that he had brought, there was no more left alive but thirty thousand; neither
durst Charles the space of a year look abroad, for fear of the Orke: yet at
length he found means to send to the King of England, who came to his aid
with forty thousand well approved and valiant Englishmen; yet so dreadful
was the Monster, that they stood in doubt to pass, but remained thr^e days
and nights at Saint Dennis, nere Paris, of which the Orke had no tidings,
holding all that time a Counsel, how the King of France should be advertised
of their coming, that jointly they might assail the Orke on every ^^de.

CHAP. XXVII.
^ How king Charles had intelligence of the King of Englands coming: 3 of
their assault on both sides: 2 how Meruine came, who had conquered again all
that the Orke had won: 4 how Mathaburna gave charge, that no man should
speak of the wars before Paris: 5 how an Angel appeared to Meruine.
WHen the King of England had held a long consult, one of his train came unto
him, and ^ade him write his Letters, and (in despite of all the Monsters in the
World) he would attempt to carry them to Paris: which resolution the King
commended, and forthwith dispatched him; who came to Paris about midnight, and
threw his Letters over the walls: which the next morning being found, were
presented to the King; who reading them, understood the courageous English
Kings resolve; wherefore he commanded his Host to arm themselves, who were
then three score thousand.

2 Then standing in readiness, they attended to hear when the Onset should be
given, which as soon as he heard, he cried; Montioy, Saint Denis, and then
^allied forth, and made the Battle fearful to the Pagans, effecting
wonders. To be brief, both the English and French showed themselves absolute
for courage: but the Orke made such havoc of both Nations, that in less than
an hour all the Christians fled for their ^^^^tios; the Orke (with an axe
which Mutafier that night had given him) killing so many, that few escaped,
but only those in the vantguard of the Flight. The King of England fled to
Saint Dennis, whom the Orke pursued to the walls of the Town then turning
back to his Tents he found the fair Beatrice weeping, whom he saluted, and
persuaded to be joyful, for that in six months space he would crown her
Queen of France: but those words were worse than poison, for than him she
esteemed hell no viler, Also all this while lamented Charles in Paris his
cross fortunes, because the Monster now had been in France full two years,
and laid waste the most fruitful places in all the Country.

3 In this pensiuenes we will leave him while, to speak of the renowned
Meruine; who after he had converted all Iewry, went to Babylon, Jerusalem, and
the other Countries, and brought them all back to Christianity. Thence he
went to Montment to visit Drohes, whom he ^ound not; and therefore sorrowed
most exceedingly, vowing an endless revenge if he were dead: and thereupon
gave an assault to the Town, which presently yielded, because the greatest
part were Christians. So that Meruine made on Sampson (borne in that City)
their Governor, leaving him all his Army, and returned alone into his
natural Kingdom of Danske, where he found his fair Queen Mathaburna, and
the young Prince Orient their Son: who (with all the Nobles Burgesss and
Commons) most royally and lovingly welcomed him.

4 As soon as Mathaburna had brought her royal Lord to rest, which (after his
weary travail) of all other intertainment was to him best welcome, she sent
private Commandment to every Noble man and Magistrate that was likely to
have access to the King, that as they tendered the safety of his private
Person, and respected the public benefit of the Commonwealth, that they in
no case should acquaynt the noble Meruine with the miserable estate of the
Emperor Charles and the other Christians in France: for (said she) I need not
tell you the resolutions of my Princely Lord your Royal King, should he but
hear the least inckling thereof; to France he would, to woeful wretched
France: and if to France, whither goes my loves Lord and your lives Protector?
Even to the receptacle of horror, even to the grave of death: where he shall
combat with Monsters, not men; and not with mortal Monsters neither, but that
infernal three headed Dog of hell, the ugly Orke, against whose force, men can
have no force to make resistance. O do not then, I beseech ye, do not make
me a Widow and your selves Fatherless, by acquainting the King with the
Estate of France. These words she delivered with such abundance of tears,
that the Nobles and Magistrates greatly commended her zealous care, and
presently commanded, on pain of death, that no man should show a heavy
countenance, or once whisper of the Estate of France. Great Feasts and Triumphs
were therefore made throughout, and many other pastimes that continued a great
part of the night, (...) the King was laid in his bed.

5 When the hour of midnight was come, there appeared to him (in his sleep)
an Angel from Heaven, who like Sunshine stood before him, and said;
Meruine, the God which created all things, by me commands thee, that to
morrow thou depart and go to king Charles and aid him against the Christians,
who have besiedged him, and brought him almost to utter confusion, by the
means of a monstrous three headed Orke, against whom thou must take battle,
and the Lord will be thy defender, wherefore see thou depart without any notice
to the queen thy wife, lest she should follow thee, which were offensive to
the heavens. This said, the Angel departed, and immediately Meruine arose, and
having armed himself and gathered his Soldiers together; told his Queen he
would pass into Surrey, and make a speedy return: wherefore he desired her
with her little Son Orient to pass to Lilfort, where they should not fail
but meet him. She gladly agreed, because she feared no place but P^^is. Thus
he departed with threescore thousand, and made such haste, that he came to
Roan; which he found so sacked and destroyed, that his heart for pity bled
within him. There he left his Army, and himself alone marched toward Paris,
finding every thing as he went destroyed and ruinated* When he was come within
the sight of the Pagans tents, he turned himself toward them, and marched
into the camp with his head unarmed, and his helmet hanging by his saddle.
Then calling a Pagan unto him, he desired to be brought to the sight of king
Turniquant. The Pagan consented, and brought him to his Tent, but the King was
not there, only he found the fair Beatrice, who at the first sight knew him
to be a Christian: and therefore demanded what he sought. Madame said he, my
business is to speak with him that bears three heads on his shoulders. Friend
quoth she, if you will but stay here alittle, I will go tell the king my father.
Do so good Madame (said he) but I beseech your Ladieship, stay not long.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1 How Meruine undertook combat against the Orke, 2 of the fight, and the
Orkes death, which brought rest to the Christians.
BEatrice instantly went to her father, and told him what she knew touching
his request, and how he would speak with the three headed monster: which the
King hearing, he went and took the Orke with him, who looking terribly upon
Meruine, whom no looks could affright, Meruine stou^ly began saying, Thou that
have dared to destroy this receptacle of Christianity, I challenge thee, if
thou dare, to single combat body to body, with these conditions, that if
thou vanquish me, all this Country shall be at thy disposing: if I shall
conquer thee, then thine army shall return home again if they can escape our
vengeance. How say thou? When Turniquant heard this resolute Challenge, he
demanded of him his name. Men call me answered he, Meruine. Which word was no
sooner uttered, but taking the Orke and his daughter aside, he told many
wonders of Meruine, how he had slain Barant surnamed the Cruel, with the rest
of his famous conquests: and therefore was now flatly determined by treason to
put him to death. To which his Daughter made answer, that treason were vile
even in a King, and therefore rather, since the Orke had vaunted himself
against twenty, that now he should try himself against this one single
knight, whom there was no doubt but be would vanquish with shame, or quickly
dispatch of his desperate life. At this speech the proud Orke rejoiced, and
swore none but him self should be in that combat: so they went to Meruine and
accorded, drawing certain articles touching the combat, which dispatched,
Meruine went and told Charles, to whom he was the welcommest man alive.

2 When the day of battle was come, Meruin, Charles, Naymes, Loys, and all
their army came forth, and went to the Pagans tents, where after their oaths
taken on both sides, the two champions were brought into the listes armed at
all points, and after the sound of Trumpets they assailed each other, and
Meruine brake his staff upon the Orke, but his armor was so good that he
could not hurt him, only made him recoile ten foot backward: at the which
the Orke was angry, who with his battle ax would have stricken the prince, but
with fine nimblenesse in turning he avoided it, so that the axe fell into the
earth above three foot, then the prince with Entrant struck him a mighty blow
on the head, but could pierce no skin, which seen, he sheathed his sword, and
took his great mace, which hung by, and with that gave him such a blow upon one
of his helmets, that he reeled, and with much ado held himself from falling:
when the Orke felt these intolerable woundings, he flew upon Meruine like a
tempest, and thinking to hit him with his devilish axe, the good horse Passant
turned so nimbly about, that he failed in his purpose, for why there was no
steel would have borne out the blow. When the Orke saw his effectlesse fury*
he grew mad, often assailing, and as often failing* Then prince Meruine
advancing himself, gave the Orke such a blow on the neck, that he made one
of his helmets fly into the midst of the field, so that one of his heads
was disarmed; then drawing his sword, he seconded his blow upon the Orkes
disarmed head, that he cut away one of his ears, whereat the Orke raised a
most fearful cry, which put the pagans into a fearful affright. Beatrice
seeing this, said to her father, My Lord, this day the Orke will be vanquished,
therefore he advised by me, and let us fly to our ship, to escape worse
danger, the Orke is neither of our country nor kindred, let us leave him to his
fortune. Daughter (said Turniquant) you are too blame, for it he do overcome,
what shall befall us? therefore let us attend some more of his fortune. Meruine
this while lion-like assailed the Orke, and gave him such a monstrous wound on
his thigh, that he was no longer able to sustain himself from falling, yet
still held his axe in such sort in his hand, that Passant durst not assail
him. Then began the Orke to cry so fearfully that the Pagans hearing him,
trussed up their tents, and betook themselves to flying: which the emperor
Charles seeing, showed the duke Naym^s saying, see how they fly and dare not
stay the end of the battle: were it not that I am sworn to the contrary, they
should not escape so easily. It Is true, (said Naymes) therefore let them go, for
the devil is their conduct. As they were thus talking, the pagans got to
their ships, and with all the haste they could, sailed into their own
countries: all this while Meruine assailed the Orke, but by reason of his lying
on the ground, he could no whit hurt him, wherefore he alighted down and
commanded Passant, if need compelled him, to come and succor him; which the
Fairie horse well understood. This said, Meruine went toward the Orke, and he
seeing him come, bethought himself of his best defense; and Meruine imagining
to strike him, the false devilish Orke thrust his axe before him with such
violence, that hitting Meruine one blow upon the knee, he made him perforce
fall to the ground, which the monster seeing, he crawled upon him, and gave
him many intolerable blows, whilst Meruine on the other side drawing forth
a puniard, thought to stab the monster, but lighting upon his curaces, the
dagger without hurt brake in two pieces. Then Meruine implored some divine
help in his succor, for the Orke preased him most extremely, yet his
strength gave him some remedy. Whereas the history reports, if there had
been an hundred besides himself, the Orke had force to have strangled them
all. But the strength of Meruine equalled him every way: Charles seeing this
turmoile, wept exceedingly, and said to Naymes, What shall we do, since the
damned Orke holds king Meruine in subjection? As they were thus in talking,
Passant seeing his Lord in danger, he went to this Orke, and took hold of his
disarmed head, in such sort, that in despite of his will, he made him let
King Meruine go, who instantly rising took his sword which lay on the
ground: Passant with his teeth took hold of his ear, and Meruine gave him two
such blows, that he let his battle axe fall; then doubling his blow, he cut
off his other two heads: at whose death Mutafier came in such a tempest, that
all Paris trembled. Then seeing his son dead he would have taken vengeance,
but of the horse he could not, because he was a Fairie; and of the ma^ster he
durst not, because he had heard divine prayers before the combat, otherwise he
had done some notable mischief: but prevented, he could do nothing, but took
his son and all his accompliments into hell with him: yet know for a surety,
that at his departure, he made such a wonderful storm, that for the space of
a quarter of an hour, the darkest midnight had a fairer countenance.

CHAP. XXIX.
1 How Meruine took leave of Charles and departed. 2 How he went to Jerusalem,
and thence was conveyed into Fairia.
THus did the false Orke that monstrous son of the devil come to his end,
being slain in the thir^^eth month of his age, being so invincible, that he
brought all France almost desolate, and so likewise had done al christendom,
if God had not raised Meruine to be his destroyer. And the story says, that
if Meruine had been brought up with woman's milk, he could never have
conquered the monster. Now by this time came Charles and the other christians,
who with great honor and solemnity would have brought him to the city; but
he refused, telling the emperor he must first pay his vows to the sepulcher
of his Sa^iour, entreating Charles for his sake, to aid his son Orient when
any extremity should assail him. Which when Charles heard he sorrowed
exceedingly.

2 Thus parted Meruine, whom Charles would no longer hold, and came to Roan,
where his army attended him, whom he sent to Lilfort, and bade them charge
Mathaburna his Queen ^o look carefully to his son Orient, for that he
would go to Jerusalem. Thus ^^parted they, and he stayed still in Roan til the
wound in his knee was cured; then he betook himself to the sea: which having
ouerpassed, he rode till he came to a forest, where the night so suddenly
ouertooke him, that he knew not where to lodge. Now it fell out, that Mutafier
to reueng^ his sons death, made in this wood an Abbacie* and himself like a
Nun. When Meruine espied the house, he spurred his horse toward it, but by
no means could he make him go, but evermore he did recoile back: then
came Mutafier in the habit of a Nun, and saluted him: then Meruine desired
her to take his horse and bring him to the house, than which the Devil desired
nothing more. So soon as Meruine was within the hall* he found a table
spread, and store of cakes, but Meruine would neither eat nor drink; but
Mutafier at last enchanted him that he forgate God, and fell to both eating and
drinking. Which when Mutafier perceived, he vowed at midnight to carry him to
hell: then he demanded of Meruine if h^e would go to his rest, to which he
consenting, brought him into a most sumptuous chamber, where when he was laid
to repose, before the night was half spent, he imagined, that the chamber,
the Abbey, the bed, and all about him was on fire, wherefore incontinently he
arose and armed himself, and came into the court, where he found Mutafier in
the likeness of Passant (who then was gone into Fairia) upon whom as soon as
he was mounted, the Devil flew away like thunder or tempest, and bare him by
woods, rivers, and mountains, even to hell, where he found his travel
doubled; for by the commandment of God the devil was compelled to bear him
back again, wherefore he carried him into India, where were many serpents and
cruel beasts, and therefore discharging himself of his b^rthen, he told
Meruine how he was his mortal Enemy the spirit Mutafier, that had the
keeping of him at Minor, and there so many years formented him, with hideous
noise telling him that he intended to have borne him quick into Hell, and that
now he would be revenged for the fatal death of his dear beloved son Orke.
Which Meruine hearing, he drew his sword, and defended himself therewith in
such sort, that if the malicious flend Mutafier had been mortal, he had
slain him an hundred times; which seen, Meruine with the sign of the Cross
blessed himself at which the devil like a tempest flew away, and left
Meruine, who falling on his knees, asked pardon of his Creator, then he beheld
his horse Passant, to whom he went, but in that the devil had deceived him,
he was strict in trusting: wherefore using some blessings and coniuration:
Passant fell upon his knees, and then he mounted upon him, and never stayed
till he came to Jerusalem, where he adored the holy sepulcher, and visited all
the shrines of the Saints, remaining there the space of two months, at the end
whereof he went into Spain, to an Abbey that was founded by duke Lion, where
he was confessed and absolved, and then Gratiana sent the king Orient and
diverse renowned Fairies, who embraced Meruine and brought him into the Fairie
land, where he lived out his time with the beautiful Gratiana.

Thus ends the history of the famous and ever renowned Meruin, which was
first composed in rithme, and after translated into French prose, from whence
it is thus reduced.
Finis.

