A short and faithful Instruction, gathered out of holy Scripture, composed in
Questions and Answers, for the edifyeng and comfort of the simple Christianes;
which intend worthily to receive the holy Supper of the Lord.
1. Corin. xi. Who so ever shall eat of this Bread and drink of the Cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be gylty of the body and blood of the Lord. 2.
Corin. 4. I believe, and therefore I speak.

To the faithful congregation of the Dutch Church at London. Grace and peace
from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.


Forasmuch as our Lord Jesus Christ has commanded all true Christians to
observe, hold and use his holy Supper in remembrance of him till his coming
again: and seeing also that al they which according to the rule of holy
scripture neither do examyn, try nor prove them selves ryghtly before ye
recept of the said holy supper, neither yet do truly judge and discern the
difference of it from other profane bankettes, are gyltie of the body and
blood of Christ: and seeing also that no man can accordyngly other try and
prove himself, or ryghtly judge and discern the body of the Lord, except he
first know and understand the fou^dacion and ground of the christen faith
and religion: Therefore have we (as they which are careful for the health of
your souls) written this brefe and short su^mary of the most needful and
principal parts of the christen religion, to your most profitable
instruction and comfort to thentent that no man other through ignorance
should despise that commandment of Christ: or else thorough stubburnes should
(...) not regard the recepte of that holy ^upper, or in any wise slanderously
or unworthily abuse it. In consideracion whereof we humbly beseech you of
charity and for Christ Jesus sake, that you will thankfully take this my
labor, and with all diligence embrace it, to the further au^ce of your own
salvation, and our joy in the day of the Lord. Given in London by your
welwyllyng Minister. Marten Micron. 8. December. 1552.

Question. Well-beloved brother or sister N. seeing that thou inte^dest to receive
with us the holy Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ, so before all things (if
otherwise thou wylt not make thy self gyltie of his body and blood) thou
must be a christian: therefore we ask of thee.

Whereby know thou, that thou art a Christian.

Answer, Romans 8. 2. Cor. 1.
Two manner of ways: First because the holy ghost by the witness of faith
certifieth me in mine heart and seals my conscience, that I am the child of
God alonly through the merit of Jesus Christ. Secondarely, because that I
through the same spirit (as touching the inward man) am moved wyllyngly and
gladly to the due obedience of gods holy commandments.

Question. Which are the commandments?

Answer. Those which God himself commanded, and Moses in the.xx. Cha. of
Exo. wrote, in manner and form following.

The. ten commandments.
I Am the Lord thy God, which brought the out of the land of Egypt out of
the house of bondage: Thou shalt have none other Gods but me.







which the Lord thy God gives the.

Thou shall do no murder.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not bear false witness against

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors

Question. How are these commandments divided?

Answer. Ex. 23. 34
Into two tables, whereof the first pertayneth to God, Deute. 9.
and the other to our neighbor.

Question. What learnest thou in the four first commandments which belong
alonly unto God?

Answer. Esa. 44.
That I shall set my faith, trust and confidence upon no creature, Psalm. 115.
but up on God alone. Mat. 15.
And him, Exo. 25.
not with image service or any other counterfayt worshippyng, 1. Reg. 15.
but alone in spirit and truth shall worship and serve, Ioh. 4.
and shall also daily praise his holy uame, Esa. 48^.
and exercise my self diligently not only in hearing his holy word, Ephe. 5.
but also in the use of his Sacraments, Luke 8. 10.


Question. What learnest thou in the six commandments following, which
belong to our neighbor?

Answer. That I shall be obedient unto the^, whom God has set over me, and
that I shall by no manner of means be hurtful to my neighbor in his body, wife
famylie, goods, honor, name, fame, or estimacion, no not so much as with any
euel luit, but in all godly and honest things shall be to him an help and
furthera^ce.

Question. Haste thou these commandments in all points so perfytlye
fulfilled, that you art able to stand in the judgment?

Answer. Och nay: for seeing that y^ law is spiritual, and I am carnal, I can
not but confess my self in many things against that holy law to have
offended, not only in leauyng undone that that is therein commanded, but
also-in doing that, Deute. 27.
that is therein forbidden.

Question. Gala. 3.
Seeing that man because of one sin by the sentence of the law is condemned
and excluded out of the kyngdo^e of God, Iaco. 2.
how shall thou then be saved, for as much as in many things thou haste
sinned, and because that no man can enter into Gods kingdom unless he be
clean from all sin?

Answer. My salvation depends only of mere mercy and grace through Jesus
Christ, which without al my deserving has taken and accepted me for one of
his members, and also has made me partaker of all his gracious merits and
good deeds, because with a repentaunt heart I believe undoubtedly to be saved
through him.

Question, Seeing the ground of thy faith is set alone upon Jesus Christ, wylt
thou shortly declare, what thou beleuest on Christ? Romans 1. 9.


Answer. Ioh. 1. 3.
I believe that Jesus Christ in one person is very God of God: 1. Ioh. 2,
and very man of man: 1. Tim. 2.
and also that he is my only mediator, Heb. 7. 8.
advocate, intercessour, high Priest, Deute. 18.
King and Prophet, which has taken upon him my curse and condempnacion,
Act. 3. 7.
and has to me again rerestored freely his holiness and righteousness, Gala. 3.
as it is most briefly comprysed in the chief articles of our Christen faith.
Roma. 8.


Question. Which are the chief articles of the Christen faith?

Answer. I believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. etc.

Question. What understand thou by that word (I believe) as thou confessest
saying: I believe in God the Father: I believe in God the Son: I believe in God
the holy Ghost.

Answer. I mean this, that I set all my faith, trust and confidence in God
the Father, who has made me and all the world: In God the Son, who has
redeemed me and all mankind: and in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me and
all the chosen people of God.

Question. Beleuest thou then, that God the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost are one true God?

Answer. Yea most surely, for so all the holy scripture teaches us, and
thereof are we admonyshed in our baptyme wherein we are baptized in the name of
ye father and of the son, and of the holy Ghost.

Question. Has Christ ordened no sure outward exercises and certain marks
and tokens whereby his congregation may be known and discerned from all other
churches and sects?

Answer, Yes doutles, and that because of our weakness, that we through them
may be exercysed and strengthened in a sure faith, and also by the due
administracion of them may so much the better be styrred up to the due
obedience of the foresaid commandments of God.

Sure marks and tokens of Christ's true Church.
Question. What are ye sure exercises, marks and tokens, of the true church of
Christ?

Answer. The first is, the sincere preaching of Gods holy word.

instituted and ordained of Christ.

And the third is, the christen correccio^

Question. Wherein stands the sincere preaching of the holy word of God.

Answer. In the right declarynge of the law, and of the holy gospel, whereof
hitherto I have made my confession.

Of the Sacraments.
Question. What are the Sacraments?

Answer. They are holy exercises, seals and effectual tokens of
remembrance, ordained of the Lord him self for the comfort of his
congregation. In which exercyses the free forgiveness of sins in and by
Christ Jesus, before our eyes, and that most clearly and euidentlye is set out
and sealed. And beside that, we are thereby admonyshed of our duty both toward
God, and to our neighbor.

Question. How many such Sacraments are there?

Answer. Two, that is: Baptyme. And the holy Supper of the Lord.

Of Baptyme.
Question. What is Baptyme?

Answer. It is an holy ordinance of Christ in the recept whereof all the
members of his congregation (in which young children are contained also) are
baptized wc water in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost.

Question. What comfort have thou of thy Baptyme?

Answer. Great comfort. For albeit of nature I am unclean and the child of
wrath, yet nevertheless by faith in the promyses of mercy am I fully
persuaded, ^ala. 3.
that through Jesus Christ I am assuredly and certeynlye accepted and taken
into the grace and favor of God, as my body in the recept of baptyme is
besprenkled and washed with water.

Question. What more comfort haste thou of Baptyme?

Answer. Forsooth this: that I may all my life long have a continual
forgeuenes of my sins, into the which through the deuels temptacion and mine
own weakness and fraylnes I may chance to fall: whenever I with a repe^tant
heart in spirit and faith through Jesus Christ do pray and ask pardon and
forgiveness of the same.

Question. Whereof moreover art thou admonished in thy baptyme?

Answer. Truly, that I shall al my life long forsake the deuell, the world,
and all the fylthy lusts of my flesh, and with al diligence continually walk
in a new and godly life.

Of Christ's holy Supper.
Question. What is the holy Supper of the Lord?

Answer. It is an holy soul banquet, Math. 26.
ordened of Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 10.
for an effectual remembrance of his death, He. 7. 10.
especially that he upon the cross once for all offered up his innocent body,
and there also shed his most precious blood for the forgeuenes of sins.

Question. Wherefore intendest thou to receyne the holy Supper of our Lord
Jesus Christ?

Auswere. Math. 28.
Because my Lord and Master Jesus Christ has wylled, Mar. 14.
ordained and commanded it to be received in remembrance of his death, 1.
Cor. 11.
for the synguler comfort, profyt and commodity of me, and of all the worthy
receyuers of it.

Question. What profyt and comfort fyndest thou in the due and worthy recepte
thereof.

Answer. Truly, in the right ministracion thereof, it is lively and
effectually set out to me miserable sinner as it were before mine eyes, beaten
into my remembrance, yea wytnessed and sealed to my feeble conscience through
the holy Ghost, that Christ has once for all upon the cross made an
everlasting full and parfyte oblacion and sacrifice for my sins, Heb. 7. 10.
and that I also beleuynge in him have thorough his death and oblacio^ once
made, forgyuenes of my sins with comfort and full trust of everlasting life
as verily, truly and certeinlye as I at his table eat of the bread broken and
drink of the cup of the Lord, which (after the use of holy scripture and
manner of Sacraments) he calls his body and blood.

Question. What form, manner, and property of speaking uses the holy
scripture in all Sacraments?

Answer. Uerely, that the outward parts or matter of the Sacraments in the
holy scripture are decked, bewtifyed and adourned with the names of the
mysteries and hyd things, which they signifye: to thentent it might be known
where unto they were properly ordained, and wherefore they should be received.
Genesis 17.
As circumcision is called the Covenant of God: Exo. 12.
the Paschlambe is entitled the Passover or pass by: Tit. 3.
Baptyme is named ye wasshing away of sin or bath of the new birth. Actu. 22.
Even so the holy Supper is called the body of Christ broken for us, 1. Pet. 3.
and his blood shed for us. 1. Cot. 10. and, 11.


Questi. Is y^ very natural body and blood of Christ necessarely present here
upon earth, so that in ye supper it may be eaten and dro^ke^.

Answer. Nay truly: For first it were utterly contrary to the nature and
property of al Sacraments. 1. Six reasons against the 2 corporal presens of
Christ in the supper 1, Cor. 10.
Again, the opinion of corporal presence obscureth the spiritual eating and
drinkyng of the body and blood of Christ, which all the old fathers (as S. Paul
says) did: which spiritual eating and drynkyug alone in holy scripture is
required unto salvation. Beside that, it defaceth and in a manner blotteth

Question. Whereof else art thou admonished in the use of Christ's holy Supper?

Answer. Truly, that I with all mine heart shall thank my Lord Jesus Christ
for this great benefit of my redemption. And this thankfulness by his
gracious favor, with patience, love, mortificacion of carnal desires,
soberness of life and conversation, and finally with a continual and free
confession of his holy name, shall I signifye and declare unto my lives end.

Of Christen correccion.
Question. Where is the correccion of the Church commanded of Christ?

Answer. Uerely in the.18. tha. of S. Mat. gospel under these words: Math. 18.
if thy brother trespase against the. Go and tell hi^ his faut between him and
thee alone. If he hear the, thou have won thy brother. But if he hear the
not, then take yet with thee one or two, that in the mouth of two or three
witnesses every matter may be stablyshed. If he hear not them: tell it unto the
congregracion. If he hear not the congregation, let him be unto the as an
heathen man, and as a publican. Uerely I say unto you: what so ever ye bynd on
earth shall be bound in heaven: and what so ever, ye lose on earth, shall be losed
in heaven. This ordinance of Christ S. Paul also confirms and puts in use
as appears in the.i. epistle unto the Corinthes. 1. Cor. 5.


Question. What is the correccion of the Church of Christ.

Answer. Math. 18.
It is an ordinance of Christ, through which every christian is bound orderly
after the word of God, Luke. 17.
lovingly to admonish his brother of his fault: Romans 15.
and also again willingly and gladly to receive and take admonicion, Collo. 3.
warnyng and charitable rebukes for the same. Heb. 3. 12.
Or else if he refuse and utterly despise all such godly admonicio^s and
warnynges (so that according unto Christ's rule they be orderly done) then by
the authority of gods word he ought to be excommunicated and put out of the
congregation and delivered to satan: Iaco. 5.
and as an heythen and publican to be esteemed, 1. Cor. 5.
reputed and taken, 1. These. 5.
unto such a time he return, amend and reco^cile himself again unto the
congregation.

Question. 1. Petri. 5.
Seeing that subtle satan seeks always and means to pluck away man from
his faith and obedience to Jesus Christ, how shall thou the^ be able to stand
in thy profession?

Answer. Mar. 13.
By the only grace of God and such means as he has ordained, Ephe. 6.
which are: watchyng, Iaco. 4.
resistyng and prayeng. etc.

Question. To whom prayest thou? and how?

Answer. To God only through Jesus Christ, in spirit and truth.

Question. For what thing prayest thou?

Answer. I pray first for those things

Question. Wylt thou according to this confession of thy faith live: And with
al diligence observe the discipline of the church, and bond of charity: and
also (al envy, malice and hatred of heart set aparte) will thou reconcile thy
self and be at one withal me^ with whom thou art at variaunce?

Answer. Yea by the grace of God, so far as is possible to this mine
infirmity and weakness, ye which I shall earnestly pray unto God to strengthen
me daily more and more. Amen.

Translated out of Dutch into English, By T. C.

