GODS Arithmeticke.

WRITTEN By Francis Meres, Master of Art of both Universities, and Student in
Divinity,

Hebr. 13. Honorabile est coniugium inter omnes, and cubila eorum mundum est:
scortatores autem and adulteros iudicaturus est Deus.

August. in Psalm. 99. Coniugium humile melius est virginitat^ superba.



Printed at London by Richard Iohnes 1597.

To the right Worshipful M. John Meres Esquire, High Sheriff of
Lincolneshier, Francis Meres wishes the true felicity of this life, and
eternal happiness in the other.
THere be four parts of Arithmeticke, Addition, Multiplication, Substraction,
and Division, whereof the first two take their beginning from the right hand,
and do multiply and increase: and these be GODS numbers: the other two begin
from the left, and do substract and divide, and these be the Devils. When God
had married Adam and Eua together, God said to them both, increase, multiply
and replenish the earth: this is Gods Arithmeticke. But when the Devil
subtracted Dalila from Sampson, the Leuits wife from her husband, and divided
Micholl from David: this was the Devils Arithmetic. Diuisum imperium cum Jove
Demon habet, two parts for God, and two for the Devil. En quatuor ^ras. Ecce
duo tibi Deo, duoque altaria Daemoni. Addition and Multiplication belong to
God, but Substraction and Division belong to the Devil. In Gods house are
Companies, Armies and Troops, but in the Devils desolation, solitude and
destruction. In Gods house dwell Adam, Noah, Lot, Seth, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, David, Ezechias, Josias, the Apostles of Christ,
all which by Multiplication replenished the earth, and by Addition enriched
Gods Kingdom. But in the Devils dwell the Nicolaitans, the Marcionites, the
Saturnites, the Tatians, the Adamites, the Encratites, the Manichees, the
Mahometanes, the Anabaptists, and that great Dragon of Rome Pope Gregory the
seventh, otherwise called Hildebrande, all which by Substraction either
condemned, or by Division contemned Gods Arithmeticke, and bannished out of the
bonds of Christianity, that most famous and glotious Empress Lady
Matrimony and exalted in her Throne fained Dame Chastity, which being pure
is not to be preferred before holy Wedlock, except we will say that the
Daughter has a pre-eminence above her mother, for Virginity is the daughter
of Marriage, and through marriage is made a Citizen and In-dweller of Paradise,
which also without marriage, should neither be, nor yet possess Paradise.

The ancient Fathers and Philosophers have singularly extolled the knowledge
of humane Arithmeticke, being one of the seven liberal Sciences, when they
considered the deep devises, the profound practices, and cunning conclusions
therein contained: and also that it is the Key and entrance into all other
Arts and Learning: as well approved the noble Philosopher Pythagoras, who
caused this Inscription to be written upon his School door (where he taught
Philosophye) in great Letters: Nemo Arithmeticae ignarus hic ingrediatur: Let
none enter here, that is ignorant in Arithmeticke.

But the commendation of this heavenly Arithmeticke, is so excellently
depainted and dignified in Scripture, that it needs neither the pen of
Father nor Philosopher, nor the praise of Angels. Not Romulus of Rome, not
Solon of Athens, not Minos of Crecte, not Lycurgus of Sparta, nor insatiable
Art-searching Aristotle did institute it, nor any other Creature either in
heaven or in earth, but God himeselfe that most high Majesty, who after he had
created Man and Woman in his own Image, he commanded neither angel nor
Archangell to marrye and couple them together, but he himself, as I may so
speak, supplied the place of a Minister, and married Adam and Eua together.

Neither was it instituted in this wretched and wicked world, which is nothing
but a vale of tears and sorrows, but in Paradise, that Garden of most sweet
and joyful pleasures. Upon which holy and honorable estate the holy and
blessed Angels attend, as we may see in the story of Abraham and Sara,
concerning the having of a son, and in the book of Judges, how the Angel of
the Lord came to the wife of Manoah about the birth of Sampson, and in the
first of Luke, how Gabriell the Angel brought word to Zachary, how his wife
Elizabeth should bring forth John Baptist.

We read also how the reverend Patriarchs, the sage Judges, the noble Kings,
the holy Priests, the heavenly inspired Prophets were all married, which
examples do not a little grace this estate. In the new Testament we read,
that the Savior of the world was born of a Virgin espoused and married, and
graced this his Fathers ordinance with the firstfruites of his miracles,
himself being present with his Mother and his Disciples. Whereupon Saint
Augustine says in his book De bono coniugali: Bonum coniugii Dominus in
Euangelio confirmauit, non solum quia prohibuit dimittere uxorem, nisi ex causa
fornicationis, sed etiam quia venit inuitatus ad nuptias. The Lord in the
Gospel does commend the goodness of marriage, not only because he will have
no ^vorce, but for fornication, but also because he comes unto a marriage
being invited. Marriage also is an holy Mystery of the Union of Christ and his
Christian Congregation.

Therefore exceeding Derogatorie to the Wisdom of God is that Canon of the
Council of Trent which makes Chastity and Priests marriage opposite, quite
contrary both to the commandment of God, and the practice of his Saints. God
has done that for the matrimony of priests, which he never did for the
Matrimony of King or Kesar, or of any other mortal creature. For in his holy
Law given by Moses, he appoynteth evidently what Woman the priests should
marrye. Are not these his words Leuit. 21.? Let not the priest take a wife,
that is an Adultresse, or defiled, nor put from her husband, for such an one is
holy unto his God. He shall take a Maid unto his Wife: but a Widovv, a
divorced woman, or an Harlot he shall not marrye, but shall take a Maid of
his own people to wife. By the Prophet Ezechiell he says also, Chap. 44.
The priests shall marry no Widdovv, neither one that is put from her Husband:
but a Maid of the seed of the house of Israel. Saint Paul also sets forth
what manner of VViues the spiritual Ministers should have. Their Wives must
be (says he, (...). Timoth. 3.) honest, no evil speakers, but sober and
faithful in all things.

For the practice of Gods Saints, the holy Scriptures and ancient writings
make manifest. The priests of the old Testament were married, and their
Children succeeded them in the Ministry. Jeremy the prophet, who was
sanctified in his Mothers womb, was Helkiah the priests son. Ezechiel the
Prophet, to whom marueysous Visions and great Mysteries were revealed, was Buzi
the Priests son.

In the new Testament, Saint John the Baptist, of whom Christ gives this
wttnes, that he was more then a Prophet, and that among them, which were borne
of Women, arose not a greater then he, was the son of Zachary the Priest.
The Apostles of Christ were married men, as the Monuments of the ancient
Writers testify. Saint Matthew, Saint Mark and Saint Luke make mention of
Peter's wives mother. The Histories declare evidently, that Saint Petronilla was
Saint Peter's Daughter. And there are that write, that Saint Mark the
Evangelist was Saint Peter's natural Son. Saint Paul in his first Epistle to
the Corinth. Chap. 9. testifies, that the Apostles, of Christ led their wives
with them, when they went about preaching the Word of God. Saint Luke Acts 21.
makes mention of Phillip the Evangelist, and his four Daughters which were
Virgins and did prophecye.

If we search the Histories of ancient writers, we shall see that many
reverend Bishops and virtuous ministers were married in the primative Church,
and many hundred years after. Spiridion Bishop of Cyprus was married, and had
a Daughter called Irene. Pelagius Bishop of Syracusa had both wife and
children: Gregorius Nazianzenus was a Bisshops son, and succeeded his Father
in place and Office: Policrates Bishop of Ephesus said: Seven of my
Forefathers by order were Bisshops of this See, and I am the eight:
Philogonius was a married Bishop, as Chrysostom testifies. Cheremon a Bishop
in Egypt of the City Nilopolis was married: Philias also both Bishop and
Martyr was married. Adolphus Bishop of Colen had a Wife: The Ancient Doctor
Tertulian was mariyed. Saint Hillary having wife and Children was made Bishop
of Pictania: Basilius Magnus was a married Bishops son, and Epiphanius
Archbishop of Constantinople was a married Priests son.

The grauest and prudentest among the Heathen, as the Romans and Grecians,
have greatly reverenced and honored marriage. The Romans made a Law, that
such as lived among them vamaried till they were aged, should pay certain
great sums of money for the defense and mainteinance of the common weal, and
that they should be judged and counted the enemies of the state. The noble
Lacedaemonians made a Law, that if any among them remained unmarried, til he was
past 37. years of age he should by no means be suffered in Summer time to come
unto the plays, Pastimes, sports and such other public spectacles or fights,
as were used among them for their solace and delight. The Grecian Ladies (as
Homer reports) count their age from the time of their marriage, not from the
day of their birth, and if they be demanded how old they be, they begin to
reckon from their marriage, and so answer accordingly, for then only, say
they, we begin to live. And surely there is nothing in this world that makes
a life more vital and pleasant, then this society does. Without friendship
and love no Man can live either in prosperity or adversity. It is friendship
that makes prosperity more glorious, and adversity more tolerable. But in
no kind of society has this friendship more gloriously appeared, nor more
constantly continued, then between man and wife. Which we shall presently
yield unto, if we go no further then to the stories of the Heathen: The
friendship of Pilades and Orestes, of Damon and Pythias, of Achilles and
Patroclus, so much admired and extolled of the Grecian Writers, for continuance
was never more stable, for mutual duty and help more requisite, or for
tenderness of affection and sincerity of true and unfeigned love and loyalty
more commendable, then the love of Alceste to her husband Admetus, who
underwent the weighty burden of death for him. Or of Tiberius Gracchus to his
wife Cornelia, who for her tasted of the same cup, that Alceste did for her
husband, so that it is a matter vndecideable, whether Alceste loved her
husband, or Gracchus his Wife better. Damon and Pythias are much commended for
being each others pledge in a capital case, and for the return at the
prefixed day: But if you poyse with Damon and Pythias the love of the Mynian
wives to their Husbands, and the love of the wife of Theopompus the
Lacedemonian to him, the VVomens scale will far prove the weyghtyer.

Achilles hearing tell of the death of his friend Patroclus, so miserably
lamented his loss, that he could scarcely be restrained from laying violent
hands upon himself. But Plancus the Roman for the death of his dear
Orestilla could not be restrained. Panthea killed her self upon the carcass
of her slain husband: Portia the Daughter of Marcus Cato, hearing of her
Brutus death, swallowed hot burning Coals to follow him.

For brevity sake I refer the admirable love of the Indian Wives to their
Husbands, to be read in the fifth Book of Tullyes Tusculan.

Exceeding admirable was the love of Camma the Galathian to her Hushand
Sinatus, as appears by revenging his death upon the murderer Sinorix with
the loss of her own life.

But that I may not be too tedious in rehearcing examples, which are almost
innumerable, I hear break of, and briefly conlude, that there is no
friendship more true, nor amity more honorable, nor any societiy more sacred
or profitable, then that which is coupled together by marriage bonds. Therefore
very truly speaks Propertiu: Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto conigue mayor,
Great is all love, it makes sweet man's life:
But greater is the love between man and wife:


And those most sweet plangors and lamentations even hearkened too of infernal
spirits (if we will hear the Poets) of Thr^acian Orpheus for his dearest
Wife Eurydice, do testify this to be true.

But least this Epistle be scoft at, as Di^genes scoft at the Gates of the
City Myndus, I refer your Worship to the present discourse, which by proof
of sacred Scripture shall lead you to a due estimation of this honorable
Ordinance, and do wholly dedicate and bequeath both the Censure of it, and of
my self to your Religious and virtuous Patronage: having a longing desire to
make known your Worships courtesies extended to me at your House at Auborne,
your forwardnes in preferring my successelesse suite to Master Laurence Meres
of York, sometimes of her Majesty's Counsel established for the North, and
your willingness and readiness for my longer abode and stay at Cambridge.

Thus in all humility and thankefulnes, I beseech Jesus Christ, the great
Shepherd of our souls to endue and bless you with the Rich Gifts of his
heavenly grace, and with continuance of prosperous health both of soul and
body, to his honor and glory, your own desire and comfort, and to the
profit of this your native Country. From my Chamber in Saint Marie
Buttolphlane, near London-Stone this 10. of October. 1597.

Your Worships wholly to command. Francis Meres.

Gods Arithmeticke.
Two are better then one. Eccles. 4. 9.


THat there is a good in humane society (if men can hit upon it) Solomon in
this place is plain, when he says, Two are better then one; concerning which
speech, some offense at a blush may arise, as if it did befit neither the
gravity of the Preacher, nor the reverence of the Scripture, nor the Wisdom
of Solomon. For what shall we call it? does Solomon here set out an
Arithmomachia, a combat of nombers? does he after a fantastical manner compare
number with number? or Poetlike for trial of his wit, does he oppose Unity
against Duplicitie, one against two, and two against one, to make one and two
to fight together? or as he wrote of Trees, Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, so did
he writ of nombers too? Or was there an error in them that gathered his
writings together to foyst in this saying of Solomon the Philosopher, amongst
the sayings of Solomon Ecclesiastes the Preacher, and so to mingle his
Philosophye with his Divinity? Surely no, there is no such matter, but it is
even the saying of that sober spirit, which said Genesis 2. It is not good for man
to be alone, let us make him an help meet for him; equivalent and of like
force and sense with this, Two are better then one, as if he should say, while
a man is one and alone, it is not well with him, but when a help is made, it
is better for him; Therefore have we in this Scripture three things to consider.

First, that society is good.

Secondly, that it is bester then Unity.

Thirdly, a care that since God has orday ned it unto good, that we use the
means to direct it unto good.

For the first, that society is good, is inferred by the very words, for he
that says it is better then unity, implies it is good, for in reason
whatsoever is good in comparison must needs be good of it self, and so is
society a good thing, ordained for the help, the health, the comfort, and good
of man, therefore says David Psalm. 133. Behold how good a thing it is for
Brethren to dwell together in unity, not expressing the measure, but admiring
it, as if he could not say how good it were: it is like a pleasant ointment
affecting the sense with delight, it is like the deaw of Hermon replenishing
the fields with profit, if ye feel it, it is profitable: if ye taste it, it
is sweet: if ye behold it, it is beautiful: but if ye have it, there is no
treasure like it.

Ask the Beasts (says Job Cap. 12.) and they shall tell thee, or the fowls
and they shall show thee; so say I, if ye will know how good, and what a good
society is, ask the Beasts and Fowls and they will declare to thee. The
Grasshoppers have no King, yet go they forth in bands, a wonder to see so
silly a worm by society should become a soldier in the field. Beside in
observation we find, that the most innocent and harmless creatures are by
nature sociable, therefore Christ exhortes his Disciples to imitate those
creatures, which were sociable and loving one to another, such as are sheep
which go together in flocks, such as are Doves, which fly together in
companies, he resembles the^ to doves, he calls them sheep, for those be in
deed the harmless creatures: but Wolves, and Owls, and Lions, which live
apart and run into wild and desert places, those be they, which meditate on
mischief: Thou leadest thy people like sheep (says the Psalmist) by the
hands of Moses and Aaron Psalm. 77. But of the wicked says Eliphas: thou
scatterest them as the Lions whelps, Job. 4. Gods people are like sheep, the
wicked as Lions; these lead, they scattered: these flocking together, they
divided a sunder.

How well God liked of society, is seen by the creation, for why did God make
men and Angels, but to join them to himself, and that which God the Father
liked, Christ his son disliked not, for why came Christ from Heaven, but to
seek that one sheep which was lost, and bring it to the fold? Luke the 15.
or why did he yield himself to die, but to gather together into one the
children of GOD, which were scattered. John. 11.

The great difference between Christ and the Devil, is this, that Christ
gathers things together: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thee together, but the Devil deuides and scatters them in sunder,
for he is that Wolf that catches the sheep and scatters them, John 10. It
was he that carried that one sheep into the Wilderness Luke 15. it was he that
carried the possessed into the mountains and into the graves; Mark. 5. It was
he that led Christ into the wilderness, into the mountains and to the pinnacle
of the Temple, Math, 4. If the Devil see four together, he is never well till
he has brought the^ to three, for when Noah and his three sons were together
he culled out Cham from among them, Genesis 9. Or if he see three together, he is
never well till he has brought them to two, for it was he that divided the
prodigal child from his Father, and from his elder Brother Luke 15. Or if he
see two together, he is never well till he has brought them to one, it was he
that divided Lot and Abraham asunder Genesis 13. for in the Devils Arithmeticke
three are better then four, and two are better then three, and one is better
then two, whereas God says: Two are better then one, therefore it is well said
that Addition and Multiplication belong to God, but Substraction and Division
belong to the Devil. The Devil is like a Canonstone, that makes two walls of
one, but Christ is like a Corner stone, that makes one Wall of two,

It was given for a sign of Christ's government, that when he came, the Wolf
should dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard with the Kidde, the Cow with the
Bear, and the Calfe with the Lion, Esaias 11. that things of unlike nature
should ioyn in peace, and couple by his coming: but the Devil by his coming
diuides a sunder things of like nature, it was he that divided the stars
from the stars, Apoc. 12. it was he that divided the Angels from the
Angels when they fell from Heaven; it was he that set Ephraim against
Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, the Father against the Son, and the
Son against the Father, it was he that divided Di^ah from Jacob, Demas from
the Apostles, Paul from Barnabas, and Judas from Christ, in a word, it is he
that by pride diuides a man from God, by covetousness diuides him from his
neighbor, and by anger diuides him from himself. In the Canticles, the
spiritual beauty of Christ and the Church, is compared to troops of horses,
to clusters of Grapes, to bundelles of Myrrh, to heaps of wheat, to flocks
of sheep, and Canticles 6. what shall ye see in the Shulamite but as the
company of armies? They that be of Christ's Church, they go together in
troops, in clusters, in bundles, in heaps, in flocks, in armies, that is,
they be loving and sociable one with another, and whosoever is not so, he is
hateful and despised of what state or calling soever, yea, though he be a
King, yet if he have not a smiling face, a cheerful eye, an affable tongue, if
he be not fo^able and familiar in behavior every man will detest him, it had
like to have cost David his Kingdom, that his son Absolon was more affable
and pliable to the people then he: that he stood at the Gates to welcome
them as they came.

In a Minister, nothing more commendable then to be affable, to confer,
consorte, and acquaint himself familiarly with the people.

I like not this same grum clergy, that hang down their heads, and lock up
their lips, and look demurely, as if there was no way to be counted a
Saint, but by looking like a Sotte. John the 3. the Disciples of John Baptist
told him, that the man beyond Jordan, meaning Jesus, that he baptized, and
that all men came to him, putting John in a fear that he had lost all his
followers, now what was the reason of that, but because John was a man of the
Wilderness, a sour austere man, that did neither eat nor drink with the
people, and therefore the people said plainelye, that he had the Devil, for so
it is Matthew. 11. John came neither eating nor drinking, and they said he had
the Devil, whereas Christ did not carry himself strangely among the people,
but came to their houses, did eat and drink with them, help them, heal them
and talk with them.

Among civil men, if any man behave himself vnneighbourlye among neighbors,
he is hut an Owl, he is like Ismaell, he cares for no man, and no man cares
for him. God has made us all members of one body, and it agrees not with
Christianity that the eye should say, I have no need of the hand, or the head
should say, I have no need of the feet, 1. Corinthians. 12. H^ that lived in the
graves was possessed, Math. 8. and had the Devil, therefore when thou find a
man affecting solitarines, hating the societye of men, and liueinge to
himself, then may thou save, that man is possessed, and that the Devil is in
him to lead him to the Graves, a place where Christ would not be sought, why
seek ye the living among the dead, resurrexit, non est hic, he is risen, he is
not here, Luke 24. But especially, if thou see any man (under a pretense of
devotion) dividing himself from the society of men, as do the Brownistes and
Familistes, with the rest of the separation, who say they be too holy to mingle
themselves with every profane Assembly, take heed of them, for they be
Hypocrires that say, Stand apart, touch me not, come not near me, for I am
holier then thou, Esaias. 65. for were a man never so holy, yet that is no reason
to divide himself from the society of men, for what says S. Bernarde: Si de
fatuis virginibus ^s, congregatio tibi necessaria est, si de prudentibus tu
congregationi, every man is either a wise Virgin or a foolish, if thou be of
the number of the foolish Virgins, then haste thou need of the wise, but if
thou be of the number of the wise virgins, then have the foolish need of thee,
therefore separate not thy self from the communion of Sainets least the
communion of Saints separate it self from thee, for the society and ^ommunion
of Saints is an Article of the Creed, and he that comes not to the communion
of Saints shall never come to the remission of sins.

Now unto this consideration, that socyety is good, it shall not be amis^e to
add the next, that it is better then unity, for the holy Ghost is not content
with a simple commendation, as to say, two are good, but two are better then
one. And certainly I do find in Scripture, that the works of God do
wonderfully affect this number, and when I find it, I attribute it to his
Wisdom, of whom it is said, that he made all things in measure, weight and
number. Begin at the creation, and ye shall see what honor God gave to this
number, for when he had made one single man, he (as it were) corrects himself,
as if he had not done well, and says It is not good that man should be alone,
and then he made another to him. In Gen Cap. 1. 3. God made a light. and then
as if one light was not sufficient, verse 16. he ^adet woe great lights the one
to rule by day, and the other by night. In the body, the per^ectio^s of beauty
are more eminent in those whereof there were two, therefore GOD made two eyes,
and not one eye, and so in the rest,: and of these parts was Christ chiefly
enamoured of his Spouse, as Cantic. 5. and 7. Thy two breasts are like young
Roes, thine eyes are like Doves, thy cheeckes like a bed of spices, thy lips
like Lillies, thy hands like ringes of Gold, thy legs like pillars of
Marble.

In the old Law all ran upon twoes, like a door upon two hindges, the
Sacrifices were most of them offered by twoes, ye shall offer two Sparrowes,
two Doves, two Goats, two Oxen, two Rams, two Lam^es. In the Law two Tables,
in the Tabernacle two Altars, in the Temple two Pillars, on the Arc two
Cherubins, In the Church two People, in the Gospel two Sacraments, in Christ
two Natures.

And Christ rekoneth up his Disciples by twoes, Peter and Andrew, James and
John, Philip and Bartholomew,. Math. 10. 2. And he sent out his Disciples
before him by two and by two, like paires of Oxen to plough up the Church
before him, Luke 10. 1. as the Beasts came into Noaths Arc by two and by two,
Genesis 7 9.

And to end with that wherewith we began, when God made mankind, he made him
neither under nor over, but he made them just two, for when he was but one,
God said it was not good, and when he was three, it was stark naught, for it
was set as a brande o^ shame upon Lamecht head, that he was the first that
married two wives, Gen, 4. and so brought three into one flesh: and where it
was said, that two shall he one flesh, it should seem that an unmarried man is
but half a man, for if two must concur to make one flesh, then where there
is but one, there is but half a man.

If any man think I strain this Scripture out of the right sense, to refer
that unto marriage particularlye, which was spoken of all socyetie generallye,
I will even from thence take my defense, from whence I am accused, for if
Solomon spoke of all society generallye, then is marriage included, which is
one society among the rest, but that marriage is not only generally included,
but particularly intended, I refer you to the next verse going before, where
Solomon rekoneth among the miseries of this life, to see one single man, that
had neither Brother, nor son laboring for the world, and defrauding his
soul of pleasure and then infers this upon it: Two are better then one, as
if he meant, that he who is married had a son, for whom he labored, and
therefore defrauded not his soul of pleasure. Of the single life says S.
Paul, It is good: It is good for a Man not to touch a Woman 1. Cor. 7. but of
marryage he says, It is honorable. Heb. 13. To be good is the smallest
commendation that can be given to any thing, for God made nothing but was good
and whatsoever is not good, is of the Devil,

But to be honorable is the excellency and perfection of good, and strives
among other goods, like the Sun among the stars, which when it appears, they
are not known to be. But what if S. Paul said, the single life was good?
that proves not that marriage is not good, nay wherein is the single life so
good, but marriage is as good? It is good for a Man not to touch a woman: how
means he that? does he mean it is good generally for mankind? No: for Christ
says, all men cannot take that gift, Math. 19. but it is good particularlye
for this man, or for that man, for thee or for me, but marriage is good
generallye for mankind, and who preferres not a common good, before a private,
and the single life but a private good? for when he says, It is good for a man
not to touch a Woman, he means, it is good for that man that he can abstain
from marriage, that is yet more plainly, that it is good for him self,
because he feeds none but himself, he clothes none but himself. But herein
does marriage excel, because it does good to other, first to her, whom he
takes into his protection, which if all men should abhorte to do, then might
women go with Iephthes Daughter, to bewail the days of their Virginity.
Secondly, it does good to the Church, in begetting an holy seed to the
kingdom of Christ. Thirdly it does good to all the world, in replenishing it
with people, and Lots Daughters chose rather to lie with their Father, then to
leave the world unpeopled, therefore Two are better then one. But wherein does
the single such good to himself? ye will say in easing himeselfe of care,
because he has none to labor for but himself, but look verse 8. and Solomon
rekoneth that among the miseries of this life to see a man laboring and
traveling for the world, and knows not for whom, and in deed it is an ease
and comfort amidst our labors, that when we are gone, we have to whom to
leave them, which no man has that is alone, therefore two are better then one.
Or will ye say the single life is freer from temptation, for that when the
sword comes, when affliction or when persecution comes, thou haste none to
withdraw thee from GOD, thou haste no wife to tempt thee with tears, thou
haste no children to pearce thy soul with pity, thou haste no hinderance to
hold thy heart in thrall. I answer again, that as the temptation is less,
so the glory shall be less, for he that forsook more, he loved more, and
what is more admirable in the Church of God, then to see a man for Christ's
sake and for religions sake, forsake wife and children? For there is nothing
that calls so importunately upon the heart of man, as the cry of nature in the
tears of wife and children, and it is a thing at which the Barbarous Tyrants
are many times amazed, to think what religion should be, when they see that
for love of it, men forsake wife and children, it makes them think that there
is somewhat in the peace of GOD, which passes al understanding; Or which of
ye all is there, who if ye saw two Martyrs at a stake, whereof the one was
single, the other had wife and children, would not conceive more reverently of
him that was married, because he overcame the greater temptation, in leaving
wife and children, which the single martyr could not, because he had the^ not
to leave? therefore in him that is mathe patience is more admirable: the
victotie more honorable, the reward more glorious, the wages better, therefore
two are better then one, for Solomon here says, they shall have better Wages
for their labor: Well, ye will grant all this, that the victory is more
glorious in them that are married, when they do overcome these temptations, but
that they seldom overcome the^, because of the clogge. Surely this were
somewhat if it were true, but amongst other slanders against this honorable
ordinance of God, I must needs avouch this to be one, for let your single
Saints come in, and spread forth the Ensign of their honor, what ever was
done by men not married, but the matryed have done as much as they, yea I say,
as much, as often as honorable? If ye speak of patience, whom have ye to
come into the balance with Job, and he married, ifyee speak of obedience, whom
have ye like David, a man after Gods own heart, and he married, if of Faith,
whom like Abraham, if of Wisdom^, whom like Solomon, if of courage, whom like
Sampson, and all married, and it is no small commendation of marryage, to see
all the patterns of perfection in men that were married. If ye speak of
perfect sortitude in contempt of the world, marriage has been no hinderance,
but the married have hazarded as much as any: Where ever saw ye such a sacrifice
as that of Abraham, who sacrificed his own son for Gods sake? or when ever
heard ye such a work as that of Judah and Benjamin, who thrust away their
own wives for Gods sake? or who ever left more then Peter, who left all he had
for Christ's sake? and they all married. The Prophet Ezechiell, Cap. 14.
rekoneth up the three worthies of the world, Noah, Daniell and Job, though
these three men Daniel, Noah and Job were among them, yet should they save but
themselves, there were but three worthies in the world, and two of them, Noah
and Job were married, and marryage had the odd one. Nay what honorable thing
atcheiued in Scripture, but the married had a hand in it? or what honor in
Scripture ascribed to any, but the married had a share in it. The translation
up to heaven in Enoch, who was married, the building of the Arc, and preserving
of the world in Noah and his three sons, all married, the building of the
Temple in Solomon, who was married. If ye speak of vision and revelation then
against Daniell in the old Testament, and John in the new, I oppose Jacob among
the Patriatkes, Samuel among the Judges, Ezechiel among the Prophets, and
Peter among the Apostles, who had as many reuelatio^s, and saw as many visions
as any. Or if ye speak of Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, of whom it is
like he was not married, against him I oppose Moses the leader of the Jews,
who in deed was married, and what was there in the one, which was not in the
other? Paul was a great Scholar, a Pharisee, and brought up atthe feet of
Gamaliel, Acts. 22. so was Moses a man well seen in all the learning of the
Egyptians, Act. 7. to show that marryage is no enemy to learning. Paul was a
man fervent in prayer, for by his very prayer he healed the sick, Acts. 28. so
was Moses a man vehement in prayer, for he prayed forty days and forty
nights, Deuteronomy. 9. to show that marriage is no enemy to a man's devotion. Paul
fought with Beasts at Ephesus and overcame ^em, 1. Cor. 15. so did Moses with
fiery Serpents, with Sehon King of the Amorites, and Og that Beast of Basan,
Nomb. 21. to show that marryage is no Enemy to honor and victory. Paul
wish: himself eternally separate from God for the Jews sake, Romans 9. 3. so
did Moses, If thou will not pardon them, then blot my name out of thy book,
Exodus 32. 32. to show that marryage is no enemy to a Pastoral care in a
spiritual function. Paul was rapt up into the third Heaven, 2. Cor, 12. but
God came down from Heaven to talk with Moses in the Mount, Exodus 24. and me
think his honor was the greater, for Paul went up to God, but God came down
to Moses, to show that marryage is no enemy to vision and revelation.

Or if ye will object out of Matthew. 22. that the state of single men is like
to the Angels, because Christ says of the dead, phat they neither marry,
nor are given in ma^age, but are as the Angels in Heaven, and therein
conclude that the single life is so much to be preferred, above marryage, as
the Angels above carnal men, then look how much you prefer the Ang^lles,
who are not married, above mortal men, who are married, so much will I prefer
Christ, who was married, above the Angels, who were not married, for Christ
was and is married, the book of the Canticles, is the book of his love. Math.
22. 2. God is the King, whose son was said to be married and Christ is the
son of that king which was married, and Apoc. 19, 7. Christ is that Lamb,
whose marryage was said to be come, and we are that spouse, which was said to
make her self ready, therefore if an Argument from resemblance may do any
thing, then since the single state is but like to the Angels, and marriage
like to Christ, I conclude that this is better then that, and two better then
one.

If ye ask me wherein marriage exceedes, I answer for company, for comfort,
for help, First for company, for before Eua ^as made, there were a great many
creatures in the world, and yet Adam was still said to be alone, because the
other crea tures were no fit companions for him, and company is a thing that
in nature pleases, as we see that fowls of a fether flock together, even for
companies sake, though they receive no other benefit one by another, and the
same is in the nature of man, which delights in a companion, but to have him
or see him, though he reap no other good by him. But marryage is good not
only for company, but also for comfort too, therefore faith Solomon, if two
sleep together, there shall be heat, but to one how should there be heat, by
heat understanding comfort, which is like a warming in a cold day, and
certainly there is no comfort like the comfort of a good wife, only the holy
Ghost excepted, which saint Paul calls the God of all comfort and
consolation, because of that unspeakable peace, which it works in a man's
conscience, but set that a side, and there is no peace or comfort like this:
Whither it be in the infirmities of the body, no hand so welcome to apply the
medicine as the wives, or whether it be in the maladyes and perturbations of
the mind, no tongue so gracious to assuage the grief as the wives, for that
by a secret power they have in nature given them, they do I know not how slily
and smoothlye encroach and steal upon a man's affections, and surprise his
whole heart before he be aware. The presence of the wife, is like the Angel
in the midst of the fiery Furnace, that allayes the surie of affliction when it
comes: The hand of the wife is like the hand of Moses in Rephidim that drives
away distress, when she but holds it up; The tongue of the wife is like the
Harp of David in the ear of Saul, that expelles the spirit of anguish from
the heart of man, therefore two are better then one, better for company,
better for comfort, yea and better for help too: For when one is overcome,
yet two shall stand, and do we not live in a world of contention, wherein we
have need of continual help? is not the world a pitched field unto us? are
not our enemies encamped round about us, before and behind us, with out and
with in us? and the Devil the ringleader of them all, is he ^ot daily at our
doors? and have we not then need of a Helper? seckes he not continually by
power and by policy, by presumption and despair, by terrors and temptations
to overthrow us? does he not assay us in all subtlety, seeks he not all
auan^ages against us, and is it not like then he will set upon us, when we
be alone, as by all probability he set upon Eua, when she was alone, and upon
Christ, when he was alone, in the wilderness, in the mountain, on the pinnacle
of the Temple, where no man could come at him, and have we not then need of a
Helper? The Devil is like that Egyptian, Exodus 2. that singled out one
Israelite and smote him when he was alone, but when Moses came to assist him,
that Egyptian was slain: So is the Devil in a single combat valiant, yea many
times victorious, but when a second comes to assist, he takes him to his
flight. What says S. Bernarde, Malum quod nemo vidit, nemo arguit, and vbi non
timetur reprehensor, securus accedit tentator, the sin which no man sees, no
man reprehe^deth, and where there is no fear of a reprehe^der, the devil coms
boldly to as sault, and who is so fit to reprehe^d thee as thy Nay who will
reprehend thee but thy wife, yea though thou sin with greedines? thy
superiors care not, thy inferiors dare not, thy friends remember not, thine
enemies vouchsafe not, and strangers will not, but thy wife has a privilege
to reprove thee, beside she is always at thine elbow, and when she fiudes thee
either saying what is not seemly, or doing what is not comely, she pulls
thee by the sleeue, and says, Husband remember thy self, therefore provide
thee a Helper, and the Devil will be afraid of thee, because of her, and when
he finds thee married to her, he will take it as a discharge to be gone.

But be sure then that she be a Helper, be sure she be good, for if she be
naught, then can I not say that two are better then one, but that one is better
then two, and that it were good for such a man to be alone. And certainly that
men complain of marriage as a cause of evil, it is because themselves be
evil, for what a blasphemy is this, that men shall make this honorable
ordinance of GOD, as a cause of their sin, that Adam should say to God, the
woman which thou gave me, that whereas God had given him the woman as a gift
worth all the world, he returns it to God in great reproach? And we are all
the sons of Adam, for it after marryage there come a storm, that things run
not right, why then the woman, which thou gave me, and had I been single, my
woe had not been so singular, and the woman is the cause of al woe: No, thy
self ar^ the cause, either because thou did not chose her well, or else
because thou do not use her well, but observe these two points, and
marryage is good, otherwise even this ordinance of God shall turn to thy
evil, as to the Egyptians the pure waters were turned into blood. And where it
is said, two are better then one, I would have ye therein to consider, that
all society was ordained for good, and therefore you that be husbands
remember that, and you that be wives remember that, that marriage was ^rdayned
for good, and when I say it was ordained for good, I would not have ye to
mistake me, as if I meant for goods, for that was a pleasant point for them
that pray upon silly women. A certain rich man being asked what his religion
was, made answer good enough, meaning that if he had gold he had his God,
and that all his religion was in his riches, and there be a great ^any such
husbands in the world, who if ^ee ask them what they chiefly desire in a ^ife,
they will answer good enough. Such husbands are like Idolaters, for as Job
says of them, that they say to a wedge of gold, thou art my God, so say these
to a wedge of gold, ^hou art my wife, for in truth they are married to gold,
and not to a wife. I would have such men to remember, that when Eua was brought
to Adam, she brought nothing but herself, for all the world was given to Adam
before she was made, and if al was his before, what had she to bring that came
after? In old time Jacob served seven years for Rachell, and bought his wife
by his service, but now men must be hired to take wives, as if to take a wife,
were to take up a cross, and hence it often times comes to pass, that marryage
is not good, because the end of it is for goods, and not for love, and where
there is no love, there can be no joy, there can be no peace, but as the
yelling of a Lion and a Bear, so it is in such unkindly, ungodly matches,
they loath and detest one another, and then is one better then two, and it were
good to be alone.

Beside if thou desire thy marryage should be for thy good, take heed of
thine eye, for as thy heart in covetousness may corrupt thee, so may thine eye
in Beautye blind thee. He that had seven hunderd Concubines, and three
hunderd Wives, which makes up a thousand women, he says, Eccl^s. 7. that
among a thousand Women he found not one good.

One being asked why amongst all creatures so few women were good, made
answer, because so many of them seemed so good, all is not gold that
glisters, if she whom thon love be fair with out, have a care that she be
so with in, and think that she may be like Nabuchadnezars Image, if her head
be of gold, sure her feet or soms part is of claye, for an evil woman is
like a painted cloth, which if thou beholdest on the one side, thou shall see
Kings royally painted in their Roabes, but if on the other, it is all patches
and rags, and what a match then haste thou made, when thou haste got a
picture to thine eye, and a horror to thy heart, golden fetters, a painted
serpent, a silken snare? It was the chief corrupting of the children of God,
and the first cause of their Apostacye, that they chose their wives by the eye,
for so it is Genesis 6. When the sons of God saw the Daughters of men that they
were fair, they choose them wives of all that they liked, and by choosing such
wives, they lost the favor of God, for God brought the flood upon them for it,
therefore rather then to come into such a yoke, it were better to be out of the
yoke, and one were better then two. But if thou be once yoakt, then must thou
bear what thou can not for bear, and suffer patiently against what thou
haste no remedy, if thy wife be good, then may thou give God thanks, and
say what the wise Solomon could not say, that thou haste found one good woman,
but if thy wife be bad, yet must thou give God thanks too, and say thou haste
found a trial for thy patience, for an evil wife makes her husband a figure
of the militant Church. One boasting in glory of his felicitye that he had a
good wife, answer was made again, that he could not therefore come to
Heaven, meaning that a good wife was like Heaven, and since there is but one
heaven, he that has it here shall hardly have it hereafter, therefore by a
consequent of oppositio^, if a good wife be like Heaven, then an ill wife is
like hell, therefore think she is thy patience, and that God in her has
chalkt thee out the way to Heaven, for he that finds Hell here, has a
promise of heaven hereafter. And to you wives likewise let this remembrance be
directed, that marriage was ordained for good, and apply your selves that it
may be so, for I know no great care or study that belonges unto you, for so
said Solomon of the good wife, that she will do her husband good and not evil
all the days of her life Prove. 31. good in his body by cherishing it, good in
his mind by yielding council and comfort to it, and good in his substance by
preserving and mainteyning it. If her husband be in affliction, she must not
do as Iobes ^ife did, to come in for the Devils attorney, (and make him
murmurre against God, but she must pacify him with words of grace, and use
those pleasing parts, which God has given her for his appeasement. Or if her
husband be about a good work, she must not discourage him, as Micholl did to
David. Or if he be about an ill work, she must not encourage him, as Iezebel
did to Achab, for then I cannot say that Two are better then one, but that one
is better then two, and it were good for such a man to be alone. Nor she must
not be a railing wife like Zipporah, if her husband displease her, to break
out into cruel and bloody speeches; Thou art in deed a bloody husband to me.
Nor she must not be a heade-strong wife like Vasthi, her husband sends for her
to come, and she sendes him word plainly, she will not come, as if she was not
made out of his ribs, but he out of hers, for then one is better then two,
and it were good to be alone. Nor she must not be a sumptuous wife, by excess
of diet or pomp in apparel to consume her husband. Salomo^ says of the good
wife, that she is profitable, she spinneth wo^ with her hands, and lays her
hands to the (...) and so do our women now a days to the wheel, for they
make all run on wheels, they turn spinning into spe^ding, and look how much
one is worse, or less then two, so much they make a rich husband worse or
less then one, they make him none, for they undo him. It is true of the
proud wife, that Salomo^ says of the profitable (though in an other sense)
that she is like a Mercha^ts ship, for so is a proud woman vain, foolish,
fantastical, and carried with every wind, every fa^cie it must be hers, eueri
new sangle it must be hers, and if she have it not, the^ is she like Rachel for
her children, give it her or else she dies, and if she have it, she loathes it,
while she looks upon it. The Poets pretily scoft at the vanity of women in a
fable of Mercury and the Moon, for when Mercury had taken measure of the moon
to make her a coat, he could never make it fit, but it was always either too
large, or too sca^t, because she was always either increasing or decresing:
and so it is with you, your fa^cie will not hold, while the coat is in
fashioning: and well ye may be said to be like a Merchants ship, for before
ye can be full fraught and furnished, ye must have one thing from Egypt,
another thing from Spain, and another from Italy, you must have your
bracelets from one ^ountrie, your girdle from another, and your perfumes from
another, and all the world must be traveled too, to rigge out one woman, and
when she is once furnished, then she cuts her Ankor, all a flaunt under sail,
and abroad she goes like a Giant to run her race: Of such an unprofitable
wife I must needs say, one is better then two. I know of all points it
pleases not to write against the pride of women, and if I tempred my pen to
please, I would write none of this, but I must needs write, because I see that
many; who otherwise are good and virtuous, are overtaken here. Nay, which of
ye all is there, (if ye will shriue your selueswho is not longer in tricking
up your selves, then at your prayers, and what a shame is that among Christian
women? Solomon was 20. years in building the Temple and his own house, but he
was but 7. years in building the Temple, and 13. about his own house, and
what a foul odds was that? thirteen for him self, and but seven for God, but
it is not so well with you, for if you di^de the time of your attyring and your
(...) is into twenty parts, I think your ^ing has nineteen, with such
trimming (...) setting, and smoothing and correcting, ^yee meant immediately to
have your pictures taken, with such waiting, attendance, and solemnity, as if
there were some solemn sacrifice to be performed, and ^yee do, for ye make
Idols of your selves, and set up your Image in a glass: Well, will ye have a
glass to look in, then ^oke upon Sarah, Abigall and Rebecca, and ^n them ye
shall see what is amiss in your ^elues, for what should I write of many other
women more? of Rachell, of Leah, of Ruth and Deborah, of Annah and Penni^ah, in
them ye shall see how to behave your selves toward God. In Rebecca ye shall
see how to behave your selves toward your children, in Sarah how toward your
^usbands, if they be good, in Abigall, how, (...) they be bad, for love,
wisdom and o^edience is the perfect beauty of a woman, and all other beauty
is blackenes, if ye be ^ot saife with in, which if ye be, then shall the King
have pleasure in your beauty, and it shall appear that ye came out of
Paradise, and that ye be wives of Gods making, and as in this life ye were
joined with an earthly companion, so in the ne^, ye shall be joined with
Christ the Husband of the Church. Therefore love your husbands here, and if
they reward it not, it shall be rewarded in Heaven, be obedient to them
here. and ye shall be made equal with them in Heaven: be humble and lowly
here, and ye shall be exalted in Heaven, be clothed with modesty here, and
ye shall be clothed with honor in Heaven, be patient here, and ye shall
be crowned with glory in Heaven, and as here for your bettring you did tutne
one into two, so there for your further bettring you shall turn two into one,
and have unity and society with Christ for ever.

FINIS.

