The work of Pomponius Mela. The Cosmographer, concerning the Situation of
the world, wherein every part, is divided by it self in most perfect manner,
as appears in the Table at the end of the book. A book right pleasant and
profitable for all sorts of men: but specially for Gentlemen, Merchants,
Mariners, and Travelers, translated out of Latin By Arthur Golding Gentleman.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Hacket, and are to be sold at his shop in
Lumbert street, vnthe sign of the Popes head. 1585.

To the right Honorable, Sir William Cicill, of the Noble order of the Garter,
Knight, Barron of Burgley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and one of her
Maiestyes most honorable pri^^e Counsel, health, honor and prosperity.
INtending long since (my very good Lord) for the benefit and delight of my
Countrymen, to have set forth a description of the whole world in our own
Language, according to the consent of the ancient and late VVriters, I thought
this mine Author Pomponius Mela, for his breefenesse, order, and perspicuitie,
to be a very fit ground to begin with, for those three parts which were
known in former ages: purposing, therewithal to have added some brief
collection of the late writers, concerning the description of the other parts,
which being either utterly unknown, or very lightly and darckly glaunced at
by the men of ancient time, have since been better discovered and brought to
light, by the continual Nauigationes of the travelers of these our latter
years. And as my meaning and hope was then, to have made this first enterprise
of myn^e as a frame of a buyldinge, to have been set up and finy shed by me
more exactly, afterward at further leisure, according to the small ability of
my poor skyll; or as a roughe hewn Image, to have been perfected and
polyshed by the industry of some other person of greater readyng, better skyll,
and longer experience, and finally to have been beautifyed and furnished with
more particular and large discourses, both of the places and of the notablest
things which either the places themselves do naturally yield, or have been
done or made in them by the famousest personages, whom the wrytinges of our
ancestors have made renowned unto us: So least this work of mine (which has
slept now many years) might pass away as it were in a Lethargy, whereby I of
the performaunce, and my Conntry of the enjoying of any fruit of my duty in
this behalf, might be utterly bereft, and so consequently my said purpose and
the travel taken to the setting forward thereof, should be of none effect at
all: I have caused the Printer to put to his helping hand to the preventing of
that perrill, which thing will easily be done, if it may please your good
Lordshippe (according to your accustomed good will toward such as any way
endeavor, either to further others or to profit themselves, in the knowledge of
lyberall Arts) to permit this my travel to shroude it self under the
shadow of your protectyon, that being by your ^^uour after a sort quickened
and cheered up again, it may if not grow in time to full rypenesse, yet at
leastwyse yield the pleasure of the infancy, the delight whereof, may chance to
be such as shall provoke some person, ^yther to train it up to full grouth,
or to undertake the doing of some better work of the same kind. And for the
more enlarging hereof with substance and variety of matter, both delectable
and profitable, as far as time would permytte: I have delivered unto the
Printer hereof the Polyhistor of Julius Solinus, and certain trauelles of one
Andrew Theuet, likewise translated long a go to be added as appendauntes to
this work of Pomponius Mela, that as they treat though diue^sly, yet cheefely
of one ground, so they may join in one volume to remain together to the
behofe of posterity, under the security of your Lordshyps favor, unto the
which I most humbly commend my self, and these my simple dooinges,

written this sixth of February. 1584. Your good Lordships, most humble always
to command. Arthur Goldinge.

The first Book of that worthy Cosmographer, Pomponius Mela, of the situation
of the world.
His Preface.
I Go about to entreat of the situation of the World, a combersome work, and
which in no wise admits eloquence. For in a manner, it consists wholly of
the names of Nations and places, and of the order of them, which is somewhat
troublesome, a matter more tedious than handsome to bring to pass: howbeit
right worthy to be seen and known, as that (not for the witty handling
thereof by the writer, but in respect of it self,) may sufficiently
recompense the labor of such as take heed to it. An other time I will speak
of mo things, and more exactlie. As for now, I will meddle but with the
notablest things, and that breeflie. And first, I will show the platte of the
world, which be the greatest parts thereof, how each one of them lie to other,
and how they are inhabited. Then will I peruse the outermost of them all
again, and set out the Sea coasts according as they be, both within and
without, and according as the Sea shoots into them, or beats about them:
with an addition of such things as are worthy remembrance, in the natures
of the Countries, and the inhabiters of them. And to the intent this thing may
the easilier be conceived and borne away, the sum of the whole shall be
repeated somewhat deeply.

The division of the world into four parts.
The first Chapter.
ALI this therefore whatsoever it be, which we term by the name of Heaven and
Earth, is one: and in one compass comprehends it self and all other things,
and differs but in parts. From whence the sun rises, is called the East:
where it sets, is called the West: his race between them, is called the
South: and the quarter over against that, is called the North. In the mids
here of the Earth rising in height, is environed round about with the Sea, and
being cut from the East to the West, into two sides, which are named half
Spheres, it is distinguished with five Zones. Whereof the middlemost is combred
with heat, the two uttermost with cold, and the other two being habitable,
have like seasons of the year, but not both at one time. The Antycthones
inhabit the one half Sphere, and we the other. For as much as the plat of the
other is unknown, by reason of the heat of the Zone, which is between them
and us: we must entreat of the situation of ours.

This therefore stretching from the East to the West, and (because it lies so)
being somewhat more in lenght, than in breadth, where it is broadest: is
enclosed wholly with the Occean, from whence it receives four seas: one at
the North, two at the South, and the ^ourth at the West. The other three shall be
mentioned in their places. The mydland Sea, entering out of the West Occean, at
the Streightes of Marocke.
This being narrow, and not above ten miles over, opens the maine Lands,
and enters into them: where spreading far and wide, he drives the shores a
great way asunder, and makes them give room: the which on both sides growing
almost together again, do bring him to such a straight, as he is not full a
mile over: From thence, howbeit very leysurelie he wideneth himself again,
and anon after, wresteth through a narrower gappe than he went before. And when
he has passed that, he wexeth eftsoons great and huge again, and with a
narrow mouth enters into a poole which comes against him, and (...) either
side of him, bears the name of our Sea into it. All this is called the maine^
Sea.

The gappes and enteraunce of the Sea where it comes in, we call Streights,
and the Greeks call it Porthmos. Where it flows in wideness, it takes
diverse syrnames, according to the places it beats upon. Where it first
becomes narrow, it is called Now called S. Georges arm.
Hellespont. Where it wideneth again, it is called The Sea of Constantinople.
Propontis. Where it streightneth again, it is called the The Straight of
Co^sta^tinople.
Bosphor of Thrace. Where it spreads out again, it is called The great Sea.
Pontus Euxinus. Where it medleth with the Lake, it is called the The Straight
of Caffa.
Bosphor of Cimmeria, and the Lake it self is called The Sea of Zabacca.
Maeotis. With this Sea, and with two noble Rivers, Now called Don.
Tainas and ^ilus, is the whole Earth divided into three parts.

Tanais proceeding from the North into the South, falls well near into the
mids of Maeotis: and right against him falls Nilus into the Sea. Whatsoever
Land lies from the Streightes to these Rivers, on the one side we call
Affricke, and on the other side Europe. That is to say, from the Streightes to
Nilus, Affricke: and from the said Streightes to Tanais, Europe. Whatsoever is
beyond, is Asia.

A brief description of Asia.
The second Chapter.
ON three sides it is bounded with the Occean, which bears diverse names
according to their Coasts: At the sun rising, with the east Occean, on the
south with the Indish, and on the North with the Scithish. The Country of Asia
it self, facing the East with a large and continual front, does there
spread as much in wideness, as is the breadth of Europe and Affricke, and the
Sea that is let in between them both. After it has proceeded from thence,
keeping his full breadth, it receives out of the said Indish Occean, the
Arabian and Persian Sea, and out of the Scithish Occean, the Caspian Sea: and
therefore where it receives those Seas, it is somewhat narrowed, but by and by
it wideneth again, and becomes as broad as it was before. Lastly, when it
is come to his own end, and to the marches of other Lands, the middle part of
it butteth upon our Seas, and the rest of it, runs on the one side up by
Nilus, and on the other side by Now called Don.
Tanais. The uttermost bounds thereof, come down with the channel of Nilus,
along the rivers side into the Sea, and a great while together keeps cheek
by cheek with it, as the shore goes. Then steppeth he forth to meet the Sea
as it comes against him, and there first bends himself with a great
bought. Afterward he bears himself foreward with a huge front, to the
straight of Hellespont. From thence again he bends askew to the Of Thrace.
Bosphor, and bowing likewise by the side of Pontus, turns back, with an
elbowe to the enteraunce of Maeotis: and thencefoorth embracing the Lake, as it
were in a bosom, even unto Tanais, he becomes the bank of Tanais, even to
the head of it.

We understand that the first men in Asia Eastward, The fu^thest people of Asia
Eastward.
are the Indians, Seres, and Scithians. The Seres inhabit almost the middle
part of the East, The Setes.
the Indians and Scithians, The Indians and Scithians.
the two uttermost parts: both peoples extending far and wide, and not
only toward the East Occean. For the Indians stretch also into the South, The
s^^tuation India.
and with sundry Nations of their own, one by an other, possess all the Sea
coast of the Indishe Occean, saving where the heat makes it uninhabitable. The
situation of Scit^^ia.
And the Scithians likewise extend into the North, and to the Scithish Occean,
(saving where they be kept of with cold) even unto the Caspian gulf.

Next unto India is A^^ane, The description of the South Countries of Asia.
and Gedrosis, and Persis, even unto the gulf of Persia, this gulf is
environed with the people of Persis, and the other with the people of Arabia.
All that is from Arabia unto Affricke, belongs unto the Ethiopians. The North
coast of Asia.
On the other side are the Caspians, next neighbors to the Scithians, beyond
whom are the Amazones, and out beyond them are the Hyperboreans. The mid land
Country, The myddle Countries of Asia.
is inhabited by many and diverse Nations: as the Gaudars, and Paricans, the
Bactrians, and Susians, the Pharmacotrophies, the Bomarins, the Coamans, the
Rophans, and the Dahans. Upon the Scithians, and the Desartes of Scithia, and
upon the Caspian gulf, are the Comars, the Massagets, the Cadusians, the
Hyrcanians, and the Hyberians. Upon the Amazons and Hyperboreans, lie the
Cimmerians, the Scithians, the Eniochians, the Georgians, the Now called
Moscouites.
Mosches, the Corsites, the Phoristes, the Ryphakes, and where the Country
passes along unto our Seas, the Mardes, the Antibaraeans: and from thence
somewhat better known names, the Medes, the Armenians, the Comagenes, the
Murrans, the Vegets, the Cappadocians, the Galgreekes, the Lycaonians, the
Phrygians, the Pysidians, the Isaurians, the Lydians, and the Syrocilicians.
Again, of those that lie Southward, That is to say, Syrians.
Nations of one self sam^ name, inhabit the innermost coasts unto the gulf
of Persia. Upon this gulf lie the Parthians and Assyrians, and upon the other
Of Arabia.
gulf lie the Babylonians. Under Ethyope, the Egyptians possess all the
coast, The Countries of Asia, lying upon our mydland Sea.
along the banks of Nilus, the river of Egypt unto the Sea. Then stretches
Arabia, with a narowe front, to the next Seacoast. From Arabia, unto the bought
that we spoke of before, lies Syr^a, and in the very bought itself, lies
Silicia: and without the bought lie Lycia and Pamphilia, Caria, Ionia, Aeolis,
and Troas, unto Hellespont. From thence to the Bosphor of Thrace, is Bithinia.
About Pontus, lie certain Nations with several bounds, called all by one
name, Pontians. Upon the Lake of Maeotis, border the Maeotians, and upon Tana^s
the Otherwise called Sarmatians.
Sauromates.

A brief description of Europe.
The third Chapter.
EVrope is bounded on the East, with T^nais, and Maeotis, and Pontus; on the
South, with the rest of our Sea, on the West with the Athlantish Occean, and on
the North with the British Occean. The Eastern coast thereof, from Tanais to
Hellespont, and all along the bank of the said River, and where it gathers
the bowing of the Lake to the Bosphor, and where it lies with his side against
Pontus, Propontis, and Hellespont: is not only situate directly over
against Asia, but also is like unto it in fashion of shores.

Between that and the Streightes, sometime shrinking a great way back, Of
Marocke.
and sometime shooting forward again, it makes three very great Bays, and
with as many great frontes aduaunceth it self into the deep. Without the
Streightes Westwarde, it is verie^vneuen, specially in the mids: but where
it runs by North, if lies almost as straight out, as if it were drawn by a
line, saving only in one or two places, where it retyreth a great way in.
The names of the midland sea.
The Sea which it receives, in the first Baie, is called Aegaean: that which
follows in the next, is in the mouth of it called Ionishe, and innermore,
Adriatishe: that which is received in the last Baye, we call Tuscan, and the
Greeks Tyrrhene. Of Nations, the first is Scithia, (an other Country that we
spoke of before) extending from Tanais, Scithia in Europe now containing
Moscouia, Latuania, Polonia, Russia, etc. Macedonia and Thrace.
well near to the one half of the side of Pontus. From hence into a part of
the Aegaean coast, lies jointly the maine land of Macedonia and Thrace.

Then bolteth out Greece, and deuideth the Aegaean Sea, from the Ionishe Sea.
All along the side of the Adriatishe Sea, lies Ilirike. Greece.
Between the said Adriatishe Sea, and the Tuscan Sea, runs forth Italy.
In the innermost part of the Tuscan Sea, is France, and beyond that is Spain.
These lie from the East to the West, upon the South Europe.
It faceth the North also with diverse fronts. For on that side is France
again, extending all the way from That is to say, the Tusoan or Tyrrhene Sea.
our Sea thither. From thence stretches Germany, to the Sarmatians, and they
again to Asia. Thus much as concerning Europe.

A brief description of Affricke.
The fourth Chapter.
AFfricke is bounded on the East part, with the river Nile, Affricke, which is
also called Lybia.
and on the other parts with the Sea. It is shorter then Europe, in as much as
it extends any where against the seacostes of Asia, nor lies side for side
against the sea* coasts of Europe.

Nevertheless, it is more in length then in breadth: and it is broadest, where
it boundeth on the River. And as it proceedoth from thence, so rising higher
and higher, with mountains, specially in the middle, it bends askew toward
the West, and gathers softly into a ridge, and therefore in continuance,
grows somewhat narrower: where it ends, there is it narrowest. As much of
it as is inhabited, is exceeding fruitful. But for as much as most places of
it are unmanured, and either covered with barreine sands, or left untilled, by
reason of the drought of the air and the soil, or else with many kinds of
beasts: it is rather waste, then well peopled. The Sea wherewith it is
enclosed, on the North we call Lybik^^, on the South Ethyopish, and on the West
Athlantish. On that side that butteth upon the Lybike Sea, next unto Nyle, is
the Province which they call Cyrene. Cyrene.
Then follows Affricke, whereof the whole Country takes his name. The rest
is possessed of the Numidians and Moors: of whom the Moors extend to the
Athlantish Occean. Beyond are the Nigrites, and Pharusians, unto Ethyope. The
Ethyopians possess both the rest hereof, and all that side which faceth the
South, even unto the borders of Asia. But above those places that are beaten
upon with the Lybike Sea, are the Lybiaegyptians, and the white Ethyopians, and
the populous and manifold Nation of the Getulians. From thence lies a great
wide Country together, all utterly waste and uninhabited. Then the first that
we hear of Eastward, are the Garamantes, and next them the Awgyles and
Troglodikes, and lastly toward the West, the Athlant^. Innermost (if ye list
to believe it) the Egypanes, Woodwardes, or Wyldemen.
Blemyans, Gamphasants, and Satyrs (scarce men, but rather half Beasts,)
wandering up and down without house or home, rather have the Lands then
inhabit them.

This is the universal platte of the World, these are the great parts, these
are the fashions, and the Nations of the parts. Now that I must speak of the
bounds and borders of them severally, it is most handsome to begin, where our
Sea enters first into the maine Lands, and specially at those Countries that
lie on the right hand, as it comes in, and so to scour the Sea coast in
order as it lies, and when I have perused all things that butte upon the Sea,
then also to cast about those quarters that are environed with the Occean,
until that having travailed about the world, as well within as without, the
race of my attempted work, return to the place where it began.

A particular description of Affricke. Of Mauritania.
The fifth Chapter.
IT is said before, that it is the Athlantishe Occean, which touches the
maine land on the West. From hence as men sail into our Sea, Spain is on the
left hand, and Mauritania on the right. These are the first parts, the one of
Europe, the other of Affricke. The end of the coast of Mauritania, is Mulucha:
the head and beginning thereof is the Promontorie, which the Greeks call The
Vineyard.
Ampelusia, and the Afres by an other word, that has the same meaning. In the
same is a cave hallowed to Hercules, and beyond the Cave a very ancient Town
called Tingi, The Sheeld of Antaeus the Giant.
builded (as men say) by Antaeus. And there remains a Monument of the thing,
namely, a huge Shield, of the hide of an Elyphant, unable to be weelded of any
man now a days, by reason of the greatness thereof, which the dwellers
thereabouts believe, and report for a certainty to have been carried by
Antaeus, and therefore they honor it as a Relicque.

Then is there a very high Mountain, The pyllers of Her^ules.
set directly over against that which is in Spain, That in Spain is named
Abyla, and the other is named Calp^, and both of them b^ called the Pillars of
Hercules. Upon the naming of them so, Fame has forged a Fable, that Hercules
cut a sunder those two hills, which erewhiles grew whole together in one
continual ridge, and by that means did let in the Occean, which erst was shut
out by the force of the Mountains, unto the places which it now ouerfloweth.
From hence the Sea spreads wider, and through his great violence, eats
winding gulfes into the maine Lands, which he disseuereth far a sunder:
Howbeit the Realm is unnoble, and has scarce any thing famous in it, it is
inhabited with small Uillages, and fendeth forth small brooks: it is better
of soil then of men, and altogether vnrenowmed, by reason of the
slothfulness of the people. Notwithstanding, among the things that I may
vouchsafe to report, are certain high Mountains, which being set on a row
one by an other, as it were for the nonce, are (by reason of their number and
likeness one to an other) called the seven brethren. There is also the river
Tamuada, and Rusicada, and Siga, little Cities, and a Haven, which for the
largeness thereof, is sir named the great Haven. The foresaid river Mulucha,
is the bound of the Kingdoms of Bocchus and Iugurth, which were puissaunt
Realms in old time.

Of Numidia.
The sixth Chapter.
FRom the said river Mulucha, to the bank of the river Ampsaga, lies
Numidia: not so large a Country as Mauritania, but better peopled, and
wealthier. Of the Cities which are in it, the greatest are Cirta, Cirta.
far from the Sea, now inhabited by the Sittians, and in times past, the
Palace of King Iuba and King Syphax, when it was in greatest wealth: Iol
sometime very base, but now very famous, in as much as it has been the
Palace of Iuba, and is called Heerof the province Caesarie^sis took his name.
Caesarea. On the hitherside of this City (for it stands almost in the mid
shore) are the Towns of Cartenna and Arsenaria, and the Castle Ampsa, and the
gulf Laturus, and the river Sardabale: and beyond it, is the common burial
place of the blood Royal. Then comme Cities of Iasion, and Vthisia, and the
brooks of Ancus and Nabar, falling between them into the Sea: and certain
other things, which to suppress with silence, is neither loss of matter, nor
prejudice to fame. Strange things in the inner parts of Numidia.
Innermost, and a great way off from the shore, (a wonderful matter, if it be
to be believed) the back bones of Fishes, broken shelles of Murreies and
Disters, Stones worn, as is wont to be with beating waves, and not differing,
Anchors fastened as in rocks of the Sea, and other such like signs and tokens
of the Sea, flowing even unto those places in times past, are reported to be,
and to be found in the barreine feelds that bear nothing.

The lesser Affricke.
The seventh Chapter.
THe Country that follows from the Foreland of Metagonium, to the Philens
altars, does properly bear the name of Affricke. In it are the Towns of
Hippo Rhegius, and Rusicade, and Tabraca. Then three Forelands, called the
white Mount, Appollos Mount, and Mercuries Mount, shooting hugelie into the
deep, make two great Bays. The hithermost is called Hippon of Hippo
Diarrhytus, which is a Town standing upon the riuadge of it.

At the other are Laelyes camp, Cornellis camp, the river Bragada, Vtica, and
Carthage.
the Cities of Vtica, and Carthage, both famous, and both builded by the
Phaenicians: Vtica innobled with the destruction of Cato, and Carthage for the
destruction of it self: now a free Town of the Romans, and in old time a
striuer with them for their Empire: even now again wealthy, and even now more
famous for her former destruction, then for her present recovery. From hence
the Or Whashe.
Syrt, stand Leptis, Clupea, Abrotanum, Taphre and Naples, as among bace
things the famousest. The mouth of the Syrt, The lesser Syrt, or short Whashe.
where it takes in the open Sea, is almost a hundred miles broad, and it is
three hundred miles compass by the banks of it: but it is harbroughlesse and
rough, and partly by reason of the numbers of shallowes, quick sands, and
flattes that are in it, but more for the changeable alteration of the sea, in
his ebbing and flowing, it is exceeding dangerous.

Above this is a great Poole, which receives into it the river Triton, and the
Poole it self is also called Triton, Whereof Minerua has one of her sir
names, The Poole and river Triton.
because (as the inhabiters thereabouts suppose) she was bred there. And they
make the tale to have some likelihood of truth, because they keep holy the
same day, which they think she was borne on, with solemme Ioustes and
Tourneies of young Maidens. Beyond that, is the Town Oea, and the river
Cimphis, which runs through most fruitful feeldes.

Then is there an other Leptis, and an other Syrt, of like name and nature to
the former, The greater Syrt, or Whash.
but almost half as big again as the other, both at the mouth and in the
compass of it. Unto this belongs the Foreland of Boreon: and the coast
beginning at the same, Loteaters.
(which the Loteaters are reported to have possessed,) from thence forth to
Phycus, (which also is an other Forelande) it is altogether harbroughlesse. The
notable zeal of the Philens, toward their Country.
The Altars aforesaid, took their name of two brethren, called Phile^s, who
being sent from Carthage against the Cyrenians, to make a final end of war
that had been long between them, for the bounds of their Countries, to the
great slaughter of both parts: when covenant was not kept according to
agreement, (which was, that wheresoever the Ambassadors met, which were sent
out of both Cities at a time prefixed, there should be the bounds of both the
Realms) upon couenaunting a new, that whatsoever was on this side, should
fall to the lotte of their own countreyfolke, suffered them selves to be
buried quick in this place: a wonderful thing, and right worthy to be had in
remembrance.

Of Cyrenaica.
The eight Chapter.
FRom thence to Catabathmos, is the Province of Cyrenaica, wherein are the
Oracles of Hammon, famous for the assured truth thereof, and a fountain which
they call Sonnewell, A wonderful Hill.
and a certain Mountain, holy to the South wind. For if this Hill be
touched with man's hand, the wind ryseth exceeding boistrous, and turmoyling
the sands, as it were waters, rages as the sea does with waves. A wonderful
Well.
The Well at midnight, is scalding whote: afterward by little and little,
falling to be but luke warm, at day light it becomes cold: and as the sun
ryseth in height, it wexeth colder and colder, so that at noone it is most
extremely cold. From that time it gathers heat again, and in the
beginning of the night becomes warm, and as it grows further in the night,
it increases more in heat, so that at midnight it is sealding where again.

Upon the shore, are the Forclandes of Zephyrion and Naust^thmos, the Haven of
Paraetonie, (...)
and the (...), Hesperia, Apollonia, Ptolemais, A^^moe, and (...) it self,
whereof the whole Country takes his (...) Catabathmos, (which is a slope
valley, shoring down to Egipt-ward) is the uttermost bound of Affricke.

Thus are the coasts inhabited, The manners, apparel, and diet of the people
on the Sea coast of Affricke.
for the most part with civil people, after the manner of our Countries,
saving that some of them differ in languages, and in the serving of their
Gods, which they keep of their own Country, worshipping them after their
own Country fashion. There are no Cities near one to an other, howbeit
there be houses which are called Uillages. Their fare is hard and without
cleanliness. The Noble men and Gentlemen go in Cassockes, and the common
people are cladde in skins of Cattle and wild Beasts: the ground is their
bed to rest on, and their Table to feed on. Their vessels are made, either
of woodde or of bark: their drink is milk, and the juice of berries: their
meat is for the most part Uenison, for they spare their Cattle as long as
they can, because it is the only best thing which they have.

The vplandishe folk do yet after a more rude fashion, wander abroad
following their Cattle: The manners of the vplandishe folk of Affricke.
and according as pasturage leads them, so remove they themselves and their
sheddes from place to place, and wheresoever day ^aileth them, there they abide
all night. And albeit that being thus every where scattered by householdes,
and without any law, they consult not in common upon any thing: yet
notwithstanding, for as much as every of them has many Wives at once, and by
reason thereof many Children and kinsefolke, there never lives any small
company of them together in one place.

Of those sorts of people, The manners of the Athlantes.
which are reported to be beyond the Wilderness, the Athlantes curse the
Sun, both when he ryseth, and when he sets, as noisome both to themselves
and to their grounds. They have no names severally, neither feed they of any
thing that bears life, neither is it given them to see such things in their
sleep, as other men see.

The Troglodites, The manners of the Troglodites.
possessing not any goods at all, do rather iabber than speak, dwelling in
Caves under the ground, and seeding upon Serpents.

Among the Garamants, Of the Garamantes.
also are those kind of Cattle that graze sideling, with their necks awrie,
for their horns growing down to the groundwarde, will not suffer them to
feed right foreward. No man there, has any Wife of his own. They that are
every where borne, of this uncertain and confused companying together, take
those for their fathers, whom they most resemble in countenance and making.

The Awgyles think there are none other Gods, The Awgyles.
but the Ghostes of dead men. By them they swear, at them they ask counsel,
as at Oracles: and when they have prayed what they would have, they lie down
upon their graves, and receive dreams for aunsweres. It is a solemn custom
among them, that their Women, the first night they are married, shall abandon
themselves to the common abuse of all men that come with reward: and it is
counted the greatest honor that may be, to have had to do with many, at that
time: but ever after, they keep themselves exceeding chaste.

The Gamphasantes are naked, The Gamphasantes.
and (...) utterly ignorant o^ all manner of armor: knowing neither how to
shun a Darte, nor yet how to throw it: and therefore if they meet any body,
they run away, and dare not either come in company, or (...) communicate
with any other, then such as be of their own disposition and nature.

The Blemmyes are without headdes, The Blemmyes.
and have their faces in their breasts. Satyrs or Woodwardes.
The Satyrs have nothing of man, saving shape. The shape of the Panes or
Gotefeete.
Aegypanes is such, as it is reported to be. And thus much of Affricke.

A particular description of Asia. Of Egypt.
The ninth Chapter.
Egypt, the first part of Asia, lying between ^atabathmos and Arabia, draws
altogether inward That is to say, of the mid-land ^ea.
from this shore, and runs still Southwarde, until it bear upon Ethyope
with his back. This Land is always without rain, but yet wonderful
fertyle, and a very fruitful mother, both of men and other living wights. Of
Nilus, the great river of Egypt.
The cause hereof is Nilus, the greatest river of all those that fall into our
Sea. This stream springing out of the Desartes of Affricke, is neither by and
by sayleable, nor by and by called by the name of Nile: but when he has come
down a long way, single, and yet rough: about Meroe a very large Island, it is
sheaded into Ethyope, and on the one side is called Astaboras, and on the other
side Astapus. Where it comes together again into one channel, there it
takes the name of Nile. From thence, partly rough, and partly sayleable, it
falls into a great Lake, through which it sweepeth with a violent course, and
embracing another I Will called Tachempso, runs down to Elephant, a City of
Egypt, all the way as yet still rough and raging. Then at length wexing
somewhat mylder, and now in manner sayleable: first about the Town of
Cercassye, it begins to have three channelles. Afterward, dividing it self
once or twice more, at Delta and Metilin, it passes on wandering, and
dispearsed through Egypt, and at length parting it self into seven channels,
and yet continuing very huge in every of them, it falls into the That is
our mid-land Sea.
Sea. It does not only wade through Egypt, but also ouerflowing it in the
chief of summer, moysteth it with waters so effectual to engender and
nourish, Water-horsses, and Crocodiles.
that over and besides that it swarmeth with Fish, and breeds Water-horsses
and Crocodiles which are huge monstrous Beasts, it also sheadeth life into
the cloddes, and shapeth living creatures of the very moolde. Which thing is
hereby manifest, for that when he has ceased flowing, and is fallen again
within his channel, there are seen in the moist feeldes, certain creatures
as yet not perfect, but then first beginning to receive breath, in some part
having already their full shape, and in part as yet stark earth.

Moreover, Opinions of the flowing of N^le.
it increases, either because the snow, being melted with the great heat,
falls more abundantly from the great high Mountains of Ethyope, then that it
can be received into his banks: or else because the Sun, which in winter time
was nearer the ground, and therefore abated his spring, now in summer time
mounteth higher, and suffers it to rise whole and full, as it should be: or
else for that the North east winds, which ordinarily blowing in that season
of the year, driving the clouds from the North into the South, do power
down showers upon the head of his spring, or meeting his stream by the way
with contrary blastes, do stay his course in the coming down, or else
stop his mouths with sand, which they drive to the shore together with the
waves: and so it becomes greater, either because it loses nothing of it
self, or because it receives more then ordinary, or because it utters
less than it should do.

But if there be an other World, and that the Anticthones. go feet to feet
against us in the South, it were not much unlike to be true, that the river
rising in those Lands, after it has pierced under the Sea in a privy
channel, should vent again in our World, and by that means increase at the
standing of the (...), for as much as it is winter at that time he springs.

Other marvelous things also are in this Land. Woonders of Egypt.
In a certain Lake, there is an I Will A swimming I Will.
called Chimmis, which bearing Woods and Forests, and a great Temple of
Apollos, floteth, and is driven which way so ever the wind blows. Bridges
builded of Stones* thirty foot square a piece, High Bridges.
whereof the greatest (for there are three of them) contains well near four
acres of ground at the bottom, and is full as much in height.

Maeris, A Feeld turned into a Lake.
sometime a plain feeld, and now a Lake of twenty mile compass about, deeper
of water then any great Ships, full fraughted do draw. Also a Maze A Maze.
made by Sammetichus, containing (within the compass of one whole entire wall)
a thousand houses and twelve Palaces, builded wholly of Marble, roof and all:
which having but one going down into it, had within it ways almost
innumerable, turning hither and thither, with many windlasses, altogether
doubtful with continual steps, and often reere-vaultes, which winding
round one above an other, and eftsoons retyring back, as much as they had
gone foreward, made it so busy and entangled, that a man could not devise how
to wind himself out.

The inhabiters of the Realm, The manners of the Egiptians.
demean themselves far otherwise then other men. In mourning for their dead,
they besmere themselves with doong, and they think it not lawful to burn
them or bury them: but by the advice of Poticaries, they keep them preserved
in their privy chambers. They write their Letters awkelie. They temper claie
with their hands, and kneede dowe with their feet. Their Women plead matters
in Courts, and look to foreign affairs, and the men spin and card, and
take charge of the house at home. The Women bear burdens on their shoulders,
and the men on their heads. When the Parents fall in poverty, the women are
bound of necessity to find them, the men are at choice. They eat their
meat openly, and without their doors, and do their natural needs in the
innermost parts of their houses.

They worship the shapes of many Beasts, The superstition of the Egiptians.
or (to say the truth) the very beasts themselves, some one Beast, and some
an other: in so much as it is a matter of life and death to have killed some
Beasts, even unawares. And when they die either by disease or by mischaunce, it
is their custom to bury them and mourn for them.

The common God of all the people is Apis, a black Bull, marked with certain
spots, and unlike other Bulls in tongue and fail. It is a rare matter to
find one of that breed. For (as they hold opinion) he is not engendered by a
Beast of the same kind, but is conceived by supernatural power of heavenly
fire, and the day that he is calued, is held for a most holy and Feastiuall
day, of all the whole Nation.

They being (by their own assertion) the auncientest of all Nations, The vain
assertion of antiquity, among the Egiptians.
have registered in autentike Chronicles, three hundred and thirty Kings
before Amasis, and the continuance of above thirteen thousand years. And they
keep it written in good Records, that in the time that the Egiptians have
continued, the Stars have four times altered their courses, and the Sun
has twice gone down where it now ryseth.

In the reign of Amasis, The largeness of the kingdom of Egypt in old time.
they inhabited twenty thousand Cities, and now also they inhabit very
many. The notablest of them, far from the Sea, are Say, Memphis, Syene,
Bubastis, Elephant, and Thebes, which has (as is reported in Homer) a hundred
Gates, or (as other say) a hundred Palaces, the houses of so many Princes,
each of which Palaces (as the state of affairs required) was wont to send
forth ten thousand armed men.

On the shore stands Alexandria, Alexandria.
by the Marches of Affricke: Pelusium cutteth the borders of Arabia. The names
of the mouths of Nyle, are Canopicum, Bolbiticum, Sebenuiticum, Pathnuiticum,
Mendesium, Tanicum, and Pelusiacum.

Of Arabia.
The tenth Chapter.
ARabia, extends from thence to the red Sea: and being thencefoorth more
pleasant and plentiful, it abounds in Frankincense and Spices. In the
hither part (saving where Mount Casius makes it high) it is altogether plain
and barren: and there it receives the Haven of Azotus, which is the Mart Town
and vent for the wares of that Country. Where this hill mounteth in height, it
is so high, that from the top of it, a man may see the Sun in the That is
before the break of day.
fourth watch.

Of Syria.
The eleventh Chapter.
SYria runs a great way along the Sea^ coast, and very far also into the
main Land, and is called by sundry names. The names or divisions of Syria.
For it hight Caele, and Mesopotamia, and Damascene, and Adiabene, and
Babilonia, and Iewrie, and Sophene: furthermore, it bears the name of
Palestine, where it butteth upon Arabia and Phaenicia, and where it joins to
Cilicia, it is called Antioche. In old time and a long while together, it was
a puissant Realm: but most puissant when Semiramis reigned over it. There are
surely many notable works of hers, The praise of Semyramis.
but two of them pass all the rest: namely, the building of that wonderful
great City Babylon, and the letting in of the rivers Euphrates and Tigris,
into those Countries which before time were dry. Howbeit in Palestine, there
is a great and strong fortified Town called Gaza, Why Gaza was so named.
for so the Persians term a Treasorie: and thereupon it took that name,
because when Cambises invaded Egypt with war, he bestowed his provision for
the wars and all his Treasure there. There is also Ascalon, Ascalon.
as big as the other. And there is Now called Port la^^e.
Ioppa builded (by report) before the flood: where the dwellers by, affirm
that Cepheus reigned, upon likelihood, for that certain old Altars, with
great show of holiness, have in them still engraven, the names of him and of
his brother Phineus.

And besides that, for a more assurance of the thing so renowned in verses and
old tales, and of the saving of Andromade by Perseus: they show for a plain
Monument, the excessive great bones of the Monstar of the Sea.

Of Phaenicia.
The twelfth Chapter.
PHaenicia, is renowned for the Phaenicians, a pollitique kind of men, and
both in feats of war and peace peerless. The first inuenters of Letters,
and of other things.
They first invented Letters, and Letter matters, and other Arts also: as to
go to the Sea with Ships, to fight upon the water, to reign over Nations,
to set up Kingdoms, and to fight in order of battle. In it is Tire, Tire.
sometime an I Will, but now joined to the firm Land, since the time that
Alexander made works about it to assault it. Further forth, stand certain
small Uillages, and the City of Sidon, Sidon.
even yet still wealthy, and in old time the greatest of all the Cities
upon the Sea coast, before it was taken by the Persians.

Between that and the foreland of It may be interpreted fair prospect.
Euprosopon, there are two Towns, called Byblos and Botris: and beyond them
were three other, each distaunt a furlong a sunder, and therefore the place was
of the number called Tripolis: Tripolis.
Tripolia.
then follow the Castle Simyra, and a City not vnrenowmed, called Marathos.
From thence the Country being not crooked with the Sea, but lying right forth
side by side unto it, bends his shore into the maine Land, and receives a
great Baye. About the which dwell rich people, the cause whereof is the
situation of the place, for that the Country being fertyle, and furnished
with many Rivers, able to bear Ships, serves well for the easy exchange
and conueying in of all kind of wares, both by Sea and Land.

Within that Baye, Syria of Antioche.
is first the residue of Syria, which is syrnamed Antioche, and on the shore
thereof, stand the Cities Seleuca, Paltos, Beritos, Laodicia, and Arados:
between which Cities run the Rivers Lychos, Hypatos, and Orontes. Then
follows the Mountain Amanus, immediately from whence begins Myriandros,
and Cilicia.

Of Cilicia.
The thirteenth Chapter.
IN the innermost retreite, there is a place, sometime of great renown, as a
beholder and witness bearer of the discomfiture of the Persians by great
Alexander, and of the flight of Darius: at that time having in it a famous
great City called Issos, whereof the Bay* is named the Bay of Issos, The Baye
of Issos.
but now having not so much as a little Town. Far from thence lies the
Foreland Amanoides, between the Rivers Pyramus and Cydnus, Pyramus being the
nearer to Issos, runs by Mallon, and Cydnus, runs out beyond through
Tarsus. Then is there a City possessed in old time by the Rhodians and
Argiues, and afterward at the appointment of Pompey by Pirates, now called
Pompeiople, then called Soloe.

Hard by, on a little hill, The Tomb of the Poet Aratus.
is the Tomb of the Poet Aratus, worthy to be spoken of, because it is
unknown, why stones that are cast into it do leap about. Not far from
hence, is the Town Corycos, environed with a Haven and the salt water, and
joined with a narrow balke to the firm Land.

Above it is a Cave named Corycus, The Cave of Corycus.
of singular nature, and far more excellent, then may with ease be described.
For gaping with a wide mouth, even immediately from the top it opens* the
Mountain butting upon the Sea, which is of a great height, as it were of a ten
furlonges. Then going deep down, and the further down the larger, it is
green round about with budding Trees, and casts it self into a round vaulte
on both sides, full of wooddes, so marvelous and beautiful, that at the first
it amazeth the minds of them that come in to it, and yet makes them think
they have never seen enough of it. There is but one going down into it,
narrow and rough, of a mile and a half long, by pleasant shadows and couerts
of wooddes, yielding a certain rude noise, with rivers trickling on either
hand. When ye come to the bottom, there again opens an other Cave, worthy
to be spoken of for other things. It makes the enterers into it afraid with
the din of Timbrels, which make a ghastly and great rattling within. Afterward,
being a while lightsome, and anon the further ye go, wexing darker, it leads
(such as dare adventure) quite out of sight, and carries them deep, as it
were in a Mine: where a mighty river rising with a great breast, does but
only show it self, and when it has gushed violently a while in a short
channel, sinketh down again, and is no more seen. Within is a waste space,
more horrible then that any man dare pearce into it, and therefore it is
unknown. It is altogether stately and undoubtedly holy, and both worthy,
and also believed to be inhabited of Gods. Every thing presents a
statelynesse, and sets out it self with a certain Majesty.

There is an other beyond, which they call Typhos Typhos cave.
cave, with a narrow mouth, and (as they that have tried it do report) very
low, and therefore dimmed with continual darkness, and not easy to be
sought out: howbeit, because it was sometime the chamber of the Giant Typho, an
because it now out of hand stifleth such things as are let down into it, it
is worthy to be mentioned for the nature thereof, and for the tale that is
reported of it. Beyond that, are two For^landes, that is to say, Sarpedon,
sometime the bound of King Sarpedons Realm, and Anemurium, which parts
Cilicia from Pamphilia, and between them Celendris and Natidos Towns builded
and peopled by the Samians, whereof Celendris is nearer to Sarpedon.

Of Pamphilia.
The foureteenth Chapter.
IN Pamphilia, is a River able to bear Ships, called Melas, Melas.
a Town called Sida, and an other River called Eurimedon. Eurymedon.
At this River, Cymo Captain of the Athenians, gat a great victory of the
Persians and Phaenicians, in a battle upon the water. Into the Sea where this
battle was fought, out of a very high hill looks the Town of Aspendos,
which was builded by the Argiues, and inhabited by the people of the Country
about it.

Then are there two other mighty streams, called Oestros and A sluice or
flood-gate.
Cataractes. Oestros is easy to be sailed: the other has his name of his
headlong fall. Between them is the Town Perga, and the Temple of Diana, which
of the Town is sir named Pergaea. Beyond them is Mount Sarde^isos, and
Phaselis a Town builded by Mopsus, which is the end of Pamphilia.

Of Lycia.
The fifteenth Chapter.
SVccessiuelie, Lycia so called of Lycus, the son of King Pandion, and (as
report goes) annoyed in old time with the fires of Chimaera, encloseth a
great Bay, between the Haven of Sida, and the Foreland of Taurus. Mount Taurus
it self rising of a huge height at the Eastern sea shore, The description of
mount Taurus.
proceeds straight forth in one continual ridge from thence into y^ West,
with his right side toward the North, and his left side toward the South,
bou^ding many great Nations* where he runs out in banks, and where he
deuideth the Countries, he passes to the Sea. As Taurus is the general name
of him whole together, The sundry names of mount Taurus.
so is it also his name, where he faceth the East: next he is called Haemodes,
and Caucasus, and ^aropamisus: then Caspian Streights, Niphates, and the
Streights of Armenia, and (where he butteth upon our Sea) Taurus again. Behind
his said Foreland, is the river Lymira* Lymira.
and a City of the same name, and a number of Towns of no great renown,
saving Patara, which is ennobled by the Temple of Apollo, sometime like to that
at Delphos, as well in riches as also for the trueness of the Oracle. Beyond
is the river Panthus, and the Town Panthos: the Mountain Crag, and the City
Telmisos, which ends Lycia.

Of Caria.
The sixteenth Chapter.
AFterward follows Caria, inhabited with people of an unknown beginning:
some think them to be bred in the Land, some think they were Pelasgians,
othersome think they were Candians, a kind of people loving feats of Arms
and fighting, so well, that for wages they served also in foreign and strange
wars. Here are a few Castles, and then the two Forelandes of Pedalion and
Crya, and by the River Calbis side, the Town of Caunus, diffamed for the
^^^^thinesse of the inhabiters.

From thence to Halycarnassus, lie these things, certain Towns of the
Rhodians: two Havens, the one named Gelos, and the other Thissamissa, according
to the name of the City that it enuironeth. Between them is the Town of
Larumna, and the Hill Pandion shooting into the Sea. The three Bays on a row,
Thymnias, Schaenus, and Bubessus. The Foreland of Thymnias, is Aphrodisium:
Schaenus enuironeth Hylas: and Bubessus compasses about Cynotus. Guidus
stands in an angle of a piece of ground, enclosed almost altogether with the
Sea. between it and the gulf of Ceranie, in the retreit of Euthana,
Halycarnassus.
is Halycarnassus, a Town inhabited by the Argiues. worthy to be had in
remembrance, not only for the founders thereof, A notable Tomb.
but also for the Tomb of King Ma^solus, which is one of the seven woonders of
the world, and was builded by Artemis^a. Artemisia.
Beyond Halycarnassus, are these things: the shore of Leuca, the Cities
Myndus, Aryanda, and Naples: and the Bays of Iasius, and Basilicus. In Iasius
is the town of Bargylos.

Of Ionia.
The seventeen Chapter.
BEyond the Bay of Basilicus, Ionia win^^deth it self in certain Angles, and
first of all, beginning to fetch about the Foreland of Possideum, it enuironeth
the Oracle of Apollo, The Oracle of Branchide.
called in old time the Oracle of Branchide, and now the Oracle of Didymus.
The City Miletus, sometime the chief of all Ionia, both in feats of war
and peace, the Country of Thales the Astrologer, and of Tymothie the Musician,
and of Ana^^mander the natural Philosopher, and woorthelie renowned ^or the
excellent wits of others that were borne there: is after a manner called
Ionia. There is also the City Hyppis, where the River Meander falls into
the Sea, and the Mountain Latmus, famous for the Fable of Endymion, whom (as
men say) the Moon was in love with. Afterward bowing again, it enuironeth
the City P^^ene, and the mouth of the River Gessus, and anon after as it
casts a greater circuit, so it comprehends mo things. There is the holy
Land called Panionium, so named, because the Ionians occupy it in common.
There is the town Phygela, builded (as some say) by fugitives, to which
report, the name seems agreeable. There is Ephesus, Ephesus.
and the most famous Temple of Diana, which the Amazons are reported to have
consecrated, when they held the souereintie of Asia. There is the River
Cayster, Cayster.
there is Lebedos, and the Cappell of Apollo, Clari^us, which Manto the
Daughter of Tyresia builded when she fled from the Epigons, that had gotten the
victory of the Thebanes: and Colophon which Mopsus the son of the said
Manto builded at the Foreland wherewith the Bay is enclosed, which on the other
side makes an other Baye called Smyrnie, and shoots out the rest with
narrow shankes. From thence it spreads wider, in manner like a Nesse, above
the Streightes, on the hither side to Teos, and on the further side to
Clazomen. And because the hinder parts are streightened and knitte together
with the neerenesse of the Sea, with diverse frontes they face diverse Seas. In
the vary Nesse, is Coryna. Within the Baye of Smyrnie, is the River Thermodon,
and the City Leuca: and without it is Phocis, the uttermost part of Ionia.

Of Aeolis.
The eighteen Chapter.
THe next Country, since the time it began to be inhabited by the Aeolians,
took the name of Aeolis, The Country about Troy.
whereas before times it was called Mysia: and where it boundeth upon
Hellespont, as long as the Troianes possessed it, it was called Troad. The
first City they call Myrina, after the name of Myrinus the founder thereof.
The next, Pelops builded* at his return out of Greece, when he had overcome
Oenomaus. Cyme, Cyme, a Captain of the Amazons.
a Captain of the Amazons, driving away the inhabiters that dwelt before at
Cyme, named it so, after her own name.

Above runs the River Caycus, between Elea and Pitane, Archesilas the
Philosopher.
where Archesilas was borne, that most famous president the Academie, which
affirmed the knowledge of nothing. Then is the Town of Cama, situate in a
foreland: and as soon as men are past that, there receives them a Baye of no
small bigness, which boweth a great way of and softly withdraws by little
and little into the land, even unto the foot of Mount Ida. The Straight
between the Seas, is sprinkled with a few Cities, of which the notablest is
Cistena. In the innermost part of the Baye, a feeld called Thebes, contains
the Towns of Adrimittium, Austra, and Teressa, lying one by an other in the
same order, as they be rehearsed.

In the other side is An^andros. Why An^andros was so named.
There are reported two causes, of the naming of this Town so. Some say that
Ascanius the son of Aenaeas reigned there, and being taken prisoner by the
Greeks, gave them this Town for his ransom. Other think it was builded by
such as in a tumult and insurrection, were driven out of the I Will of Andros.
These would have Antandros taken for Andros, and the other would have it taken
as it were for a man. The coast following, reaches to Gargara and Aslos Towns
builded and inhabited by the Aetolians. The Country about Troy.
Then an other Baye called the Greekishe Haven, windeth his banks not far
from Troy, that City most renowned for the wars and destruction thereof.
Here was the Town Sigae^, where the Greeks encamped, during the time of the
war. Here Called also Panthus.
S^amander, running down from Mount Ida, and Simois, Rivers of greater Fame
then stream, fall into the Sea.

Mount Ida it self being renowned with the contention of the Goddesses, Mount
Ida, and of the rising of the Sun there.
and the judgment of Paris, shows the rising of the Sun after an other
sort, then it is wont to be seen in other Lands. For unto such as look out
of the top of it, there appear (almost at midnight) dispearsed fires
glistering every where, and as the day light approaches, so seem they to
meet and join together, until that being assembled more and more, afterward
they grow feawer, and lastly, burn all in one flame. And when it has so
shined a good while together bright, and like a fire, it gathers it self
round, and becomes a great globe.

The same also appears a great while huge, and joined with the earth, and
afterward by little and little wexing less, and the more it decreaseth wexing
brighter, last of all it chaseth away the night, and becoming the Sun,
rises with the day.

Without the Baye, are the Rhetaean shores renowned with the famous Cities of
Rhetaeum and Dardania, The Tomb of Ajax, the son of Telamon.
but most of all with the Tomb of Ajax. From hence the Sea wexeth narrower,
and now no more washes away the Land, but dividing it again, cutteth through
the bank that meets it at the Streightes of Hellespont, and makes the
Lands where it runs, to have sides again.

Of Bithynia.
The nineteen Chapter.
INnermore are the Bithynians and Mariandynes. On the Sea coast are the Greek
Towns of Abydos, Lampsacum, Pa^ion, and Priapos. Abydos is famous for the
intercourse of He means of Leander and Hero.
great Love in old time. The Phocans gave Lampsacum that name, upon this
occasion, because when they asked counsel of the Oracle, into what Country
they should chiefly go, answer was made, that they should there take up
their dwelling place, where it first sh^ned.

Then again the Sea becomes more open, which is called Propontis. The river
Granicke.
Into it falls the River Granike, famous for the first battle that was
fought there, between the Persians and Alexander. Beyond the River, in the
neck of a piece of ground, which is almost an I Will, stands Cyzicum, a Town
so named of one Cyzicus, vanquished in battle and slain (as we read) unawares
by the Minyes, as they went to Colchos ward. After are Place and Scylace,
little Towns builded by the Argiues, on the back part whereof hangs the
Hill Olympus of Mysia, Olympus of Mysia.
as the the inhabiters call it, which sends forth the River Rhindacus into
those quarters that follow.

There abouts breed Snakes of unmeasurable bigness, Wonderful Snakes
wonderful, not for their hugeness only, but also for that when they have
retired into this channel of the said River, to avoid the heat of the
Sun, there putting up their heads and gaping, they swallowe in the Birds
that pass over, fly they never so high and so swiftly.

Beyond Rhindacus is Dascylos, and Myrlea, which the Colophonians builded. From
thence are two good measurable Bays. The one of them being namelesse,
compasses in the City Cion, a most commodious Mart Town of Phrygia, which
lies not far from thence: the other Baye compasses in the Olbians. In the
Foreland it bears the Chapel of Neptune, and in the bosom the Town of
Astacon builded by the Megarians. Then the Land strikes before again, and
makes a narrow channel for the Sea to pass out at into Pontus: and the
Bosphor of Thrace (as is aforesaid) disseuereth Europe five furlonges from
Asia.

In the very mouth of the Streightes is a Temple, and a Town called This
Town is over against Canstantinople.
Chalcedon. The founder of the town was Argias Prince of the Megarians: the
Idol of the Temple is Jupiter, and the builder thereof was Jason. Here the
Sea spreads it self wide (saving where the Forelandes be) stretching out on
both sides, with a long and direct shore, and then forth bending inward. But
because it extends not so much foreward, it wideneth on both hands, the
bowing inward of it with smooth points until it grow to a narrow issue on
both sides, is as like as can be to a Or a Turki^ bow.
Scythish bow.

It is short, rough, mistie, few harboroughes in it, not enclosed with soft
and sandy shores, bleake upon the North wind, and because it is not deep,
full of waves, and ever raging, in old time called Harbroughles.
Axenus, of the nature and disposition of the dwellers about it, which was
very cruel, and afterward, as their manners began somewhat to amend and wexe
milder, through having traffic with other Nations, it was called Harborous.
Euxinus.

First of all, the Mariandines inhabit a City there, given them by Hercules
of Argos, (as the report goes) which is called Heraclea, Heraclea.
and therefore made the report to have so much the more likelihood of truth.

By the same is the Cave Acherusia, that leads (as they say) to hell: and it
is supposed that Cerbe^us Cerberus.
was drawn out thereat.

Of Paphlagonia.
The twenty Chapter.
THen follows the Town of Tios, sometime inhabited by the Milesians, but now
altogether Paphlagonish, as well the people as the soil: in the midde shore
whereof almost is the foreland Cerambis, on the hither side whereof is the
river Parthenie, and the Cities Sesamus, and Cromna, and Cytoros builded by
Cytorus the son of Phrixus. Then follows Cimolis, and Armine, which ends
Paphlagonia,

Of the Chalybies.
The xxi. Chapter.
THe Chalybies, who were next neighbors to Paphlagonia, have two right famous
Cities, Amysos and Synope, the place where the doggishe Diogenes was borne:
Doggish Diogenes.
and the Rivers of Halys and Thermodon. By Halys, is the City Lycast: and
along by Thermodon, is a plain wherein was the Town Themyseyre, and the camp
of the Amazons, and therefore they call it Amazonia, Upon the Chalybies, do
border the Taberenes, whose chief felicity is in laughing and playing.

Beyond Cerambis dwell the Mossynaekes, in Towers of timber, The manners of the
Mossynaekes.
printing all their bodies with marks, eating their meat abroad, and
companying with their women in common. They choose their King openly by
voices, and keep him most streightlie in prison and gyues: and if he offend in
misgouernement, they make him fast all a whole day for his penance. But they
are churlish, vnmannerlie, and very hurtful to such as arrive among them.
Furtherfoorth are people less sauadge, but they also are vnmannerlie and
uncivil as well as the other, which are called Longpa^es, Dischers, and Buxers:
and a few Cities, whereof the notablest are Cerasus, and Trapaesus. Trebizond.
From thence is a place where the Coast that is drawn along from the Bosphor
takes his end, and so forth bowing himself forward in the bosom of the
shore over against it, makes the narrowest angle of Pontus. Here are the
Colchians: Colchos.
from hence issues Phasis. Here is a Town of the same name that the River is
of, builded by Athenistagoras a Milesian. Here is the Temple of Phryxus, and a
wood famous for the old Fable of the golden fleece. The Ceraunishe Hills, and
the names of the same.


From hence rise certain Mountains, which stretch out with a long ridge,
until they join with the Ryphaean Hills, which running with the one end
toward Euxinus, Maeotis, and Tanais, and with the other of the Caspian Sea, are
called They may be called the Thunder-hylles.
Ceraunii. The same are called by sundry other names, as Taurish, Moschian,
Amazonish, Caspian, Coraxincian, and Caucasean, according to the sundry
Nations that border upon it.

But in the first turning of the winding shore, there is a Town which the
Merchauntes of Greece are reported to have builded: and because when they were
tossed with a dark tempest, and knew not what Land it was, the crowing of a
Swan gave them knowledge, they called it It may be interpreted Swanton.
Cygnus. The residue of it along the waste Sea, is inhabited by cruel and
uncivil Nations, called Black Cotes.
Melanch^laenes. The vpland Country is inhabited by the Sepolites, Coraxes,
Phthirophagies, Eniochyes, Achaeans, and Cercetikes: and in the borders of
Maeotis dwell the Syndones. In the marthes of the Eniochyes, is Dioscurias
Dioscurias.
builded by Castor and Pollux, when he entered the Sea with Jason: and Syndos in
the marches of the Syndones, builded by the inhabiters of that Land. Then the
Country writhing aside, and spreading somewhat in breadth, shoots forth
between Pontus and Maeotis to the Bosphor, which running with two channelles
into the Lake and the Sea, makes Corocondama almost an Island. There are four
Cities, Hermonassa, Cepoe, Phanagoria, and in the very mouth Cimmerium.

When men are entered here, the large and wide Lake receives them, which
(where it touches the firm land) is enclosed with a bending shore, and where
it is nearer the Sea, being as it were ouer-dreeped with a bank (saving where
the mouth of it is) it is almost like unto Pontus, but that it is not so big.
The coast which bends from the Bosphor unto Tanais, is inhabited by the
Toreates, the Arichies, the Phicors, and (next of all to the mouth of the
river) by the Iaxamathians, which Nations are called by one general name
Maeotians.

Among the Iaxamathians, The manners of the Iaxamathia^s.
the women exercise the same feats that the men do, insomuch that they be not
priueledged from the wars. The men fight a foot with arrows, and the women
fight on horseback. Neither encounter they with weapons, but such as they can
snare with ropes, they strangle with drawing them after them. They marry:
howbeit, to the intent they may be counted marriageable, the matter consists
not in their years, for they abide unmarried until they have killed an enemy.
The River Tanais being sheaded out of the Mountain Ryphey, The head of the
river Tanai^.
falls so headlong, that when all the streams near abouts, yea, and Maeotis
and the Bosphor, and some part also of Pontus are frosen with the winters cold,
he only bearing summer and winter a like, runs always at one stay, both
full and swift. The banks thereof, and the Countries adjoining to the banks,
are inhabited by the Sauromats, which is one nation of diverse peoples, and
diuersely named. First are the Maeotians, called the Women-seruers, the
Kingdom of the Amazons. The Budines possess the fat pasture grounds, which
otherwise are but barreine and naked feeldes. The Gelones inhabit a City
built of Timber. Hard by them, The Turks.
the Thyrssage^s and Turks hold the waste Forests, and live by hunting. From
thence forth to the Arymphaeans, The country and manners of the Arymphaeans.
lies a large Country, rough with continual hills, and altogether Desert.
These Arymphaeans live most vprightlie. In steed of houses, they haunt woods.
Their food is berries: and as well the women as the men go bare headed. They
are therefore counted holy: and so far is any man of those so many cruel
Nations from doing them harm, that if other folk fly unto them, they be as
safe as in a Sanctuary. Beyond them rises the Mountain Riphey, and beyond
the Mountain lies the ^oast that butteth upon the Occean.

The second Book of that worthy Cosmographer, Pomponius Mela, concerning the
situation of the world.
Of Scithia, of Europe.
The first Chapter.
THE marches* and situation of Asia, extending to our Sea and the river
Tanais, are such as I have showed before. Now to them that row back again
down the same river into Maeotis, on the right hand is Europe, which was
directly on the left side of them, as they sailed up the stream: and it
butteth upon the mountain Riphey* for the same also extends hither. The snow
which falls continually, does make the Country so vntrauellable, that a man
is not able to see any farnesse into it.

Beyond is a Country of a very rich soil, but vninhabitable
notwithstanding, Of the Griffons.
because the Griffons (a cruel and eger kind of wild Beasts) do
woonderfullie love the gold, which lies altogether discovered above the
ground, and do woonderfullie keep it, and are very fierce upon them that
touch it. The first men are Scithians, and of the Scithians, the first are the
Arimaspians: Arimaspians.
which are reported to have but one eye a piece. From thence are the Essedons
unto Maeotis. The River Buges B^ges.
cutteth the compass of the Lake, and the Agathyrsies, Agathyrsies.
and the Sauromats, inhabit about it, who because they dwell in Carts, are
named Which may be interpreted Cart-wonners.
Hamaxobits. Then the coast that runs out askew to the Bosphor, is enclosed
between Pontus and Maeotis. The side toward the Lake, is possessed by the
Satarches. The breast toward the Bosphor of Cimmeria, has the towns of
Myrmecion, Panticape, Theodosia, and Hermesium. The other side toward Pontus
Euxinus, is possessed by the Taurians. Above them is a Baye full of Havens, and
therefore is called the fair Haven, and it is enclosed between two
Forelandes: whereof the one called the Rams head, butteth against the
Foreland of Cerambis, which we said before to be in Asia: and the other called
Mayden-hyll.
Parthenion, has near unto it a town called Cherronesus builded (if it may
be believed) by Diana, and is very famous for the Cave Nymphaeum in the top
thereof hallowed to the Nymphs. Then the Sea fleeteth under a bank, and
following continually upon the shores flying back (which the Satarkes and
Taurians possess) until he be but five miles from Maeotis, makes a Nesse.
That which is between the Lake and the Bay, is named Taphre, and the Bay it
self is called Carciuites. In the same is the City Carciue, by the which do
run two Rivers, Gerros and Hypacyris, which fall into the Sea in one mouth, but
come from two several heads, and from two several places. For Gerros sweepeth
between the Basilids and Nomades. Then are there woods, whereof those Countries
bear very great store, and there is the River Panticapes, which disseuereth
the Nomades and Georgians. Georgians of Europe.
From thence the land wideneth far, and ending in a slender shanke, ioineth
with the Sea shore. Afterward enlarging again measurablie, it sharpeneth it
self by little and little, and gathering his long sides as it were into a
point, grows into the likeness of the blade of a sword laid flatlinges.

Achilles entering the Sea of Pontus with a Navy like an enemy, after he had
gotten victory, is reported to have made a gaming in the same place for joy
thereof, and to have exercised himself and his men in running, while they
rested from war, and therefore the place is called Achilles race. Then
runs Boristhenes by a Nation of the same name, The river Borysthenes.
the pleasauntest of all the Rivers of Scithia. For whereas all the other are
thick and muddie: he runs exceeding clear, more gentle than the rest, and
most pleasant to drink of. It cherishes most fine and batling pasture, and
great Fishes which are of very delicate taste, and have no bones. He comes
from far, and springing from an unknown head, bears in his channel forty
days journey: and being all that way able to bear Ships, he falls into the
sea* hard by Borysthenides and Olbis Greek Cities.

Hypanis, The river Hypanis, and the nature thereof.
rising out of a great Poole* which the dwellers by call the mother of Hypanis,
incloseth the Callipeds, and a long while together runs the same that he was
at his head. At length, not far from the Sea, he takes so bitter waters out
of a little Fountain* called Exampaeus, that from thencefoorth the runs
unlike himself, and altogether unsavory. The next which is called Axiaces,
comes down among the Calli^^des, and Axiakes. The River Tyra seperateth
these Axiakes from the Istrians: it springs among the Neures, and falls
into the Sea, by a Town of his own name. But that famous River which parts
the Nations of Scithia from the Nations following, rising from his spring in
Germany, has an other name at his head than at his falling into the Sea. The
river Ister, called also Danow.
For through huge Countries of great Nations, a long while together he bears
the name of Danow. Afterward, being diuersely termed by the dwellers by, he
takes the name of Ister, and receiving many rivers into him, wexeth huge, and
giving place in greatness to none of all the Rivers that fall into our Sea,
saving only to Nile, he runs into the sea with as many mouths as he, The
cruel mann^rs of sundry Nations, by the river Danow.
whereof three are but small, the rest are able to bear Ships. The natures
and behauiours of the Nations differ. The Essedones The Essedones.
solemnize the deaths of their Parents merely, with sacrifices, and feasting
of their neighbors and acquaintance. They cut their bodies in pieces, and
chopping them finely with the inwardes of beasts, make a feast of them and
eat them up. The heads of them, when they have cunningly pullished them, they
bind about with gold, and occupy them for Cups. These are the last duties of
natural love among them. The Agathyrsies paint their faces and their lyms: and
as any of them comes of better Ancestors, The Agathirsies.
so does he more or less die himself: but all that are of one lynnage, are
died with one kind of mark, and that in such sort, as it cannot be gotten
out. The Sarmates, being altogether unacquainted with Gold and Silver, The
Sarmates.
the greatest plagues in the world, do in steed thereof use exchange of one
thing for an other. And because of the cruel coldness of the winter, which
lasts continually, they make them houses within the ground, and dwell either
in Caves, or else in Sellars. They go in long side garments down to the
ground, The Taurians.
and are covered face and all, saving only their eyes. The Taurians (who be
chiefly renowned with the arrival of Iphigenia and Orestes) are horrible of
conditions, and have a horrible report going of them, namely, that they are
wont to murder strangers, and to offer them up in sacrifice. The original
of the Nation of the Basilides, The Basilides.
comes from Hercules and Echidna. Their manners are Princelike, their weapons
are only arrows. The wandering Nomades, The Nomades or Graziers.
follow the pastures for their Cattle: and as feeding for them lasts, so is
their continuance of abiding in one place. The Georges The Georges or Tyl-men.
occupy tillage of the ground and husbandry. The Axiakes The Axiakes.
know not what stealing means: and therefore they neither keep their own,
nor touch that is an other man's. They that dwell more vpland, The vplandills
Scithians.
live after a harder sort, and have a country less husbanded. They love war
and slaughter, and it is their custom to suck the blood clean out of the
wounds of him that they kill first. As every of them has slain most, so is
he counted the iolliest fellow among them. But to be clear from slaughter, is
of all reproaches the greatest. Not so much as their loue-daies, are made
without bloodshed. For they that undertake the matter, wound themselves, and
letting their blood drop out into a vessel, when they have styrd it together,
drink of it, thinking that to be a most assured pledge of the promise to be
performed. In their feasting, their greatest mirth and commonnest talk, is in
making report what every man has slain. And they that have told of most,
are set between two cups brim full of drink: for that is the chief honor
among them. As the Essedones make cups of the heads of their Parents: so do
these of the heads of their enemies. Among the Anthropophages, The
Anthropophages, or eaters of men.
the daintiest dishes are made of man's flesh. The Gelones The Gelones.
apparel themselves and their horses, in the skins of their enemies:
themselves with the skins of their heads, their horses with the skins of the
rest of their bodies. The Melanchlaenes Melanchlaenes, or Blacke-coats.
go in black clothes, and thereof they have their name. The Neures The
Neures.
have a certain time, to every of them limited, wherein they may (if they
will) be changed into Woolues, and return to their former shape again. The
God of them all is Mars, to whom in steed of Images, they dedicate Swords and
Tents, and offer to him men in Sacrifice.

The Countries spread very large, and by reason that the Rivers do diverse
times ouerflowe their banks, there is every where great store of good
pasture. But some places are in all other respects so barreine, that the
inhabiters, for lack of woodde, are feign to make fire of bones.

Of Thrace.
The second Chapter.
NExt unto these is Thrace, and the same extending wholly inward from the front
that bears upon the side of Pontus, even unto the Illyrians, where spreading
into sides, it butteth upon the River Ister and the Sea. It is a Country
cheerful neither in air nor soil, and (saving where it approaches to the
Sea,) unfruitful, cold, and a very evil cherrisher of such things, as are
either set or sown. Scarce any where does it bear an Apple tree, but Uines
somewhat more commonly, howbeit the Grapes ripe not, ne come to any good
verdure, unless it be where the keepers have fenced them with boughs to bear
of the cold. It is somewhat more friendly in cherrishing of men, though it be
not to the outward show: for they be hard favored and uncomely shaped.
Howbeit, in respect of fierceness and number, to have them many and
unmerciful, it is most fruitful. It sends few Rivers into the Sea, Hebrus,
Nestos, and Strymon, rivers, Haemus Rhodope, and Orbele, mountains.
but those very famous: as Hebrus, Nestos, and Strymon. Innermore, it rayseth
up the Mountains Haemus, Rhodope, and Orbele, renowned with the Ceremonies of
Bacchus, and with the flocking of the Maenades, when Orpheus first gave them
orders, and trained them to that Religion. Of the which hills, Haemus mounteth
to such a height, that in the top thereof, a man may see both the Sea of
Pontus, and the Sea of Adria.

One only Nation of the Thracians inhabites the whole Country, The manners
of the Nations of Thrace.
termed by sundry names, and endewed with diverse dispositions. Some are
utterly wild and very willing to die, The manners of the Gets, and their
opinions of the immortality of the soul.
namely the Gets, and that is stablished through sundry opinions. For some of
them think, that the souls of them that die, shall return into their bodies
again. An other sort think, that though the souls return not, yet they die
not, but pass into a blessedder state. Others think they die, but that dying
is better then to live. And therefore among some of them, the childebeddes are
sorrowful, and they mourn for them that be borne: and contrariwise, the
burialles are joyful, and solemnized with singing and playing, as if they were
high holy days. Not so much as the women, have cowardly or faint courages:
for they sue even with all their hearts, to be killed upon the carkases of
their dead husbands, and to be buried with them. And because the men have many
wives at once, they plead very earnestly before Judges, which of them may
come to that honor. It is imputed to their good behavior, and it is the
greatest joy to them that can be, to get the upper hand in this kind of suit.
The rest of the women fall a weeping, and shreeke out with most bitter
complaints. But such as are minded to comfort them, bring their armor and
riches to the Hearse, and there professing themselves ready to compound with
the destiny of him that lies dead, or else to fight against it, if they could
come by it, when neither money nor fighting can take place, continue wooers at
the pleasure of the widows whom they like of. The Maidens when they shall
marry, are not bestowed at the discretion of their Parents, but are openly
either let out to be married, or else sold. Which of these shall befall unto
them, proceeds of their beauty and behavior. The honest and beautiful
yield a good price: the other are feign to buie husbands to marry them. The
use of Wine is to some of them unknown: nevertheless, when they are making
good cheer, as they are sitting about the fires, they cast in a kind of
seed, whose sent provoke them to a certain mirth like unto droonkennesse.

On the Sea coast next unto Ister, is the City Istrople: and next unto that,
Galatis builded by the Milesians, and Tritonice, and the Haven Carry, and the
foreland Tiristris, immediately beyond the which is an other Angle of Pontus,
directly over against the Angle of Phasis: and it were like unto it, but that
it is larger. Here perished Bizone by an earthquake. There also is the Haven
Crunos, and the Cities of Dennysople. Odessos, Now called Me^imbria.
Messembria, Anchialos, and (in the innermost bosom of the Baye, where Pontus
finisheth an other of his windinges with an Angle) the great City Apollonia.
Apollonia.
From hence it goes with a direct coast, saving that almost in the mids, it
shoots out a Foreland called Thin^^a, and turns inward to it self with
crooked banks, and bears the Cities Halmydesse, and Phyleas, and Phinople.
Hitherto is Pontus: and hereafter is the Bosphor, and Propontis.

In the Bosphor, is Now called Constantinople.
Bizance, and on Propontis are Selymbria, Perinthus, Bathynis, and running
between them the Rivers Ergine and Atyras: Then follows a part of Thrace,
where sometime reigned King Rhaesus and Bysanth, a Town builded by the
Samians, and Cypsella, sometime a great City.

After that, ensues a place called of the Greeks, Longvvall, Lysimachia.
and (in the neck of a Nesse) the Town of Lysimachia. The Land that
follows, being no where broad, runs forth narrowest here between
Hellespont and the Now called Arch-sea.
Aegean Sea. The Streights thereof they call Isthmos, and the front thereof
Mastusia, and the whole together Chersonesus. It is worthy to be had in
remembrance for many things. In it is the River Aegos, renowned with the
Shipwreck of the Athenian Fleet. There is also Sestos, situate against
Abydos, very famous for the love of Leander. There is also the Country, where
the Persian host adventured to make a bridge over the Sea that parts the one
maine land from the other, (a wonderful enterprise) and passed over the Sea,
out of Asia into Greece on foot, and not by Ship. There are the bones of
Protesilaus consecrated with a Temple. There is also the Haven Caelos, renowned
with the destruction of the Laconish Fleet, at such time as the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians, encountered there in battle on the Sea. There is also
Dogs-graue, The Tomb of Queen Hecuba.
the Tomb of Queen Hecuba, which place received that homely name, either of
the shape of a Dog, whereinto Hecuba is reported to have been transformed,
or else of the misfortune that she fell into. There is Macidos, and there is
Eleus which ends Hellespont.

By and by the Aegean Sea beats hugelie upon a long shore, and with a great
compass fetches leysurelie about the Lands which it seuereth far a sunder,
unto the Foreland of Sumum. Such as sail by that coast, when they are passed
Mastusia, must enter into a Baye: which washing by the other side of
Chersonesus, is enclosed like a valley, with the ridge of a hill: and being
called Melas of the River Melas which it receives, it imbraceth two Cities,
Alopeconesus, on the one side of the narrow Streights, and Cardie on the other
side. Aenos Aenos.
is famous, builded by Aenaeas, when he fled from Troy.

About Hebrus are the Cycones, The Cycones.
and beyond it is Doriscos where Xerxes (because he could not number his
army,) is reported to have measured them by the space of the ground. Beyond,
is the Forelande of Serrium, out of which, the wooddes of Zona are reported to
have followed Orpheus, Orpheus.
when he soong. Then is the River Scaenas, and (adjoining to his banckes) the
upper Country of Maronie, which brought forth Diomede, The Tyrant Diomede.
that was wont to make strangers, prouinder for his cruel Horses, and in
the end, was by Hercules cast to them himself. The Tower which they attribute
to Diomede, remains as a remembrance of the Fable: and a City which his
sister Abdera Abdera.
named after her own name. But that City is woorthier to be had in memory,
for breeding of Democritus Democritus.
the natural Philosopher, than for her sake that builded it.

Beyond that, runs the River Nestos: and between it and the River Strymon,
are the Cities, Phillippos, Appollonia, and Amphippolis. Between Strymon and
mount Athos, are the Tower Calarne, the Haven Caprullon, and the Cities
Acantos, and Oesyma. Between Athos and Pallene, are Cleone and Olynthus.

Strymon (as we have said before) is a river, Of the River Strymon.
which rising a far of, and running slender, becomes greater and greater
with foreign waters: and when he has made a Lake within a little of the sea,
he bursteth forth in a greater channel than he came in.

Mount Athos is so high, Mount Athos.
that it is thought to reach above the place from whence the rain falls. The
opinion has a likelihood of truth, because the ashes are not washed from the
Altars in the top thereof, but continue^ in the same heap whole as they were
left. This Hill shoots not with an elbowe into the Sea, as other Hills do,
but it keeps on whole, and aduaunceth with a whole breast, a great length
into the Sea. Where it cleaued to the maine Land, it was cut through by
Xerxes, when he made his voyage against the Grayes, and was sailed over, and an
arm of the Sea conveyed through it, to make way for his ships. The neathermost
parts of it, are furnished with small Towns, builded and peopled by the
Pelasgies. In the top was the town Acroathon, the inhabiters whereof were
wont (by report) to live half as long again as other men. Pallene is of such
a large soil, that in it are five Cities, with their territories. It rises
all in height, somewhat narrow where it begins, and there is the City
Potidaea. But where it wexeth wider, there are the Towns of Mend and Scione,
worthy to be spoken of, Mend builded by the Eretrianes, and the other by the
Greeks, as they returned from the taking of Troy.

Of Macedonia.
The third Chapter.
THen the people of Macedonia inhabit many Cities, of the which, Pella is the
most renowned, for her two ^oster children Phillippe the subduer of Greece, and
Alexander the conqueror of Asia also. In the shore, the Bay of Mecyberne
between the Forelandes, deuideth Canastreum and the Haven that is called Cope:
and encloseth the Cities of Toron and Physcell, and also Mecyberne, whereof it
takes the name. Scione is next unto the Foreland of Canastre: and Mecyberne
Baye enters somewhat within the Land in the mids, where it gives way like a
bosom. Howbeit casting forth long arms into the deep, it becomes a great
gulf between the seas. Into it run Axius through Macedonia, and Peneus
through Thessalie. A little above Axius, is the City Now called Salonich.
Thessalonica. Between them both are Cassandria, Cydna, Azaros, and Derris.
Beyond Peneus, are Sepias, Cordynia, Melibaea, and Castanea, all of like
renown, saving that Phyloctetes Phyloctetes.
who was fostered at Melibaea, beautifieth that town. The inner Lands are
renowned with the names of famous places, and contain almost nothing that is
not notable. Not far from hence is Olympus, and here is Pelion, and here is
Ossa, Mountains renowned with the Fables of the Giantes wars. Here is
Pieria, Pieria.
the dwelling place and mother of the Muses. Here is the ground that Hercules
of Greece trod last upon, namely, the Forest of Oeta: Here is Tempe
ennobled with holy wooddes. Here lies Lebethra, and the versifying fountains.

Then follows Greece, shooting forth hugelie and mainlie, and bearing from
the North into the South, till it butte upon the Myrtean Sea. Where the Sun
ryseth, it faceth the Aegean Sea, and where the Sun goes down, it faceth
the Ionish Sea. Next that, lies a large Country, named Hellas, which steppeth
forth with a large front, and anon after is cut off almost by the waste,
with both the Seas: whereof the Ionish enters furthest into his side, until
the Land becomes but five mile wide. Then again the Lands widen on both
sides, and shoot into the deepes, but more into the Ionish Sea than into the
Aegean Sea: and stretching forth, not altogether so broad as they began
(howbeit very great) they become a Nesse, which is called Now it is called
Morea.
Peloponesus: which by reason of the Bays and Forelandes wherewith the shores
thereof are fretted, as it were with little veins, and therewithal because it
spreads out a toside with a slender stalk, is very like the leaf of Plane
tree.

In Macedonia, the first Country is Thessalye, Thessalye.
the next Magnesia, Magnesia.
and then Phthiotis. Phthiotis.
In Greece are the Countries of Doris, Locris, Phocis, Beotis, Attis, The
sh^eres of Greece.
and Megaris: but the most renowned of them all is Attis. In Peloponesus, are
Argolis, Laconice, Messenia, Achai^, Elis, Arcadia: and beyond it are Aetolia,
The shieres of Peloponesus.
Acarnania, and Epyrus, unto the Adriatish Sea.

Of the places and Cities situate in the maine Land, these are the
woorthiest to be touched: In Thessaly, Larissa, Larissa.
sometime called Iol^os: in Magnesia, Antronia: in Phthiotis, Phthia: in Doris,
the City Pindus, and hard thereby the City Erineon: in Lo^ris, Delphos and
Parnasus.
Cynos and Calliaros: in Phocis, Delphos, and Mount Parnasus, and the Temple
and Oracle of Apollo: in Baeotia, Thebes, and Mount Cytheron Thebes and
Cytheron.
most renowned in Fables and Poetry: In Attis, Eleusis. Eleusis,
hallowed unto Ceres, Seres.
and the noble City of Athens, Athens.
more famous of it self, then it need to be set out: in Megaris, Megara,
Megara.
whereof the Country has his name: in Argolis, Argos, and Mycene, Argos and
Mycene.
and the Temple of Juno very famous for the auncientnesse and Religion
thereof: in Lacon^ce, Therapne, and Lacedemon, Lacedemon.
and Amy^le, and Mount ^aygetus: in Meslenia, Messene, and Now called Modon.
Methone: in Achaia and in Elis, sometime Pises, the Palace of Oenomaus, and
Elie, and the Idol and Temple of Jupiter of Olympus, renowned for the gaming
of exercise, and for the singular holiness, but most of all, for the Image it
self, which is the work of Phi^^dias.

Arcadie Arcadie.
is environed round about with the Nations of Peloponesus. In it are the
Cities Psophis, Tenea, and Orchomenon: the Mountains Pholoe, Cyllenius,
Parthenius, and Maenalus: and the Rivers Erymanthus, and Ladon. In Aetolia,
Aetolia
is Naupactus: in Acarnania, Stratos: Acarnania.
in Now called Albanie.
Epyre, the Temple of Jupiter of Dodon, and a Well which in this consideration
A wonderful Fountain.
is counted holy, for that whereas it is cold, and quenches sirebrandes that
are put into it, as other waters do: If ye hold brandes without fire a good
way off from it, it kindles them. But when men scour the Sea coast, their
way is to sail from the Foreland of Sepias, by Demetrias, and Boion, and
Phtheleon, and Echinon, to the Baye of Pagasa: which embracing the City
Pagasa, receives the River Sperch^us: and because the Minyes (when they made
their voyage into Colchos) launched forth there with their Argosie, it is
therefore had in estimation.

From thence as men sail to Sunium, they must pass by these things: namely,
by two great Bays, the one of Malea, the other of Opus, and in them the
Monumentes of the slaughter of the Lacedaemonians: By Ther^opile, Opaes,
Scarphia, Cnemides, Alope, Anthedon, and Larymna: by Aulis, the Haven where the
Fleet of Agamemnon and the Greeks that conspired against Troy, did
harborowe: By Marathon, a witness of many vialent deeds, even from the time
of Theseus, but most cheefeli^ renowned with the slaughter of the Persians: By
Rhamnus, a little Town, but yet famous because of the Temple of Amphia^rus,
and the Image of Nemesis, made by Phi^dias, which are in it: and finally, by
Thoricos and Brauron, some time Cities, and now but bare names.

Sunium is a Forelande, which finisheth the East side of This is the Country,
properly called by the name of Greece.
Hellas. From thence the Land leans Southward unto Megara, now facing the
Sea with his front, like as before it lay with his side against Attica. Then
is Pyrrheus the Haven of Athens, and Scyrons rocks, even at this day
diffamed* for the cruel entertaynement* that Scyron gave there to Strangers
in old time.

The bounds of Megaris, extend even to the Balke, which is so termed, because
it parts the Aegean Sea but five miles space from the Ionish Sea, and
knitteth Peloponesus unto Hellas, with a narrow balke. In it is the town of
Cenchree, the Temple of Neptune, the famous gaminges called the B^lke games,
and Corinth Corinth.
sometime renowned for riches, but afterward more renowned for the destruction
thereof, and now newly builded again, and peopled by the Romans: which
City out of the topcastle thereof called Acrocorinth, vieweth That is the
Aegean and Ionish Seas.
both the seas. As we said before, the Sea coast of Peloponesus, is indented
with Bays and Forelands: on the East side with Bucephalos and Chersonesus, and
Scyllion: on the South side with Malea, Taenaros, and Ichthys: and on the West
with Chelonates and Araxos. From the narrow balke to Scylleon, inhabit the
Epidaurians, renowned with the Temple of Aesculapius: Aesculapius.
and the Troiezenians, famous for their faithful continuance in league and
freendshippe with the Athenians. Also there are Saronike Haven, and Schaenitas,
and Pagonus. The Towns of Epidaure, Troizen, and Hermion, stand upon this
shore. Between Scylleon and Malea, is the Bay of Argolis: between that and
Taenarus, is the Bay of Laconia, from thence to Acritas, is the Bay of Asine,
and from thence to Ichthys, is the Bay of Cyparissus. In the Bay of Argolis,
are the known rivers of Erasmus and Inachus, and the known town of Learn. In
the Bay of Laconia, are the Rivers Githius, and Eurotas. On the head of
Taenarus, are the Temple of Neptune, and a Cave like unto the Cave of Acheruse
Acheruse.
in Pontus, that we spoke of before, both in fashion and Fable. In the Bay of
Asine, is the River Pamisse, and in the Bay of Cyparisse, is Alpheus: These two
Bays take their names of two Cities, Cyparissus, and Asine, that stand upon
their shores. The Messemans and Pylians, inhabit the Lands, and Pyle it self
stands near the Sea, and so do Cyllene Cyllene.
and Callipolis. The City Patre, stands upon that shore where Chelonates
and Araxos, run into the Sea. But Cyllene is notable, because men think that
Mercury was borne there. Afterward Rhion (it is the name of a Baye) falling
like a Lake with full mouth, as it were in at a narrow gap between the
Aetolians and Peloponesians, breaks in even to the Balke. In it the shores
begin to look Northward.

Here abouts are Aegian, and Aegira, and Oluros, and Sicyon: and in the
coasts over against them are, Page, Creusis, Auticyra, Oeanthia, Cyrrha, and
(whereof the name is better known) Calydon, and the River Euenus. Without
Rhion in Acarnania, the notablest things are the Town Leucas, and the River
Achelous.
Achelous.

In Epire, The Bay of Ambrace.
nothing is more noble, than the Baye of Ambrace. The cause hereof in part, is
the Baye it self, which at a narrow gappe, less than a mile wide, lets in
a great Sea: and partly, the Cities Actium, Argos* built by Amphilocus, and
Ambrace the Palace of the posterity of Aeacus, and of Pyrrhus, which stand by
it. Beyond is Butroton, and then the Hills The Thunder^ hills.
Ceraunii, and from them the winding toward Adria. This Sea being received
far into the Land, and spreading very broad, but yet broadest where it
pearceth in* is besette with the Countries of Now called Sclauonie.
Illyricke unto Now called Triest.
Tergestum, and the residue with the Nations of Italy and France.

The Parthi^nes and Dassarets, possess the first parts of it: The next by
little and little, is possessed ^y the Euchelies and Pheakes: afterward, are
they that be properly called Illyrians: then the Pyreans, and Lyburnes, and
Histrich. Of Cities, the first is Oricum, the second Now called Durazo.
Dyrrachium, called before Epidamnum, until the Romans changed the name,
because it seemed to them to be a forespeaking of evil luck, toward them when
they went thither. Beyond are Apollonia, Salon, Iader, Naron, Now Bruzza.
Tragurie, the Baye of Pola, and the City Pola, inhabited (as report goes)
by men of Colchos, and now (as things altar) peopled by the Romans. Also,
there are the Rivers Aeas, and Nar, and Danow* which is spoken of before by the
name of Ister. But Aeas falls into the Sea by Apollonia: and Nar, between the
Pyreans and Liburnes: and Ister, through Istrich. Tergestum, which is situate
in the innermost nooke of Adria, ends Illyrich.

Of Italy.
The fowrth Chapter.
SOmewhat shall be said of Italy, rather because order so requires, then for
that it needs any setting out: for all things are known. At the Alps, it
begins to mount in height, and as it proceeds, raising it self in the
mids, it runs forth with a continual ridge between the Adriatishe and
Turkishe Seas, or (as they are otherwise termed, between the upper Sea, and
the nether Sea) a great while whole: but when he has gone far, he splitteth
into two horns, whereof the one faceth the Sea of Sicill, and the other the
I^nishe Sea. It is through out narrow, and in some place much narrower than
where it began.

The inner parts thereof are inhabited by sundry Nations. On the left side,
the Carnies and Venetians possess Now a part of Lombardie.
Gallia togata. Then follow Italian people, the Picents, the Frentanes, the
Daunians, the Appulians, the Calabrians, and the Salentines. On the right side
under the Alps, are the Ligurians, and under Appenine, is Hetruria. After
that, is Latium, the Volscies, Campane, and above Lucanie, are the Brutians.

Of Cities inhabited far from the Sea, the wealthiest on the left hand, are
Padua, Padua.
builded by Antenor: and Mutina, and Bononi^, builded by the Romans: Rome.
and on the right hand Capua, builded by the Thuscanes, and Rome in old time
founded by Sheepheardes, but now (if it should be treated of according to the
worthiness) an other whole work of it self.

In the Sea coast next to Now called Triest.
Tergestum, is Concord. Through it runs the River Timauus: which rising from
nine headdes, falls into the Sea with one mouth. Then the River Natiso, not
far from the Sea, passes by the rich Tow^e Aquileia, beyond which is
Altine. The River Po, The river Po.
occupies a large space in the upper shore. For he ryseth out of the very
foot of the Mountain Vesulus, and gathering himself at the first of little
springes, runs a while lanke and lean: but anon after he so increases, and
is so fed with other Rivers, that at the last he emptieth himself with seven
mouths. One of these, they call great Po, and he gusheth out of it so
swiftly, that beating aside the waves, he carries his stream a great while
in the same sort that he sent it out of the Lands end, and keeps his
channel still even in the Sea, until the River Ister flushing with like
violence, out of the shore over against him, does meet with him. Hereby it
comes to pass, that as men sail through those places, where the said Rivers
come on both sides, they draw up fresh water among the waves of the Sea.

From Po to Ancona ward, the way lies by Rauenna, Arm^ne, Pisaure, the
fraunchised Town of Fane, and the Rivers Metaurus and Esis. And in the very
skirt of those two Forelandes, meeting one against an other, stands the said
Town of Ancona, Ancona, or Ancon, signifies an elbowe.
which has that name given it by the Greeks, because the situation thereof
resembles the bowing of a man's elbowe: and it is as a bound between the
Marches of the French and Italian Nations.

For when men are passed this Town, they come upon the coast of Picene,
wherein are the Cities, Numana, Potentia, Claterna, and Cupra: the Castles of
Firmum, Adria, and Truent, with a River running thereby of the same name. From
thence is the Sea coast of Senogallia, unto the mouth of the River Aterne: the
Cities whereof are Bucar and Histon.

The Daunians have the River Tiferne, the Cities Cliterne, Lucrine, and
Theane, and the Mountain Garganus. There is a Baye in Appulia, enclosed with a
whole shore, which is called Vrias, of small room, and for the most part rough
to come unto. Uttermore, is Sypunt, or (as the Greeks call it) Sypius, and a
river that runs by Canusium, and is called Aufidus. Afterward are Barium,
Egnatia, and Rudie, ennobled with Ennius, E^^ius the Poet
who was of that City. And in Calabria, are Brunduse, Valece, Lupie, and
Mount Hydrus, together with the plains of Salent, and the Sea coast of Salent,
and a Greek City, named Gallipole. Hitherto extends the Adriatishe Sea,
and hitherto extends the one side of Italy. The front of it (as we have
said) splitteth into two horns. But the Sea that is received in between them
both, being once or twice disseuered with thin Forelandes, is not environed
with one whole bank, nor received open and at large on level shore, but in
Bays. The first is called the Baye of Tarent, which lies between the
Forelandes of Sale and Lacinium: and in it are Tarent, Metapont, Heracle,
Croto, and Turium. The second, is called the Baye of Scyllace, between the
Forelandes of Pacinium, and Zephyrium, wherein are Petilia, Caecine, Scyllace,
and Mistre. The third, which is between Zephyrium and Brutium, enuironeth
Consiline, Caulone, and Locres. In Brutium are the Kings Pillar, Regium,
Scylla, Taurian, and Metaure. From hence is the turning into the Tuscan Sea,
and to the other side of the same Land, on the which side are Terine: Hippo now
called Vibon: Temesa: Clampetia: Blanda: Buxent: Velia: Palinure sometime the
name of ye Master of Aeneas Ship, and now the name of a place: the Baye of
Pesta, and the Town of Pesta: the River Silarus, the City Picentia, the
Rocks which the Mermaides dwelt in, the Foreland called Mineruaes Mount, the
fat grounds of Lucanie, the Baye of Puteolis, the Cities of Surrent and
Herculean, the view of the Mountain Vesuuius, the Pompeyes, Naples, Puteolis,
the Lakes of Lucrine and Auerne, the Bathes, Missene* now the (...) of a place,
sometime the name of a Troiane Soldier: Cumes, Linterne, the River Vulturne,
the Town Vulturne, the delectable Sea coast of Campane, Sinuessa, Liris,
Minturne, ^ormie, Fundie, Tarracine, Circes house sometime called Circey.
Autium, Aphrodisium, Arde, Laurent, and Ostia on the hither side of Tyber.

Beyond it are Pyrgie, Anio, Newcastle, Grauiske, Cossa, Telamon, Populon,
Cecine, and Pises, places and names of Hetruria. Then Luna, ^igurum, and
^iguria, and Geane, and Sabatia, and Albigaunum. Then has it the Rivers Paul
and Varus, both falling from the Alps, but Varus is better known, because it
ends Italy.

The Alps themselves, The Alps.
spreading far and wide from these shores, do first run a great step into
the North: and when they have touched Germany, then turning their race, they
go forth into the East, and disseuering cruel Nations, extend even into
Thrace.

Of the Province of Narbon.
The fifth Chapter.
GAllia being divided by the Lake Leman, Now called Lake Losan, and the Lake of
Geneua.
and the Mountain Gebenna, into two sides, whereof the one butteth upon the
Tuscan Sea, and the other upon the Occean, extends on the one side from
Varus, and on the other side from the Rhine unto the Mountain Pyrene. The part
that bordereth upon our Sea, was sometime called Braccata, and is now called
the province of Sauoy and Delphynoys.
Narbone, and is more inhabited and tylled, and therefore also more cheerful.
Of the Cities that it has, the wealthiest are Vasio of the Vocontians, Vienna
of the Auignion.
Allobrogians, Nimes,
Auenio of the Cauars, (...)
Nemausus of the Arecomikes, Tolous of the Languedocke.
Tectosages, Orange.
Aurasio of the Secundanes, Arle.
Arelate of the Sextanes* and Blitera of the Septumanes.

But before them all steppeth the place where the Atacines and Decumanes dwelt,
from whence succor was ministered to all those Countries: which place is now
the Martial Narbo, Narbon in Province.
the name-giuer and beauty of the whole Province. On the Sea coasts, are a
few places of some reputation. But the Cities stand thin, because there are
few Havens, and all that quarter lies open to the South and South-west winds.

Nicea touches the Alps, and so does the Town of Deceate, and so does
Ragnie.
Antipolis. Afterward is Julius Markette, a Town builded by the Octauians,
and then forth Athenople, and Olbia, and Glauon, and Citarist, and Halycidon,
the Haven of Marsilles, Marsilles, and the foundation thereof.
and in it the Town of Marsilles it self. This being founded by the Phoceans,
and builded in old time among boistrous Nations, has now brought them in awe,
and made them good neighbors, far unlike to that they were before. It is a
wonderful thing, how easily it then took sure settling, and unto this day
keeps the old custom. Between it and Rhone, lies Marius Ditch, upon the
Sea side near unto the Poole of the Auatikes, That shore carries a part of
the said River into the Sea, in a channel able to bear Ships: otherwise it
is but a rascal bank all stony, where the report goes that Hercules
fighting against Albion and Bergion* the sons of Neptune, and having spent
all his Artillery, called upon his Father Jupiter, who rayned down stones to
help him with: and a man would believe it had rained stones in deed, there
lie so many, and that every where, and so far of.

The River Rhone Rhone.
springs not far from the heads of Ister and Rhyne, and then being received
into the Lake Losan, he holds on his race, and forcing himself whole through
the mids of it, passes out as great as he entered in. From thence being
carried back into the West, he deuideth Gallia a while, and then turninig his
course Southward, keeps so forth on, and becoming now great with the
resort of other Rivers, and continually wexing greater, runs ^ut at the
Lands and, between the The people of Mount Pelier.
Volscies and the Cauers.

Beyond are the Pooles of the Volscies, the River Led, the Castle Latara, and
the Hill Mesna, environed almost round about with the Sea, and (but that it
hangs by a narrow Cawsie to the Land) a very I Will. Then Soan falling out of
the Mountains of Auue^ne, The River of Soan.
runs into the Sea by Agatha, and Obris by Bliters. Atax coming down from
the Mountain Pyrene, The river Atax.
as long as he has none but the waters of his own spring, runs small and
shallowe, and yet a great channel, howbeit not able to bear a Ship any
where, saving where he passes by Narbone.

But when he swells with winter showers, he is wont to rise so high, that
his banks be not able to hold him in. A Lake receives him* named Rubresus,
very large, but where the Sea enters into it narrow mouthed. Beyond is
Leucata, as shore so named, and the Fountain of Salsusa, which sheadeth water,
not sweet, but more brackishe than the water of the Sea.

Hard by, is a Feeld very green with short and slender Reed, A strange Feeld.
but floting upon a Poole that is underneath it. That it is so, the middle part
of it plainly proves, which being cut off from the rest about it, swimmeth
like an I Will, and suffers it self to be shooued and drawn too and fro.
Moreover, by those places that are cut through, appears the Sea sheaded
underneath it. Whereupon, whether it were through ignorance of the truth, or
that they were purposelie disposed to make a leasing, it lyked as well our
Authors, as also the Greeks, to leave in writing unto such as should come
after, that Fish was dug out of the whole ground in that Country, which in
deed coming out of the deep Sea thither, and there being killed by such as
babbed for them, was drawn dead out of the foresaid holes.

From thence is the coast of the Sardones, and the little brooks of Thelis and
Thicis, which are very noisome when they rise with any rage of water: and
Ruscinum, a Town of the Romans, and the Uillage Eliberris, which sometime was
a great City, and now is but a slender Monument of great wealth. Then
between the Forelandes of Pyrene, is the Haven of Venus* in a Baye of
salt water, and a place called It may be called Herts-walke.
Ceruaria, which is the end of Gallia.

Of Spain.
The sixth Chapter.
THe Mountain Pyrene, first runs from hence into the Britishe Occean: and
then turning with a front into the main Land, breaks into Spain, and
shutting out the lesser part of it on the right hand, stretches out a long in
one whole ridge, until such time as having passed a long race through all the
Country, it come to those shores that are butting upon the West. Spain it
self (saving where it boundeth upon France,) is environed round about with
the Sea. Where it cleaves unto France, there is it narrowest, then widening
it self by little and little into our Sea and the Occean, and wexing larger
and larger, it runs into the West, and there becomes broadest. It is so
plenteous and fruitful of Men, Horses, Iron, Lead, Brass, Silver and Gold,
that if in any place it be fruitless and unlike it self* for want of water,
yet it bears Flax and A shrub like Broom, whereof they make Cables.
Spart. It is distinguished by three names, one part is called Tarraconensis,
an other Boetica, and the third Lusitania. Nauar, Aragon and Biskay.
Tarraconensis, butting with the one headde thereof against France, and with
the other upon Boetica and Lusitania, thrusts out his sides Southward to our
midland Sea, and Northward to the British Occean. The River Guadiana.
Anas parts Boetica from Lusitania, and therefore The kingdom of Granado.
Boetica looks into both the Seas, that is to say, Westward into the
Athlantish Occean, and Southward into our midland Sea. Portingale, Gallicia,
and castile.
Lusitania lies only against the Occean, that is to wit, with his side into
the North, and with his front into the West.

Of vpland Cities, in Tarraconensis, the famousest in old time were Palenze.
Pallance, and Numance: and now the famousest is Saragossa.
Cae^auragusta: in Lusitania, Emerita: and in Boetica, Astigie Civil.
Ispalis, and Corduba. But if ye go along the Sea coast, next beyond Ceruaria*
is a Rock which thrusts Mount Pyrene into the deep. Then follows the
river Thicis unto Rhoda, and Clodian to Empuries; beyond which, is Jupiters
Mount: the West part whereof, (by reason of the stones that rise with a little
distaunce one above an other like greeces) they call Hanniballes Stayers.
Hanniballes Stayers.


From thence to Terragon.
Tarracon, are the little Towns, of Blanda, Illuro, Betullo, Barsilone.
Barchino, Subur, and Tholobie: and the little brooks of Betulo* next to
Jupiters Mount, and Rubricate, somewhat bigger at the shore, between Subur and
Tholobie. The City Tarraco, is the wealthiest of all that stand upon these
coasts. Above it runs a mean River called Tulcis, and beneath it runs
the great river Iber or Ebro*
Iberus. From thence the Sea windeth it self into the Land, and entering at
the first with great force, is anon after divided into two Bays, with a
Foreland called Ferrar. The first Bay is named Sucron, which is the greater of
both, and receives the Sea at a very large mouth, wexing still narrower the
further it goes. It receives Serabis and Duria, and Sucron, rivers of no
great bigness. It embraces other Cities, but the best known are Valentia,
and that famous Town of Saguntum, renowned both for faithfulness, and for the
miseries it endured. The other Bay following* called Ill^ce, has Alone and
Lucence, and Illice whereof it takes the name.

Heerhence, and from those things that are spoken of already, unto the Marches
of The kingdom of Granado.
Boetica, there is nothing worth the writing, except it be Cartagene.
Carthage, which Hasdruball Captain of the Carthaginens^s builded. On those
coasts are base Towns, which are not worth the naming, but for orders sake:
as Virgie, in the Baye called Virgie Baye: and without it Abdera, Suell, Hexie,
Menoba, Malliqua.
Malaca, Salduba, Lacippo, and Berbefull. Afterward follows the The Streights
of Civil, or the Streightes of Marocke.
opening of the narrow Sea, where the two Mountains, Abyla and Calpe do in
manner join the shores of Europe and Affricke* together, as we said at the
beginning. They are called the Pillars of Hercules, and both of them (but Calpe
more, and in manner wholly) bear foreward into the Sea. The same being
wonderful hollow on that part that is toward the Sun setting, opens
almost his midde side, where into there shuts a Bay, which is almost
altogether passageable as far as it goes, and beyond it is a Cave. In that
Bay, Carteia in times past (as some think) called Tarteslus, and Mellaria
environed with the Sea, a Town which the Phenicians passing out of Affricke
inhabit, (the place where I was borne) together with the Towns of Bello and
Besippo, The place where the Author of this work was borne.
occupy the rest of the coast on that narrow Sea, unto Saint Vincents head.
Iunos Mount. This rising into the West into the Occean with a bowing ridge,
and facing the Forelands of Ampelusia which we told you to be in Affricke, is
the end of Europe toward our Seas.

The Isles of the mid-land Sea.
The seventh Chapter.
THe I Will Cales.
Gades, which meets men when they pass out at the Streightes, puts me in
remembrance, cheefely to speak of the rest of the Isles in our mid-land Sea,
before I proceed to treat of the coast of the Occean, and the uttermost
circuit of the maine Lands, as I promised at the beginning.

There are but few in Maeotis, (for it seems most handsome to begin there)
and yet all of them are not inhabited, for they yield not sufficient
sustenaunce. Heerevpon it comes to pass, that the inhabiters of them, dry the
flesh of great Fishes in the Sun, and braying it into fine powder, use it in
sleede of meal. There are also but f^we in Pontus, Leuke, a very little
Island, situate against the mouth of Boristhenes, is sir named Achille^, Leuce
or Achillea.
because Achilles lies buried there. Not far thence is Aria, Aria.
which being consecrated to Mars, did (as is reported in Fables,) breed
Birds* that cast forth feathers as it had been Darts, and therewith made
great slaughter of such as arrived on that coast. There are six at the mouths
of Ister, of which Peuce Peuce.
is the best known, and the greatest.

Thynnias Thynnias.
facing the borders of the Mariandynes, has a City, which (because the
Bithynians builded it) is called Bithynis. Against the Bosphor of Thrace lie
two little Isles, The Cyanies or Symplegades.
distaunt a small space asunder, sometime believed and reported to have run
together, called Cyanies and Symplegades. In Propontis, Proconesus.
only Proconesus is inhabited. Without Hellespont, the notablest (of such as
lie upon the coast of Asia) are Tenedos, Tenedos.
over against the Foreland of Sigaeum, and such as are situate against the
Foreland of Taurus, whereof I will speak in order as they stand, which were
called Macarons Isles, Macarons Isles.
either because they have a happy air and soil, or else because one Macar
and his Uicegerentes, held them under their dominion.

Upon the coast of Troad is Lesbos, Lesbos.
and in it some time were five Towns, Antissa, Pyrrha, Eressos, Ciraua, and
Mitylene. Upon Ionia, lie Chios, and Samos: Chios and Samos.
upon Caria, Cos: Cos. Rhodes.
upon Lycia, Rhodes: and in each of these Isles, is a City of the same name.
In Rhodes where ere-while three: The Chelidonies.
Lindus, Cami^us, and Ialysus.

The Isles that lie against the head of Taurus, being combersome to sail unto,
are named Ch^lidonies. In the greatest Baie that Asia receives, almost about
the mids thereof lies Cyprus: Cyprus.
which stretching it self from the East into the West, shoots with a
straight ridge between Cilicia and Syria, and is very great, as which
sometime* contained nine Kingdoms. And at this day it bears certain
Cities, whereof the notablest are Salamis, and Paphos, and Palaepaphos, where
the folk of that Country hold opinion, that Venus set first foot a land
out of the Sea. There is a little I Will in Phenicia, I Will Arados.
called Arados, conveyed all in one Town as much as is of it, but plentifully
peopled, because it is lawful for men to dwell, even under other men's roofes.
Canope Canop^.
also is a little one, at the mouth of Nile* called Canopicke. Menelaus
Shipmaister, Canopus, dying there by chance, gave that name to the I Will, and
the I Will gave name to the mouth of Nile, Pharos Pharos.
is now joined with a bridge to Alexandria, but in old time (as is reported
in Homers work) it was disseuered a whole days sailing from that coast. And
if it were so in deed, it may well be coniectured, that Nile has been the
cause of so great alteration: who bringing mudde continually down his
channel (and that cheeflie when he flows) and beating it to the shore,
increases the Lands, and enlarges the plat of them, by growing foreward into
the next shallowes.

In Affricke, against the greater Syrt, is Cuteletos. Cuteletos,
against the Forelandes of the lesser Sy^t, are Meniux, and Cercinna: Meniux
and Cercinna.
against the Baye of Carthage, lie Tarichie, Tarichie and Aegates.
and the Aegates* renowned with the Shipwreck of the Romans. Many mo are
situate against the coaste of Europe.

In the Aegean Sea, near to Thrace, are Thasos, Imbros, Samothrace, Scandille,
Polyegos, Scyathos, Halonesos and Lemnos, Thasos, Imbros, Samothrace, Scandill,
Polyegos, Seyathos, Hole^esos, Lemnos*
where the women in old time are reported to have murdered all the men, and
to have held the Realm alone. Lemnos lies over against the Mountain Athos:
the Bay of Pagasa, faceth ^cyathos, and embraces Cicyneton. Euboea thrusts
out the Forelandes of Geraestos, Eubaea.
and Caphareum, into the South: and Coeneum into the North. It no where bears
any breadth: and where it is narrowest, it is two miles over: but it is long,
and lies against all Baeotia, being disseuered from the shore thereof, with a
very narrow arm of salt water, which they call Euripus, a swift Sea* ebbing
and flowing seven times a day, and as often every night, with so unmeasurable
strong tides, that it disappointeth Ships which have the wind full on their
sails.

There are a few Towns in it, as Hestiaea, Eretria, Pyrrha, Nesos, and
Occhalia: but the wealthiest, are Carystos and Chalcis. In Attis, is Helene
known, ^^e Helene.
for the adultrie of Queen Hellen, and Salamis Salamine.
better known, for the destruction of the Persian Fleet.

About Peloponesus, yet still in the Aegean Sea, are Phitiusa, and Aegina,
Phitiusa, and Aegina.
situate against the shore of Epidaurus. Against Troiezen (among vnrenowmed
things) is Calauria, Calauria.
renowned otherwise with the death of Demosthenes. In the Myrtoan Sea, Cythera*
is Cythera set against Malea, and Theganusa Theganusa.
against Acritas. In the Ionish Sea, are Prote, Hyria, Cephalenia, Neritos,
Same, Zacynthos, Dulychium, Prote, Hyria, Cephalenia, Neritos, Same, Zacynthos,
Dulychium, and Ithaca.
and (which is not to be reckoned among the base sort) Ithaca, most chiefly
renowned with the name of Ulysses. In Epyre, are the Echinades, and the
Strophades, The Echinades and Strophades.
in old time called Plottes. Against the Bay of Ambrace, is Leucadie, and
near unto the Adriatish Sea, Corcyra: and these lie against the Lands of the
Greeks, Leucadie, Corcyra, now called Cortu.
and the Thracians.

But innermore are Nelos, Ol^aros, Aegina, Ca^hon, Ios, Thera, Hyaros,
Hippuris, Donysa, Cianos, Chalcis, Icaria, Pinaria, Nisyros, Lebynthos,
Calydne, and Asine, The Sporades.
and all these (because they lie scattering) are called Sporades. Afthem follow
Sicynus, Cythnos, ^yphnos, S^riphos, Rhene, Paros, Scyros, Tenos, Myconos,
Naxos, Delos, and Andros: The Cyclades.
which (because they stand round, as it were in a cyrcle together) are called
^^clades. Above them in the mid Sea, Candye.
Crete, (furnished sometime with an hundred Cities) sends out into the East
a Foreland called Samon, and into the West an other, called the Rammes-head.
But that is greater then Cyprus, it were like it. The same thereof is blazed
abroad* with many Fables: as the (...) of Europa, the Loves of Pasiphae and of
Ariadne, ^he cruelnesse of Minotaure and his death, the works of Dedalus* and
his flight in the air, and moreover* his arrival and death: but most of all,
for that the inhabiters yet do show the Tomb of Jupiter Jupiters Tomb*
with his name graven therevppon, as an ^uident Monument of his burial there.

Of the Cities therein, the best known are Gnosus, Gortyna, Lyctos, Lycastos,
Holopixos, Phaestos, Cydon, Manethusa, and Dictyn^a. Among the Hills, the same
of Mount Ida excels, because it is said that Jupiter was nourished there.
By the same Hill are Asticle, Naumachos, Zephyre, Crise, Gaudos, The Carpathian
Sea.
and three Towns called all by the one name of Musagories, and Carpathus,
whereof the Carpathian Sea takes his name.

In the Adriatishe Sea, Absoros, Celaduse, Absyrtis, Trucon, Issa, Hydria,
Electrides, black Corcyra, Tragurie, Diomedia, Aestria, Asine, Pharos.
are Absoros, Celaduse, Absyrtis, Issa, Trucon, Hydria, Electrides, black
Corcyra, Tragurie, Diomedia, Aestria, Asine, and an other Pharos lying to
Brundusium as the other did to Alexandria. Sicill (by report) was sometime
maineland, and joined to the Country of Brutia, but afterward it was cut off
by an arm of the Sicilian Sea. Sicill.
The same being narrow and sharp, runs with interchaungeable course, one
while into the Thuscane Sea, and an other while into the Ionish Sea, rough,
cruel, and renowned with the terrible names of Scylla and Charybdis. Scylla is
a Rock, and Charybdis a Sea. both of them perilous, for such as pass by them.

The I Will it self being great, and shooting forth with three headdes three
sundry ways one from on other, The description of Sicill.
makes the shape of the Greek Letter called Delta. That which looks toward
Greece, is named Pachynus: that which looks to Affricke ward, is called
Lilybie: and that which enclineth to Italy, and is direct against Scylla, is
called Pelorus of Pelorus a Ship Master, buried there by Hanniball. For when
Hanniball ^ledde out of his Country, as he was passing at way into Syria,
because that to his sight a far of, the shores seemed to join all in one^ as
if there had been no Sea to pass through, thinking himself to be betrayed by
Pelorus, he killed him. The coast that extends from thence to Pachinus, along
the Ionish Sea, bears these notable things: Messana, Taurominium Catina,
Megaris, ^yracuse, and among these the wonderful Arethusa.

It is a Fountain wherein are seen again, The Fountain Arethusa.
such things as are cast into the River Alpheus, which (as we have said)
sinketh into the Sea-banke of Peloponesus. Whereupon it is believed, that the
said River mingleth not himself with the Sea, but sinking down, carries his
stream in a channel, under Sea and land hither, and here springs up again.

Between Pachynus and Lilybie, are Acragas, Heracle, and Therme. Between
Lilybie and Pelorus, are Panormus and Hymera. Innermore are the Leontines,
Centuripine, Hybla, and many others. Enna Enna.
has the chief fame, for the Temple of Ceres. Of Mountains, the most
renowned is Eryx* E^yx.
for the Temple of Venus builded by Aenaeas* and Aetna* Aetna.
which in old time nourished the Cyclopes, and now burns with continual
fire.

Of the Rivers, Hymera is worthy to be spoken of, A strange running of a
stream.
because that rising in the very heart of the Country, it runs two
contrary ways, and cutting it into two halfes, falls with the one mouth
into the Lybish Sea, and with the other into the Thuscane Sea. About Sicill, in
the narrow Sea of Sicill, is the Island This is supposed to have been called
Ogygia, and Calypsus.
Aeoee, where Calypso is reported to have dwelled. Toward Affricke are Gaulos,
Malta.
Melita, and Cosura: and toward Italy, Galata, and those seven which by common
name and reputation, are called. Aeolus Isles, Aeolus Isles, or Vulcanes Isles.
that is to wit, It is also called Euonymos.
Osteodes, Lipara, Didyme, Phaenicusa, Ericusa, Hiera, and Strongyle, which
burn with continual fire like Aetna. But Pithecusa, Leucothea, Venaria,
Sinonia, Capree, Prochyta, Pontia, Pandataria, Phytonia, and Palmaria, lie
against the side of Italy, on this side the mouth of Tyber. Beyond are
certain little ones, called Dianium, Iaginium, Carbania, Vrgo, Ilua, and
Capraria. Then are there two great ones, divided with the Hetruscan Sea: of
which Corsica, Corsica, called also Cyrnos.
nearer to the shore, being long and slender between the sides, is inhabited
by barbarous people, saving where the Roman Towns, Aleria, and Marian are.

Sardinia, Sardinia.
butting upon the Sea of Affricke, saving that it is narrower Westward than
Eastward, is alike square on all sides, and every where somewhat larger than
Corsica where it is largest. It is fruitful, and of better soil then air:
for as it is fruitful, so is it almost pestilent. In it the auncientest
people, are the Ilians, and the auncientest Cities, are Calaris and Sulchie.

But on the coast of France, there are none worthy to be treated of, save
only the Stechades, The Stechades.
which are spread from the coast of Ligurie, unto Mas^ilia. The Baleards in
Spain, The Isles called Baleares, now called Mallorca and Minorca.
situate against the coast of Tarraconensis, are not far distant one from an
other: and of their bigness they take their agreeable names of Maiorica and
Minorica. In Minorica, are the Castles of Iamno and Mago: and in Maiorica, are
the Roman Towns, Palma and Polentia. The I Will Ebusus, Ebusus, now called Euiza.
being situate directly over, against the Foreland of Ferrara, which is in
the Bay of Sucron, has a City of the same name, only barreine of Corn,
but of other things plentiful, and so clear from all noisome creatures, that
it suffers not so much as those that of wild things are made tame, to breed
and increase, neither can abide them to be brought in.

Of a contrary nature is Colubraria, Colubraria, or Adderland, now called
Cormedera.
whereof it comes to my mind to write. For although it swarm with many
kinds of hurtful Serpents, and be therefore vninhabitable: yet notwithstanding
when men arrive there, if they bring of the earth of Ebusus with them, as many
as are within the precinct* that is strowed about with that earth, are safe
without peril, and the Serpents (which otherwise would adventure to meet
them and assault them) shunning the sight of the dust (or rather some other
secret^ power thereof) fly far of for fear.

The third Book of that worthy Cosmographer, Pomponius Mela, concerning the
situation of the world.
The uttermost shores of Spain.
The first Chapter.
THE coast of our mid-land Sea is already spoken of, The description of the
Occean, and the opinion^ of the ebbing and flowing thereof.
and the Isles that it contains are spoken of also. Now remains that
circuit which (as we have said at the beginning) is environed with the great
Occean, that unmeasurable Sea, which raging with great tides (for they so term
the mouinges thereof) one while flows into the feeldes, and an other while
leaving them a great way bare, flies back, from one to an other
successinelie, and not turning by enterchaungeable course, eft into one and eft
into an other. But when he has powered himself whole together out of the
mids into all shores, as well of Islands as of maine lands, though they be
contrary one against other, he gathers from them again into the mids, and
retireth into himself, rushing forth always with such violence, that he
drives back hudge streams, and either takes the Beasts of the Land unawares,
or else leaves the Beasts of the Sea waterlesse. Neither is it yet certainly
known, whether the world cause it with his panting, and utters out on all
sides about him the water that he had drawn in with his breath, for (as it
seems to the learned sort) the world (...) a living wight: or whether there
be some hollow Caves in the ground* for the ebbing Seas to retire into, and to
lift themselves out again when they are too full: or whether the Moon be the
cause of so great fleetings. This is certain, that according to the rising and
going down of the Moon, the course of the Occean varieth, and keeps not one
ordinary time, but as she mounteth or falls, so we perceive it to go and
come.

When men are come out hither, and pursue those parts that are on the right
hand, the Athlantish Occean, and the coast of the front of Granate.
Boetica, receives them, which lies in manner straight unto the River Anas,
Guadiana.
saving that once or twice it withdraws a little into it self. The Turdules
and Bastule, inhabit it. In the hithermost Bay, is a Haven which they call
Gad^^ Haven, and a Wood which they call* Of wild Oly^fes.
Oleastre. Then on the shore* is the Castle of Ebor, and far from the shore*
is the Roman Town Asta, and without the Baye is the Temple and Altar of Juno.
In the very Sea is the Tomb of Geryon, set rather upon a Rock, then in an
I Will. The River Boetis coming out of the Country of Tarracon, The river
Boetis, now called Guadalquebir.
runs a long while* almost through the middle of this Country, in one
channel as he sprang up at his head. But afterward having made a great Lake.
not far from the Sea, he ryseth double* as it were out of one spring, and
issues out as great in either of them, as he came in single in his own. Then
boweth there an other Baye inward unto the end of the Shore, upon the which
Baye stande^ the little Towns of Olitingie and Onoba.

Beyond the River Anas, Portingale.
Lusitunia (on that side where it looks into the Athlantishe Occean) steppeth
out at the first with a great bulk into the deep, and afterward shrinking
back again, retireth further inward than ^oetica. Where it bears foreward,
it receives the Sea twice into it, and so is divided into three Forelands.
That which is next the River Anas, (because it passes forth from a broad
base, and by little and little grows into a narrow point) is called
Wedge-feeld, or Wedge-land.
Cu^eus Ager. The second, they call Holy Head: and the third, Great Head. In
the Wedge, are M^tylis, Balsa, and Ossobona: In Holy Head, are Lacobriga, and
Hanniballes Haven: and on the Great Head, is Ebora. Between these three Heads,
are the Bays: in the hithermost whereof is Salacia, and in the other is the
City Lisbone.
Vlisippo, and the mouth of the River Tagus, which ingendreth Gold and precious
Stones. From these Forelandes to that part which retired back, is opened a
great winding gap, wherein be the old Turdules, and their Towns: and the
Rivers, Monda and Durius, of which Monda runs out almost through the midst
of the side of the last mentioned Foreland: and Durius sweepeth by the very
root of it. That Front for a while has a direct shore, which afterward making
a little winding, shoots forth anon again, and then shrinking in once or
twice, proceeds right forth with a direct bank unto the Foreland which we
call Now called the Lands end.
Celticke. All this Coast is inhabited by the Celts, from the River Durius, to
the bought of Gronium, and through their borders run the Rivers Auo,
Celandus, Nebis, Minius, and (which bears the name of forgetfulness) Limia.
The bought it self embracing the City Lambriaca, receives the Rivers of
Ie^na and Via. The foremost part of the bought, is inhabited by the
Presamarkes, through whose Country, the Rivers Tamaris and S^rs, having their
heads not far one from an other, do run into the Sea, Tamaris* at the
Haven of Artabrie, and Sars at a Tower renowned with the name of Augustus.

The rest of the Country beyond, is inhabited by the Tamarikes, and Nerians,
who be the last on that coast. For hitherto the shores lie full upon the West:
and from thencefoorth, the Land turns with full side to the North, from the
Celtike Foreland, to the Foreland of Scithia. From this Celtike Foreland, unto
the Biscay.
Cantabers, the Coast is almost right out, saving that there be a few small
Bays and little Forelandes. On that coast, are first the Artabers, and
Ianasum, Celtike Nations, and next them the Asturians. In Artabria, a Bay with
a narrow mouth* receiving the Sea into a large room, bends about by the
City Adrobike, and the mouths of four Rivers: whereof two be but smallie
regarded* even of the dwellers by: and by the other two, the Rivers Mearus and
Narius run into Libunca. On the shore of the Asturians* stands the Town of
Naega: and in a certain Nesse there are three Altars* which they call
Sestians, which are ennobled with the name of Augustus, whereby they ennoble
these Lands also, which were unnoble before.

Nevertheless, from the River which is called Salia, the coast begins to
draw back by little and little, and more and more to streighten the widenes
of Spain, which yet notwithstanding is wide still, gathering the Lands into
so narrow a room, that between the two Seas where Spain butteth upon
France, Spain is narrower by the one half, than where it reaches into the
West. That Coast is held by the Cantabers and Vardules. Among the Cantabers
are diverse people and Rivers, howbeit, whose names can not be uttered by the
mouth of us Romans.

Through those Countries, comes down the Rivers* Salenos, and Saurium: and
through certain people, called the Autrigones, and Origeuiones, comes down
the River Nesua. The River Deua runs by Tritium* Tobolicum, and beyond that,
Magrada passes by Iu^rissa, and Jason. The Vardules being one entyre Nation,
extend from hence to the head of Mount Pyren, and so close up (...) the
Country of Spain.

The uttermost coasts of Gallia.
The second Chapter.
NOw follows the other side of Gallia, whose Coast shouing somewhat forewarde
into the deep, and anon stepping forth, wellneere as much into the open Sea,
as Spain had retired back, bresteth the Lands of Cantabrie, and winding about
with a great circuit, turns his side unto the West. Then turning again to
y^ North, it spreads out with a long and straight coast, unto the banks of
the Rhyne. It is a Land very fruitful, theefelie of grass and corn, and
pleasant to behold for great Forests. Whatsoever kind of seed can away with
n^ cold, the country yields it not every where, neither is there any great
store of hurtful Beasts. The people themselves are proud, superstitious, and
sometime also they have been outrageous: insomuch that they have believed,
that the Sacrificing of men, was the best and acceptablest thing to the Gods.
There remain yet still some remnants of their foreworne cruelty: insomuch,
that although they abstain from utter ^^eaing of men, yet notwithstanding,
they bring them to the Altars, and taste of their blood. Neuerthelater, they
have their kind of eloquence, and teachers of wisdom, whom they call
Druides. These profess themselves to know the greatness and fashion of the
world, the moouinges of the Heaven, and of the Stars, and the will of the
Gods. They teach many things, to the men of chief Nobility in that Nation,
privily and a long time together, even by the space of twenty years, in some
Cave of the earth, or in unseen corners.

One of the things which they teach, is escaped into common knowledge:
namely, that men's souls are everlasting, and live an other life after they
be departed out of their bodies: and that is to the intent, that men should be
the better for the wars. And therefore when they burned or buried their dead,
they sent with them an account of their affairs, agreeable to their state
aforetime when they were alive, yea, and also a demand of the debtes, which
they owed or had owing unto them: yea, and there were some which did willingly
cast themselves into the fyres* where their friends corses were burnt, as
folk that looked to live together with them.

The Country which they inhabit, bears wholly the name of Gallia Comata. Of
Nations, are all comprehended under three chief names, and are limited by
great Rivers. For from Mount Pyren* to the River Geround.
Garumna, is Aquitane, from thence to Seane.
Sequana, dwell the French men.
Celtes: and from thence to the Rheine, inhabit the The people of the Low
Countries, as Braband, Holland, Zealand, Flaunders, etc.
Belgians. Of the Aquitanes, the most renowned are the Auscianes: of the
Celtes, the Heduanes: and of the Belgians, the Treuires. The wealthiest
Cities, are among the Treuires, Augusta: among the Heduanes, Augustodunum: and
the Auscians, Elusaberris. The River of Geround* falling out of Mount Pyren,
runs a long while shallowe* and scarce sayleable, saving when he swells,
by reason of winters rain, or of the melting of the snow. But when he is once
increased* by meeting with the comminges in of the flowing Occean, and carries
both his own waters, and the Occeans also* in their going back again: he
becomes somewhat fulser, and the further he goes, still the wider. At
length, being like a great arm of the Sea, he not only bears ^reat
Ships, but also swelling after the manner of the ^aging Sea, he tosseth the
Sailers, and that very cruelly, if the wind and the tide be one against an
other. In this Sea is an Island called Antros, the which the Inhabitants thereof
do think to hang loose, and to be lift up with the rising of the water,
because that when it seems high, it ouerdreepeth the water, and when the
waves are up to their full, they not only inuiron it as before, but also
ouerpeere it: and the things which at other times would not be seen for the
banks and hills, do then lie open to sight, as from a higher place.

From the going out of Geround, begins the side of the Land that shoots
into the Sea, and lies right over against the coast of Cantabria. The midde
parts thereof are inhabited by sundry sorts of people, bending downward
from the Santons, unto the Osismians. For from thence again, the front of the
shores faceth the North again, and so holds on to the The people of A^toys
and Picardie.
Morines, which are the uttermost people of France. And the Morines have not
any thing that is better ^nowne, then the Haven that is called Calis.
Gessoriacum.

The Rh^in^ falling down from the Alps, makes two Lakes within a little of
his head, namelle, It is called now a days, the lower Lake and Cellar.
Ve^et, and ^t is called Poden-sea, and the Lake of Constance.
Acronie, from thence running a long time whole again, and in one channel, he
is dispearsed asunder again* within a little of the Sea, Howbeit yet
Riuer-lyke still on the left hand, even until he run out into the Sea.

But on the right hand, at the first he is narrow, and like himself: but
afterward, his banks give way, so as he becomes not a River, but a great
Lake, and having filled the feeldes, is called Fl^uo, and embracing an Island of
the same name, he becomes narrower again, and falls like a River again
into the Sea.

Of Germany.
The third Chapter.
FRom henceforth to the Alps, Germany is bounded on the West, with the
Rhyne, on the South, with the Alps themselves, on the East, with the borders
of the Nations of Sarmatia, and on the North, with the Occean Sea. The
Inhabitants are huge of body, and hautie of mind, and according to the
sauadgenesse that is bredde in them, do inure both of them, as well their
minds to battle, as their bodies to the custom of pains taking. In the
greatest cold that is, they go naked, till they grow to man's estate, and
childe-hood is very long among them. The men go clothed in Mandilions, or in
barks of Trees: and be the winter never so sharp, they not only can endure
to swim, but also have a delight in it. They be at war with their next
borderers, and they pick quarrelles to them of pleasure, and not of desire to
reign, or to enlarge the things which they possess, (for they do not
greatly manure the grounds which they have) but to make Countries about them
waste. Force is their Law, insomuch that they be not ashamed even of robbery
and murder: only they be good to Strangers, and merciful to suppliaunts.
They be so hard and careless of their fare, that they feed even upon raw
flesh, either new killed, or softened by kneading it with their hands and
feet, in the skins of the Cattle and wild Beasts themselves, after it is
stiff for cold.

The Land is troublesome with the multitudes of Rivers, combersome with the
multitude of Mountains, and for a great part vntrauelable for Wooddes,
Fennes, and Marshes. Of Fennes and Marshes, the greatest are Su^cia, Mesia,
and Melsiagum. Of Wooddes, the greatest is Herts-wald.
Hercynia. There are some other also that bear name, but as Hercynia is the
greatest, for it is three score days journey over, so is it also the best
known. The highest of the Mountains, are Taurus and Rhetico, saving those
which it is scarcely possible for the tongue of a Roman to utter.

The notablest Rivers, of them that run forth into other Nations, are Danow
or Tonware.
Danubius, and Rhone.
Rhodanus: of them that run into the Rhyne, Maenus, and Lupia: of them that
fall into the Occean, Emse.
Amisius, Weser.
Visurgis, and Albis. Upon the River Albis, is the great gulf called Codanus,
full of Islands, both great and small. The sharp Sea* which is received into
the bosom of those shores, does no where bear any great breadth, nor any
likeness of a Sea, but is shed out wanderinglie and dispearsedlie, after the
likeness of Rivers, by waters that run into it, and oftentimes run clean
through it. Where it beats upon the shores, it is hemmed in with the banks
of Islands not far distant asunder, so as it is every where almost of a like
scantling, narrow, and resembling an arm of the Sea, bowing and bending from
place to place* with a long brew. In it are the Cimbrians, and Theutons, and
beyond them the Some think these to be the Pomeranes, and some, to be Prutenes.
Hermions, which are the uttermost people of Germany.

Of Sarmatia.
The fourth Chapter.
SArmatia being broader innermore, then at the Seas side, is divided from the
former Countries, by the river Visula, from whence it extends back to the
river Danowe.
Ister. The people in their behavior and Armor, resemble much the Parthians.
But as their Country is of sharper air, so be they of fiercer disposition.
They abide not in Cities, no nor in any certain dwelling places: but as
pasturage provoke them, or as the enemy fleeing or pursuing, gives them
cause, so do they ever convey their goods and Cattle with them, dwelling
always in Tents like warriers, free and unbridled, and so immeasurable fierce
and cruel, that even their women go to battle with the men, and to the
intent they may be the fitter for the purpose, as soon as they be borne, their
right pappes are seared, that the hand which is to be put forth to service,
may be the more at liberty to strike, and their breast become the more
manlike. To bend a bow, to hunt, and to ride, are the tasks of Maidens. To
encounter the enemy, is the wages of women grown: insomuch, that not to have
stricken an enemy, is counted a heinous crime, and for their punishment, they
be enjoined to live Maidens still.

Of Scithia.
The fifth Chapter.
FRom thence-foorth, the Sea coasts of Asia, saving where the snow lies
continually, and where the cold is intolerable, are inhabited by the Nations
of Scithia, called almost all by one name, universally Sages. The first upon
the Sea coast of Asia, be the Hyperboreans, furthest North beyond the Riphoean
mountains, under the very North Pole: in which Country the Sun does not
rise and set daily, as it does with us: but it ryseth in the Lenton
equinoctial, and sets not again, till the Harvest equinoctial, by reason
whereof, it is day by the space of six whole months together, and likewise
night, by the space of other six months. The Land is narrow, open to the
Sun, and fruitful: the Inhabiters are most upright dealers, and live both
longer, and more happily than other men. For they enjoying always feastfull
peace, can no skill of war, nor of quarelling, but do buste themselves about
matters of Religion, specially concerning Apollo, the first fruits whereof,
they be reported to have sent to Delos, at the first by certain Uirgins of
theirs, and afterward by their neighbor Nations, delivering them from one to
an other, still further and further, which custom they kept long time, until
at length it was restrained, through default of those Nations. Their dwelling
is in Woods and Forests: and when suffizance, or rather wearines of life
comes upon them, then decking themselves with garlands, they throw
themselves cheerfully headlong into the Sea* from a certain rock, which unto
them is the honourablest burial that can be.

The Caspian Sea breaks into the maine Land, at the first with a narrow and
long gutte like a river, and when it is flowne in after that manner* in a
straight channel, it sheadeth abroad into three Bays: namely, into the
Hircanian* directly against the mouth, into the Scithian on the left hand, and
on the right hand into that which peculiarly, and by the name of the whole, is
called the Caspian Baye. It is altogether rough, cruel, harborlesse, open on
all sides to wind and weather, and more replenished with noisome Beasts, then
other Seas are, and therefore lesss nauigable.

At the right hand as ye enter in, the Scithians sir named Grazyers.
Nomades, possess the Sea shores. Within it to the Caspian Bay, are the
Caspians, and the Amazons, otherwise called Sauromats. At the Hircania^ Bay, be
the Abanes, Mosks, and Hircanians. At the Scithian Bay, be the Amards, and
Pesiks, and at the enteraunce it self, the Derbiks. Many Rivers, both great
and small, do run into that coast: but the famousest is Araxes, which springing
out of the side of Mount Taurus, comes down from the Thunder-hilles in one
channel, and issues out into the Caspian in two. So long as he cutteth
through the feelds of Armenia, he glideth calm and still, so as although ye
look never so wistly upon him, ye cannot discern which way he ^unneth.

But when he comes down into the rougher places, then being pinched in on
either side with Rocks, and the more he is pent becoming the more swift, he
breaks himself against the stones, that lie up in his way, and by reason
thereof, tumbleth down with great flushing and noise, so swiftly, that by
reason of his forcible fall, he slyppeth not plum down to the ground
underneath him, but spowteth a far of without any channel, carrying his
waters aloft more then the space of an acre, and bearing himself up in a
hanging stream without channel, at length comes bowing down again like a
bow, and becoming calm again, passing on quietly, and scarce moving, from
thence into the foresaid Bay.

Cyrus and Cambises, springing out of the foot of the next hill* which is called
Coraxus, run two sundry ways, and passing on a great while through Iberia and
Hyrcania in channels far distaunt, afterward being received into one Lake,
not far from the Sea, they run out into the Hyrcanian Bay, both at one
mouth. Iaxartes and Oxos pass into the Scithian Bay, out of the Countries of
the Sogdianes, from the Desartes of Scithia: Laxartes being great from his
very spring, and Oxo^ becoming greater by the falling of other Rivers into
him, who keeping his course a while from the East into the West, turns aside
first among the Dahanes, and taking his course into the North, opens his
mouth between the Amards, and Pesikes. The Forests of Hyrcanie bring forth
other ouglie beasts, but specially the Tiger, a cruel kind of wild beast,
and so swift, that they be wont even with ease to overtake a horse man* that
is gone away upon the spur, and that not once or twice, but diverse times*
after they have gone back again to the place they came out from. The cause
hereof is, that when the horse men having caught up a whelpe of theirs, makes
haste to carry it away, and to eschew the fury of them, when they come
near, does of policy lay down one of many that he had taken away: the
damme catching up the whelpe that was cast down, carries it home to her
kennel, and coming back again does the like oftentimes, until the robber
have escaped by flight into places of more resort, then the Tigers dare
adventure into. What was beyond the Caspian Bay, was a long time doubtful,
namely, whether the foresaid Occean, or whether some Land incombred with^^^
cold, having neither bound nor end, were cast out beyond it. But besides,
Homer, and the natural Philosophers, who have affirmed the whole world to be
becleeped with the Sea: Cornelius Nepos, though later in time, yet certainer of
credit, reports the same. And for witness thereof, he sciteth Quintus
Metellus the Swift, declaring that he made such a report as this: namely, that
when he had the government of the Galliaze as Proconful there, the King of the
Sweuians sent him certain Indians for a present: and that when he asked by
what means they came into those Countries, he understood that they were brought
away by force of tempest from the sea coast of India, and that having passed
over the space that is betwixt that and Sweueland, at length they arrived upon
the coast of Germany. Now therefore remains the maine Sea: but the residue
of that side is frozen with continual frost, and therefore is uninhabited.

The Islands of Spain, and of the North-partes.
The sixth Chapter.
AGainst the said Coasts which I have glaunced at from the angle of Boetica
hitherto, there lie many vnrenowmed, yea, and also namelesse Isles. But of those
which I am loath to ouerpasse, Gades butteth upon the dery Streightes, and being
cut off from the very firm Land by a narrow space, and as it were but by a
River, carries almost a direct shore, where it is nearest the maine Land.
Where it faceth the Occean, there bolting out with two heads into the deep, it
shrinketh in his mid-shore, in one of the which it bears a wealthy City of
the same name, and in the other a Temple of the Egiptian Hercules, noble for
the builders, for the Religion, for the Antiquity, and for the riches
thereof. The builders thereof were the Tyrians: the holiness of it, grows of
the bones of him that lies buried there: as for the years, what a number is
there of them? The beginning of them, comes from the times of Troy: and
continuance of time, has nourished the wealth.

Against Lusitania, is Erythia, Erythia.
where we read that Geryon dwelt: and other Isles without peculiar names, so
fruitful of soil, that when Corn is once sown, the seed that sheadeth as
they fell the harnest, springs up again from time to time, and yields at
the least, seven croppes one after an other, and sometimes mo. On the Celtishe
coast are some, The Tynn^ Mines.
which (because they abound with Lead and Tin) are called all by one name,
Cassiterides.

Sena, being situate in the Britishe Sea, against the country of the
Osismydes, is renowned with the Oracle of the God of the Galls, whose Uowes in
number nine, are hallowed to continual Uirginitie. They call them Gallicens,
and are of opinion, that through the singular wisdom wherewith they are
endued, they raise the seas and winds with their charms, and transform
themselves into what Beasts they will, and heal such diseases as to others
are incurable, and know things to come, and prophecy of them, but not unto
any other, then such as sail thither for the nonce, and come of set purpose to
demand (...) counsel of them.

What manner of thing Britain is, and what manner of folk it breeds, we
shall shortly be able to make more tried report. For behold, our most
puissaunt Prince is now disclosing of it, which has so long been shut up,
and as a conqueror, not only of unsubdued, but also of unknown Nations
before his time, his bringing home the certeintie of his own exploytes, to be
declared and published in Triumph, in like sort as he endeavored to come to them
by Battle.

Howbeit, as we have hitherto heard of it, The description of Britain, as it
was known in the time of Mela, the Author of this work.
shooting between the North and the West, it faceth the mouth of Rhyne, with a
great Angle, and then withdrwing his shoring sides, butteth with the one of
them upon France, and with the other upon Germany. Afterward being pulled
back, with a continual bank of a direct shore, it sharpeneth it self again
into diverse Angles, and is three cornered very like Sicilie, plain, great,
and fruitful: howbeit, of such things as are rather for the food of Cattle,
than for the sustenaunce of men. It bears Wooddes, Forests, and very great
Rivers, which ebb and flow after the manner of the Sea, whereof some breed
Pearls, and precious Stones.

It bears Nations, and Kings of Nations, but they are all uncivil, and the
further they be from the main Land, so much the more unacquainted with the
wealth of other Nations: only rich of Cattle and Land: and (whether it be for
to beautifle themselves; or for some other purpose) they be stained all their
bodies over. They seek occasion of war, and pick quarrels one with an other
from time to time, specially, for desire of sovereignty, and to enlarge those
things which they possess. The fashion of armed Chariorts, which the Brittons
used in Battle.
They fight not only on horseback and on foot, but also in Wagons and
Chariottes, and are armed after the manner of the Galls. They call those
Chariots Couines, which are set with sithes round about the naues.

Above Britain is Ireland, almost of like space, Ireland.
but on both sides equal, with shores e^elong, of an evil air to ^ypen
things that are sown, but so abundant of grass, which is not only rank,
but also sweet, that the Cattle may in a small part of the day, fill
themselves, and if they be not kept from feeding, they burst with grazing
ouer-long.

The Inhabiters thereof are unnurtured, and ignorant of all virtues, more then
other Nations, but yet have they some knowledge, howbeit altogether void of
godliness. There are thirty Islands, The Isles of Orkenay.
called Orchades, disseuered with narrow spaces, one from an other. There are
seven also called Hemodes, scattered against Germany, in that gulf which we
called Codan. Of these, like as Codanonia, which the Theutons inhabit to this
day, exceeds the rest in bigness, so also it excels them in
fruitfulness. Those that lie against Sarmatia, by reason of the
interchaungeable coming and going of the Sea, and because the space that is
betwixt them, is sometimes covered with water, and sometimes left bare, seem
one while to be Islands, and an other while all one with the maine Land.
Moreover, that in them are Oones, Oones.
which feed only upon eggs, of water-fowles, and Oten cakes: and the
Hyppopodes, Hippopodes.
with feet like Horses: and the Satmales, Satmales.
which have sowsing ears, so side and large, that they are able to wrappe in
their whole bodies, and serve them to cloth them with, being otherwise naked:
besides that, it is reported in Fables, I find it also in such Authors, as I
am not ashamed to follow. Iseland.
Thule is situate against the Coast of the Belgies, renowned in the Poetries,
both of the Greeks and of us. In it, because the Sun rises and sets
far of, the nights are very short: in Winter-season dark, as in other
places, and in Summer lightsome, because at that time the Sun mounting
somewhat high, although he be not seen, yet sheadeth a glimmering light into
the parts near where he goes. But in the heart of Summer, there is no night
at all, because at that time being nearer sight, he shows not only a
brightness, but also the greate^t part of himself.

Talga, in the Caspian Sea, being plentiful without tyllage, has abundance
of Corue and all fruits: howbeit, the people near aboutes, think it
unlawful, and as ill as Church-robbing, to touch any of the things that grow
there, for they think they are prepared for the Gods, and that they are to
be spared for the Gods. Also, against those coasts which we said to be
Desert, ly^ some Islands that are Desert likewise, which being namelesse of
themselves, are called the Scithish Isles. From these the Coast turns again
into the East, and extends to the Coast that beholds the Sun rising. This
from the Scithish Foreland, lying directly against the same side, first is
altogether vntrauelable for snow, and afterward for sauadgenesse of the
Inhabiters, unhusbanded.

The Eaters of man^ flesh.
Anthropophages and Sages, and Scithians, disseuered with a Country which is a
wilderness, by reason it swarmeth with wild Beasts. Beyond again be waste
grounds, annoyed with Beasts, unto the Foreland of Tabis, which hangs into
the Sea: far from thence ryseth Mount Taurus in height. Between them, are
the Seres, a Nation full of upright dealing, as appears by the exchange of
wares. that they make by leaving of their things in the wilderness, and going
their way.

Of India.
The seventh Chapter.
INdia, a Country right famous, which butteth not only upon the East
Occean, but also upon the Southern, which we have called the Indishe Occean,
and on the West, is bounded with the ridges of Mount Taurus, occupies as much
space along the Sea coast, as a Ship with full Sails, may pass in three
score days, and as many nights.

It is so far distaunt from our Countries, that in some part thereof, none of
both the North ways appear, and contrariwise to other Regions, the shadows
of things fall into the South. Howbeit, it is fruitful, and replenished with
sundry sorts of men and beasts. Ants as big as Mastiues.
It breeds Antes, full as big as the greatest sort of Mastiues, which after
the manner of Gryffons, are reported to keep Gold dug out of the innermore
parts of the earth, and to put them in danger of their lives, that dare
adventure to touch it.

Also, Hage Serpents.
there be some so unmeasurable great Serpents, that they overthrow
Elephantes, with biting them, and with winding their tails about them. In some
places, the Soil is so fat and fruitful, Hunny, Cotton and Reeds.
that Hunny droppeth from the leaves of Trees, Wooddes bear Wool, and the
Reeds being cl^aued in the mids, make Boats between knot and knot, able to
carry two men a piece, and some three men.

Of the Inhabiters, the Apparel and manners are diverse. Some are clad in
lynnen, The manners and apparel of the ancient Indians,
or with the wool aforesaid, some with the skins of Beasts and Birds:
some go naked: some hide only their privy members: some are low of stature
and small: othersome are so tall and hudge of body, that they take the backs
of Elephantes, and ride upon them as easily and handsomelie, as we do upon
our Horses, and yet the Elephantes are very great and large there.

Some think it good to kill no living thing, nor to eat any flesh. Some live
only by Fish: some kill their neighbors and parents, in manner of
Sacrifice, before they pine away with age and sickness, and think it not
only lawful, but also godly, to eat the bowelles of them when they have
killed them. But if they be attached with old age or sickness, they get them
out of all company into the Wilderness, and there without sorrowing for the
matter, abide the end of their life.

The wiser sort of them, which are trained up in the profession and study of
wisdom, ^^^ger not for death, but hasten it, by throwing themselves into the
fire, which is counted a glory.

Of the Cities which they inhabit (which are very many, Nysa and mou^^ Meros.
) the famousest and greatest is Nysa: and of the Mountains, Meros, (which is
hallowed unto Iup^^er) has the thief renown. Nysa, because Bacchus is
supposed to have been borne in it, and Meros, because Bacchus was supposed to
have been fostered in the Cave thereof. Whervppon, either good grounded
matter, or else vain report was ministered to the Greek Authors, to say that
Bacchus was sowed in Jupiters thigh.

From the River Indus, to the River Ganges, the Palibotranes inhabit all the
coast. From Ganges, to the Foreland of Iolis, dwell the Nysians, where the
heat is more fervent, then that it may be inhabited, there do dwell Nations
swart, and in manner all one with the Ethyopians. from Iolis to Cudum, the
shores are straight, and the people fearful, and weltering in riches of the
Salt Water.

There is a Foreland called Tamos, which Mount Taurus rayseth: it is the Angle
of an other part, and the beginning of the side toward the South. There are the
Rivers of Ganges and Indus. The greatness of the River Ganges.
Ganges springing out of many heads in Haemodes, a Mountain of Inde, as soon
as he comes in one channel, becomes of all Rivers the greatest: and being
in some place broader, where he runs narrowest, he is ten miles over, and
dispearseth himself into seven coasts.

Indus rising out of the Mountain Paropamisus, The River Indus
recey^eth into it other Rivers also, whereof the noblest are Cophes, Acesines,
and Hydaspes, and in broad channel, carries the water that he has received
out of many streams. Henceforth he almost matcheth Ganges in bigness.
Afterward, when he has gyrded the hill oftentimes with many great windlasses.
He comes down again hudge, straight, and in one channel, until at length
splitting himself to the right hand and to the left, he empties himself at
two mouths, far distaunt one from an other.

At Tamos, is an I Will called Gold-land.
Chryse: and at Ganges an other called Syluer-land.
A^gyre. The soil of the one is Gold (so have ancient Authors reported,) and
the soil of the other Silver: and so it comes to pass, of most likelihoodde,
that either the names of them are given them of the thing, or else the Fable is
forged of their names.

Taprobane, Taprobane.
is reported of Hypparchus, to be either some very great Island, or else the
hithermost part of the other world. But for as much as it is inhabited, and no
man by report is near about it, it shoots near the truth. On the contrary
part, The Gates of the Sun.
there are the mouths, called the Gates of the Sun, so vninhabitable, that
as soon as men enter into them, the outrageous heat of the caulme air,
smothereth them by and by.

Between the mouths, lies a scattered country, somewhere void of
inhabitaunts, by reason of the intolerable heat. From thence to the entrance
of the red Sea, lies a way-lesse and Desert ground, more like ashes then
duste, and therefore there run out of it very few streams, and those not
great, whereof we hear say, the notablest are Tubero, and Arusaces. The
Greeks (whether it be because it is of that color, or because one Erythras
reigned there,) The red Sea.
call the red Sea, Erythran Thalassan. It is a stormy, rough, and deep
water, and nourishes hudge beasts, more then all other Seas.

At the first, it beats euenlie upon the uttermost banks of the earth giving
way, and if it entered not somewhat inner, it were but some broad Bay. But
where it had bowed the banks, it breaks twice in, and opens again two
other gulfes, whereof that which is nearer to the foresaid Countries, is
called the Persian gulf, and the further is called the Arabishe gulf.

Of the Persian gulf.
The eight Chapter.
The gulf of Persia, where it takes in the Sea, comprehends a great mouth,
with straight jaws on both sides, in likeness of a neck: and then the Land
(which every way shrinketh in a great space, and every where a like)
enuironeth the Salt Water within the compass of a great round shore, and
makes the likeness of a man's head.

The mouth of the Arabishe gulf is narrower, and the breadth lesser, but the
retreit is somewhat bigger, and the sides much longer. It runs far into
the maine Land, until it attain almost unto Egypt and Mount Casius of Arabia,
wexing less and less wide into a point, and the further it pearceth, the
narrower.

From these said things to the gulf of Persia, all is wilderness,
Shelfish-eaters.
saving where the Chelonophagies do dwell. In it, on the right hand as men
sail, are situate the Carmanians, Carmania, now called Rasigut.
without Apparel, without Corn, without Cattle, and without houses, who
cloth themselves with Fishes skins, and feed on their ^^eshe, and are rough
all their bodies over, save their heads. The inner parts are inhabited by the
Gedrosians, and forth on by the Persians. Through Carmania runs Cethis, and
above them run Andanis and Corios, into the Sea.

In that part, that is over against the mouth of the Sea, are the bounds of
the Babylonians, and Chaldyes, and two noble Rivers, Tygris Tygris.
near unto Persia, and Euphrates^ Euphrates.
further of. Look how Tygris springs, so runs he all the way to the Sea
coast. Euphrates, opening an exceeding wide mouth, does not only pass
forth, from whence he ryseth, but also falls mainlie: neither does he by
and by cut through the feeldes, from place to place as he goes, but spreading
wide into Pooles, and becoming slow with long settled waters abroad without
Channel, afterward when he has broken out of his brimme, becomes a River in
deed, and purchasing banks, runs swift and fomie Westward through the
Armenians and Capadocians, as though he would come into our Seas if Mount
Tau^us let him not. From thence he is turned of to the South, and entering
first into Syria, and afterward into Arabia, holds not out into the Sea, but
one while being great and able to bear Ships, and anon after becoming
lanke, dies a pelting Brook, and no where runs out again with issue to be
seen, as other Rivers do, but soketh away into the ground. The other side is
environed with a Country shooting forth between both the Seas, named
Arabia, Arabia.
and surnamed the Happi. It is but narrow howbeit most plentiful of Cinnamon,
Frankincence and other Spices. The Sabaeans The Sabaeans.
possess the greater part thereof next unto the mouth, and the Maces the part
over against the Carmanians. That which lies between the mouths is roughe
with Woods and cragged Cliffes. In the mids are certain Isles of which Ogiris
is more famous then the rest, because the Tumbe of King Erithras is in it.

The gulf of Arabia.
The ninth Chapter.
THe other Gulf is enclosed round about by the Arabians. On that side which is
on the right hand as men enter in, are the Cities Carre, Arabia, and Gaudam.
On the otherside in the innermost Angle are, first Beronice between
Heroopoliticum and Strobilum: next Philoteris and Ptolemais, between the
promontories Merouenon and Colaca: beyond them, Arsino^ and another Beronice:
then the Forest that bears the Wood Ebonie, and the spices, and a River made
by man's hand, and therefore to be spoken of, because that being drawn by a
Dich from the River Nile without the Gulf. (Howbeit bending, and as no part at
all of the red Sea) it is annoyed with beasts, and by that means desert also.
Part hereof is inhabited by the Candanes, which people (because they feed upon
Serpents, are named Ophiophagies. Serpent eaters.
Innermore were the Pigmies a kind of Dwarfes, The Pigmies.
which were destroyed in a battle that was fought against the Cranes for their
Corn that was sown. There be many kinds of wild fowls, and many kinds of
Serpents. Winged Serpents.
Of Serpents the worthiest to be had in remembrance, are those which being
very little (and whose stinginge is present death,) are reported to come forth
of the mudde of the frozen Fennes at a certain time of the year, and from
thence flying in flocks toward Aegipt, are in the enteraunce thereof
incountered with another flock of Birds called Ibisles, which fight with them
and destroy them. Of Birds the worthiest to be spoken of is the Phoenix, The
Phoenix.
which is evermore but one alone: for it is not conceived by treadinge or
disclosed by hatching. But when he has continued the full time of five hundred
years, he brooth himself upon a Neste that he has timbered of diverse
spyces, and there wastes away. Afterward growing again of the matter of his
rotting flesh, he conceiueth himself and breeds of himself again. When he
comm^th to be full fledge he carries the bones of his old body wrapped in
mirre into Egypt, This City is called Heliople.
and there in the City which they call by the name of the Sun, he lays
them upon a Herce of sweet smelling Nardus, and consecrateth them with
honorable Funeralles, The Foreland, wherewith that Sea is enclosed, has no
way to it from the These are not the same that were spoken of heretofore in
Europe, but others in Ethyope.
Ceraunish Hills.

Of Ethyope.
The tenth Chapter.
BEyond them dwell the Ethyopians. The Meriones have the Land which Nylus
embraces about, in the first windlasse that he fetches, where he makes an
Island. Some of them (because they live half as long again almost as we do)
are called Macrobians: and some of them (because they came out of Egypt) are
named Automales.

They are beautiful of personage, The goodlinesse of the Inhabiters of Meroe,
and of their customs.
straight bodied, and somewhat more honorable of countenance, then other men,
as the followers of most excellent virtues. It is a custom among them, to
choose him that they will obey, by his beauty and strength. Among them is more
Gold then among the Persians, and therefore they count that to be the
preciouser* whereof they have the less store. They make their ornaments of
Brass, and their fetters for offenders of Gold. There is a place continually
furnished with meats ready dressed to eat, and because every man may eat
thereof at his pleasure, they call it the Table of the Sun, The Table of the
Sun.
and they affirm that such things as are set there in Messes, do come
thither by the providence of God.

There is a Lake, A s^raunge Lake.
with the water whereof* if men wash themselves, their bodies become as crispe
and shining as if they were anointed with Oil. Yet is the same droonke also:
and it is so sheere, and so weak to bear up things that fall into it or are
borken into it, that it is not able to bear up the leaves that fall from the
Trees about, but that by and by they sincke down to the very bottom. There are
also most cruel beasts, Strange beasts.
as Licaons spotted with all kind of colors, and Sphinxes in such sort as we
have read of them. There are also wonderful Birds, Strange Birds.
as Tragopomones which have horns, and Pegasies which have ears like horses.
But as men sail along the coasts into the Eastward, they meet with nothing
worth remembrance, all is wast, all is full of steep cliffes, and there are
rather banks then shores. From thence is a great Coast inhabited. It was a
doubtful matter a good while, whether there were a Sea beyond, and whether the
land might be coasted about, or whether Affricke being altogether void of
fruit, extended so far as that there were none end of it. But Hanno of
Carthage being sent by his countrime^ to search the coasts, The voyage of
Hanno Captain of Carthage about the coast of Affricke.
when he had passed out at the mouth of the Ocean, saylinge about a great part
thereof, reported that he wanted not Sea room, but victual. And in the time
of our graundfathers, one Eudoxus fleeing from Latirus King of Alexandria,
passed out of the gulf of Arabia, and (as Nepos affirms) was brought by this
Sea even unto the Gads, The Journey of Eudoxus.
by means whereof some things of that coast are come to knowledge. Beyond
those places which we said even now to be desert, Speechless people.
there are dumb people which use signs in steed of speech. Some have no
sound of tongue: some have no tongue at al: some have their lips growing
together, saving that they have little round pipeholes in their Nosethrilles
at which they suck in drink: and when they have list to eat, they are
reported to draw in one grain of Corn at once, which grows every where.
There are people towhom (before ye coming of Eudoxus) fire was so unknown,
People unacquainted with fire.
that they were wonderfully delighted with the use thereof, and gladly embraced
the flames and put burning coals in their bosoms, until such time as they
felt it hurt them. Above them the shore fetching a great compass, encloseth a
great I Will, wherein are reported to be none but women, heary over al their
bodies, which of their own nature bear children without the company of men:
A strange kind of Women.
and they be of so f^erce and boystous kind, that some of them can scarce be
restrained from struggling, no not even with chains.

This report was made by Hanno, and because he brought home the skins of some
that he had killed: he was the beter believed. Beyond this gulf is a high
Hill called of the Greeks Gods Chariot, A Hill called Gods Chariot.
which burns with continual fire. Beyond this mountain is another Hill with
a long ridge fresh and green, lying all along the Sea side, from whence is a
prospect into a Champion Country of much more wideness, then that a man may
see to the end of it. The opinion of the Pannes and Satires Pannes and Satires.
took credit herevppon, for that whereas in this quarters, there is nothing
tilled or husbanded, no place for men to dwell in, nor print of man's foot, but
a day times waste solitariness, and therewithal more waste silence: in the
night time there appear^ many blasing ^ires, and as it were Camps pitched
far abrod, with noise of Trumpets and Dromes, and Shalmes, which are heard
much louder then those that men use.

Then again are the Aethiopians, The Western Aethiopians.
not rich as those we spoke of heretofore, nor like them in bodies, but
lesser, unnurtured, and called by the name of Western Aethiopians* In the
Country of these men is a fountain supposed of some to be the head of Nile.
The head of Nilus.
The inhabiters call it Muchull, and it may seem to be all one name with
Nilus, though more corruptly pronounced of the barbarous pople. It nourishes a
River also, which breeds the same kinds of beasts that Nile does, though
somewhat lesser: whereas all other run toward the Ocean, this only River
goes into the heart of the land toward the East, and no man can say where his
issue is.

Hereupon it is coniect^red, that Nilus being conceived in this spring, and
carried forth a while through wailess^ places, and therefore unknown where he
becomes, shows himself again when he has proceeded into the East: but by
means of being hidden so long, it comes to pass, that men think that this
fountain runs to some other place then to Nile, and that Nile springs
from some other head then from this fountain. Among them is bred a beast of no
great bigness, but having a great and ouergreat beetle head, and therefore
hanging his muzell (for the most part) always downward to the ground, called
a Catoblepe, The beast called Catoblepe.
worthy to be entreated of for his singular power. For whereas by stinging or
bitinge he is able to do no harm at all, yet to behold his eyes is present
death. Over against them are the Isles Gorgones, The Gorgon Ile^
sometime (by report) the dwelling place of the Gorgones. The maine land it
self takes his end at a promontorie, called Hesperionkeras. The Western^
horn


The coast and Islands of the Athlantishe Ocean.
The eleventh Chapter.
FRom thence begins that same front which shoreth toward the West, and is
beaten upon with the Athlantish Ocean. The first part thereof is inhabited by
the Aethiopians, the middle by no body, for either the Countries are burnt up
with heat, or overwhelmed with sand, or annoyed with Serpents. Against the
scorched Countries lie the Islands where the Hesperides The Isles of the
Hesperides.
are reporto have dwelled. In the sandy Countries is a Hill rising very high
of it self, which is steep down on all sides with ragged cliffes, not
possible to be traueled over, and taper-shape^ up to the top. The which
because it reaches higher then a man can see, even unto the clouds, it is
said not only to touch the Sky and the Stars with his top: (...)

A Table containing the Contents of this Book.
The first Book.
THe division of the world into four parts. Cap. 1, fol, ^ A brief
description of Asia. Cap. 2. fo, 4 A brief description of Europe. Cap, 3, fol,
6. A brief description of Affricke. Cap. 4. fol. 7.
A particular description of Affricke.
Of Mauritania, Cap, 5, fol, 9 Of Numidia. Cap, 6, fol, 10 The lesser Affricke.
Cap, 7, fol, 11 Of Cirenai^a. Cap, 8, fol, 13
A particular description of Asia.
Of Egypt. Cap, 9, fol, 16 Of Arabia. Cap, 10, fol, 20 Of Siria. Cap, 11, fol,
20 Of Phoenicia. Cap, 12, fol, 21 Of Cilicia. Cap, 13, fol, 22 Of Pamphilia.
Cap, 14, fol, 24 Of Lycia. Cap, 15, fol, 25 Of Caria. Cap, 16, fol, 25 Of
Ionia. Cap. 17, fol* 26 Of A^olis. Cap, 18, fol, 28 Of Bithynia. Cap* 19, fol,
30 Of Paphlagonia. Cap, 20, fol, 3^ Of the Chalybies. Cap, 21, fol, 32
The second Book.
Of Scithia, of Europe. Cap, 1, fol, 35 Of Thrace. Cap, 2, fol, 40 Of
Macedonia. Cap, 3, fol, 44 Of Italy. Cap, 4, fol, 50 Of the Province of
Narbon* Cap, 5, fol, 53 Of Spain. Cap, 6. fol, 56 The Isles of the mid-land
Sea. Cap, 7, fol, 58
The third Book.
The uttermost shores of Spain. Cap, 1, fol, 65 The uttermost coasts of
Gallia^, Cap, 2, fol, 69 Of Germany. Cap, 3, fol, 72 Of Sarmatia. Cap, 4, fol,
73 Of Scithia, Cap, 5, fol, 74 The Islands of Spain, and of the North-partes.
Cap, 6, fol. 77 Of India. Cap 7. fol, 81 Of the Persian gulf. Cap. 8. fol. 85
The gulf of Arabia. Cap. 9. fol. 87 Of Ethiope. Cap. 10, fol. 88 The coast and
Islands of the Athlantish Oce^n. Cap. 11. fol. 9^*
FINIS.

