Of two VVoonderful Popish Monsters, to wit, Of a Popish Ass which was found
at Rome in the river of Tyber, and of a Moonkish Calfe, calued at Friberge in
Misne. Which are the very foreshewings and tokens of Gods wrath, against
blind, obstinate, and monstrous Papists. Witnessed, and declared, the one by
Philip Melancthon, the other by Martyn Luther.

Translated out of French into English by John Brook of Assh, next Sandwich.

These books are to be sold in Powles Churchyard at the sign of the Parat.

JOHN BROOK Unto the Christian Reader.
AMong all the things that are to be seen under the heavens (good Christian
Reader) there is nothing can stir up the mind of man, and which can engender
more fere unto the creatures then the horrible Monsters, which are brought
forth daily contrary unto the works of Nature. The which the most times do
note and demonstrate unto us the Ire and wrath of God, against us for our
sins and wickedness, that we have and do daily commit against him. But man's
heart is so hardened that those his threatenings and foreshewings are rejected
as though they were but fables. Therefore many times the Elements have been and
be the heralds and executors of Gods Justice, as we do read in the viij.
chapter of Genesis, Genes, 8
that the waters ouerflowed the top of the highest mountain. xv. cubits,
and drowned all the world except viij. persons. The fire in like manner as we
do read in the xix. chapter of Genesis consumed and burned Genes. 19
the City of Sodoma and Gomorra. Also the earth as we may read in the xvi.
chap. of Numeri opened her mouth Number. 16
and swallowed up Chorah, Dathan, and Abiron. Besides an infinite number of
examples more, which are to be seen in the holy Scripture, and all was done
for the wickedness and sins of the people. Therefore the rather to move the
hearts of every good christian to fear and tremble at the sight of such
prodigious monsters, I have taken upon me to translate out of French into our
English tongue these two monsters, the one of a Popish Asle which was found at
Rome in the year of our Lord. 1496. And the other of a Moonkish Calfe, calued
at Friberge in the year 1528.

And the willinglyer for that Philip Melancthon and Martyn Luther two godly and
learned men, have interpreted upon these two Monsters, who were of such
authority and credit, that we must not think that they be forged and
invented. Signifiyng that these two Monsters may well be compared unto the Pope
and his rablement of Cardinals, Abbottes, Bishops, Priests, Canons, Moonks and
Friars, as Gods messengers, to give warning unto them that Gods wrath is ready
at hand to destroy both him and his kingdom, with his whole rabble of
Cardinals, Moonks and shauelings, disguising themselves so against nature, as
these two Mo^sters were. For Satan is a wyly Fox seeking all the means
possible through his subtle practices, to seduce and keep still in ignorance
and error, all Christendom. Therefore let us way diligently these his
wondrous works, and repent in time from the bottom of our hearts of our
sins, and desire him to be merciful unto us, and ever to keep and defend us
from such horrible Monsters.

AMEN.
JOHN CRESPIN UNTO ALL which fear the Lord.
THere has now been a long time sithe^ce God does advertise men of their
impieties diversely.
God has not ceased to teach and give aduertisme^ts after diverse sorts and
fashions, to draw men from their impieties and detestable conuersations, and
yet nevertheless the ingratitude of the world is so great, that nothing
follows but a hardening of heart more then obstinate. The Lord threatens, and
his threatenings are rejected as if they were but fables. He sets forth
monstrous and fearful figures, The ungrateful men despise the meruailes of God.
which were enough to make the Devils themselves afraid: And men do see them
and let them pass, as if they touched them nothing at all. Furthermore, he
declares effectually that he threatens not in vain. He declares by terrible
judgments, that he cannot suffer the contempt of his aduertisments: Howbeit,
men have their senses altogether dull in regard of that: And of a thousand,
sca^tly there are twain which will open their eyes to consider and behold the
wonders of the Lord, and to amend their lives thereby. Behold two monstrous
figures which are set before us: And the two most excelent men, to wit, Philip
Melancthon and Martin Luther, who have interpreted them, are of sufficient
authority to make men to understand, that those monsters are not forged and
invented fantasies. The first is a general witness of the horrible vengeance
of God over every The signification of the first Monster.
kingdom that exalts it self by cruelty and tyranny above the spiritual
jurisdiction of the son of God. And because that this tyranny is more lively
set forth by the dominatio^ of the Pope, the^ by any other, even so this
threatening is referred chiefly unto that Romish Antechrist whom we do see at
this day, yea, in his latter age far out of modesty, that he sets all The
Pope that ^now.
the world together by the ears. Who after that he has showed his scales
upon his back, and feared them with his claws, feet, nails and talons,
cannot choose but cause that his Asses nose may be seen, and uncover his
whoorish breast and belly, without all shame. The ingratitude of men have well
deserved to fall into that brutishness: They see the belly of a whore naked,
and yet nevertheless this is their own God, whom they fear and worship, and
unto whom they do homage, with their kings, Lords, and Emperors. Now for as
much as the Moonkes are the principal proppes of that drunken and enchaunting
harlot, The figure of the second Monster.
very fit is happened this other monster, in the likeness of a Monkish
Calfe, having on him a cool, who will play his part as well as the Popish
Ass. Giving all men to understand what sanctity has chiefly blinded the
eyes of the world: to wit, the holiness of a disguised frocke and habit. If
all that which the cool touches be holy, wherefore then shall The holiness of
the frocke or cool.
not this enfrocked Calfe be holy, as well as any reverent Moonke that ever
has been in the world? And if in taking away the cool or frocke, the Calfe
remains but a Calfe, what shall the Moonke remain, when his frocke and cool
shall be taken from him, but that he is a Moonke for every man's porredge pot? But
this it is, so long as the Devil shall be Prince of the world, the world shall
have always their eyes blinded. But as for us we do fear such
aduertisementes of God, let us consider diligently his wondrous works, and
prevent the effects of his judgments through true repentance.

THE POVRTRAYTVRE OR SHOW of a wonderful Monster which was found at Rome, in
the year of our Lord, 1496.
A DECLARATION of the Monstrous figure of a Popish Ass, which was found at
Rome in the River of Tiber, In the year of our Lord God, 1496.
By Philip Melancthon.
GOD at all times does lively represent Wherefore god does send Monsters.
by certain tokens and after a wonderful sort, either his wrath or (...): And
ch^efely the (...) chaunges, the encreasinges (...) of Kingdoms and Empires:
As we may see in Daniel Daniel.
the eight, where after the fourth Monarch, the kingdom of Antechrist is also
foreshewed: to the end that all true faithful men and Christians should be
admonished in good time, and should take heed of his trumperies and deceites,
and of his Idolatryes, and execrable blasphemies, and of all his divine
service: the which he has so greatly, and with such craft under the show and
appearaunce of truth valued, that it is to be feared least that the elect and
faithful be deceived and wrapped in his errors, as Jesus Christ says, Matthew
Chapt 24. Mat. 24.


Even so then God has declared great meruailes and many monsterous tokens and
signs duringe that Many monstrous signs (...)
barberous and pernicious domination. And now he has set forth this
horrible figure of this popish Ass* which was found dead at Rome in the
river of Tyber, in the y^^^e of (...) thousand ^^^re hundredth four score and
si^teene: And in the same he represents and sets out so properlye, (...)
so opensye, and cleerelye, the manner of the Popes kingdom, that it seems
that man's industrye or cunninge could not make nor set out one such figure*
Wherefore we must confess that God himself has set forth this abhominnable
Popedom under one such figure, for to make it to be beheld and seen of men.

Truly this is not a figure which is for to signify and declare any grace or
favor: But it is a witness of a ^^^tible wrath^ by the which GOD declares
his ho^t^^le indignation to this (...) call does ^^ation of the Pope, for (...)
does not only (...) chaste figure, but also (...) ^isshapen members (...)

First of all, the head of the Ass is a description The head of the Ass. The
Church is a spiritual body and kingdom.
of the Pope* For the Church is a spiritual body and kingdom, assembled
together in spirit. And therefore it cannot nor ought not to have a man's
head, nor a visible Lord. But only the LORD JESUS, which forms the hearts
inwardlye, by the holy Ghost by faith, keeps, renews, and governs them as
Lord and head. Contrary unto these things the Pope has made himself the
visible and outward head of the Church: And for that cause the Pope is
signified by the head of this Ass, joined with a man's body. For as it is
not seemly that a man's body should have an Asses head: even so is it
altogether vnsmelye that the Pope of Rome should be the head of the Church.

For the holy Scriptures do understand by the What ye Ass does signify in
the holy Scripturt.
Ass, the external and carnal life, and the Elements of the world: As in
the thirteenth Chapter of Exodus. And as much difference as there is between
the brain of an Ass and the reason and wit of a man, so much difference
there is between the doctrine and ordinances of the Pope, and the Doctrine
and instruction of the son of God.

For in the Popes kingdom there is nothing but man's traditions and
ordinances which bear authority* by the which he has enlarged his
lymittes and boudes, and has exalted himself in dignity: These are the
rocks upon which he is builded. But as soon as he should hear the word
of Jesus Christ to sound, and that he should suffer that (...) preached, he
shall sodothelye come to (...) this is the cause wherefore always he (...) so
much the Counsels.

But although it be not compared to the word of God and the holy Scriptures,
but only to the natural equity and light of man's reason: we shall find
that his brain is the brain of an Ass.

The which the Canonistes themselves do witness, settinge forth this
matter, that a mere Canonist A Canonist is an Ass.
is a very Ass and a beast. Their books do confirm the same so clearly and
playnelye, that he which shall know them, will not ask, what is he whom
they call Ass. For a Canonist is he which has studied in decrees, or in the
right Canon, the Popes Scholar, having the Pope for his Schoolmaster.

Secondly, the right hand like unto the foot of The right hand
an Elephaunt, signifies the spiritual government of the Pope, by the which
he amazeth and fears all the weak and fearful consciences And ^n very
deed, he hurts and kills an influit number of souls, through so many
decrees and intolerable ordinances that he makes: by the which he
charge, tormenteth, and casts down the poor consciences, with sins and
terrible a^guishes, without any necessity or ^e^asion. As the Elephaunt which
is a beast very great and marvelous to behold, which destroys, treads
down, and breaks all that that he can lay foot upon.

For what is the spiritual kingdom of the The spiritual kingdom of the Pope.
Pope, but a cruel but therye and ^^aughter of consciences? The which
tormenteth, burns, wounds and destroys the souls after a tyrannical
sort, against the word of GOD, constrayninge and compelling men to confess
him, indusinge and per^^ading them to make vows, either of poverty, or of
chastity, and others: bringing in Masses, full of impiety and ungodliness
and false penaunces: making promises, and after breakinge them: suffering and
afterward forbidding, establishing his pardons and bulls: And finally
tourning the souls from the true faith and Christian life, for to lead them
unto a vain and frivolous simulation of outward works; and unto a false
show of holiness. According to that which is said in Daniel, Chapt, viij.
Daniel. ^
He will put to death the people of the Saints. And in the second Epistle to
Timothe, Chapter. iiij. But after 2. Timot. 4. a. 3.
their own lusts shall they (whose ears itch) get them an heap of teachers,
and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables.

For the right hand declares the inward Ministry, proper to the consciences
and souls: where it is expedient that the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ
do reign after a gentle fashion: but this gracious Lord, both exercise here a
pernicious, unjust, and cruel domination.

Thirdly, the left hand which is the hand of a man, The left hand the hand of a
man.
signifies the civil power of ye pope. The son of god has manifestly
forbidden that power or domination to the Prelates of the Church. Luc. 22 chap.
saying: Luc. 22. b. 2^
The kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule over
them, are called gracious Lords. But ye shall not be so.

Nevertheless the Pope, through so many deceits, engines, crafts and
enchauntments, is mounted unto so high power and authority through the
instigation of the devil, that his civil Jurisdiction is no less then the
most purssant King that one can find. But he has more, he governs and has
under his feet all worldly Kingdoms and Empires, as sovereign Lord of All
kingdoms and empires are under y^ Popes feet,
Kings and Princes, whom he has joined to him for to amplyfie, beautify,
confirm and maintain his barbarous and cruel power and authority. And that
is to the end that the Prophecy of the eight chapter of Daniell be
fulfilled, saying: He shall be mighty Daniel. 8. g. 24
and strong, but not in his own strengh.

Finally he is ascended to such dignity, puffed up with such pride, fine with
such pomp and magnificence, that never one heard speak of the like thing.
There was never king or Emperor which has made so many wars and which has
shed so much blood. And in steed that he ought to have regard to the dignity
of the word of God, to maynteine, conserve and keep the commodities and goods
of the Church, according as his vocation and office do require, he desires
the chief and principal dominations of the world, he has learned to make very
brave and gorgeous apparaile, and to inflame and kindle wars. And giving
himself unto all those goodly things, he treads under foot, the doctrine,
he forsakes the Church, he suffers that all the holy things be set for a
pray, that the profane and temporal things be spoiled, that all be defaced
and turned vpside down.

Wherefore behold what the hand of man signifies: The Popish kingdom
established through man's wisdoms
For that kingdom has been establyshed only through the wisdoms, opinions,
and counsels of men, without authority of the holy scriptures: when they say
that it is a reasonable thing, that the heir of the Apostolycall seat and the
Vicar of Jesus Christ, be not subject unto any man. But thanks be unto our
good God, the matter is come unto this point, that many of the common people,
and others also of al estates, do understand clearly and plainly enough,
the goodly shows of so many execrable wickednesses, of which all that Popish
vermin has shamed themselves, and has defamed the renown of the Christians.

Fourthly, the right foot like unto an Ox foot, The right fo^t
signifies the Ministers of the spiritual government, and as a man may say,
the Porters, who in oppressing the poor souls, do uphold and mayneteine the
Popes kingdom. These are the Doctors in Decrees, the Doctors made by the
Popes Those which do uphold the Popes kingdom
Bulls, Dataires, Preachers of Pardons, Mass Priests, Confessors as well of
Moonkes as Nuns: and the chiefest of all this vermin, are the scholasticall
divines.

For what does all that detestable filthy company, but to put into the headde,
and to print into the heart of the people those ordinances of the Pope, which
are so hard and not to be borne? And to set them forth in all their
Sermons, in all their doctrine, in their confessions: That thereby they may
hold the poor consciences captive under the foot of the Elephant, the which
were already too much afflicted and grieved? All those rascals are as the
foot, the foundation and pillar of the Popes kingdom, the which could never
so long time have continued, without the buylding that those here with the
rest of their accomplices and adherents, have builded upon.

I pray you what does the Scholasticall divinity Scholasticall divinity.
contain, but vain, fond, execrable, and diabolycall dreams, and the
monstrous dreams of Moonkes, by which they do enchaunt, tread under foot,
keep under, and cast down headlong the poor troubled souls of the afflicted
Christians.

Matthew. 24. False Christ's and false Prophets shall Mat, ^4
arise etc. Those have made the Pope an earthly God, yea, they have exalted and
extolled him above God: And yet these proud Prelates have rejected the word of
GOD, contemned the holy Scriptures, and have driven out from among them and
buried Jesus Christ, only to feed and pamper their fat paunches. For a
simple Bull of the Pope, was more terrible and fearful then the Judgment of
almighty GOD, thundering out his commandments and threatenings.

Fifthly, the left foot like unto the foot of a Griphin, The left foot of a
Griphin.
signifies the Ministers of the civil or secular power: That is to say the
Canonists, the Chauncelours and the rascals making profession of the Canon
law, which of their own accord do acknowledge and confess, that the most
holy Canons or Decretals, do smell their most abominable avarice and ambition.

For even as the Griphins do not easily let go that that they have once
caught or laid hold on: Even so these maynteiners and raueners of the Pope,
do hold fast all that which they can get, and let not lightly go the pray:
and as through the hooks of the Canons they have entrapped almost all the
goods of al Europe: and they hold them so fast, that one cannot pull them out
of their claws, for the Canons do serve to their insatiable avarice. This
deadly Harpy has devoured all the world: she has taken away all the goods:
she has endamaged the souls and bodies; she has stolen unto her all honors.

Sixtiy, the belly and the stomach, the which do resemble The belly and the
stomach of a woman
the belly and stomach of a woeman, signify the body of the Pope: That is to
say the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Moonkes, Priests, and other
execrable spiritual Martirs, and all the rest of his bawdes, and fat hogs,
which have none other care all their life time but to feed and pamper their
paunches with delycious wynes and delycate dishes: to seek their ease and all
the allurements and entisements to whoredom, and to keep themselves in all
pleasures and Idleness, and to give themselves unto all monstrous infamies.
The which they may very well do, and freely: For they have many privileges,
wherewith they are well armed and munited for to be exempted from all
punishment. As we do see this Popish Ass who shows before all men's eyes
openly, What it is to she^^ the belly naked*
and without any shame his belly of a woeman, naked and bare: even so these,
without any shame, do lead a dissolute and wanton life, full of all
filthiness and wickedness. That which they do is to the horrible offense and
hurt and to the utter ruin and destruction of the youth of all nations as the
deed it self deeth sufficiently declare.

There is a manifest description of this in Daniel, and in the second Epistle
unto Timothe the third ^. T^^. 3. a. 4
chapter* where it is said that they are more greedy upon voluptuonsnesse then
the lovers of God. Also unto the Philippians the iij. Chapter. They do make
their belly Philip. 3. d. 19
their God.

Let us hear also that which is said in the second The description of the
popish Clergy after 3. Peter. 2. Peter. 2. c. 10
Epistle of Saint Peter the second Chapter. Namely them that walk after the
flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise the government: presumptuous
are they, and stand in their own conceit, and fear not to speak evil of
them, that are indignity. When the Angels which are greater both in power and
might, give not railing judgment against them before the Lord.

But these as brute beasts, led with natural sensuality and made to that
end, that beeinge taken they should be destroyed, speak evil of those
things which they know not, and shall perish through their own corruption.
And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they which count it
pleasure to line deliciouslye for a season. Spots they are and blottes,
deli^htinge themselves in that they deceive you, in feastinge with you. Having
eyes full of aduontrye, and that cannot cease to sin, begylinge unstable
souls: they have hearts occupied with covetousness, detestable follows.

Which forsakinge the right way, have gone as^raye followinge the way of
Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the reward of unrighteousness: But
he was rebuked for his iniquity, for the dumme beast, whereon he sat
speakinge with man's voice, forbadde the foolishness of the Prophet. These are
wells without water, and clouds carried about with tempest, to whom the black
darkness is reserved for ever.

For in speakinge swellinge words of vanitye, they begyle with wantonness
through the lusts of the flesh men that were clean escaped from them which
are wrapped in errors, promisinge unto them liberty, and are themselves the
bond servant of corruption.

And truly this does lively set out the Pope, and The lively pa^^^ing out of
the popish kingdom.
paynteth him in his right comoures, and vncouere^^ fu^^ye the feminine bellye
of the Popish Ass.

Behold how the f^^thy and vile single life of the papisticall Priests and
Moonkes, must be figured and declared, which have defiled the holy marriage
through execrable filthynesse.

For in very deed, holiness and honestye of Marriage cannot ^ee set out and
represented by such an vnshamelesse and ^^honest Image. But rather it is
beautified by the word and blessing of GOD, and by great meruayles, and as
it were decked and garnished with a goodly argument, and placed in a high
place.

It is (...) true that there are others also which d^^^ hurt and de^^le
themselves with a manifest turpitude and filthynesse, as we may speak this
of the Panyms and Turks, and as there be a great many profane people
among the Christians, adulterers* whooremaisters, whoores and most wicke
Wolves.

Yet notwithstanding those do nothing but that is to the great prejudice of
their renown, and in danger to loose all honor: as they are never without
fear, whether they be hanged on the gallows, o^ that they be evil spoken
off, or that every manne does mock them, ly^^^nge out their tongue, or that
they be torn in pieces by force or outrage. But these wicked villames,
effeminate, impudent, The Pope and his, are without shame.
bellyes full of all filthynesse, do cover and cloak themselves with the name
of CHRIST, and do let slip the bridle unto all maddenesse and
wickedness, and do give themselves license without fearinge any punishment,
without caringe to be rebuked: And not only that, but also with all these
detestable villanyes, they would be called spiritual, the holy Fathers, and
the Catholic Church. And beeinge not yet content with that, they go about
to pursue, chastise, and spit^e in other men's faces, because of the moate
that they see in their eyes, and of the Gnatte and little Fly that they do
see them swallowe down: And yet they will not that any should check and
rebuke the great beam that The Popish Clergy will not be rebuked.
is in their eye, nor the Camel that they have swallowed down: But on the
contrary^, that the blemyshes so apparaunte and evident may be hid and
covered, yea* beautified and set out with the title of JESUS CHRIST and of
the Church.

Even so truly, there is neither sacryledge^, nor murderer, thee^e, nor
whooremaster, which abuses the majesty of the name of the son of GOD and
of the Church, for to hide their execrable filthynesse, but that whoorish
bellye of Antechrist.

And therefore the murders, theftes, the monstrous whooredomes, the horrible
wickednesses of this Idol of Rome, do surmounte a great deal the
wickednesses, crueltyes, and maddenesse, of Nero.

Seauenthlye, the scales of Fishes, wherewith The scales o^ fish.
the arm, the feet, and the neck of that Popish Ass are coured, and not
the bellye nor the breast, do signify the Princes and seculer Lords. For the
sea is oftentimes taken in the Scripture for the world, and the fishes for the
men of the world: As Jesus Christ himself interprets the Nets of Saint
Peter, Mat. 4. when he said, I will make you fishers Mat. 4. c, 19.
of men.

The scales do signify an embracinge or tyinge What y^ scales do signify
in the Scripture. Job. 41. 2. 6.
together; as the Lord faith in the. 41. Chapter of Job. His body is covered
with scales, as it were with ^^eeldes locked in, knit, and well compact
together. One is so joined ^o an other, that no air can come in. ^uen so the
Princes and other great Lords of the world have always cleaued and stand
^ast The princes do cleave alvvayes unto the Pope.
together, and are yet at this day lynked and tied unto the Pope and to his
barberous, and tyrannical kingdom.

It is very true, that they cannot allow, hyde, neither praise, nor cloak,
his drunkenness, his gluttonye, his horrible whoore^omes, his unlawful
voluptuonsnesse: For one cannot rightly there perceive any scales which do
cover his stomach and his belly. Notwithstanding that by their cloaking
thereoff, in (...) their eyes, and sufferinge that that they do see, they are
so much the more surely tied and lincked ^ast to the neck, legs; feet and
arms: that is to say, they do embrace, defend and maintain his greatness
and magnificence, and his barbarous and tyrannical estate, as an estate
lawful and ordained by the word of GOD. And that same does exalt and li^t up
his crest very proudly and with an arrogant and proud obstination.

To conclude, they do confirm his spiritual and poli^ique government, by
decrees and ordinances not to be borne with: they do beautify them with
goodly E^n^^^, and do establish his pompes and royal faculties through
strange doctrines.

Furthermore, to the end that the ground and foundation An^echrist made strong
by the gifts and foundation^ of Princes.
of that retrayt of Antechrist be more firm and sure and to endure and
continue the longer, they do make lay men's testaments and wills, they heap
up to them revenues, they constitute Monasteries, they buyld Temples, they do
ordain Conuents and Colleges of unmarried people, as of Markettes and open
Faires of such manner of Canonists, Dunces Sophisters, Beggars, Preachers for
money, Confessors and Doctors: and as of public exercises and Theaters, of
whom one can hear nothing to sound, but of the spillyng and marring of the
celestial doctrine. And for to speak briefly, the great goods the riches and
favorers of the world are so well and so firmly and strongly tied and fastened
unto him, that there is neither wind nor blast, there is neither spiritual
doctrine neither word of God, which can separate or pluck them, from him.

Eighthly, the head of the old man issuing out of The head of the old man
issuing out of his buttockes.
his buttockes, does signify the decrease, the oldenesse, and the end of the
Popes kingdom. For the fore part or the face in the holy Scriptures does
signify the increase or advancement: and the hind part or the back, or the
buttockes, do signify the declynation and the end, as you have y^ like
speech in the viij. chap. of Saint Paul to the Hebrews: That which is
disanulled Heb. ^, d. 1^
and waxed old, is ready to vanish away. Then that monstrous figure declares
that the barbarous tyranny of the Pope is now come unto his last end, and that
of himself it ought to wax old and come to naught without any swoorde or
outward violence, as it is foreshewed in the eight Chapter of Daniel, Daniel.
^. g. 25.
that he shall be destroyed without hand. For there is so great increase of
supers^itions, and such a bundell and fardell of vices, that of necessity his
own weight must cause him to fall down: and that the gronings, complaynts,
and sighings of all people and nations may be heard: Forasmuch as the word of
God has discovered and revealed before all men's eyes, his impiety, malice and
cruelty.

Even so the glory of this world passes, and the play is nigh at an end.
After this sort then we do see, that that Image or figure agrees properly
with all the Prophecy of the eight chapter of Daniel: and that the one and the
other are agreeing with the Papisticall kingdom.

Ninthly, the dragon coming forth of y^ arse of that The Dragon coming
forth of the Asses arse
popish Ass, and casting out of his open mouth a great flame of fire,
signifies the horrible bulls and the terrible lyghtnings of excommunication,
and the tempestious threatenings which the Popes and his adherents do spewe out
furiously upon all the world, when they do see their end nigh at hand, and
that they must perish sodeinely.

For this is the latter and most furious rage and The latter tempest of the
Romish An^echrist
madness of Antechrist: this is his latter endeavor, yea, if peradventure
these rauenours may keep whole that abomination, through the ^stonishments
and threats of the bulls, and afterward through lies, wrongs, cursings,
enchauntments, pricking iniuryes, and bitter scoffings of his goodly
Rhethoricians, as Eccius, Fabor, Emserus, Wicelius, and other like. The Popes
Rhethoriciners
Notwithstanding the time is come that we have no more need of such aid nor
of such defend^urs. For what shall the Dragon win to bite the clouds? What
shall ^e gain to burn the air with his flames? And truly there is none that
fears those poisoned bulls and full of cursings and enchauntments: Forasmuch
as the light of the truth is so clearly kindeled and lyghted.

Tenthly, for that this Popish Ass has been found Rome, the place where the
popish Ass has been found^.
at Rome, and not at an other place, does confirm that which has been recited
before, that the same cannot be understood of any other power and domination
then of Rome.

For at this day in our time, there is no power which is like or more greater
in the City of Rome, then that of the Pope. For GOD has always declared by
meruaylous signs and tokens in those places which those signs do signify
and betoken some thing, as it happened in Hierusulem, and for that that this
Monster was found dead, that is an argument that the end of the Popes
kingdom draws on fast.

And we must have neither sword nor any strength of man for to put it down:
But the heavenly virtue, shall cause that of himself it shall be overthrown.
For this prodigious Monster was not killed by any counsel or means of men:
But was found dead, and was revealed by the singular providence of God.

Finally, I would admonish every one not to despise We must not despise y^
monstrous signs
such a prodigious sign sent of the Majesty of GOD, and to beware of the
pestilent contagiousnesse of Antechrist and his members, and to flee from him.
And to be afraid of him.

It is most certain that GOD has used toward us a most great benignity
and gentleness, for that he has set forth before us, Antechrist in a
figure so vile and disformed, as painted in a table and lively set forth,
that one may easily assail it with hands, that God will effectually provide
for our health, and desires that we be drawn out of that detestable retrayte
of immortal impiety of that strange beast.

And as touching the Papists, according as their bay^yng frenzy and their
impe^uous madness well meriteth, they may think on this, or let them not be
angry: As in deed there is neither sign nor miracles The Pope and his do
conde^p^e all signs and miracles.
sent by the hand of God, which can move them neither astonish or warn them.
But as Giants without fear, they do beat and fight against the lyghtnings and
thundrings* and do follow their fathers, Pharao and Chore, whereoff the one
was drowned in the waves of the Sea, and the other swallowed up in the earth:
and both of them are sunk even to the bottom of hell. But we for our parts
let us rejoice and take comfort, and let us put this sign in the number of
those who do declare unto us y^ day so long desired, so healthful, so goodly,
the coming of our Lord and redeemer Jesus Christ.

In the mean time, let us suffer our enemies to do as they list, and to kick
obstinately against the prick. And let us behold whether the troubles that
they have heaped up more and more, shall be to molest and grieve God or
themselves. Nevertheless I am not much angry with-them, forasmuch as they are
so desperately mad, and that they do so trouble the heaven with the earth.

O good God, if I were so painted forth at Gods hand, with a figure and shape
so odious and terrible, I could in no manner abide and suffer it. For either I
should dye for very fear, except that I had an heart of iron or steel, as
they have: Or else I should burst and clean a sunder, with despite, choler and
madness. What is he then that goes about, either by counsel or by
commandment, to obtain of them, that they would pardon the Lord Jesus one
such contumely and wrong which is done unto them by such an Image or figure.

Inasmuch as they being reprehe^ded or reproved with one only letter of the
word of God, are sodeinly enflamed with anger and rage? For as much as the Lord
does suffer them to ele^a^^ themselves against him, although that they do
band^e his word after so wicked and cruel fashion. Yea, in the figure of a
Devil they He means the execrable Idol of the Cake in the Mass.
do set him forth the one to the other, for to laugh and mock: and yet it
does not anger him* making him to believe that the same is good to his Church,
and that they do it by his commandment. What is he The horror of the
papisticall impiety.
that dares think any other thing, or gaynesay them, except that he is
willing that all their furies, pains, enchauntments, and torments of hell do
fall upon him? For their fury is irremissible and is not without great force,
for as much as they are of the high Gods exalted above all the gods, according
to that that Saint Paul and the Prophet Daniel, speaks off.

THE APPROBATION of Martyn Luther.
THis Popish Ass is of himself a monstrous figure, fearful and horrible,
and the more that one does behold him, the more terrible he appears. But
behold which is the most terriblest of all, that God himself has formed and
revealed this monster, as a figure full of fearfulness. For if any workman
had drawn it, painted or engraued it, one might well mock of it, and not to
pass on it. But because that the holy divine majesty has formed and made it
and that he has set before us such a figure, it behooves all men to tremble*
when and as often as the same does come in their remembrance: and that they be
estonned and amazed, as of a thing of which one may easily conjecture of the
thought, counsel and will of God.

Is there any man in the world which would not be afraid, if he should see a
wicked spirit, or a phancie, or if he do hear any sodeine brute or noise,
or any groaning God does show himself irreconcilable under ye figure of the
Popish Ass.
or lamentation of spirits. Yet notwithstanding one ought not to esteem the
same but as a false visage or a play of little children, in comparison of this
Image and monstrous figure. In which god himself appeared in a terrible form,
showing an unappeasable severity. We must necessaryly say, that there is a
terrible indignation of God kindled against that Idol of Antechrist, the which
all that company and rascals of the Pope, do stir up and provoke as of a
set purpose and of an hard froward stubburnenesse: and the beginings do agree
so well and so fitly, that one can in no wise doubt.

For as much then as Sodom had of so long time and through so execrable
misdeedes provoked Gods wrath: and as the ruin beeinge nigh at hand, there
rested but a little time to repent them: then she did give her self freely
unto all execrable wickedness, and hardened her self with such obstinacy, that
she did plainly mock God, and did exalt her self against him with an
intolerable fierceness and cruelnesse. But scantly the heaven had given her
cleerenesse the next day morning, but behold it was sodeinly swallowed up and
consumed. We must not doubt, but that all that band of the Pope does spinne all
one thread. They have hitherto let ^^ippe the bridle unto all detestable
filthynesse: rebellious people and altogether obstinate against God: being
drawn from the just obedience of man's* dominations, as if they were brethren
germans of Epicures: yea, and not believing as the Devils do, who do
tremble when they hear God spoken off* as the Scripture says: and
understanding nothing of heavenly things, have no more care of the blessed
life and of eternal health and salvation then the most grosses^ Ass that ever
was. As in very deed they have this opinion of the Gospel, that it is a fable:
and do judge of the Christian faith, yt it is the faining of a Poet without
grace or favor, according to that goodly sentence and Oracle of Epicures, al
is nothing else but dust and mockery, and all is nothing. And although that
before the time of their fall and ruin they are exhorted by so many strange
figures and fearful signs sent of GOD, for to call them to repentance: yet
nevertheless they are the more obstinate and out of all order: in such sort
that they do heap up, nourish and augement more and more, a proud,
negligence and arrogant profanations: In so much that with much adooe they
themselves can suffer their rashness, boldness and wickedness. And as
though there were no heavenly and celestial anger, nor majesty in heaven for
to break and disperse their rages* in the mean season do mock of these
fearful signs, as if they were deceiving shadows, or flying dreams.

Such a foolish boldness and brutish assurance is an evident argument of the
inen^rrable wrath* of the Lord, who will suppress and consume those hoggish
Epicutes, and dull asses, before they are aware of it. Then only with fear
and trembling they will learn to cry and howl. But God of his own accord
will not (...) them* as it is said in the first Chapter of the Proverbs* ^ee
have forsaken my coun^ay^e, Pro. 1. d. 25
and have despised all my corrections: Therefore shall I laugh in your
destruction, and mock you, when the thing that ye fear comes upon you.

One may know for a truth that Satan is a great and a mighty spirit* who
holding under him she understandings and minds of men as slaves, bends, and
drives them with such violence, that not only they do plunge themselves
within the vices (which seems rather to be a work of a little devil*
learning his occupation). But also do make open war against God of their
own free will. For we must think, what that tyranny is: how desperate that
furor and madness is* when a miserable man being constrained and compelled in
his conscience, can put forth that words, and to confess for certain, this
is the word of God, of which I do not doubt: But although that the son of
God has pronounced if, the Apostles have preached it: Yet nevertheless I will
shut the eyes, I will stop the ears for to reject it, and will withstand it
hand and foot, and will persecute and condemn it as a pernicious heresy. And
if there be any one in ye mean time which will render obedience unto god, to
believe the gospel, and will not consent with me: I will kill him* I will
banish him from his enheritance, I will not suffer him to dwell in any place:
And will do all that in despite of the word of God.

O good God, had I ever thought in all my life time, to have seen so great
sins, such a rage and so furious cruelty of the enemies of ye Gospel, at
such time as I did not yet but lay the first foundation of this cause? And
nevertheless (alas) I do see those things The word of God and his truth
called heresy by the Papists.
now, being constrained to hear, that the word of god the truth that is
confessed and known, to be called heresy: and to be banished and driven away
most vilaynously, as buried.

Of right such vip^rs are figured and noted by the Dragons head, which comes
out of the arse of this Popish Ass, spewing out a retrayt full of filthiness.
The Popish Ass a piece of carrion without life.
But thanks be unto God, both the Dragon and the Popish Ass are but a piece
of carrion, and shall take unto them again neither life nor strength, nor
shall never recover their dignity and tyranny (the which they do promise
nevertheless) for any thing that the devil does in them. For it is said in
the Creed, I believe in God the father almighty. It is said also that he that
abides in us, is more greater then he that is in the world. And although that
the devil have great power, yet he shall not be altogether puissant. This is an
infallible rule.

HERE FOLLOWS THE PORtrayture or Figure of the other, that is to wit, of a
Moonkish Calfe, calued after this fashion in the City of Friberge in the
country of Misne. Anno. 1528.
THE INTERpretacion of Martin Luther, of the Monster, in the figure and
likeness of a Moonkish Calfe, drawn out in the leaf before.
AS touching the Prophetical interpretacion of this Moonkish Calfe, I will
leave it to the spirit: for I am no prophet. Yet nevertheless one may well
affirm this generally of many such meruayles, that God does send them as
presages and forewarnings of sorrowful adventures, motions, brutes, troubles
and commotions to come. And I do exhort Germany to assure themselves boldly
and to attend certeinely such commings. But to determine of chances and to
foreshew how long time they shall continue, or in what ti^e the delyueraunce
shall come, the same belongs to the Prophet^.

As for me, I will desire willingly that the latter day were at hand: the
which I also do think, that the days wherein we are, are as forerunners of
that blessed day, the which will not tarry long after. And me thinks that the
cause that I have to hope so, is not frivolous nor vain. And in very deed,
before time there has been almost a continuation of certain worlds, in which
men have seen daily monstrous things, and worthy of great admiration: And at
this day all the world burning with a terrible heat, brings forth motions
very pernicious, who commonly are not appeased without great chaunges and
alterations of kingdoms. To conclude, that the light of the Gospel, shines
now wonderfully, the which commonly was wont to bring with it alterations,
troubles and tempests, because of the hard obstination, and furious ragings of
the wicked.

And truly I will not speak but of things which are true: and will show
wherefore God has set forth such a sign in that Moonkish Calfe, and for what
cause he has defiled the religious habit or apparayle with one so vile a
spotte: Forasmuch as without the habit of a Moonke he might signify and
declare the evils to come as properly and well by any other show or token.
Even so then it is not long sithence that by his providence was calued at
Langdesberge a certain Canon Calfe, or a Moonkish Calfe. It declares thereby,
that all religious men and Moonkes ought to have their eyes thereon still
fixed, and that he beholds them, and that he has determined to punish them:
For this same year he will use none other miracles, then those which have
respect unto such holy and spiritual people.

For god paynting out of late that excellent Monarch Daniel 8. d
of Alexander king of Macedonia under the figure and likeness of a Goat,
besides the Prophetical interpretacion of the discomfiture and vanquishing to
come: he has also set forth and represented the nature of the Grecians, which
are wanton as the Goats. And all that that they have conceived in their mind
how high and hard that it be, they hope to bring it to pass, and to atteine
unto it through good counsels, through great viua^ilie and stou^nesse of the
mind.

In like manner in this figure of this Moonkish Calfe, besides the Prophetical
declaration, there is also an Image or figure of the life, of the doctrine of
the services and observations of the Moonkes: And it is possible that thereby
there is an advertisement of the cause of the calamities nighe at hand. That
is to say, that the superstitions, the deceites and wickedness of the
Moonkes, do cause the punishment to increase, for as much as by the
Pharisaycall doctrine of works, they do abolish the faith which is in our
Lord Jesus Christ, and do transform and change into the flesh of a Calfe
man's heart, which ought to be the Temple of the holy Ghost. Furthermore, let
an other draw the prophetical sense: as for me for to please my order, I
have taken upon me to interpret my Moonkish Calfe: The Canon Calfe shall have
an other for his expositer.

For so much the more willingly do I take the charge to make this declaration,
for that I do see that the obstinate courages and more harder then the rocks,
of those which shall be grieved with this my explication, shall be so much
the more wounded and shall be come more eger. As in very deed they do
arrogantlye despise all that which comes out of my mouth, and do babble
every where, that all my words are as much to be esteemed as the spittinges
of heretics. For that cause they ought not also now The interpretation made
for to harden the hearts of those which do give no credit unto the
aduertisme^ts of the faithful. Esa 6. c. 10.
to give any credit unto mine advertisement, but do wax more hard hearted,
and do make themselves more and more obstinate, hurting and molesting
themselves more then ever any did, and forsake not their filthy and wicked
life, as it is said in Esaias the sixte Chapter, harden the heart of this
people, stop their ears, and shut their eyes, that they see not with their
eyes, hear not with their ears, and understand not with their hearts, and
convert and be healed.

Even as then Balaam could by no means obey The Papists hearts hardened
after the example of Balaam.
the word of God, and although he was rebuked by his Ass speaking unto him
in a man's voice, yet nevertheless he could not amend it: so one may say the
like of those holy Fathers, which have hitherto stopped their ears at the
clear voice of the verity of the Gospel. Now they ought to behold
themselves in this Calfe and in the Cow, as in a glass, and to consider what
they are before God, and what reputation and what voice they have in heaven.
And yet nevertheless they ought to shut their eyes that they do see nothing
of all this, whereoff they may repent themselves, for to avoid the horrible
judgment of God. For there is neither forewarning, word nor sign that could
The hearts hardened after the example of Pharao.
move or bend the hard heart of Pharao.

First, that I may speak briefly, think not, that the same is a mockery or a
fable, that God has clothed a Calfe with a religious habit, and with a
Moonkes cool. We must not doubt, but that he notes by that Image or figure,
a certain assemble of people, of which one may clearly know, that the
Moonkery is nothing else The Moonkery is but a vain appearaunce.
but a vain appearaunce and show of godliness, and outward hypocrisy of a
holy life allowed of God. For even until this times we poor and miserable men
have had this opinion and have believed, that the holy Ghost dwells under the
frocke, and that the same habit does cover nothing but the holy Ghost.

But God has revealed here, that there is nothing under that habit but a
Calfe. As if he would show that there is a Serpent hid under the grass. For
the golden calfe of Aaron, lifted up in the wilderness, unto The golden Calfe
of Aaron
whom the children of Israel did represent and give the honor that apperteined
and belonged unto God, Exodus Exo. 32.
Chapter. 32. teaches playnelye what the Calfe may signify. It is said in
the 106. Psalm. They Psa. 106. c. 2^
have turned their glory into ye similitude of a Calfe, that eats hay. It is
spoken also of ye Calves of Iereboam, made in Bethell and Dan. 1. Reg. Chapter.
12. ^. Reg. 1^
against whom the Prophets have cried very sharply. In like manner let us
behold a little that same Moonkish Calfe, how that his cool does represent
there a figure of all the order of Moonkes, with all their services and divine
obseruatio^s, of which they do make so great account: as of their Pater noster,
so oftentimes repeted, of ye fair of their Masses, of their goodly songs, and
fastings, and other like.

But unto whom is that goodly service represented? who is honored? of whom
does it depend? unto whom is it tied and fastened? unto the Calfe. For the
Calfe is clothed with a frock, as we may see here. And what is that Calfe? It
is an Idol forged and The Calfe is an Idol forged in the spirits of Moonkes.
made, abiding and dwelling in their spirits full of deceites. What is that
that these things do? They do after this sort. These holy Masters have an
opinion imprinted in their understanding, that in their Moonkish and solitary
religion, they do serve and render obedience The religion of the Moonkes
builded upon ceremonies and outvvard works
unto the true God, the which religion they have constituted in Ceremonies and
observations of certain outward works, by which they do think that they
have well deserved heaven: and not in the certeinty and trust which embraces
the benefit of Jesus Christ.

For it is even thus, that there is no God, either in heaven or earth which
would be so served and worshipped but y^ devil and the Idols. For none can
serve nor obey the true God, but in spirit and truth, John ye 4. Chapter: That
John. 4. c. 24
is to say* in faith and true and spiritual mouinges of the spirit, the which
the holy Ghost does create, stir up, and quicken in us* Esa. Chapter. ^v.
Wherefore these false Esa. 55.
religious people cannot offer unto any their services, ye which they do cloak
and hide under the name of God, and in the mean time turning themselves from
all the ordinances The service of the Monks cannot profit any man.
and heavenly manifestations, and cannot bring them back again, nor set the^
up, but in rejoicing and flattering their vain imaginations, the which they
have forged of their own brain, dreaming that such services and observations
are agreeable unto God. Such foolish and (...) imagination is nothing but
lyings and an Idol (...) and forged of their own brain, neither more nor
less, but even as the Panims or Jews do f^^^^ strange Gods. Behold, this
is the Calfe, this is the impiety: this is the carnal opinion covered and hid
with the religious habit: this is the Idol to the which they are bound and
tied, the which they do garnish and beautify with Ceremonies and with a
goodly kind of shows. The Calfe does not live but of herbs and grass. For
such hipocrites have no knowledge of the eternal goodness, but do fat
themselves with the pleasures of this present life: As one may plainly see that
the most puissantest and ample riches, What it is to be nourished and sed
with grass
and the most greatest pleasures, and the most highest dignities and honors
are belonging unto the people of the Church, as one calls them. And even so
these Calves have found grass for their own tooth. And this is happened unto
them, that they have turned Psa. 106. c. 10
their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that eats Hay. For Christ is our
true glory, in whom we must triumph, glory, and rejoice. These here clean
contrary, do seek an other glory in their hearts, and do advance and
brag themselves very proudly of the trust of their merits and works. Such
a Calfe is come in the steed of Jesus Christ, and in usurping the name of him,
he does blaspheme and dishonor it.

Secondly, the Moonkish apparaile rent full of holes What does signify the
skin of this Calfe, being torn or re^t.
about the thighs, feet, and belly, do signify that in that solytarie
religion and in those Ceremonies and observations full of deceits, there is no
agreeing that is perfect or whole: And yet the holy Scripture requires
chiefly and before all things, that the Christians and faithful be of one
fellowship and unity. As it is said in the 133. Psalm, O how good and Psa.
133. 2. 2. ^
joyful a thing it is: brethren to dwell together in unity.

But these mad brains, supersticious and too holy Moonkes knew very well to
forge, invent and find out so many differences of sects and opinions, as
there is of diverse apparayle among them. The Cordehers, that is of the order of
Saint Fraunces, do magnify The frocke divided into many sects.
their order: The Iacopins, that is of the order of saint Dominicke, their
rule: The Benedictines will in no case loose their honor: The Augustines do
go on the right side: The Charterhouse Moonkes on the left: The Celestines
do keep their company: To conclude, there is not one but that he thinks
himself very fine and trim in his apparel. So we seeing that the frocke is
rent and torn about the thighs and feet of that Calfe: Although that all
were of one will and did agree well, as much as concerns the apparel of the
Calfe: that is to say, although that all did nourish that obstinate opinion in
their hearts: to wit that they did doubt or distrust of the mercy of God: and
on the contrary did lean and stay upon the affiaunce and carnal assurance of
their works, according to their observations.

We shall know this more clearly, if we do understand The thighs do
signify extremity.
the end and extremity by the thighs, and i^ we will make of the feet
proppes by the which this Calfe, that is to say, this false Mask, is holden up
and maynteined. For there was never so many sects, so many households, so many
differences, so many names, so many orders, or rather disorders brought in, as
have been seen in our time, when the end is nigh, and that that byle should
break: seeing that the vanity, and the deceits are uncovered and made known,
^o shall we see all this infection to fall down.

The feet do signify those bold brethren and other^* What (...) of this
Calfe do (...).
those Sophisters, and our worshipful masters (...) have the prehemine^ce
above other: and which are (...), and the most skillful or cunningest (...),
who do know full well to keep, amplify and establish the dignity and great
authority of that (...) religion, either by writings, preachings, lectures,
disputacions or doctrines: and do endeavor themselves with all their strength
thereto, and do imprint it into the hearts of the people throughout the whole
world. For every trifling thing they fall out and disagree among themselves:
and as many as there be The Moonkes disagreeing in opinions. The Calfe does
counterfeit the Moonkish Preachers.
of heads among them, so many opinions there be.

Thirdly, this Calfe represents the gesture and countenance of a Preacher.
For he stands upright upon his hinder feet: and of the two fore feet, he
casts the right after the manner of a Preacher, and holds back the left,
he has his head lyfted up: he puts out his tongue: there is nothing in
him, which does not represent those great Cryers in the flesh.

Even then as the Popish Ass has been an Image The Moonkes the Apostles of
the Pope.
or figure of the Papisticall kingdom, so this Moonkis^ Calfe does represent
the Apostles and Disciples of the Pope, in such sort that all the world does
well see what Doctors or Preachers they have heard until this present time, and
what they do hear at this day.

For can any man find an Apostle more fit for the brain of an Ass, then the
head of a Calfe? This is a fit cover for the pot.

The carnal government has always a carnal doctrine. And therefore the
Calfe is yet without eyes, or blind, for to figure those of whom Jesus Christ
speaks off in Saint Matthew the 23. chapter, saying. Mat. 23. b. ^^
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, blind guydes. And Esaias in his. 56.
chapter says. All his E^^. 56. c. 10
watchmen are all blind, they have altogether no understanding, they are all
dumme Dogs, not being able to bark, they are slippery: sluggish are they,
and lie sweating: they are shameless Dogs that be never satisfied. The
shepherds also in like manner have no understanding.

We might very properly or fitly apply many other things in that Monster, unto
the Monks and Sophisters. As this: The ear tied to the frocke, signifies The
ear notes the confessions.
the insupportable tyranny of confessions, by the which they do cast and throw
the poor consciences into the devils throat, and do put them in a terrible
bondage.

The putting out of the tongue, does signify that The tongue
all their doctrine is no other thing but the tongue. That is to say, a
bablyng and full of vain words.

The two little warts or knobbes which appear The two wart^ or knobs like
peason.
upon the head, should have been two horns. And the horns do signify the
Preaching of the Gospel, the which make us obedient unto death or to the
cross, destroying the old manne: as it is said by the Prophet Micheah the
fourth Chapter* I will Micheah. 4. d. 13
make thy horn iron and thy claws shall be of brass, that thou may grind
and crush in preeces many people.

Yet nevertheless this Calfe has no horns, but The Moonkes do turn the
preaching of ye Gospel unto men's traditions
only certain appearaunce or tokens of horns, which do not much appear.

For although that those do brag and boaste themselves of that title, that
they are Doctors of the Gospel: Yet nevertheless they do turn it
foolyshly unto the traditions of men. So then from the crown of the head,
which is shaven, do appear two little knobbes like unto pease. For under the
(...) of the Gospel, he hydeth and covers what him lysteth, and cannot
suffer or abide, that the Gospel should come forth of that hull or shell:
But it must agree to the sanctity of that shaven crown: And chiefly as
touching the Pope which is the head, of all those shaven heads.

And for that the Cool is so fast behind the The Moonkes cool or hood tied
to ye neck.
neck, the same declares the incredible obstination of the supersticion and
of the errors of these doltishe Moonkes, concerning the observations and
Monastical ceremonies. As in very deed they are plunged and fastened so deep
within such filthiness, that there is neither virtue nor force, nor the light
of the Christian verity, how great soever that it be, which can in any wise
draw them forth for to behold the light.

Now for that the Cool was tied and close behind The Moonkes do keep and
hold fast the hood and forsake and let go transitory goods
at the back, and that toward the belly or before it appeared to be open or
vnsewed, does signify yt those do show in their outward apparayle a certain
godliness: and it is under the color that they do forsake and renounce all
transitory goods. But if they must come unto God, or if one would bring them
to the eternal life, one shall find that those are naked bellyes, and
unprofitable burdens for to consume the goods of ye earth, yea committing all
enormities: of which I love rather to hold my peace.

And whereas that the Jaws below are like unto the Jaws of a man, and those
above with the nostrels like unto those of a Calfe, the same signifies that in
their doctrine they speak very often of the civil works of the heavenly law:
But in the mean season there is nothing but that it smells and sauoreth of
the Calfe: that is to say, that the discipline, righteousness and the
Philosophical virtues are there too much praised.

For the two lips of the mouth, do signify two sorts and kinds of doctrines:
the nether lip signifies the explycation of the Law: and the upper lyp the
preaching of the Gospel and of the heavenly promises. But in steed of the
Gospel, and of the promises touching the reconcilyation made by Jesus Christ,
they do preach the mouth of a Calfe: That is to say, they do To preach the
mouth of a calfe
preach the great recompenses and rewards which are given in heaven for man's
works dilygently done, but without faith.

Finally this Calfe is not hairy in any part, or has The calfe with out ha^^^
no hair as other Calves have, the same does signify the goodly and shining
hypocrisy by the which these doltifh Moonkes have deceived all the world.
Insomuch that they which are the cruel homicides of souls, and the mad
vpholders of the devil have been notwithstanding esteemed and counted holy and
spiritual fathers.

All these things are now openly known by a clear light: This Calfe is come
forth from the hid secrets The Calfe coming out of the belly of his mother.
of the belly of his mother. They can no longer be kept in a secret place and
hid from the sight of men, nor cannot choose but that they must be perceived.
Let them cloak or hide it as much as they will, but that shall not let that
the mask or disguising be not taken from them, and that they be not brought
forth in the light and their t^^pitude and filthiness be not known or
uncovered, that all men may show or point at them with their f^^^er.

For I will leave to every man's liberty to judge of this ^nterpretation. For
although that the exposition* (...) fit enough, yet nevertheless it is of it
self sound enough and very well builded and grounded upon the witnesses of
the holy Scripture, The exposition of the calfe builded upon the ^^riptur^^
that the Moonkery is such in very deed as we have described. Forasmuch then
as this Calfe agrees properly with y^ dwine Oracles, let every one diligently
take heed or be well advised what and is y^ he shall despise when he shall
despise and reject this my interpretation. In this Mo^ster there is more then a
sufficient warning, for to make us to understand y^ god is offended and angry
with those Moonkish observations. For if he loved them, it is God is angry
with the observations of the Moonkes.
most certain he would have clothed it with a frock of a more honester
figure. And we must very well say that by such a monstrous figure is not
signified or me^t any man alone: But a sociation, a covent, a brotherhood, or a
government of many, according to the nature and What the figure of he calfe
does signify
condition of all the visions, of which is made mention in the holy Scripture,
Daniel chapter. 8.

O you Moonkes and Nuns, take you heed, your doings are here entreated of
earnestly: and think not that such advertisement of God is a play to jest at,
or an enchauntment.

Appease God with other oblations and sacrifices then those which you have:
Forsake your Couents, and cast away your frockes, and return unto that
wherefore you were borne, and whereunto you are called by God, before that this
occasion that God shows unto you do vanish away. For afterward, when you
would ye cannot: Now when you may do well, ye will not.

Above all I do earnestly beseech the noble families and all gentlemen that
they will deliver their children and cousins, or those whose souls health they
do love, from such so horrible and perilous life, as from a most filthy
prison. Think that they are not yet out of the bonds of man's body: and but
that they are bound to the communion of men, and to the law of Nature as well
as other men. For this is not granted is Nature, that so great multitude of
unmarried The gift of (...) not granted (...)
people can live honestly and chastely: or that they can of their own free will
live without marriage. As for me I would gladly do that which lay in me, and
which apperteineth to mine office, and to warn you in time.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, dwelling by Paul's Wharfe, 1579.


