Anno Dni 1616
This Indenture made The Seauententh day of March in the fourteenth year of
the reign of our Sovereign Lord James by the Grace of God King of England
France and Ireland Defender of the Faith etc. And of Scotland the Fiffith "
Between Hugh Middellton Citizen and Goldsmith of London on the one party and
Hugh Merrick of London Esquire and " " " Hugh (...) of London ^ent on the other
party, Witnesses that the said Hugh Middellton for and in consideration of the
some of Twenty Shillinges " of lawful money of England to him in hand at and
upon thesealing and delivery hereof by the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) "
well and truly paid for and in the name of a fine or incombe, The receipt
whereof the said Hugh Middelton does acknowledge by these presents, has
demised and granted and by these presents does demise and grant unto the said
Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) a quill or branch of lead containing half an inch
of water or thereabouts the said branch to be taken from the main pipe that
lies in (...)thing La^^^ " " " and from thence to be conuaied in the foresaid
pipe of lead by two of the smallest Swan-necked-Cockes for that purpose already
employed into the yard and kitchen " of the now dwelling house of Hugh Merrick
and Hugh (...) ^ at their (...)e of their own proper costs and charges To have
and to hold the said branch and water course unto the said Hugh Merrick and
Hugh (...) " and to the longer liver of them two from the feast of the
Annuntiation of St. Marye the Virgin (...) (...)ing the date of these presents
unto the end and term of twenty and one years from thence next ensuing and
fully to be complete and ended Time of needful reparations and of mischance and
casualty by fire only excepted if they the said Hugh Merrickand Hugh (...) "
or if either of them shall so long dwell and continue in the said house wherein
now they do and use no other trade then now they do for the greater expenses of
water Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the said
Hugh Myddellton his Heirs and Assigns the some of Twenty shilling " " " of
lawful money of England at the feast of the Natiuety of S. John Baptist, S.
Michiel the Archangel, the Birth of our Lord God, and the Anunciation of S.
Mary the Virgin by even and equal portions the first payment to begin at the
Natyuitye of S. John Baptist " " next coming after the date hereof, The which
yearly rent the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " " " do covenant and grant
by these presents for them and either of them and for their and eith^^ of their
Executors and Administrators to and with the said Hugh Myddelton his Heirs
and Assigns That the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " " " and their or one
of their Executors or Assinges shall pay to the said Hugh his Heirs or Assigns
at the feasts aforesaid yearly during the said term or within one and twenty
days after at the said dwelling house of the said Hugh in Westcheape London.
And the said Hugh Myddellton for him his Heirs and Assigns does covenant and
grant to and with the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " " by these presents
That they the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " shall peaceably and quietly
enjoy the said quil or branch of water according to the tenor and true meaning
of these presents needful reparations and casualties by fire excepted Provided
always and the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " for them and either of them
do covenant promise and grant to and with the said Hugh his heirs and assigns
by these presents That the said Hugh his heirs and Assgines or his or their
Officers or Servants shall or may peaceably and quietly come into the house of
the said Hugh Merricke to view the said Cock and pipe for the said
watercourse or any other pipe or branch that shall be derived into any other
house from their the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " branch by the consent
of the said Hugh Myddellton or his Assigns and to set that the said water shall
not run at wast and further that the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " and
either of them shall repair and maintain the Cocks and so much of the pipe
serving for the said water course belonging to his the said Hugh " " Merricke
his said house at his or their own proper cost and charges by the ouer-sight
and direction of the said Hugh his heirs or assigns or his or their Officers
appointed for that purpose. And the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " " " do
further covenant promise and grant for them and either of them to and with the
said Hugh his heirs and assigns by these presents in manner and form
following that is to say, That neither the said Hugh Merricke nor Hugh (...) "
nor either of them shall suffer any Current or other disposing of any of the
said water from their said Cocks or pipe other then for the service only of
the said Hugh Merricke his* said house and only for so long time as this
lease shall remain in force Neither shall without the agreement and consent of
the said Hugh Middelton his heirs or assigns first had and obtained after or
remove or cause to be altered or removed the said pipe or Cocks otherwise then
as the same are now at the first made and set up Nor in the end of the said
term or other ceasing of this present lease shall disturb the said Hugh or
his assigns in cutting the said lesser pipe from the said maine pipe or any
other pipe or branch that shall be derived into any other house from the said
branch of the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " " as aforesaid for the
ceasing of the said watercourse. Provided always that if the said yearly
rent of Twenty Shillinges " shall be behind or unpaid in part or in all
contrary to the tenor and true meaning of these presents being by the said Hugh
his heirs or assigns or his or their servants or officers for that purpose
lawfully demanded at the said dwelling house of the said Hugh Merrick " " " at
any time in the day before the end of the said one and twenty days or if the
said rent or any other part thereof shall be behind or unpaid after one and
twenty days ended. Or if the said Hugh " " Merricke and Hugh (...) " " " or
either or them or any other by their permittance shall suffer the said water to
run at wast except in time of frost a quarter cock and shall not for every
such wast at the finding thereof by the said Hugh his Heirs or assigns or
his or their Officers or s^^uants within six days next after his or their
reasonable request pay or cause to be paid to the said Hugh Myddellton his
heirs or assigns at his said ho^^e the sum of two shillings six pence
Nomine pene or if the said pipe or Cock shall be altered or taken away or any
other watercourse out of the said pipe or Cock suffered by the said Hugh
Merrick and Hugh (...) or either of them or by their or either of th^^r
assigns or by any other person by their or any of their procurement contrary
to the true tenor and meaning of these presents. That then this present grant
and demise and all covenants and graunts therein contained which ought to be
performed on the part of the said Hugh shall cease be void and clearly
frustrate and the said term shall cease and no longer endure any such thing
in these presents contained to the contrary, notwithstanding. And it is
condescended and agreed by and between the said parties to these presents That
if the said Hugh Merricke and Hugh (...) " " or either of them shall directly or
indirectly give or contract to give to any person or persons any money or
rew^^d more then the Fine and rent agreed upon which shall be expressed in this
present demise Except the fee to the Clarke for engrossing this present demise
that then he the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) shall " " " have their
foresaid pipe and branch cut off and the Officer to loose his place that
takes or consents to the taking and receiving any such reward And lastly
the said Hugh Middleton for him his heirs and assigns does further covenant
promise and grant to and with the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " by this
presents that if the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " or either of them shall
happen to be unserved with water into their pipe through the default of the
said Hugh Middelton by reason of any ^^t or impediment in ^^e maine pipe and
shall not be amended noth in one week after notice given Then it shall be
lawful for the said Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " " to detain and keep to
their own vs^ the next quarters rent and always after till the fault be
amended without any forfeiture of the said demise or grant made to the s^^^
Hugh Merrick and Hugh (...) " " aforesaid. In witness whereof the parties to
these presents have interchangeably put to their hands and seals the day and
year (...) ^^oue written.

Hugh Myd(...)n


