THE HIGH and MIGHTY PR. CHARLES PR. OF WALES D. OF CORN: YOR: ALB: and
ROTHS: MARQ. OF ORM:etc



CIVITATIS AMOR. The Cities Love.

An entertainment by water, at Chelsey, and White Hall.

At the joyful receiving of that Illustrious Hope of Great Britain, the High
and Mighty CHARLES, To be created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of
Chester, etc.

Together with the Ample Order and Solemnity of his Highness creation, as it
was celebrated in his Majesty's Palace of White Hall on Monday, the fourth of
November. 1616.

As also the Ceremonies of that Ancient and Honorable Order of the Knights of
the Bath; And all the Triumphs shown in honor of his Royal Creation.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his
shop in Popes-head-Pallace. 1616.

The Ample Order and Solemnity of Prince CHARLES his Creation
HIS Majesty, as well to show the bounty of his affection toward his Royal
Son, as to settle in the hearts of his loving subjects, a lively impression
of his Kingly care, for continuance of the happy and peaceable government of
his Land in his issue and posterity, having determined to inuest his Princely
Highness, with those Titles and Solemnities which the former Princes of his
Realm have usually been adorned; it seemed fittest, both in regard of his
Highness years, showing the rare proofs of promising heroical virtues, and
also that it would be a gladness most grateful and acceptable to the
Commonwealth, to have the Solemnities thereof royally performed: To the
effecting of which the L. Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, with the
several Companies, Honorably furnished and appointed, and Marsh'alld in fair
and comely order, (both by the care and industry of Mr. Nicholas Leate, Citizen
and Merchant of London, and one of the chief Captains for the City; as also
by the well observed and deserving pains of Master Thomas Sparro,
Water-Bayly, made for that day Marshall for the water Triumphs) were ready
attending, with a great Train, and costly entertainment, to receive his
Highness at Chelsie, their Barges richly decked with Banners, Streamers, and
Ensigns, and sundry sorts of loud sounding instruments aptly placed amongst
them; And for his Graces first entertainment, which was near Chelsie, A
Personage figuring London sitting upon a Sea-Vnicorne, with six Tritons
sounding before her, accompanied both with Neptune and the two Rivers Thamesis
and Dee, at his first appearing, speaks as follows.

The Cities Love The Entertainment by Water at Chelsey and White Hall.
At Chelsey. A Personage figuring London, sitting upon a Sea-Vnicorne, with
six Tritons sounding before her, accompanied thither with Neptune, and the two
Rivers Thamesis and Dee. At the first appearing of the Prince, speaks as
follows: London NEptune! since thou have been at all this pains,
Not only with thy Tritons to supply me,
But art thy self come from thy utmost Maines,
To feast upon that Joy that is now so nigh me,
To make our Loves the better understood,
Silence thy Watery Subject, this small Flood.

Neptune gives action toward Thamesis, and speaks, BY the timely Ebbes and
Flows,
That make thee famous to all those
That must observe thy precious Tides
That issue from our wealthy sides:
Not a murmr, not a sound,
That may this Ladies Voice confound,
And Tritons, who by our commanding power
Attend upon the Glory of this Hour,
To do it service, and the City Grace,
Be silent, till we wave our silver Mace.

London. ANd you our honored Sons, whose Loyalty,
Service, and zeal, shall be expressed of me,
Let not your loving ouer-greedy Noise,
Beguile you of the Sweetness of your Joys.
My wish has took effect, for never was known
A greater Joy, and a more silent one.

Then turning to the Prince, thus speaks. TReasure of hope, and Jewel of
mankind,
Richer, no Kingdoms peace did ever see;
Adorned in Titles, but much more in mind,
The loves of many thousands speak in me:
Who, from that blessing of our peaceful store
Thy Royal Father, have received most free,
Honors that wooed thy Virtues long before,
And e're thy Time were capable of thee:
Thou, whose most early goodness fixed in youth
Does promise comfort to the length of Time,
As we on earth measure heavens works by truth,
And things which Natural reason cannot clime:
So, when we look into the Virtuous Aim
Of thy Divine Addiction, we may deem
By Rules of Grace, and Principles of Fame,
What worth will be, now in so high esteem,
And so betimes pursued; which thought upon,
Never more cause this Land had to rejoice,
But chiefly I, the City, that has known
More of this good then any, and more choice:
What a Fair Glorious Peace for many years,
Has sung her sweet calmes to the hearts of men?
Enricht our homes, extinguish't foreign fears,
And at this hour begins her Hymns again:
Live long, and happy, Glory of our days,
And thy sweet Time marked with all fair presages,
Since heaven is pleased in thy blessed life to raise,
The Hope of these, and Joy of after Ages.
Sound Tritons, lift our loves up with his Fame,
Proclaimed as far as Honor has a Name.

Neptune -- Sound -- On --

The Entertainment at White Hall.
This Personage, figuring London (with the six Tritons sounding before,
Neptume, and the two Rivers) being arrived at White Hall, where attend the
Princes Landing, the Figures of two sacred Deities, Hope and Peace thus speaks.
London. HOpe! now behold the Fullness of thy Good,
Which thy sick comforts have expected long,
And thou sweet Peace the Harmony of this flood,
Look up, and see the Glory of thy Song.

Hope leaning her Breast upon a silver Anchor, attended with four Virgins all
in white, having silver Oars in their hands, thus Answers. Hope. Fair and
most Famous City, thou have wak't me,
From the sad slumber of disconsolate Fear,
Which at the Music of thy Voice forsak't me,
And now begin to see my Comforts clear,
Now has my Anchor her firm hold again,
And in my blessed and calm Security,
The expectations of all faithful men,
Have their full fruits being satisfied in me.
This is the place that I Will cast Anchor in,
This, Honors Haven, the Kings Royal Court,
Here will I fasten all my joys again,
Where all deseruers and deserts resort:
And may I never change this happy shore,
Till all be changed never to alter more.

Then Peace sitting on a Dolphin, with her sacred Quire, sings this song
following. The Song of Peace.
VVElcome, oh welcome Spring of Joy and Peace,
Borne to be honored, and to give increase
To those that wait upon thy Graces,
Behold the many thousand faces,
That make this amorous Flood,
Look like a moving Wood,
Usurping all her Cristall spaces.
Amongst which The Cities Love is first,
Whose expectations sacred thirst,
Nothing truly could allay,
But such a Prince, and such a day.
Welcome, oh welcome, all Fair Joys attend thee,
Glory of life, to safety we commend thee.
Tho. Middleton.

Prince Charles his Creation.
THe days Triumph ended, to the great Honor of the City, and content of his
Highness, who out of the goodness of his love, gave the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen many thanks.

On Monday following, the Lords and Peers of the Realm being all assembled at
White Hall, his Highness then proceeded in this manner to his Creation.

First went the Trumpets, then the Heralds and Officers of Arms in their rich
Coats; next followed the Knights of the Bath, being six and twenty in
number, apparelled in long robes of purple Satin, lined with white Taffata;
then sir William Segar Knight, alias Garter, principal King of Arms, bearing
the Letters Patents, the Earl of Sussex the Purple Robes, the Train borne by
the Earl of Huntington, the Sword by the Earl of Rutland, the Ring by the
Earl of Derby, the Rod by the Earl of Shrewesbury, the Cappe and Coronet by
the Duke of Lenox, Lord Steward, his Princely Highness supported by the Earls
of Suffolk and Nottingham, came bare-headed, and so entered the great Hall,
where the King was set in his royal Throane, and the whole State of the Realm
in their Order; the Prince made low obeisance to his Majesty three times, and
after the third time, when he was come near to the King, he kneeled down on
a rich Pillow or Cushion, whilst sir Ralph Winwood principal Secretary, read
his Letters Patents: then his Majesty, at the reading of the words of
Inuestment, put the Robes upon him, and girded on the Sword, invested him with
the Rod and Ring, and set the Cappe and Coronet on his head. With which
Ceremony the Creation being accomplished, the King arose, and went up to
Dinner; but the Prince, with his Lords, dined in the Hall, and was served with
great State and Magnificence, accompanied at his Table with diverse great Lords,
as the Earl of Suffolk Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Arundell Lord Marshall,
the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Duke of Lenox Lord Steward, the
Earl of Penbrooke Lord Chamberlain, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Darby, Rutland,
and Sussex, the Prince sitting in a Chair at the upper end, and the rest in
distance about four yards from him, one oueragainst another, in their degrees,
all which were those that were employed in several Offices of Honor about his
Royal Creation.

At another Table in the same Rowme on the left hand of the Prince, sat the
Knights of the Bath, all on one side, and had likewise great service and
attendance. About the midst of Dinner, sir William Segar Knight, alias
Garter, principal King of Arms, with the rest of the Kings Heralds and
Pursuvants of Arms, approached the Princes Table, and with a loud and audible
voice, proclaimed the Kings Style, in Latin, French and English thriee; and
the Princes in like manner, twice: then the Trumpets sounding, the second
Course came in; and Dinner done, that days Solemnity ceased.

At night, to crown it with more heroical honor, forty worthy Gentlemen of
the Noble Societies of Innes of Court, being ten of each house, every one
appointed in way of honorable Combat, to break three Staves, three Swords,
and exchange ten blows apeece, whose names (for their worthiness) I commend
to Fame, began thus each to encounter other. And not to wrong the sacred
Antiquity of any of the Houses, their names are here set down in the same
order as they were presented to his Majesty; viz. Of the

Middle Temple, Master Strowd. Master Izord. Grayes Inn, Master Courthop.
Master Calton. Lincolnes Inn, Master Skinner. Master Windham Inner Temple,
Master Crow. Master Vernon. Middle Temple, Master Argent. Mast. Glascocke.
Grayes Inn, Master Wadding. Master St-Iohn. Lincolnes Inn, Master Griffin.
Master Fletcher. Inner Temple, Master Parsons. Master Brocke. Middle Temple,
M. Bentley senior. Master Peer. Grayes Inn, Master Selwyn. Master Paston.
Lincolnes Inn, Maester Selwyn. Master Clinch. Inner Temple, Master Chetwood.
M. Smalman. Middle Temple, Ma. Bentley junior. Ma. Bridges. Grayes Inn,
Master Covert. Master Fulkes. Lincolnes Inn, Master Jones. Master Googe.
Inner Temple, Master Wild. Master Chaue. Middle Temple, Master Wansted. Ma.
Goodyeere. Grayes Inn, Master Burton. Master Bennet. Lincolnes Inn, Master
Hitchcocke. Ma. Neuill. Inner Temple, Master Littleton. Master Treuer.
On Wednesday the sixth day of November, to give greater luster and honor to
this Triumph and Solemnity, in the presence of the King, Queen, Prince, and
Lords, fourteen right Honorable and Noble personages, whose names hereafter
follow, graced this days Magnificence, with Running at the Ring; viz.

The Duke of Lenox Lord Steward. Earl of Penbroke L. Chamberlain. Earl of
Rutland. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Montgomery. Vicount Villiers. Lord Clifford.
Lord Walden. Lord Mordant. Sir Thomas Howard. Sir Robert Rich. Sir Gilbert
Gerrard. Sir William Cauendish. Sir Henry Rich.
Having thus briefly described the manner of his Highness Creation, with the
honorable Service shown to the Solemnity, both by the Lords and Gentlemen of
the Innes of Court, I should have set a Period, but that the Knights of the
Bath, being a principal part and ornament of this sacred Triumph, I can not
pass them over without some remembrance: therefore thus much out of the Note
of Directions, from some of the principal Officers of Armos, and some
observation of credit, concerning the Order and Ceremonies of the Knighthood.

The Lords and other that were to receive the Honorable Order of the Bath,
repaired on Satterday the second of November to the Parliament house at
Westminster, and there in the afternoon heard Evening Prayer, observing no
other Ceremony at that time, but only the Heralds going before them in their
ordinary habites from thence to King Henry the seauenths Chapel at
Westminster, there to begin their warrefare, as if they would employ their
service for God especially; from whence, after Service ended, they returned
into the Chamber they were to suppe in: their supper was prepared all at one
Table, and all sat upon one side of the same, every man having an Escutcheon
of his Arms placed over his head, and certain of the Kings Officers being
appointed to attend them. In this manner having taken their repast, several
beds were made ready for their lodging in another rowme hard by, after the same
manner, all on one side; their beds were Pallats, with Couerings, Testers, or
Canopies of Red Say, but they used no Curtains.

The Knights in the mean while were withdrawn into the Bathing Chamber, which
was the next rowme to that which they supped in; where, for each of them was
provided a several bathing Tubbe, which was lined both within and without,
with white Linen, and covered with Red Say: wherein, after they have said
their prayers, and commended themselves to God, they bathe themselves, that
thereby they might be put in mind, to be pure in body and soul from
thenceforth; and after the Bath, they betook themselves to their rest.

Early the next morning they were awakened with Music, and at their
vprising, invested in their Hermites habites, which was a Gown of Gray Cloth
girded close, and a Hoode of the same, and a linen Coife underneath, and an
Hankercher hanging at his girdle, cloth Stockings soaled with Leather, but no
Shoes; and thus apparelled, their Esquiers Governors, with the Heralds wearing
the Coats of Arms, and sundry sorts of winde-Instruments before them, they
proceed from their lodging, the meanest in order foremost, as the nighr before,
until they came to the Chapel, where after Service ended, their Oath was
ministered unto them by the Earl of Arundell Lord Marshall, and the Earl of
Penbroke Lord Chamberlain, in a solemn and ceremonious manner, all of them
standing forth before their stalles, and at their coming out making low
reverence toward the Altar, by which the Commissioners sat, then were they
brought up by the Heralds by two at once, the chiefest first, and so the rest,
till all successively had received their Oath, which in effect was this; That
above all things they should seek the honor of God, and maintenance of true
Religion, love their Sovereign, serve their Country, help Maidens, Widows,
and Orphans, and (to the utmost of their power) cause Equity and Justice to be
observed.

This day, whilst they were yet in the Chapel, wine and sweet meats were
brought them, and they departed to their Chamber to be disrobed of their
Hermites weeds, and were reuested in Roabes of Crimson Taffata, implying they
should be Martial men, the Robes lined with white Sarcenet, in token of
Sincerity, having white Hattes on their heads, with white Feathers, white
Boots on their legs, and white Gloves tied unto the strings of their
Mantles: all which performed, they mount on horseback, the Saddle of black
leather, the Arson white, Stirrup leathers black, gilt, the pectorall of
black leather, with a cross Paty of Silver thereon, and without a Crupper,
the Bridle likewise black, with a cross Paty on the Forehead or Frontlet:
each Knight between his two Esquiers well apparrelled, his Footeman attending,
and his Page riding before him, carrying his Sword with the hiltes upward, in a
white leather Belt without Buckles or Studdes, and his Spurs hanging thereon.

In this order ranked, every man according to his degree, the best or chiefest
first, they rode fair and softly toward the Court, the Trumpets sounding, and
the Heralds all the way riding before them being come to the Kings hall, the
Marshall meets them, who is to have their horses, or else 100. s. in money for
his Fee: then conducted by the Heralds, and others appointed for that purpose,
his Majesty sitting under his Cloth of Estate, gave to them their Knighthood
in this manner:

First, the principal Lord that is to receive the Order, comes, led by his two
Esquiers, and his Page before him, bearing his Sword and Spurs, and kneeleth
down before his Majesty, the Lord Chamberlain takes the Sword of the page,
and delivers it to the King, who puts the Belt over the neck of the Knight,
aslope his breast, placing the Sword under his left Arm: the second Nobleman
of the chief about the King, puts on his Spurs, the right Spur first; and
so is the ceremony performed. In this sort Lord Maltreuers son and heir to
the Earl of Arundell, Lord Marshall, which was the principal of this number,
being first created, the rest were all consequently knighted alike: And when
the solemnity thereof was fully finished, they all returned in order as they
came, saving some small difference, in that the youngest or meanest knight went
now foremost, and their Pages behind them.

Coming back to the Parliament house, their dinner was ready prepared in the
same rowme, and after the fashion as their supper was the night before; but
being set, they were notto taste of any thing that stood before them, but with
a modest carriage, and graceful abstinence, to refrain: diverse kinds of
sweet Music sounding the while; and after a convenient time of sitting, to
arise, and withdraw themselves, leaving the Table so furnished to their
Esquiers and Pages.

About five of the clock in the afternoon, they rode again to Court, to
hear Service in the Kings Chapel, keeping the same order they did at their
return from thence in the morning, every Knight riding between his two
Esquiers, and his Page following him.

At their entrance into the Chapel, the Heralds conducting them, they make a
solemn reverence, the youngest Knight beginning, the rest orderly ensuing, and
so one after another take their standing before their Stalls, where all being
placed, the eldest Knight makes a second Reverence, which is followed to the
youngest, and then all ascend into their Stalls, and take their accustomed
places.

Service then begins, and is very solemnly celebrated with singing of diverse
Anthemes to the Organs, And when the Time of their Offertorie is come, the
youngest Knights are summoned forth of their Stalls by the Heralds, doing
reverence first within their Stalls, and again after they are descended, which
is likewise imitated by all the rest; and being all thus come forth, standing
before their Stalls as at first, the two eldest Knights with their swords in
their hands, are brought up by the Heralds to the Altar, where they offer their
swords, and the Deane receives them, of whom they presently redeem them with
an Angel in Gold, and then come down to their former places, whilst two other
are led up in like manner: The ceremony performed, and service ended, they
depart again in such order as they came, with accustomed Reverence; At the
Chapel door as they came forth, they were encountered by the Kings Master
Cook, who stood there with his white Apron and Sleeves, and a chopping knife
in his hand, and challenged their Spurs, which were likewise redeemed with a
Noble in money, threatening them nevertheless, that if they proved not true and
loyal to the King his Lord and Master, it must be his Office to hew them from
their heels. On Monday morning they all met together nigh at the Court, where
in a private Room appointed for them, they were clothed in long Robes of
Purple Satin, with Hoods of the same, all lined and edged about with white
Taffata: And thus appareled, they gave their attendance upon the Prince at his
creation, and dined that day in his presence at a side Board, as is already
declared.

The Names of such Lords, and Gentlemen, as were made Knights of the Bath, in
honor of his Highness Creation.
James L. Maltreuer, son and heir to the E. of Arund. Algernon L. Percy, son
and heir to the E. Northumb. James L. Wriothesley, son to the E. of
Southhampton. Edward L. Clinton, son to the E. of Lincoln, Edw. L.
Beawchampe, Grandchild to the E. of Hartf. L. Barkley. L. Mordant.
Sir Alexander Erskin, son to the Vicount Fenton. Sir Henry Howard, 2 son to
the E. of Arundell. Sir Robert Howard, 4 son to the E. of Suffolk. Sir
Edward Sackuil, brother to the Earl of Dorset. Sir William Howard, 5. son to
the Earl of Suffolk. Sir Edward Howard, 6. son to the Earl of Suffolk. Sir
Montague Bartue, eldest son to the Lord Willoughby of Ersby. Sir William
Stourton, son to the Lord Stourton. Sir Henry Parker, son to the Lord
Mounteagle. Sir Dudly North, eldest son to the Lord North. Sir Spencer
Compton, son and heir to L. Compton. Sir William Spencer, son to the Lord
Spencer. Sir William Seymor, brother to the Lord Beauchampe. Sir Rowland St.
John, 3. son to the Lord Saint John. Sir John Cauendish, 2 son to the Lord
Cauendish. Sir Tho. Neuill, Grandchild to the L. Aburgauenny. Sir John Roper,
Grandchild to the Lord Tenham. Sir John North, brother to the Lord North. Sir
Henry Carey, son to Sir Robert Carey.
And for an Honorable conclusion of the Kings Royal Grace and bounty shown
to this Solemnity, his Majesty created Thomas Lord Elesmere, Lord Chancelour
of England, Vicount Brackley; The L. Knolles, Vicount Wallingford, Sir Phillip
Stanhope, L. Stanhope of Shelford in Nottingham-shire. These being created on
Thursday the seventh of November, the Lord Chancellor Vicount Brackley, being
led out of the Council Chamber into the Privy Gallery, by the Earl of
Montgomery and Vicount Villiers, the Vicount Wallingford, by the Earl of
Suffolk Lord Treasurer and the Vicount Lisle, the Lord Stanhope, by the Lord
Danuers and the Lord Carew, etc.

FINIS.

