A plain subuersyon or turnyng up side down of all the arguments, that the
Popecatholykes can make for the maintenance of auricular confession, with a
most wholesome doctrine touching the due obedience, that we owe unto civil
magistrates, made dialogue wise between the Prentyse and the Priest by Gracyous
Menewe.

Psalm. 31. I said, I will confess my sines unto the Lord: and so thou
forgaueste the wickedness of my people.

To all faithful brethren / that love Jesus Christ sincerelye, Gracious Menewe
wysheth grace and peace of conscience, and Godly strength from God the father
through our Lord Jesus Christ.
MAny in these most perylous times, which have deseruingly chanced unto us
for our sins, are in such perplexite and troble of conscience, that they can
not tell, which way to turn themselves, whom to help and succoure, according
to the little talent that God has lent me, I have thought to be my bounden
duty. And truly I would have long agone discharged my conscience in this
part, If I might by any means have conveniently published and set forth
abroad those things, that I had prepared for the purpose. But that could not
be, which thing was to me no less gryeuous, than if I my self had felt
the same burden and pain, that I saw my poor brethren to feel: howbeit since,
according to the commen proverb, it is better late then never: I have now at
this present penned or written out a little treatise, wherein I show briefly out
of Gods book and such ancient writers, as ground their sayings upon the same,
how far forth we ought to be obedyente unto civil magistrates. What is
contained in this book.
And this I did because many are of this opinion, that they are bound to do
whatsoever the higher powers command them, though their laws were directlye
against God and his word, What moved me to write here of the obedience due to
magistrates.
in so much that they persuade them selves that they shall be excused by them in
the dreadful dai of judgment, when we shall appear all before god, if at
any time they commit manifest Idolatrye and plain ungodliness through their
commandment. Whom I desyer in the bowels of our savior Jesus Christ, who has
shed his blood indifferently for all them, that hear his word obedyently,
and without any fear what man can do unto them, stike and cleave steadfastly
unto it: that they will dyligently and without affectyon, puttyng aside all
vain love of their selves, look upon the places and examples of the holy
scripture, and upon the autorites of the old auncyente fathers, that I have
here alleged in this my small book, truly aunswerynge all manner of obiectyons
that are made to the contrary, then I trust, they will be better advised, and
cease to please themselves in that which is evil, or to justify their
manifest disobedyence toward God and his word, under the pretense and
color of the obedyence that we owe unto his magistrates and rulers of the
earth: whom in the scriptures we are streightlye commanded to obey, Roma. 13.
1. Peter. 2.
yea upon pain of damnacyon. But in the mean season, we must always have
before our eyes the golden sentence of our savior Christ, where he says:
pay that unto Ceasar, that is due unto Ceasar, Math. 22.
and pay that unto God, that is due unto God. If Ceasar, that is to say, the
civil magistrates command the nothing that God has forbydde^, or forbydde
thee nothing that God has commanded, if thou doeste not then obey, yea
thoghe it were to the ieopardye of losinge both life and goods, thou may be
sure that the vengeance of god and everlasting damnacyon of hell hangs over
thy head* but if the magistrates forgettyng their duetye toward GOD, from
whom they have received all autoryte and power, do take upon them, to
command thee any thing that GOD has forbidden, or to forbydde thee any
thing, that the hygheste Monarche of all has commanded: thou ought in no
wise to obey, not that thou shouldeste make any resystaunce, which thing
GODS word teaches thee not, but that thou should rather with Sidrach,
Misach and Abednago and with the holy prophet Daniel offer thy self to dye a
most shameful and cruel death, Dani. 3.6.
than in any wise to be obedyent to their ungodly laws, and wicked
constitutio^s or statutes. This thou may learn, with diligent and
affectuouslesse reading in this book, wherein also thou shall have a most
necessary doctrine of confession, teaching thee how auricular confession,
Auriculare confession has no ground nor foundacio^ in gods word.
which now a days to the great hynderaunce of Gods truth, and defacynge
of his glory, is set up again, has no ground at al nor foundacyon in Gods
word, but is a mere tradition of that Antichryste of Rome, being now,
besides al other enormites, that be contained in it, made a snare to snarle
and catch men with all.

Here are all the arguments, yt the Popecatholykes can make for the
maintenance of this Antichristian tradycyon, clean subverted and turned
vpside down, with the mighty thunder boltes of Gods word, and with ye strong
batteryng pieces of the holy fathers of the true catholic church, and spouse
of our sauyoure Jesus Christ.

And then, immediatlye after, it is declared, what manner of confession God
does require of us in his most sacred word and holy scripture.

This small labor of mine, I desire all true faithful Chrystyans, to take in
good worth, and to pray with me instauntlye, that God of his infinite
goodness and mercy vouchesafe to strengthen them, that do stand, and to
coumforte and help the weak hearted, to raise them up that fall, and finally
to beat down Satan under our fete. Which thing, doubtelesse, he will do
for his son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the father, and the holy ghost,
be al praise, glory and honor, for ever and ever. So be it.

A most wholesome talk and communication betwixt the prentyse and the Pryest,
touching the matter of auricular confession: wherein all the arguments, that
ye Popecatholykes can make, for ye mayntenau^ce of this Antichristian
tradicio^, ar overthrown and quite turned vpside down, made by Gracyous Menew.
PRiest. I am glad that I have met you now in so good a time, young man: for I
have some what to say to you.


Prentyse. What have ye to say to me master person? here I am ready to hear
whatsoever ye will say.


Priest, How chance that ye are so disobedient at this time, to ye Queen's
proceadynges? Do ye not know, that the scripture bids us to obey ye
higher powers? And has not the Queen's majesty, Of the obedyence due to the
civil magistrates.
with her most honorable counsayl, sent a commission and a most straight
iniunction, that al generally, that are in the years of discretion, should
come to shrifte or auricular confession? How does it chance then, that ye
are so unwilling to come and to fulfill her graces commaundment?


Prentise. I know right well master person, that we are bidden in the scripturs
and word of God to be obedyent to the magistrates and higher powers.

Romans 13.
For S. Paull says: let every soul submit her self to the autorite of the
higher powers. And in an other place, Titus. 3.
warn the^, says he, that they submit themselves to rule and power, to
obei ye officers.


Priest. The better yt know your duty toward the higher powers and
magistrates, the greater must be your condemnacyon because ye do it not.

For the servant, that knows his masters will, Luke. 12.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many strypes. Here ye this young man? Do
ye not also read in the place, that ye have alleged, Roma. 13.
that they that resist the magistrates, which are the ordeynaunce of God, shall
receive to themselves damnation?


Prentyse. All that ye have said is true. But what does it make for our
purpose? For where the scryptures and word of God does bydde us to obey the
higher powers and magistrates, it is not to be understood of those things,
that pertein to the conscience of man, which ought only and soleli to be
builded upon the infallyble word of god, How far forth we ought to be
obedient to civil magistrates.
in matters belongyng to salvation, but of civil co^stitutio^s, laws and
ordeynaunces, that temporal rulers, governors, and magistrates make for the
preseruacyon of the commen weal, whereunto doubtless we ought to be
obedyente, as long as they command nothing that is ungodly, or forbydde
nothing, that God has commanded us to do.


Priest. Why does not S. Peter say: submit your selves to all manner
ordeynaunce of man, for the Lords sake? Peter. 2.
Here the blessed Apostel S. Peter does bydde us to be obedyente to all manner
of ordeinaunce of man, without any exception.

Whatsoever than they command and ordain, we are bound to obey it, layinge
aside all curiouse questioning. For it is neither mete nor conueniente, that
subjects should busye themselves about Princes matters, asking, why have
they ordained this? Or why have they ordained that?

We ought, without any such busye asking or questionynge, to be obedyente,
whatsoever they command us.

If their laws and statutes be ungodly, they their selves shall answer for it,
and not we. Our blood shall be required at their hands, if they set forth
any thing contrary to Gods word.

In the mean ceason we, that be subjects, are bound to obey the^.


Prentyse. As touching the text, that ye have alleged out of the first
Epistle of Saint Peter, it ought otherwise to be understood, than ye do
expound it. Else had the blessed Apostel himself done contrary to his own
saying: for when the rulers and elders of Jerusalem, Acts. 4.
with Annas the chief Priest, had commanded him and John, that in no wise
they should speak or teach in the name of Jesus, they would in no wise obey,
but rather answered them stoutelye, saying: whether it be right in the sight
of God, to obey you more than God, judge ye. And in an other place, he with the
other Apostles says plainly thus: better it is to obey God than man. Acts. 5.
Wherefore master person, we must necessarely note here, that there be.2. kynds
of ordeinaunces of man. The one aperteining to relygyon: Two ki^des of
ordeynaunces of man.
and those, without gods holy word, ar altogether ungodly, and in no wise
to be followed. For they bid us to worshype God, after man's fancyes and wicked
inue^cyons of worldly wisdom, and not as he himself wylbe worshypped and
served. Therefore they, that follow them, shall iustlye hear this sharp rebuke
of the heavenly wisdom of god: this people draws nigh unto me with their
mouths, Math. 15.
and honoreth me with their lips. How beit their hearts are far from me,
Esaie. 29.
teaching doctrynes, that are but men's precepts. Yea the lord threatens his
people, because they feared him through men's laws and doctrynes, that he would
destroy the wisdom of their wise, and that the understanding of their learned
men should perish. And not without a good cause does the Lord threaten,
that he will do thus: for since they do prefer their own wisdom before
the wisdom of God, do they not well deserve (I pray you) to have that
wisdom, which God had given them for to bestow to his own glory, to be taken
away from them? So that the saying of S. Paul is fulfilled in them, where he
says: Roma. 1.
when they counted themselves wise, they became fools. For why? When they knew
God, they glorified him not nor yet worshipped him as god. For if they would
have worshipped him as God, they would not have sought other manner ways to
worship and serve him, than he himself has appointed.

To be short the reward of the^, that will not submit them selves to the
everlasting word of God, and serve him after the phansyes of men's dreams, The
reward of men's phansyes and dreams*
is to have their foolyshe hearts blinded with vai^e imaginations, and to be
given up into their own lusts. Wherefore I would counsel all men to beeware
of them, Ambrosius de virginibus. li. 4.
and to say with that holy father S. Ambrose: Nos noua omnia, que Christus non
docuit iureda^namus: quia fidelibus via Christus est. Si igitur Christus non
docuit, quod docemus, etiam nos id detestabile iudicamus. We do by a good
right condemn all new things, Idem in 1. Corin. 4.
that Christ has not taught* therefore if Christ has not taught that, which
we teach, we judge it also to be detestable. And no merueill, for in an other
place he says plainly, that what soever has not been set forth by ye
Apostls, ye sa^e is full of wickedness

And will ye bind us to be obedyente to that, which is detestable and wicked?


Priest. I say still, that subjects ought not to busy themselves about Princes
matters. For as ye heard already, if their laws be naught and wicked, then
they their selves shall answer for it.


Prentise. In deed in things, that appertain to civil laws, constitutions
and ordeynaunces, which magistrates be wont too make for the preseruatyon of
the commen weal, we ought to lay aside all busye and curyous questenyng.

For if their laws be not according to justice and equite, or if by their
wicked statuts their subjects be oppressed, they shall receive aco^dygne
punishment at the righteous hand of God: yea the blood of the^, yt shall perysh
through their vnrighteousse laws, shall be required at their hands.

And this is the other kind of ordeinaunces made by manne, whereunto, as I have
said before, we ought to be obedyent, and that without any exceptyon, as far
forth as they be nothing repugnant to godliness and Christian charity.

And without all peradventure S. Peter speaks there in the place before
alleged of this kind of ordeynaunces.

Howbeit, if both the Greek and latyne be well weyed, we shall soon perceive
that Peter does here set forth the same self doctrine, which Paul himself
does teach in the 13. to the Romans: for the Greek words are these:
hypotagete pase anthropine ctisei, and Erasmus does translate them after this
manner: Subditi estote cuiuis humane creature.

And in English they may be translated thus: be subject to all humayne
creature, or to all men. For although this word, ctisis, may be taken for
ordeynaunce: yet by the text that follows, it appeapeareth it ought rather to
be taken as Erasmus has translated. Mark well the circumstances of the text
your self, and read that, which follows immediately after ye same sentence,
that ye have brought in: and than, I trust, ye will confess my saying to be
true.


Priest. What follows I pray you? For I perceue yt ye are a doctor.


Prentise. I would be glad to be a disciple, master person, if I could find
such a doctor, as would teach nothing else but true Godliness.

The words that follow are these: or rather that we may understand the whole
matter the better, I will repete the whole se^te^ce: I mean both your text,
and that which follows.


Priest. Well, do so. Peter. 2.



Prentyse. Submit your selfs unto all manner ordinance of man, or as Erasmus
translateth, to all manner creature, for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the
king, as unto the chief head, other unto rulers, as unto them that are sent
of him for the punishment of evil doers, but for the laud of them that do well.

This text, I trow, is plain enough, so that we need no longer tarying about
it.


Priest. Say ye what ye will, I will be of this opinion as long as I live,
that the subjects shall be excused before God, if they follow and obey the
laws of ye higher powers, be they never so wicked and ungodly.


Pre^tyse. And that master person is a deuilyshe and abominable opinion.
Subjects shall not be excused, if they follow wicked and ungodly laws. Math. 15.
Does not Christ say: if the blind do lead the blind, they shall fall both
into the diche? He says not that ye leader only or guide shall fall, but yt
they shall both fall. And ye like read we in ye prophet Hieremy, where he says,
yt both ye falls prophet and also they, that harke^ unto the^, shall perysh with
sword, Hier. 14.
with hunger, and with pestilence.


Pryeste. Does not the Prophet Ezechiel say plainly, Ezechi. 3. and 33.
that the blood of the sheep shall be required at the shepeheardes hands? Ye
will not deny that the higher powers in the scriptures and also in profane
autors ar called Pastores populi, that is to say, the shepeheardes of the
peopell.


Prentise. I grant, that they be Pastores populi: that is to say, the
shepeheardes of the people, and yt their shepes blood shall be required at their
hands.

But what shall this be for the easemente of the poor sheep? The Prophet
says that they shall perysh, and not only the shepeherds: whose damnacion in
deed shall be the greater, because that they shall not only answer for their
own sins, but also for the loss of the^, that were of God committed into
their hands.

But, as I have already said, that shall be but a small help and comfort for
them, when they their selves, being in the everlasting pains of hell,
whereunto they are brought through the negligence and wicked laws of their
shepherds, shall see them to suffer greater punishment, than they do their
selves.

I would feign ask you a questyon, master person.


Priest. Ask what ye will.


Prentyse. Is it lawful for the inferior magystrates, to make laws contrary
to ye laws of the higher power?


Pryeste. No by S. Mary.


Prentyse. What if the inferior magistrates should presume to make any such
laws?


Pryest. I would count them no better tha^ treatours.


Prentis. And what will ye say of them, that know the higher powers laws, and
yet layinge them aside, follow and obey the laws, yt the inferior magistrates
have made?

As for an example: if the depute of Cales should take presumptuously upon him,
to set forth statutes contrary to the Queen's laws: what would ye judge him
to be, and all them, that would obey his statutes and commandments?


Priest. I would judge him to be a treatoure, and all the other to be as
accessories unto him.


Prentyse. Ye know right well master person, that they that be accessoryes unto
any evil and wicked deed, as unto treason, theft, murder and other like, do
receive the same punishment, that the wicked doers are condemned to.


Priest. No doubt thereof.


Prentise. very well, what say ye now, is not the living God, the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the hygheste Monarche of all? And have not all the
kings and Princes of the earth their power and autorite from him?


Pryeste. Yeas truly. For the Psalmist says not only, that he is a great
God, Psalm. 95.
but that he is a great king above all Gods. And Sayncte Paul in the.13. to
ye Romans writes, Roma. 13.
that there is no power but of God, and that all the powers, that be, are
ordained of God.


Prentyse. It reioyseth my heart to hear you speak so well. Is it lawful
then for the rulers, kings and Princes of the earth to make any statutes,
decrees, and laws contrary to the commandment of their high Monarche and
king, from whom they have and receive all the autorytye and power, that they
have?


Priest. They ought in no wise so to do: for as Christ does bydde us, to
pay that unto Ceasar, which is due unto Ceasar: Mat. 22. Mark. 12 Luke. 20
so does he command us, to pay that unto God, yt is due unto God. If God
then will have that to be paid unto Caesar, that is to say, to the civil
magistrates, rulers and governors, that by his own appoyntmente is due unto
them: what an ingratitude and unthankfulness should it be, if they would let
men to pay that unto god, which is of al men due unto him? I would verelye
count them no less then rank traitors?


Prentis And what is your judgment of the^, that obey their wicked laws and
unlawful commandments?


Priest. I must needs confess, that they are accessoryes unto them, and
consequently that they shall be partakers of the same punishmente, that such
wicked and ungodly rulers shall by the righteous judgment of god receive at
length.


Pre^tyse. This, that ye say, master person, is most true, and therefore that
holy man S. Bernarde, writing to a certain Moonke called Adam, bernardus in
epist. ad Adam monachu^ epi. ^
says these words: we ought in no wise to obey them, that command wicked
things: for that were to break the higher obedyence, that is to say, the
obedience yt we owe unto God, for to obey inferioure and humayne creatures.
What then? That thing, which man commands, God does forbydde.

And shall I give ears unto man, being defe to god? The Apostles did not so,
but cried out sayi^g: better it is to obey God then men. And by and by he
concludes: Igtur facere malum, Acts. 5.
quolibet etiam iubente, constat non esse obedientiam, sed potius
inobedientiam. That is to say: therefore to do evil at the commandment of any
man it is plain and evident, that it is no obedience but rather disobedience.
Hieronymus in epi. ad Titum. cap. 1.


Saint Hierome writes on this manner: if that, which the Emperor or his
depute does command, be good, obey or follow the will of him, that
commands it: but if it be naught or wicked, and against God, answer them
out of the Acts of the Apostles: better it is to obey God than men. Ambro.
ad Marcellynam sorore^ de tradendis Basilicis.
S. Ambrose says plainly, that things, which appertain unto God or unto
Gods service, are not in the Emperors power: meani^g that kings and Emperors
ought to meddell no farther in things, that appertain to Gods true service,
than he himself has appointed them in his holy and sacred word.

And out of this holy father, is there a most notable saying, Que. 3. Can.
Iulianus.
reherced in ye canon laws on this wise: Iulianus the Emperor, though he was
an Apostata, yet had he under him Chrystyan souldyers: who, when he said to
them, bring forth weapons for the defense of ye commen weal, were most
obedient, but when he said unto the^: bring forth your armoure and weapons
against the Chrystyans, they then acknowledged the heavenly Emperor.

But above all things, the golden sentences of Saint Augustyne are to be
marked, where he writes thus. Emperors, when they their selves are in error,
Augusti. epist. 169.
do for ye defense of their error make laws against the truth, whereby the
righteous are both tried and crowned: but not in doing that, which they
command: for god forbyddeth it, as when Nabucho donosor commanded that the
golden Image should be worshipped.

They, that would not do it, plesed God highly, who forbyddeth such things.
But when Emperors are in the way of truth, and make laws for the truth
against error: whosoever does contemn such laws, Augu. Bonifacio comiti de
moderate coercendis hereticis.
does purchase unto himself great damnacion. And ad bonifacium comitem, de
moderate cohercendis hereticis, these be his words: whosoever will not obey
the Emperors laws, which are made against the truth of God, does purchase
unto himself a great reward. And whosoever will not obey the Emperors
laws, that are made for the truth, does purchase unto himself a great
punishmente.

The like in a manner is alleged out of this holy father in the canon laws.
Que. 3. ca. non se^per.



Pryest These autorytes, that ye have brought, ar very Godly. And in good
faith, I cannot but praise you for your great diligence, that ye have used in
readyng both the scriptures and auncye^t writers.

But are ye able to bring examples out of the scriptures of any of them, that
would not obey unto godly statuts and laws.


Prentis. Ye as very many. Dani. 3. Sidrach Misach Abednago


Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago were in all things most obedyent unto king
Nabuchodonosor, as long as he commanded them no ungodliness, in so much that
for their true service and obedience, they were in high favor with the king:
but after that Nabuchodonosor began to doubt, and did set up a golden
Idolle, willing that honor too be given unto it, that ought only and solely
to be given unto God, they would in no wise be obedient, but choose rather to be
cast in to the burning furnace. With what stomach and boldness, when they
were called before the king, answered they? saying: Hoc notum sit tibi, O Rex,
quod Deos tuos non coimus, neque adorabimus aureum simulachrum, quod erexisti.

That is to say: Let this be known unto the, Daniel. 6.
O King, that we do not worship thy gods, nor will worship thy golden
Image, that thou haste sefte up.

Daniel him self, who was in great favor with three kings, that is too
say with Nabuchodonosor, Elmerodache and Balthazar, when a Law was made by
the procurement of all ye Lords of Persie, that if any man should ask any
thing by the space of thyrty days, either of any GOD or of any man, but of
king Darius only, he should be casten in to the den of the Lions, would
in no wise obey: but according to his wont custom prayed thryse in the
day, his chaumber wyndowes being wide open, whereby he was disclosed and
accused to the prince, and even then denied it not, though he should too the
Lions for it. What need I to reherce here ye most notable example of Eleazarus
that Godly old scribe? When that cruel tirant Antiochus had made a very
strait law, 2. Ma. 7
that as many of the Jews, as would not eat swines flesh, should be most
cruelly put to death, this godly old scribe would rather dye, than to break
Gods law.

And when certain of his friends cou^seled him to feine himself as he had
eaten swynes flesh, 2. Ma. 9.
promising him, that he should by ye mean save his life, he could not find in
his heart to dissemble, but offered himself manfully to dye. What should we
speak here of ye ^ii. young men and of their mother? How many and sundri ways
were they tempted to break the commandments of god, now with cruel
threatninges, now with fair and flatteryng promyses? And yet nothing could
make them to swerve one iotte from the law of the living god, but suffered al
a most horrible and cruel death with their mother. As for the example of the
Apostles, it has been alleged alredye.


Priest. If this doctrine should be preached openly, it should breed sedicion
and tumulte, and cause insurrection against the lawful magistrates. The true
preachers ar always slaundered



Prentise. I know ye many honest men are slaundered to have preached
sedicion and disobedience, because they have taught how far forth men ought
to be obedient to the civil magistrates: but al men of upright judgment, that
have heard them, can bear witness to the contrary. For alwais in their sermons
they did most diligently exhort the people to true obedience toward their
magistrates putting before their eyes the plags and vengeance of god, that has
at al times and in all ages happened to them, that have rebelled against their
rulers and governors, were they never so wicked and ungodly.


Priest. Is not this a kind of rebellion, when they will not obey their laws
and statutes?


Prentyse. I have already proved unto you, that we ought in nowyse to be
obedient too wicked and ungodly statutes or laws. This, I say, have I already
proved by plain textes of ye scriptures, by manifest examples of the same, and
by many notable authorities of the ancient writers. Howebeit I will be of
this opinion, as long as I live, that it were better for a Christian to dye a
thousand deaths, than once to draw the swearde against his lawful
magistrate. If God send us at any time such magistrates as be ungodly, let
us remove or put away ye causes, wherefore god did send them unto us: and then
god will either turn their hearts, and make them such, as we would have them, or
else if they be given over into their own lusts, take the^ away and place other
in their roumes.


Priest. What be the causes, wherefore God does send ungodly magistrates unto
us?


Pre^tyse. Sine: for the scripture says: Regnare facit hypocritam Deus
propter peccata populi, yt is to say: God causes an hypocrite too reygne for
the syns of the people. And in Esaie it is written on this manner: Esaie. 3.
I shall give you children to be your princes, says the Lord, and babes shall
have ye rule of you. And why? because, says ye prophet, your words and
counseyll are against the Lord, provoking the presence of his majesty unto
anger.

The surest weapons then, that we can have, to fight withal* against wicked
and ungodly rulers, is true repentance and amendment of life, faithful and
unfeigned prayer, proceadyng from a troubled and contrite heart. And they, that
use any other armure or weapons, are not of God, but are the children of Belial
by such unlawful means, as they do use, pourchassyng unto themselves
everlasting damnatyon. Now master person, I trust ye have sufficiently heard my
mind, touching the obedience that we owe unto magistrates, and how far
forth we are bound to obeie their laws.


Priest. But what means Saint Paul, Romans 13.
when he says: wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance
only, but also because of conscience.

Here are men bound in conscience to obey. What will ye have more?


Prentyse. The meaning of Sayncte Paul is this, that we must obey our
temporal rulers, not only for fear of the punishment and vengeance, that
ensues and follows of disobedience, but also because our conscience does
bear us record, that it is gods will and pleasure, that we should obey
them. That is too say: Although it were possible yt we might escape all
worldely punishment and shame, that comes of disobedience and rebellion, yet
because in our conscience we are by Gods word persuaded, that all the high
powers are of God, we can not (onelesse we would condemn our own selfs) but be
obedient unto them, as long as they keep them selfs within the bounds and
limits of gods book: for if they commau^de any thing, that God has forbidden,
or forbid any thing, that God has commanded: we ought to say with ye
Apostelles: Better it is to obey God than men. Acts. 5.



Priest. And has not God commanded confession?


Prentyse. No such kind of confession does God command, as is used now at
this present. And truly I do merueyll, that ye be not ashamed among you, to
affirm that auricular confession is of god, Auricular confession is not of God.
or that it is grounded in gods word. For though it has been used in times
passed, yet was it then free for all men, whether they would come to it or not.
The histories do plainly declare, yea and many ancient writers besides, that
there was no law at all made concerning this auriculare confession, which ye do
with to the and nail defend now, before Innoce^tius the third: and that it was
a polityke order instituted by the bishops, but not a law ordained either of
Christ or of his Apostles. De penit^tia distinc. 1.
Therefore Gratianus, after a long disputation, concludes at length the whole
matter with these words: I have briefli set fourth and declared, what autours,
or what reasons and arguments both sentences are grounded upon: but we leave
to the judgment of the reader, which of the^ he will follow and stycke to. And
he, Distinc. ^.
that has written the gloss of the first book, does playnelye affirm, that
we are only bound by man's law to this confession, and that therefore the
Greckes were never bound to it, because this law was never received of them.

Which thing any man would have judged Diuelyshe and abominable, if this
confession had been commanded by Christ. Sozomenus writes, that this
institution and ordeynaunce was diligently observed and kept in the weaste
churches, Trip li. 9.
and specially at Rome: wherbi he signifies that it was not a general law of
all churches, and that one priest among al other was appointed to this office:
wherein also he does confute the lying opinion of the^, which affirm that the
keys are delivered universally to al priests for this purpose: for it was not
the office of all priests too confess, but one only was appointed to it by
the Bishop.


Priest. And was this confession used only in the Occidentalle or Weaste
churches? This is a strange thing, that ye do tell.


Prentyse. The same Sozomenus does also testify, that it was used at
Constantinople, until abominable whoredom and adultry was shamfully committed
between a Deacon and a noble woeman, under the pretense of it. For this enorme
and detestable crime did Nectarius, being a holy and godly man, abolishe
auricular confession: which Nectarius was then bishop of Constantinople. Now
mark this thing, master Person: if this had been ye law of God, Nectarius
durst not have put it down. Will ye accuse this holy man (who of all men is
so (...), commended) of heresye? Or will ye condemn the church of
Constantinople, which never after that time would admit and receive
auricular confession* Yea, not only the church of Constantinople, but also all
the East churches have been always at defiau^ce with this Antichristian
tradition. Would they have been against it, if it had been ye institution of
Christ? Chrysostom, who was also bishop of that church (I mean, of the
church of Constantinople) does so plainly testifye the same in all his
writings, yt I merueyl, they be not ashamed once too opene their mouths to
defend it. Tell furthe thy syns (says he) yt thou may put them away. If
thou be ashamed to tell to any man what thou have done amysse, Rome. 2. in
Psalm. 51.
tell thy sins every day in thy mind. I bid not the to tell them to thy
fellow servant, who may bewraye the: but tell them to God, which heals them.
Tell forth thine offenses upon thy bed, that there thy conscience may
acknowledge and recognyse her own wickedness. And in an other place: Ser. de
co^fessione et penitentia.
Now is it nothing necessary, says this holy father, to confess our selfs
before witnesses, let a diligent inquisition of thy sins be made in thy
thought, this trial be done without witness: let God alone see thee, wherein
thou do confess thy self. To. 5. de incompre. Dei natura contra Anameos.
And in his 5. homelye de incomprehensibli Dei natura contra Anameos, these be
his words: I do not bring thee in to the scafold of thy fellow servants. I
do not compelle the to confess, detecte or open thy sins unto men: repete
thy conscience before God, open thy mind, show thy wondes unto the Lord, that
most excellent Physician, and call for help at his hands: show the^ to him,
that vpbraydeth nothing, but will heal them most gentilly. Besides all these,
he says in an other place: Beware thou tell not thy fault unto man, To. 4. de
Lazaro.
lest he do vpbrayede the, for we are not bound to confess our selfs to our
fellow seuraunt, yt may vpbrayede and utter abroad our confession. But show
thy wou^des to God, who is careful over thee, who is gentill, and a sure
Physician. Afterward he does induce or bring in God, speaking on this manner:
I do not compelle thee to come forth in to ye common scaffold, and to call for
many witnesses? Tell thy sins to me alone privily, yt I may heal ye sores.
Will ye sai yt Chrysostom was so far out of ye wai, yt he would have set me* is
consciences at liberty, from coming to such kind of confession, if they had been bound to it by Gods laws? No no, master person, but he durst not
require yt as a thing necessary, which he knew was not prescrybed and
commanded in Gods word.


(...) (...) will I prove, yt (...) comm^^ded of god.


Prentys I would be glad to hear, (...) do it.


Pryest. Math. 8.
Does not Christ say unto ye (...) thy self unto the pryest?


Prentyse. Why master person, Luke 7.10. Mar. 1.
did he send him to shrifte?

Who ever knew that the priests of the Leuiticall law were appointed to
shriue men? But now good master person, weigh with your self, how well this
place serves for your purpose. When did ever Christ send lepers to the
priests? before or after they weere made clean?


Priest. What question is that? No doubt, he healed them before he sent them to
the priests.


Prentyse. Very well, if ye will then have this place to serve for your purpose:
it should follow that we must be healed of our leprosye, yt is to say, Mark
how well ye place alleged by the priest serves for him.
that we must have clen remission of our sins before we should come to you.
Wherefore then will ye have us too tell you our sins, with all the
circu^strau^ces thai may be, perswadinge the simple and ignorant people, that
onles they tell you all their sins one by one, and receive absolution at your
hand, they shall never be forgeuen? This is altogether against your own laws.
For in ye book de penitentia distinc. 1 Canon. Cum ergo. De peni. Distin. 1.
Cano. cum ergo.
these words are found: it does plainly appear, that sin is forgeuen
through the contrition of the heart, without ye confession of ye mouth. And
the^ a litel after it follows: sin is not forgeuen in confession: for it is
manifestly proved that it is already forgeuen. Therefore confession is made for
a declaracion of repentance, not for obtayninge of forgeuenes. And against
the tellyng out of sins after your sort, one by one with the circumstaunces
and all, Augu. li. 10 confess. ca. 3
we have these words of S. Augustine: what have I to do therefore with men, yt
they should hear my confessyo^s, although they were able to heal al my diseases
and infirmites? A curiouse and busye kind of people to know an other man's
life, but slouthful to correct their own. And why seek they to hear of me
what I am, that will not have thee to hear, what they be? And when they hear
me speak of my self, how can they tell, whether I say truth or not? For no
man knows what is in man, but ye spirit of man that is in him. It is also
alleged in ye decres out of S. Chrysostom, ye such enumeratio^ or tellyng out
of sins is nothing necessary.


Priest. Ye bring many things, to draw me away from my purpose. But I will
not suffer you to escape. This was Moses law, that the Priests should judge
of Leprosye: Leui. 13.14.15.
sin is spyrytuall Leprosye: ergo Priests ought to give sentence or
judgment of it.


Pre^tyse. If this place does make you judges of ye spiritual leprosye, why
do ye not also take upon you the handelinge of the natural and carnal
leprosye? Is not this to play with the scriptures? The law has put the trial
of leprosye in to the priests hands, let us take the same upon us. Sin is
spiritual leprosy, therefore let us also be the judges and tryers of sins:
But ye shall understand, that the priesthode, being translated, the law also
must necessarely be translated. Hebru. 7.
All the whole priestehode is translated unto Christ, fulfilled and fynished in
him: therefore to him only apperteyneth the whole right and honor of the
priesthood. If ye have such a delighte too follow Allegoryes, appoynte Christ
too be the only priest, geuynge him the whole authority, and then ca^ we
abide your allegoryes. But we can not away with those allegories, that make of
a mere politic law a ceremony.


Priest. But why did God command in the old law, yt the priests should
have the handeling and trial of the leprosye? Or why did Christ se^d the
leapers, after they were cured and healed, unto the priests, biddinge them to
offer that, which Moses commanded for a witness unto them?


Prentyse. The holy Ghost willed the priests of the old testament to have ye
trial of leprosye, Why God would have ye pryest of the old law to have the
handlynge of the leprosye.
that when men should see the priests of God to have ye handeling of leprosye,
they might by that sight, be admonished, that God looks upon our
infirmyties, and is careful for them. Secondely, because the leuiticall
priesthod was a shadow and figure, not of these Popish sacrificers, that most
untruly take upon the^ the names of Pryestes, but of ye most pure and holy
Pryest, our sauyoure Jesus Christ: the holy ghost by this institution does
certify us, that as the Leuiticall priests had not only the handlyng and
trial of Leprosye, but also offered expiatorye sacrifices for it, so our
savior Christ alone knows truly our filthiness, and seeing it worthy of
everlasting damnacion, has taken upon him to make satisfaction for it, that
we being through him reconcyled to God, may obtain true clenelynes.


Priest. But this yt Christ did when he sent the lepers unto the Priests, Whi
christ did send ye lepers to ye pryestes.
is in the new testament. Therefore it can be no figure.


Pre^tise. It was for two causes, that Christ did send the lepers to ye
Priests. First ye shall understand, that the Priests being utter enemies of
Christ, and of his most holy doctrine, did always sla^der his doings, going
about to persuade the people, that he did not work true miracles, but
through legerdemayne deceived them. If then the priests should receive again
those lepers into the congregacyon of the clean, those lepers I say, that
Christ se^te unto them, taking at their hand the gift, which Moses
commanded to be offered unto them for their clensyng, that must have been an
other day a plain witness against them, if they should go about to calu^niate
Christ's miracles. Secondly Christ, because he would not seem to be a breaker
of Moses law, which was inful strength until his death and passion, did
always send those lepers, that he did heal, to the same Leuiticall Priests,
commaundyng them strayghtly, to offer ye gift, which Moses willed the^ to
offer, that so he might on every side stope their mouths. Read Chrysostom in
the.12. Homili de muliere Can. Chri. Ho. 12. de muli Cana. Am. ser. 3. in. 119.
psa.
What need we too tarry any longer about this matter: Does not the blessed
Saint Ambrose in his. 3. sermon upon the 119. Psalm write on this manner? go
show thy self unto the pryest. What is this true Pryest (says he) but he, who
is priest for ever?


Priest. Yet can ye not deny that sin is signified by the leprosy. And that
the lepers did represe^t sinners.


Prentyse. Put the case I grant the same unto you: what have ye won by
it? Even that sinners ought to repair to the ministers of gods word, there
to learn by their wholesome prechi^g instruction and teaching out of gods
book, how to repent truly and how to take hold through faith upon the
mercy of God, being offered unto all true repentaunt sinners in the gospel
of our savior Jesus Christ: but ye shall never be able to prove, yt they are
bond to tell out their sins unto them, or to receive such beggarly
absolutyo^ at their hands, as is now used in Antychristes church.


Priest. What can ye say to this place of S. Mathewe: Math. 16.
I will give the, says Christ to Peter, ye keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
whatsoever thou bindest in earth shall be bound in heaven, and what soever
thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And in the. 18 chap. of the
same gospel, these be our saviors words to all his Apostles. Math. 18.
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye bide on earth, shall be bound in heaven.
And whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And also in the.19.
chap of John's gospel, he says: receive ye holy ghost. Whose soever sins ye
do forgive, Ioh. 19.
they are forgeuen unto the^. And whose soeuers sins ye retain, they are
retained.

The places do sufficiently declare, that Pryestes have receued of Christ the
autorite and power to forgive sins.


Prentise. I will cirst, master person, under your correction and leave, show
what the scripture understands by ye keys, and than shall any man easily
perceive and see, how shamfully these places have hertofore bee^ wrasted and
wrighed. The keys, says that worthy Chrysostom, Chriso. in math. 23. Hom.
44.
are the word of God and ye knowledge of the scriptures, whereby ye gate of
truth is opened unto me^. And the kepers of them are the Priests, to whom the
office of preaching the word and expou^dyng the scriptures is committed. This
is to be called the keye, writes saint Augustyne, where with the hard hearts
are resolved to receive faith, Aug. Ser. 27, de sanctis.
the secrets of the minds opened, and what soever lurketh within, is by a
reasonable way brought to light, That, I say, is the true keye, that opens
the conscience to true co^fessyon of sin, and includes or shuts in grace
to the eternite of an wholesome mystery. To this a greeth that holy father
Ambrose, saying: De peni. di 1. Can. Verbum.
verbum dei. The word of God remytteth sins, the Priest is the judge in
deed, the Priest does his duty and office, but he exercises no manner power
nor jurisdiction. And in an other place these be his words: Liber. de cain et
Abell.
Peccata per verbu^ dimittuntur. Sins are forgeuen by the word, ye
interpreter whereof is the Leuite. Now is it plain and euydent enoughe, what we
ought to understand by the keys: even the true word of God and the right
understanding of the scryptures: whereby the conscyences of true repentaunte
sinners are loosed and set at liberte from sin and everlasting damnacion, and
ye consciences of them, that be hardened in their wicked maliciousnes, and will
in no wise repent, bound with the doleful chains of sin, and of helly
destructyon. And yt this is the true meaning and understanding of the keys
Christ him self does sufficientlye declare, when he sends his apostles
abroad into the world, to preach ye gospel, o penyng the misterye of byndynge
and loosynge on this wise: go ye throughoute all the whole world, Mark. 16.
and preach ye gospel to all living creatures: here be the keys delivered
unto the^: he, that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that
believes not shall be condemned. And in the 24 chap. of Luke, Christ says on
this manner: Luke. 24.
thus it is written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer and to rise again
from death ye third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his name among all nations.

The word of God then, and the preaching of the gospel, are the keys yt
Christ does speak of. And when the faithful ministers of Gods word do,
Whst is to bind and louse.
by due mynistryng and preaching of ye gospel, certify the repentaunt sinners
of the remission and forgiveness of their sins in ye blood of our savior
Jesus Christ, they louse them, so that they are also loused in heaven: but when
on ye contrary they do a certain them (because of their vnrepentaunte hearts)
of the wrath and indignation of God, and of everlasting damnation, except
they forsake their wicked ways, and turn unfeignedly unto the Lord their God,
they bind them so, yt doubt less they are also bound in heaven.

And by this byndyng and loosing Christ our savior understands none other
thing, but remitting and retaining of sins. And it is said, that the
minister does forgive sins, because that he, as a man might say, sitting in
commission under his master Christ, does out of his mouth certify ye
consciences of true repentau^t sinners of the free remission and forgeuenes of
their sins in th blood of ye so^e of god, apprehended and taken hold upon by
faith. For to sai yt me^ ca^ forgive sines, it is a mere blasphemy against god,
which thing the very Pharisees and Scribs their sels do testify, saying: whi
does he speak these blasphemies? Mark. 2.
who ca^ forgive sins but god only? These Pharisees and Scribes shall rise at
ye day of judgment, and condemn our Pharisaical hipocrites, yt so arragau^tly
take upon the^ to forgive me^ their sins.


Priest. And have we not power to forgive other me^ their sins, but by ye way
of co^missio^?


Pre^tyse. No forsooth. And yet this co^missio^ must be duly executed according
to ye will and pleasure of him yt has given it: else it will be worth (...),
though it has never so gloriouse a face in ye site of ye world.


pri. I will believe touching this matter, as the holy fathers have believed and
taught before us. But they have both beeleued and taught, that ye Pryestes have
power and authorite to forgive sins.

Therefore ye may prate what ye list, as a sort of new fangled heads that ye
be, I will stycke to the old catholyke church, as long as I have any breath
in my body.


Prentyse. I will not have you to take the matter so hot, master person, but
let us rather with all lenite and gentylnes reason the matter together, that
there may come some edifying of it. I doubt not but that ye remember the
saying of Ciprian full well, where he says: and that Christ ought only to be
heard, the father also did testify from heaven, saying. This is my well-beloved
son, in who^ I am pleased, hear him. Wherefore, if Christ ought to be
heard only, we must not regard, what any man has before us thought good to
be done, but what Christ, who is before all, did first. For we ought in nowise
to follow ma^s custom, but the truth of God. And does not the Lord our god
cry out in the prophet Ezechiell saying: Eze. 20.
Walk not in the statutes of your forfathers, keep not their ordenaunces, and
defyle not your selfs with their Idols: for I am the Lord your God. But walk
in my statutes, keep my laws, and do them? Verily master Person, the religion
of our forefathers shall not excuse us. God only forgeueth sins.
But what will ye say, if I can prove by the sayings and authorities of the
most ancient fathers, that no man can forgive sin but God only?


Priest. Let me hear what ye ca^ say. Cyrillus in Io. 12. cap. 56.



Prentyse. Cyrillus writing upon Ihon, speaks these words: Truly it lies
only in the power of God to louse men from their sins. For who can deliver
the transgressors of the law from sin, but only the autour of the law? And
by and by it follows in the same place: For when they (meaning the Apostles
and other ministers) forgive and retain sins, it is not they that do it, but
the holy Ghost that dwells in them, he it is that forgeueth and retayneth by
them. Whereunto agrees saint Augustine, writing contra epistolam Petiliani.
Aug. co^tra epi. Peti. lib. 2. ca. 11.
For, having touched this place of S. Ihons gospel: Receive the holy Ghost,
whose sins soever ye forgive, they shall be forgeuen, and whose sins soever
ye retain, they shall be retained, he does end the matter with these words: It
is sufficientlye showed, that they do it not, but that the holy Ghost does it
by them. As it is said in an other place: for it is not you yt speak, but the
holy Ghost that is in you. In like manner Ambrose upon the.2. Corin. 12.
Ambro. in 2. Cor. 12.
writes on this manner: It is only in the power of God too remitte sins and
to give the holy Ghost. And again: He alone does forgive sin, that alone
dyed for our sins.

Likewise Chrysostom upon Matthewe: Chryso. in Mattheu^ ho. 5.
The servitude and boundage of sin, says he, is very grievous and heavy,
from the which no man can deliver but God only. For no man besides God
has power to remitte or forgive sin. Cyprian in his sermones De lapsis
says plainly thus:

The Lord alone can show mercy, and give pardon of those sins: that are
committed against him, he alone can grant forgiveness of our sins, that
did bear our sins, yt sorowed for us, whom God did deliver up to death for
our sins. Is it not than a blasphemy intolerable, and in nowise to be
suffered in ye church of Christ that such vile persons, that have neither
godliness nor learning, should take upon the^ that thing, that apperteineth
only to god? If it were only for this, your confession is to be abhorred of
all true Christian men.


Priest. Does not Christ say these words: Mar. 11.
when ye stand to pray, forgive, if ye have aughte against any man? Math. 6.
Again* if ye will not forgive men their offenses, my father that is in heaven
shall not forgive you. It appears by these textes, that men have power to
forgive sins.


Prentyse. Here does our savior Jesus Christ speak of that mutual
forgiveness of sins and offenses, that ought to be among Christians, without
the which we ought to look for no forgiveness at all of our own sins at
the hands of God. Eccle. 28.
For as the wise man says: He that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance
of the Lord, which shall surely keep him his sins. Hereto may be applied
all that whole parable, yt Christ does set fourth at large in the.18.
chapter of Matthew. Math. 1^.
But it follows not, because we may forgive our Christian brethren the
offenses and trespasses, that they have done against us, that we can therefore
forgive those offenses and sins, that are committed against God.


Priest. Is not this to give power unto the lay peopell too bind and to
louse? Who can abide this doctrine.


Prentyse. Saint Augustyn De verbis Domini gives power unto the lay peopel
to bind and to louse, August. de verb. domini, sermon. 16 Theophilactus in
Matthew. 18.
and also Theophilactus, whose words be these. Verily I say unto you:
Whatsoever ye shall bind upon the earth. If thou (says he) being offended,
do count him, that has wronged thee, as a Publican and Heathen, he shall be
such a one in heaven: But if thou lousest him, that is to say, if thou
forgeuest him, it shall also be forgeuen him in heaven. For not only those
things, that ye priests do louse, are loused, but whatsoever also we, being
wronged, do either louse or bind, is bound or loused. What say ye to this,
master person?


Priest. Well. I will bring an other text of the scripture, which I trust
will stop your mouth. Joan. 11.
When Christ did raise Lazarus from death, did not he command his
disciples to louse and unbind him?

So when Christ has raised any sinner from the death of sin, who shall
louse and vnbynd him, but the priests?


Prentyse. First I answer, that allegories are nothing worth for the
confirmation and establishment of any doctrine. Secondely, where ye say, that
Christ commanded his Apostles, too louse and unbind Lazarus, ye ca^ not
prove it by the scriptures. For it is rather to be thought, that he willed the
Jews, that stood by, to do it, lest they should think, that there was any
feininge in the miracle, and that his power might the better be known, in
this, that he did without touching, with his word and voice only, raise the
dead.

It is rather too be expounded after this manner: Christ, to take away all
evil suspicion from the Jews, commanded that they should first take away
the stone, that they should smell the stynche, have sure tokens of his death,
see him being raised again, by the only power and virtue of his word, and
touch or handle him first, after he was reliued. But what if we should grant
that this was spoken unto the Apostles? What should ye get by it?


Priest. That the Lord has given power to his Apostles, too louse.


Prentyse. No, no master person, not so: for, if ye will ground your selfs upon
allegoryes (as yt can do none other here) this doctrine is rather to be
gathered upon this history: that Christ by this fact would admonish us, that
we should louse them, whom he had raised, that is to say, that we should not
bear in remembrance those sins, that he him self had forgotten, or that we
should not condemn them as sinners, whom he had quyted and assoyled: again,
that we should not vpbraye the sins, which he him self had forgeuen: or
where he is merciful him self, and reddy too forgive, we should not be cruel,
and bent to vengeance. Go now master Person, and make boaste of your
allegoryes.


Priest. It was never merry with us, sythens such ionge boys presumed to read
the scriptures. What say ye to this, seeing, ye are such a doctor? Did not
they, that came to the baptism of Ihon, Math. 3.
confess their sins? Why should not they likewise, yt come to receive their
housel, be shryuen?


Prentyse. Ye must mark, master Person, that Ihon preached the baptism of
repentance, and did baptize with water unto repentance. And therefore it is no
merueylle, that they, which came to be baptized, acknowledged or confessed
themselfs too be sinners. For baptism is a Sacrament or mystical sign of
forgiveness of sins: whom then should they receive too it, but them, that
acknowledge them selfs to be sinners? They therefore confessed their sins,
that they might be baptized.

But how or after what fasshio^ they confessed their sins, where shall we
learn better then in the third Chapter of the Gospel of Luke* Luc. 3.
For after Ihon had made his dreadefull sermon: the people, being stricken with
a fear of Gods righteouse judgment, asked him, saying: What shall we do
than? Likewise the Publicans and the Soldiers, that came to be baptized. Let
any indifferente manne read the whole place throughoute. And as for your
shryuinge before the receyuinge of the Sacrament, would god, that godly order,
which was set fourth in king Edwardes days, whom we may rightwel call the
flour of all Christendom, might had been kept and observed. For in many
churches, that were godly reformed, the Communicantes should the night before
be called together before the ministre, there to receive most godly
instructions.

And if any contention, strife or hatred had been between any persons, there
should had been honest agreemente made, or ever they had come to the Lords
board, all notorious and open sinners being excluded from it. And what godly
confession were they wont to make together in the face of the whole church,
before ye holy communion was ministered unto them? No such things are now used,
but rather all is done contrary to the order of the holy Ghost, without any
edifyinge. And this one only thing ought to fraye all godly men and women, to
be present at it. For who, being godly minded, would seem with his presence to
consent and agree too ye breaking of that order, which the holy Ghost has
appointed and ordained to be in the church of God. But of this we will
commone more at large, when ye shall be at better leisure.


Priest. Well, I perceive, that I must talk with you, concerning this
receyuinge of the Sacrament. But I have business now: therefore differring
that communication till an other time, I will make an end of this present
matter, that we have in hand. Are not these saint James words? James. 5.
knowledge your fautes one to an other.

Can ye deny, that the holy Ghost does here bid, ordeyne and command
confession? What are all the heretykes, in all the whole world, able too say
against this manifest and plain saying of this most holy Apostel?


Prentyse. Ye should have rehearsed the whole text. For he did not only say:
Confess or knowledge your fautes one too an other, but also, pray one for an
other.

Whereby it must needs follow, (saying he commands as well mutual prayer, as
mutual confession) if we must confess and knowledge our fautes only too the
priests, that we must alsoo pray for them only. What an absurdity should
this be? Moreover it should follow of James words, that priests only ought
to confess and knowledge their fautes one to an other. For, when James wills
us too confess or knowledge our fautes one too an other, he speaks of such,
as must hear one an others confession. For so sou^deth this Greek word
allelois, which is as much too say, as mutually or reciprocally.

But none, after the bishope of Romes law, can or may hear one an others
confession, onelesse they be priests after his holy order: and this can be
understood but of such, as ought too knowledge their fautes one to an
other, or hear the confession one of an other.

Therefore this place serves nothing for your purpose. Let us rather seek
the true meaning of it, master person, that we may have profit thereby.

The true meaning therefore of this text of saint James is, that we ought
to knowledge our infirmities, weaknesses and fautes one too an other, too the
end we may give good, wholesome and comfortable counsel one too an other:
and knowing in what case or state we stand all, pray one for an other most
earnestlye unto God for the help and assistaunce of his holy spyryte, but
most specially for the forgiveness of our sins.


Priest. I perceive well enough, what mark ye shout at. Ye will have no
confession at all, that so y may live still after a carnal liberty.


Prentyse. As though that kind of confession, that ye use, could refrain or
keep men from carnal liberty.


Priest. Men never lived so dissolutely, A false praise of auriculare
confession.
nor so wantonelye, as they have done sense this holy confession have be^ put
down.

There is now no shamefastenesse in the world, honestye is clean gone, youth
stands in no awe. And why is this? Because forsouth they are free from the
yoke of holy shryfte. All the year long, when they remembered, that they must
come under BENEDICITE, they were affrayed to do any thing amiss; but when it
was gone once, so yt they were delivered from al fear of confession, they did
set al at six and seven, not passing how they did live. What mischief
auricular confession does
For they knew, that they should be called to no reckenyngs. Wherefore any man
may easily se, whi ye be so great an enemy to the wholesome ordeynaunce and
co^stitution of the church.


Pre^tise. Where as ye lay to my charge, yt I will have no confession, ye
shamfully sla^der me. For I have always allowed yt kind of confession, that
god has commanded us in his holy scripture: but yt beggarly confession, that
ye have invented of your own brains, without gods holy word, to bring all
men's consciences under your gyrdels, I do utterly detest and abhor. And it is
so far of, yt me^ should by it learn to fear god, that rather by it the
fear of God is driven and clean chassed away out of their hearts. For when the
rude and simple are once persuaded, that if they be o^ce in the year shriuen of
the Priest, they shall have clean remission of their sins and receive (if at
lest they will be still ye children of your whoryshe mother Antichrystes church)
full absolution both a pena et culpa: what care they how they live all the year
long? It is enough, think they, if a litell before Easter they come to sir
John lack latin, and tell him a tale in the ear of an hour long: and yt they
may escape the better chepe, look who^ they know to be most foolish and most
unlearned among the rabblement of priests, him will they chose for their
gostly father. For why? they have been made to believe, yt all the sins, yt
they confess themselves of unto yt priest, are quite and clean forgiven, and
put out of remembrance before god, eue^ as soon as they have told them to
their gostly father. As for repentance and the due fruetes thereof, it is not
unknown, how well and how substa^tially ye ha^del ye matter emonge you. For
whereas ye should send them to Christ, who is ye only physician of ye souls,
and exhort the^ to such works, as God has prepared for us to walk in: ye most
ungodly send the^ to dead creatures, prescribing unto them not ye works
commanded of God, but superstitious works of your own inue^tion, making the^
an hondreth fold more ye children of hell, tha^ they were before they came to
you. I do here let pass how yt ye make it a matter of such necessite, that
by your own doctrine no man can without it obtain salvation: yea so^e now a
days are not ashamed to make it equal with baptism and the supper, which are
sactamentes instituted and ordained of Christ himself. Besides all this is it
not made a snare, Auricular confession is made a snare to snarle men with all.
to snarle me^ wtal? For the first question almost that ye priest uses to ask
them, yt now at this present come to shrift, is: whether they believe not, that
ye body of Christ is in the sacrament of the aultare, flesh, blood, and
bones, as he was borne of ye virgin Mary: if they once say nay, not only they
shall not have absolucion, but also they shall straighte ways be complained of
and accused to ye bishop, and so put in ieopardye to lose both body and goods.
What honesty and goodness ye be wont to teach fair maide^s, and men's wives when
ye have the^ behind a cloth under benedicite, I will not here now at this
present rehearce: lest I should offend honest and shamfast ears. But although
I am ashamed to tell it (the thing is so vilainous and so filthy) yet are ye
not ashamed to do it. As for that ye allege, that your confessyo^ keeps
youth under awe, and that servants were never in awe, se^s it was taken away:
ye same is plai^e false: for it is rather a mean and away to make the^ to
stand in no awe at al of their parents nor of their masters and mistres,
seeing they be persuaded, that whatsoever they do, if they be once shryuen of
it unto the Priest, it shall be clean forgeuen unto the^: so that if they stand
in any awe, it shall be of sir John, and not of the^ that they should stand in
awe of. But if, puttyng aside such beggerlye inuencyons of men, ye would
diligently out of Gods book teach youth their duetye toward their elders,
toward their parents, toward their masters and mystres, not once or twyse
in ye year but every fourthnighte, putting before their eyes the fierce
vengeance of god, The way to drive ye fear of God into ye youth.
that hangs over ye heads of all disobedient children and of al untrue
dealig seruau^ts, and that there is no way to purchase the favor and
blessing of God, except they will repent, and taking hold through faith upon
our savior Jesus Christ, walk up ryghtly in their vocatyon, being sure that
god sees both their doings and also the very secret thoughts of their
hearts: then would they in deed stand in that true awe, that God will have
the^ to stand in, fearing him, not with men's doctrynes and precepts, Math. 15.
Esaias. 29
but with the true fear, that he commands in his word.


Pryeste. By S. Mary, I will speak to my lord bishop, that ye may come into the
pulpit and make a sermon to the people. I pray you master doctor of the new
learning, tell me, what the same confession is, that God has commanded.


Pre^tyse. I can well inoughe abide your mockes master person, say on me
what ye will. In the mean whiles I will not let to tell ye truth. First and
formest there is a confession, The confession that we are bound to make to God.
that God will have too be done unto him, wherein we do daily and hourly
confess our sins unto him, accusynge and condemnyng our selves before hi as
unrighteous and miserable sinners, that our sins may through his mercy,
which we faithfully crave for, be forgeuen unto us.

And of this confession does David speak, when he says: I will knowledge my
sin unto the, Psalm. 32.
and mine unrighteousness have I not hid. I said, I will confess my sins unto
the lord, and so yt forgaueste me ye wickedness of my sin. And in the.51.
psalm these be his words: Psalm. 51.
have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercyes, do away mine offenses. I knowledge my fault and my
sin is always before me. Daniel in the 9. chap. of his prophecy makes this
confession unto god: Dani. 9
O Lord, you great and fearful God, we have sinned, we have offended, we have
been disobedient and gone back, yea we have departed from al thy precepts and
judgments. And John ye Eua^geliste writes thus: 1. Ioh. 1.
if we knowledge our sins, God is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous. This confession says Saint
Augustine, writi^g ad Iulianu^ comite^, which is done unto God, Augu. ad
Iulianu^ comitem.
is required by Gods law: whereof says he Saint John speaks sayi^g: if we
knowledge our sines etc. for without it sin cannot be forgeuen. And of this
does spryng the confession and acknowledging of the great and unspeakable
mercy of God. For except we do truly from the botome of our hearts recognize
and acknowledge our miserye and wyckednes, we shall never truly confess and set
forth, praise and extol, enhau^ce and magnify the great mercy of god, and
unspeakable goodness of our savior Jesus Christ our Lord, declared to us
ward. And hereof it does come, that they that have a true feling of their own
misery, and of their sinful and corrupted nature, having on the other side
before their eyes ye exceading great bounteousnes of their heavenly father:
are always ready to confess openly their sins in the great congregacyon. As
when David was rebuked of Nathan, he then, being prycked in his conscience, did
say: 2. Regu. 2.
Peccaui domino, I have sinned unto thee lord. As if he should say: I do not
excuse my self, nor I refuse not to be counted of al men a sinner, or to have
that to be published abroad among men, which I would had to be^ hydden
affore. And for this cause god did in times passed ordeyne among the
Israelites, Leui. 16.
that the people should openly in ye temple confess their sins. For god did
foresee this to be a very necessary mean, whereby they should be brought into
the true knoweledge of themselves. And it is also most convenient, that by
acknowledging our misery we should set forth the goodness and mercy of God
among us, and publyshe it openly before al ye world. O how Godly was this do^e
in king Edwards time? whenever the people of god gathered themselves
together, to offer their spiritual sacrifices, Augusti. de vera and falsa
penitentia. ca. 11
and to make their common prayers unto him. S. Augustyne de vera et falsa
penitentia cap. 11. makes mencyon of an open or public confession, which he
defines after this manner. Open or public confession is, whereby in times
passed they, that were dead in open sins, declared themselves to be dead,
publishing openly their death, and showing openly ye fruits of repe^tau^ce, ye
the people might bewail him yt was lost. This was in deed the wont and custom
of the old ancient church, when any man had committed any notorious crime or
fault, that he should be excommunicated and put out of the congregation, til he
had earnestly repented and in took thereof confessed his sin openly in ye face
of ye whole church. But this wholesome kind of confessyo^ is clean abolyshed,
and in stead there of an apyshe momerye crepte into the church. S. Paul seems
to speak of it, in the 1. Cor. 5. and in the 2. Cor. 2.


Priest. Is this all that ye can say? Have ye no more stuff in your bogette?


Prentise. I have yet somewhat more to say. Two ki^des of private confession
allowed in the word of god.
For ye shall understand, that the scripture does beside all this allow. 2.
kinds of private confession. The one we use for our own sake, when we being
troubled in conscience, do open our grief unto our neighbor, to ye end he
may help and coumfort us, with some godly and wholesome counsel. And as touching
this kind of confession, though by gods word we have liberte to open our
conscience and to show our grief to any of our Christen brethren, who^ we
think to be able to counsel and comfort us: so if ye pastors or shepeheardes
be me^ of godlynes and learning, and of a pure and sound judgment, we ought
most specially in ye trouble and angours of the conscience to resort or fly
unto the^, that according to their office, they may in time minister ye
comfortable salfe of gods word unto our wounded co^scie^ces. For they are
ordained and instituted of God for the same purpose: therefore ought we most
chyefelye to come unto the^, that so we may enjoy those spiritual benefytes,
that God of his mere mercy and goodness does daily offer unto us by the^. But
what manner of pastors are they, The Pastors and shepeherds of Antichrystes
church.
that ye will have us now a days to come to? me^ with out al godlynes, without
learning and judgment, men given to al kind of superstition and Idolatry,
me^, of who^ ye can learn nothing else, but to blaspheme God and his word, yea
men that are ready, instead of giving good and wholesome counsel, to cut all
men's throtes, that will not consent and agree to their abominacion and
stinkyng blasphemies. Gregorye, as we have in the decrees, Gregorye. De peni.
disti. 6. Cano^ Sacerdos.
did ordei^e that a Priest should in no wise, neither by sign nor toke^, utter
ye confession of any man: but these your blood suckers have a good sport, by
vtteryng men's confession, to put them in ieopardye to lose both body and
goods. How largely, when they sit bybbynge upon their ale benches, they talk
of those things, that they have heard under benedicite, it is to shamful to
tell. The fathers of the west church would never confess their sins unto them,
of whom they could not be taught nor instructed to godlynes; but ye will have
us to confess our selves to them, that have no more learning than dull headed
asses. Oh that those holy Canons might take place, which will us to shu^ne
those gostly fathers 'that are blyndonly and ignoraunte of gods way: in so
much that they appoynte, that we should rather confess our selves to our
neighbor, being a lay man, than unto that Priest, that wants both learning
and judgment. The other kind of confession is, that we make for our
neighbors sake, to reconcyle him unto us, if we have offended him in any manner
of thing. Of this kind of confession does our savior Jesus Christ speak
when he says: if, when you offerest thy gift at the altar, you do remember,
yt thy brother has aught against the: Math. 5.
leave there thy gift, and go thy way, be first reconciled to thy brother, and
then come, and offer thy gift. This renews love and nourishes charity, if we
do humbly acknowledge our fautes to who^ we have offended for pardon: of this
confession says Cypryan: They do penance till a due time, and afterward
come to confession, and then the bishop and the clergy do restore unto the^ ye
right of ye communion. But of this enough.


Priest. Ye and to much to, to se so much divinity in a Prentyse.


Pre^tyse. Ye have heard my conscience of ye obedience to magistrates,
Auricular confession, and of ye confession yt god requires.


Priest. Since it will be no^e other wise, tell me, will ye receive ye sacrament?


Prentyse. Master person I have now other busynes to do.


Priest. Well, well, I shall handell you well enoughe.


Answer ye Pope catholykes.


