THE LEGEND OF HVMPHREY DVKE OF GLOUCESTER.

By Chr: Middleton.

LONDON Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop at
the west door of S. Paul's Church. 1600.

TO THE RIGHT VVOORshipfull, Sir Iaruis Clifton Knight.
SIR, the ancient ememy to learning (ignorance) has left off his old liuerye,
russet Ierkins and leather hose, and to deceive the world (like Esops Ass in a
Lions skin) thrusts in him self sometimes like a Gentleman, sometime, like a
soldier, and sometimes like a Lawyer, and like Catterpillers at the spring,
bites off blossoms of Trees and corruptes the buddes of flowers; And although
the young fruits of my labors grew not by the banks of Hellicon, nor were
ever watered at Aganippies wells; yet (simple as they are) loath I was a great
while, to turn them abroad into the world, without armor against this enemy,
and almost in despair: I was by a Gentleman your Woorships wel-willer and my
very good friend, persuaded to shrowde these simple lines under your shadow,
who being your self daily conversant in the histories of ancient times, are
always willing and ready to countenance and support the poor remnants of
depressed learning that are left for our times, would like the seven fold
shield of Ajax retort such darts to them, that throw them, whereupon I am
bold to presume upon your Worcester. favor for my defense, which I doubt not but to
find, and when more leisure, gives liberty to my pen, I will endeavor
painfully to requite this courtesy which so impudently I now crave.

Your Woe in all duty to command Chr. Middleton.

Ad Christopherum Middletonum Hexastichon.
Illustri Humphredi genio tua musa parenta^s,
Vera refert, generosa canit, memoranda reuoluit
Virtuti, et laudi statuam dans, dat simul ips^.
Non opus est vestrae musae, tum, carmine nostro,
Nec opis est nostroe, radijs inuoluere Phoebum;
Quid satis ornatam mus am phalerare iuuabit?
Rob: Allott.

To his friend, Master Chr. M. his Book.
LIke as a man, on some adventure bound
His honest friends, their kindness to express,
T'incourage him of whom the maine is owned;
Some venture more, and some adventure less,
That if the voyage (happily) be good:
They his good fortune freely may partake;
If otherwise it perrish in the flood,
Yet like good friends theirs perished for his sake,
On thy return I put this little forth,
My chance with thine indifferently to prove,
Which though (I know) not fitting with thy worth,
Accept it yet since it proceeds from love;
And if thy fortune prosper, I may see
I have some share, though most return to thee.
Mich: Drayton.

To the Author. etc.
OFTEN have I seen in some seign'd History,
Of lofty Knights, or lowly shepherds writ,
Whereas Invention runs at liberty;
Art, judgment, reading, spirit show'n and wit.
Yet in a Legend like Duke Humphreys known
Where wits inuiron'd in with verity,
Sildome have seen more art or judgment shown
More reading spirit, wit, and Poetry.
But Orpheus with his harp melodicall
In Canzonets: and heavens azure frame,
For heavens history most hermonicall,
In Spheres sweet music sings yet of thy name.
The^ heu'ns and him I wrong, thei'l give thee merit
For judgment, wit, for reading, art and spirit.
Another of the same, To Duke Humphreyes attendants.
YE daily wayters on Duke Humphreys table,
And hourly walkers by D. Humphreys shrine
If that for meager famine ye be able
Right to peruse a wel-pend wittye line;
Wait, walk no more, on's table, by his shrine,
But with D. Humphreys Lege^d (Gentles) dine
John Weeuer.

The Legend of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester.
1
YE powers Divine directors of our wits,
Send some small current from those silver springs
By whose fair banks the heauen-borne muses sits,
And to the bubling streams sweet Ditties singes:
Following whose course my meanor Muse may see,
How she shall write this famous History.
2
Do not direct her in those muddy streams,
Where now swims many wits, whose worth affoords
Sinful foul subjects, detestable theames,
Set forth in worse and more detested words.
Whose sound even sinful men refuse to hear,
As obiectes far unfit for any ear.
3
But in a better vain direct my verse,
Obscure not her intent, with such a blot,
Since she endeavors truly to rehearse
A story of times past, now near forgot.
Grace her with words, then of no meaner worth,
Then was the man, whose story she sets forth.
4
So shall his name by your assistance, raised
From dark oblivion, show it self again,
As one deserving better to be praised
Then some, whose lives recorded now remain.
For meaner virtues mightily renowned,
Whilst his great works in ruin are nigh drowned.
5
What time this land disquieted with broils,
Wearied with wars and spent for want of rest,
Saw her adjoining neighbors free fromth'spoyles,
Wherewith her self, her self had disposest
Of peace and plenty, which men most desire,
And in their steeds brought famine, sword and fire.
6
Laboring now to restore her great decays,
Like to a sea-beate Bark new com'd to shore,
Seeks for a quiet harbor, where they may
Mend and repair, what they had lost before:
So fares it with this land that thus distressed,
Was almost left vn-peopled, vnpossest.
7
But that the fortunes of a blessed King,
Embalmed and cured the wounds it had fustain'd,
As when the son accompaning the spring,
Brings life to the dead earth in which remained
No hope of summer, for in killing frost
Were all her powers decayed, her virtues lost.
8
Henry the firstborn to his countries good,
After he had relieved this ruined state,
Fighting against the French, that had withstood,
The right his Ancestors had wone of late.
Cropped in his chiefest time, dies this fair King,
Preventing th'haruest of so sweet a spring.
9
And in his Kingdom now grown great again,
Almost too mighty for to be controwlde
By a young King, that did retain the name
Of his dead Father, yet scarce twelve months old.
Too heavy was (God knows) for such a hand
The Scepter that did sway this headstrong land.
10
But yet supported by his uncles care,
Humfrey, Glosters Duke (for so they call him,)
To ryper years sprung up our kingdoms heir,
Protected from all harms that might befall him.
During his nonage, by the careful heed
Of watchful Gloucester, borne for this good deed.
11
Whose holy life, good works, and virtuous deeds,
I leave as subjects fit for greater wits:
For greater are the virtues that proceeds
From Kings, then meaner men: and better fits
A loftier style, whose wit and judgment ripe,
Then an unlearned Shepherds oaten Pipe.
12
O were my pen, but able to set down
Great Glosters virtues (as indeed they were)
How would the world bewitched with his renown,
In immitation, strive for to come near
His worthy deeds, whereof who were possessed,
Themselves might justly think were happily blessed.
13
Look as the stars, when as the worlds great light,
Rowses him from his mleancholie bed:
Drawing the duskie Curtains of the night,
Wherein the earth lay sadly mantelled,
Pluckes in their pale heads as ashamed, and sorry
He should so far exceed themselves in glory.
14
So did the world (wherein this worthy was)
Admire the more then common gifts he had,
Wondering how such a work should come to pass,
And with abundant mellancholie sad
Frets out their lives, in envy and despair,
For with his life, no life could ere compare.
15
And had he not been royal in his birth,
Yet had his matchless learning and his wit
From meanor roots, as fair a branch brought forth:
For King-borne bloods, to shroud them under it.
For Wit and Learning are two Angels wings,
By which mean men soars up to mighty things.
16
Ah woe the while our age neglects that same.
Would our great men would immitate his course:
Then should their virtues add unto their name
More nobleness, and after death, enforce
A new lives date: whose lymits should extend
Beyond all ages after time shall end.
17
His youth not vainly spent in idle sports,
Such as be-witches young men's fantasies:
But seriously attending the resorts
Of learned Counselors, men of great degrees
Made him an Atlas, abler to sustain
The heavy burden of his Cousens Reign.
18
By how much straighter springs the new-set Pine,
By so much hope men of a fair increase:
But way-ward plants that crookedly decline,
That they should prove good trees, all men surcease
The hope they have of any further good,
And lets them dye regardlesse in the wood.
19
So when the impes that springs from Royal stocks,
Keeps a straight passage through their virtuous youth:
O how that show all men's desires prouokes,
That should increase still to a fairer growth:
Until it prove a goodly broad-spred tree,
To shade poor shrubs from wrongs and injury.
20
So had men's hopes in him their full effect,
His godly youth sprung to a virtuous age:
Whose matchfull care, was spent in the respect
Of Countries welfare: and he did engage
His substance and himself, to do much good
To th'poore, and such as most in danger stood.
21
And happy was the King, whose infancy
Was guided, by so good a man's direction;
Whose care was not his own commodity,
Nor for to satisfy private affection.
But to perform the charge he had in hand,
Protect the King, for th'quiet of the land.
22
Then was not justice colored with deceit,
Kept down by might, wrought unto great men's wills:
Nor was her Schools peis'd down with golden waights
And she that should correct, color men's ills.
But who did well, by him were well regarded,
And wicked men with their deserts rewarded.
23
Then Ruffling pride as light as vanity,
Roused from her soft secure luxurious bed;
Banished from hence, lived in obscurity,
As on exilde, from whence she first was bred.
And what sins else were great, were all defaced,
And in their steeds, religious virtues placed.
24
But see to what a ftaylty we are borne,
When as our best estate is sooh'st declyn'd?
Fair days have end, and their delights out-worne,
Succeeeds dark nights, cold storms, and blustering wind.
Few men there were, that had, or ere shall have
Fortune continue constant to their grave.
25
As storms of hayle fal's on the rypen'd corn,
All unexpected to the husbandman,
And shakes the full-fraught ears, that had out-worne
Cold, heat, drought, wet, and what soever can
Decay the earths increase, and now did stand
Expecting but the gladsome Reapers hand:
26
So fares it with this Duke, whose young days spent
In virtuous studies, and true holiness,
Sets down himself, now with a full intent,
To spend his weary age in quietness.
Thinking his holy life should this have found,
Peace, tending on his body to the ground.
27
But o sad times where naught but misery.
Stands ready to make pray on each estate,
Sometime she tends them from their infancy,
Until she sees their whole life ruinate.
Other men lets she grow, to th'top of all,
Intending so to work their greater fall.
28
So Pompey in the midst of victory,
All unexpected happened on his end:
And Caesar in his greatest majesty,
Untimely murthred by his nearest friend.
Such are men's best estates, more wretched they:
In greatest pomp most subject to decay.
29
And did the troubles of this world but tend
On wicked men, it were a iuster doom:
But soonest do their injuries extend
To holy lives, that hindering too soon
The course of virtue, fore it grew too great,
They may themselves establish in her seat.
30
And had it not been so with this great man,
In what a glorious current had he run?
Even from the Royal spring where he began,
Down to the Sea of honor: nor there done.
Had turned the strong tides by his virtues force,
And made them strive to follow on his course.
31
Why does my laboring Muse so far proceed,
Exemplyfying of his worthy life,
And numbering his good gifts? because indeed
She Is loath, to enter into such a strife
As she must do, comparing but the ruth
Of his sad age, with th'onor of his youth.
23
These were the younger sort, but grauer men,
Whose plots and drifts sorts not to their effect,
With false surmizes slyly settles them,
To draw the Kings mind into some neglect
Of the Dukes rule, and by that enterprise,
Intise his youth to follow their advise.
33
And since the worlds first age, what age was seen
Wherein some fury rowz'd from th'deepest hell:
Possessed not men's conceits? and still has been
Ready to plot and practice any ill.
Nor ever shall there be an age so clear:
But in her smooth face shall some faults appear.
34
For as the brightest flame has darkest smoke,
Bodies their shadows, clearest springs their mud:
Whose envious quallityes, often times provoke
Them to be ill, who else would still be good.
Mud spoils the spring, smoke often obscures the flame,
And vicious men enxies at virtues name.
35
And which is more admired, even twixt two friends,
Rises sad discord, I, and such as were
Linked in the bonds of blood, whose deeds should tend
To mutual friendship, and should eleaue as near
As twin-borne brethren, whilst they are intoombe,
Within the compass of their mothers womb.
36
Great Henry Bewfoord Bishop of Winchester,
Nearly allied both to the Duke and King,
A man ambitious, haughty, not sincere
And hollily affected, seeks to bring
By bad devises, underneath his hand,
The King, the Nobles, th'commons of the land.
37
And having now inricht himself, with store
Of what was needful for his great attempt:
As money, friends, authority and power
Of men, that nothing could his will prevent
His great intendments, what so ere they were,
But Glosters foresight in his daily care
38
Kindles the first fire of that woeful age.
Whose flames coupling themselves with new allies,
Which many after times could not aswage,
But still fresh fuel brought it new supplies,
Till this poor country spent with civil iarres:
Want brings at length a weak end to their wars.
39
Now Lyon-like he forrages the land,
And being Lord Chaunc'ler, practizes his will,
Keeps laws and government at his command,
And commaundes all, for no man would rebel
Against his edicts, nor durst be so bold,
But live content to be by him controwld.
40
Whose tyranny, when Gloucester once espies,
Like a good subject, labors to prevent
The further mischief that might else arise,
And in an open Court of Parliament,
Draws articles; wherein he had expressed
The Bishops wrongs, which all would have red rest.
41
Now like the wind and tide when they do meet,
With envious oppositions do affright
The lesser streams, running for to regreet
The Ocean Empire, so do these two fight.
One labors to bring all things to his will,
The others care, works to prevent that ill.
42
The Bishop like the proud insulting wind,
Disturbes the quiet stream where Gloucester runs:
Gloucester as fitting such a royal mind,
Defends himself against intruding wrongs.
The meaner sort of men whilst things thus are,
Dismayde and trembling, hides their heads for fear.
43
And whilst in this state did this land remain,
New quarrels twixt their men did still arise,
Wherein were great harms done, many were slain,
Nor was there any man that could devise
Means to prevent the mischiefs, that thus falls
Upon their heads in these uncivil braules.
44
Ah what a woe was this, to see those days
When they that should keep peace, is means it is broken,
Whilst guiders strive, their government decays.
Some thought this strife, was but a fatal token
Of those sad times, which presently insu'd;
Whose woes, a many after ages rew'd,
45
Yet Gloucester thou were guiltless of that wrong,
Thou stoodst for thy defense, he strove to'ffend,
Meddled with nothing, but what did belong
Unto thy office, whilst he did contend
To keep down the young King, to displace thee
And bring this land to servile villainy.
46
And had thou borne with this his foul offense,
What a soule-killing mischief had it bin?
Who suffers such vilde deeds, and does dispense
With the bad dooers, cherishes the sin:
For errors left unpunished, are professed,
And being not defended, is deprest.
47
But anncient Bedford whose deep piercing sight,
Perceiues the issue of this kindling fire,
How both sides daily gathers to them might,
Whose flames ere long, were likely to aspire
Unto their highest buildings, and pull down
The royal work that yet was scarce begun:
48
He labors with the King to make a peace,
Now when their infant wars were scarce begun,
The cause once gone, the effects thereof surcease,
And mischiefs being prevented whilst they are young,
Cannot branch forth themselves to do that hurt,
That time, their natures, and bad men would work.
49
Great King quoth he, the pole whereon our world
Is moved, and by whom we sail our course,
Forgive my tongues presumption that grows bold,
Here in thy sacred presence, to rehearse
In this unseemly manner that I do,
Th'clog of my mind and th'subiect of my woe.
50
It is a story full of grief and ruth,
An unexpected, sad, and harsh discourse:
Of home-borne troubles, which I know for truth,
By gentle suffrance will grow daily worse,
The force of fire, and water not contrould,
Would merciless consume and drown the world.
51
Ever since that unlucky dismal hour,
In which your Royal Father left this life,
Have I been Regent of your foreign power,
And know the event of wars and the end of strife,
And therefore fear, least that ill hap should chance
To us, that wars have brought to woeful France.
52
And you great Lords, Gloucester and Winchester,
To whom I am bound in kindred and in love:
Here before God, the King and you, I swear
It is no partial grudge or hate, does move
My mind to this, but care of Countries peace,
That whilst we war abroad, home broils may cease.
53
It is the strife and hatred twixt you two,
That my love labors now to reconsile:
And it is the oath I made and th'due I owe,
Unto my Sovereign, that thus makes me toil.
To keep this furious stream within her bound,
Least breaking forth, her neighboring friends be drowned
54
And the great reason why I move it here,
Rather then to your selves, is, for I know
The Lions countenance, better keeps in fear
The meaner creatures, and to him they bow
Their dutious knees, content with his decree,
Who else betwixt themselves would nere agree.
55
Now do I turn me to your sacred seat,
Where all the virtues have their residence,
And on my aged knees with tears entreat,
A gracious favorable audience,
It is a work of charity God knows,
The reconsilement of two mortal foes.
56
A deadly hatred's grown betwixt these two,
But from what root it springs I cannot tell,
Nor can I learn, but I suspect it now,
And for it be long I fear shall know too well:
It Is from some private quarrel of their own,
That all this public quarrel is now grown.
57
Which to repress, put to thy sacred hand
Unto these seuer'd branches of thy kind:
The powerful words of Kings may more command,
Then the affections of a subjects mind.
I know great King, they both will be content,
If thou but speak, to surcease and relent.
58
The King looks on them with a sad aspect,
And thus begins, in care and grief of soul:
Dear Uncles, am I urged to correct
My subjects faults, and must at length control
Their sins with judgments such as they deserve:
When words and good perswations will not serve?
59
Such is my mind, that I could hartly wish
There were no laws, so no man would offend,
O what a world were that of joy and bliss,
When to do well all creatures would contend!
Good Princes sorrow more in punishing,
Then evil subjects in committing sin.
60
But since our first creation, we have still
Been subjects unto sin, therefore the law
Was first ordained, and given to keep our will
From following sinful lusts, to live in awe,
That those bad men whom no good means could mend
For terror of the law, might fear to offend.
61
Then for the honor of our auncientry,
Whose happy souls in fair Elysium,
Reposed in rest, lives to eternity,
Whether ere it be long we all shall come:
Let not my time be stained, with such a sin
As th'vengance-crauing discord of my kin.
62
With that speaks reverend Gloucester, whose gray hayres
The ancient signs of honor, did presage
A guiltless soul, in humble words declares
What he supposed, incensed the Bishops rage,
And how himself had patiently outborne
His injuries, disdainful words and scorn.
63
Great King quoth he, here at thy Princely feet,
Do I throw down myself and my good cause,
And of thy sacred Majesty entreat,
If I be guilty, or have broke the laws
Of God, or thee, drkms-man-like affect'on,
Let me be punished by my foes direct'on.
64
The Articles I gave in th'parlament,
Containing many wrongs that craved redress,
So help me God, was not with an intent
To prejudice his person, or possess
Your Princely mind with any wrong conceit,
But to redress those wrongs the world thought meet.
65
And had he not been wilful stubborn,
Against my private exhortations,
Glad had I then been, I might have forborne,
Those public kinds of exclamations.
For well he knows often have I privately,
Persuaded him to more humility.
66
With that the Bishop swelling with disdain,
His works should come in question like dark skies,
Whose mallancholy show, presages rain
And boystrous storms; in angry words replies.
For his aspiring mind could not sustain
Reproof, but held th'reproouers in disdain.
67
Eternal time quoth he, why have thou changed
Thy golden progress, for a leaden way?
Why have days, nights, and hours, thy servants ranged
Through these deep myry steps, and still do stray
In this bad world, whose rude vnmembred form
Begot by time, was too untimely borne
68
On nature the great mother of us all,
Who in abortiue birth brought forth our age;
And looking on her child, foresaw t'wold fall
To this disordred, and vnnat'rall rage
Of brotherhood, and therefore would not stand,
To set it into parts, head, foot and hand.
69
But left it out of order, like a Bear
That brings deformed creatures to the light,
So bore she us, and loath she was to rear
The frame in order, least it should in spite
Of time, and her, the father, and the Mother,
In civil discords one undo another.
70
But Fortune the commander of all kinds,
Although our parents, thought they should prevent
This fatal mischief, yet this Empress minds
Nothing shall hinder her in her intent,
But takes the advantage of our formelesse course,
And makes our mischiefs by so much the worse.
71
For had our limbs been in their several places,
Brought into order, then the face had stood
Without th'controulment, and the base disgraces
Of meaner parts, in lovely brotherhood.
And the poor feet had been content to tread,
Those paths they were directed by the head.
72
I have done nothing but what I might do,
What the holy Church commands, you esteem wrongs
In times fore-past, well wot I it was not so:
And times to come shall teach you, what belongs
Unto your duties better then you do,
Or fret your stubborn hearts away with woe.
73
With that good Gloucester, who no more could hear
Of these proud braues, answers the Bishop thus:
I would the times were either as they were,
When as our late dead King reigned over us,
Or he that does his royaltyes inherit,
Had but his Fathers years and lofty spirit.
74
How would he stop these soul words down thy throat
That thus defil'st the stock from whence we came?
Thou sing'st a Ravens harsh untuned note,
Unlike an Eagles bird: And without shame
Compar'st our root, and th'branches thence brought forth,
To a misshapen, foul, untimely birth.
75
Which makes me think, that from our Royal nest
Some fatal night-crow, stole away a bird,
And in his place unluckily possessed
Some of her own foul, black, and hel-borne brood:
How otherwise should such a deed be done,
Parents so good, should have so bad a son?
76
From the sweet Rose springs not foul stinking flowers.
Nor does the spreading Vine bring forth black slowes.
Like things from like proceed in shape and power.
The Kingly Eagle hatches not foul crows.
Thy Royal Mother nere brought thee to light,
But some ill-boading, fierce, and ugly spright.
77
Forgive me King that I dare be so bold,
Here in thy presence: for I must confess,
Patience is angers subject, and contrould
With every fury, which men would redress
But cannot do it; for she is gentle, mylde,
Ore-com,d, and kept down, like a strengthlesse child.
78
Whereas thou vrgest me, that I neglect
My duty to the Church, and that I grudge
Her holly laws should be of such respect:
For that his sacred Majesty be judge,
How I have ever strove with all my might,
To keep religion and the Churches right.
79
But against thee, a bad unworthy guide,
For such a thing of worth am I so stout:
And God defend least thy unruly pride,
Bring her in perrill, if not root her out.
So strong-built ships in careless masters hands,
Are split and beat a sunder on the sands.
80
When he had done, the King prolongs his speech,
Sorry I am my Reign should thus begin
With civil discords, and the hateful breach
Of kinsmens love: then which, a deadlyer sin
Was never bred. What peace is like to be,
When kindred with their kindred disagree?
81
Be ruled by me, let not offenses grow
Among meaner men, exampled by your lives;
Forget your griefs, and do not further sow
These seeds of discord: whosoever strives
For troubles, he gains nothing in this life
But woes, disquietnes, hatred and strife.
82
With these and such like motions, they were brought
At length to compremit their injuries,
Which Gloucester truly meant, but the other sought
To ouer-reach him with his subtiltyes:
And so he did at length, but still pretends
All should be quiet, and they two be friends.
83
Then harmless Gloucester glad of these good days,
For he (good man) wished not the Bishops ill,
Goes forward in his office, and assayes
To root up other weeds, that were as ill,
Though not so mighty; so the weeds being dead,
The flowers might sooner grow and better spread.
84
So rau'nous Woolues often in disguised skins,
When in their own shapes they dare not be seen:
Deceiues the harmeles sheep, and often wins
Great conquests, from good men, that have not been
Inured to subtilties and deep deceipts,
Caught in silk nets, nor poisoned with sweet baytes.
85
And thus consorts his ancient enemies,
Envious Winchester, and many more,
The Duke of Suffolk, and a company
Of hell-borne villains, such as he before
Nere knew, nor nere offended, but it is so,
Whom men suspect least, breeds them often most woe.
86
O that good gifts, placed in so good a creature,
Should both be subjects, unto such as they!
Or that injurious wrongs should work by nature,
To bring honest true dealing to decay!
But so it is, fair colors soonest soil,
Things of best prise, are subject most to spoil.
87
And for on him, their work cannot prevail,
They change their plot, and go another way,
To grieve his aged mind; and do assail
Him in an other kind: for often they say,
The wrongs that men have done unto their friends,
Unto their substance, and themselves extends.
88
But more then to his friend, th'accuse his wife,
A virtuous Lady, one of good account:
Lays treasons to her charge, seeks for her life,
Says her conspiracies, do far surmount
The common faults of men, and she has been
A traitor unto God, and to the King.
89
They charge her that she did maintain and feed,
Soul-killing witches, and conuers'd with devils.
Had conference with sprits, who should succeed
The King; and by their means, had wrought some evil
Against his royal person; and had sought
To end his life, and bring the state to naught.
90
Upon surmises thus she was arraygn'd,
Witness suborned, and she condemned for it:
And from her husband closely is detained,
And that their doings, might succeed, more fit
To their desires, it is among them thought meet,
She should do open penance in the street.
91
And after that performed, be banished hence,
Into the Isle of Man, and there should live,
A guiltless exile, for a small offense
Or none at all: and who so ere did give
That unjust sentence, has ere this his doom,
Amongst th'condemn'd, where comfort nere shall come.
92
All this her husband saw, but could not mend,
Saw his Sunsetting in a dusky cloud,
That did presage, a dark and lowering end
Of his old days, and he disdained to shroud
His head in meaner shades, whose usurped power
Might drive away that imminent foul shower.
93
Yet hopes he, that the King will not forget,
What his deserts had won, and what he was,
Or at the least, his honor would not let
His dear friends, and his near alliance, pass
Through such a hell, of undeserved woes,
That nere deserved the penalties of laws.
94
And thus he mooues it whilst the floods of griese
Did Nilus-like oreflow the Di'mond shore
Of his wet eyes, whose hope was not relief
Of their sad case, but rather wished for more
Abundant sorrow, by which they might be
Drowned in dark pitchy gulfes, and nere more see.
95
Men rather fast to death, then they will take
A poisoned nutriment: a sick man's heart
Desires death, rather then his health should make
Way for a worse disease, whose bitter smart
Would work his greater grief; even they do so
Wish blindness before sight, to see more woe.
96
If pity quoth he, sit in Princes hearts
As it should do, or mercy have her seat
By judgments side, to mittigate the smart
Of punishment, too heavy and too great,
Let these two gentle Gods look then on me,
That ask their help, with tears in misery.
97
Hateful oppression has usurped (great King)
Thy place, and wrung out of thy Royal hand
The sword of Justice, and stands mennacing
Of cruel punishments unto this land,
Whose guiltless eyes, were nere opened to see,
(Since thou were King) the face of tyranny.
98
It Is not thy fault, for thou art just and kind,
Witness my self that do complain of wrongs.
I am oppressed (great King,) and yet I find
That thou art guiltless, and do what belongs
Unto a guiltless soul, wish all were right,
But wishing helps not wrongs, nor resists might.
99
Remove the Pillars, on whose base does stand
A mighty building, and all comes to thrall:
Take out the staff from an old man's weak hand,
And then his aged body must needs fall.
Take steeridge from a ship, or do not guide it,
And on some Rock the silly bark will split.
100
The base whereon my aged frame has stood,
The staff whereon I stayed my trembling arm,
The rudder that did guide me, and with good
And wholesome counsel kept my age from harm,
Is gone, what then may I suspect to have,
But so daine fall, to an untimely grave?
101
Where would I were in peace, for here is none,
And less I fear will be, which makes my mind
Think, happy are our Fathers that are gone,
Where sure they shall a better kingdom find.
Truly said Ovid, that no man should say
His life was blessed, before his latest day.
102
Against my wife (God knows) a guiltless soul,
Is past a heavy judgment undeserved:
Which yet thy Royal power may control,
And by that means, their lives may be preserved,
That lives to do thee good, who, were they gone,
I prophecy thy quiet reign were done.
103
Pity speaks to thee for her guiltless case:
And mercy says, the doom is all too great:
Judgment it self would be content to cease,
If but thy sacred tongue vouchsafe t'intreate,
For it is most fit (say they) we should dispense,
With those that have committed no offense.
104
For laws were made to punish evil men,
And cherish up the good, such as live well.
This being so true as it is: why do they then
Make equal justice, against her self rebel?
Keep it in order (King,) for all men say,
That things brought out of course, will soon decay.
105
The King heavy to hear this sad discourse,
Descends his royal throane, whereon he sat,
Takes up his uncle, and to make restraint
Of his increasing grief, gins to entreat
Him with good words, and his desire is
He could but do that good, which he does wish.
106
My Noble Aunte quoth he, suffers these ills,
Without my priuity, and they have got
Such strong Commissions, for to work their wills,
Under out seals, that rightly can I not
Recall the work, nor will they license me
To pardon her pretended traytory.
107
Good uncle well you know, I have given over
All government, and have discharged my soul
Of worldly cares, and cannot well recover
That right again, and if I should control
What they have done, t'wold sure stir up their wrath,
To execute my ruin, and your death.
108
Gloucester with this amazed, that he should hear
His Kingly Cousin give him no relief:
What he would gladly speak, he does for-beare,
His mouth is locked, and the grim porter grief,
Keeps in the sad words that he feign would speak,
Controules his tongue, and makes her powers too weak.
109
Thus the King sorry he cannot relieve him,
Comforts his grief with tears, and so they part:
The woes that Gloucester has, do no less grieve him
Then the good Duke, and cleaues as near his heart.
True friends have seeling of each others woe,
And when ones heart is sad, all theirs is so.
110
The Duke looked up, and saw the King was gone,
And the room empty, time and place affoords,
A fit occasion for a man to moan,
And quiet silence licenses his words,
To talk to wood, and stones, and empty air,
For to his plaints, no man would lend his ear.
111
For want (quoth he) of witness, I must make
You senseless things recorders of my woe:
Friends and acquaintance fly, and will not seek
Redress for wrongs; the laws are altered so,
That men which of all creatures should live best,
Are of all law, and justice, dispossessed.
112
Would you (quoth he) could utter what I say;
That the remembrance of my tears, might last
To vn-borne ages, and when you decay;
You could tell your succession what has past
In these ill times: then would I tell a tale
Of so much ruth, that flint and steel should wail.
113
I prophecy a time shall shortly be,
And well is me, I shall not see the day,
When all too late, with sorrow they shall see
What it is to do injustice, and to sway
The sword awry: for next to tyranny,
Comes wars, dissentions, civil mutiny.
114
Once did Astrea leave the world before,
Because the world grew weary to do well:
Once gone again, I fear she will nere come more,
Nor set her helping hand, for to refell
These growing mischiefs, but let them increase,
Till men have quite forgot the name of peace.
115
When as the Sun forsakes his cristal sphere,
How dark and ugly is the gloomy sky?
And in his place there is nothing will appear,
But clouds that in his glorious circuit fly.
So when a King forsakes his royal place,
There still succeedes oblique and dark disgrace.
116
Let not the air be moved and it will infect:
Let not the water run and it will stink:
Disturb the course of Justice by neglect,
And the poor world corrupts: and I do think,
The want of right, to us like plague will bring;
For not to rule, is not to be a King.
117
And where there is no guide, the people perrish,
As pruning to the vines, lopping to th'trees,
Weeding to th'corne, corn, vines, and trees do cherish,
So should Kings rule inferior degrees,
Least stinking weeds and briars themselves do nourish,
In that good ground where better herbs should flourish.
118
Forgive me heavens, that I do not amend
The Abused youth of this well meaning King,
It is my charge; yet can I not defend
Him from these dangers he is falling in;
But frown on them great God, his youth that lead
In paths of sorrow so misordered.
119
And gracious time tell to the world to come,
By whom, his royal youth was thus misled,
Least ignorant of it, I be by some
Condemned, for doing of so bad a deed.
For well I know, with such a foul offense,
Nor God, nor mortal men, will ere dispense.
120
With that, a servant of his comes and says,
How that his wife had gone through London street,
In public penance, and was led away
By Sir John Stanley, whom if he would meet,
He must make have, or else (quoth he) she is gone
In woeful exile, her hard hap to moan.
121
Hereat the Duke awakt, as from a sleep,
Or as one rising from a cold dead swound,
For-beares his further words, and's feign to keep
What else he would have said, till he have found
So fit a time again; for he must go,
To see his wife, and comfort her in woe.
122
And ouer-takes her even at that same shore,
That bounds this Island from the Oceans force:
A place whereas they never met before;
Upon whose banks, passed such a sad divorce
Betwixt these two, as never since has been,
Nor th'sunne that all does see, had ever seen.
123
There like two streams that parted at their spring,
Runs in two several channels all their way,
And at the last, their twin-borne currents bring
Into one bed, where long they cannot stay,
To greet each other, fore that time perforce
Drives them down to the sea, and ends their course.
124
So meets these two, even where they may not bide
To feed their sorrows with sad tales of woe,
For they were subjects, to the time and tide
That tarried but their parting, she must go
To wayle her woes upon a foreign shore,
He stay behind (poor man) to suffer more.
125
Good Ellinor (quoth he) for thou retain'st
That title still, though ignominious wrongs
Have ceaz'd upon thy fortune, and destaines
Thy virtues, and leaves nothing that belongs
To such a Lady, but thy poor bare name,
And that disgraced too, with reproach and shame.
126
Although the Sun be often Eclipst in clouds,
Yet that vale drawn, he shows himself again:
Often misty fogges, the heavens great glory shroudes,
But they desolue, and the fair stars remain:
The crystal streams are often defilde in mud,
But cleares again, and makes their waters good.
127
So are we subject to the rust of times,
Dishonors, and disgraces, but they fade,
And we shall one day shake them off, and clime
Up to our own estates, for we are made
Reproachful, that of our selves are not so,
And therefore shall we live, t'out-liue this woe.
128
The melancholy seaes, will give thee leave,
To mourn thy fortunes, whilst Orion-like
The deep string'd sighs and tears, shall quite bereave
The Ocean of her people, and shall strike
Them with remorse, who being all gathered there,
Reasonlesse things shall pity what they hear.
129
And I will leave men's companies a while,
And under Cipres shades, to beasts and birds,
Trees, stones and rivers, sit and there beguile
Consuming time, till to my woeful words
They frame lamenting notes; whose heavy ditty
Shall always end, their mournful stops in pity.
130
So lands and seas, poor fishes, beasts and birds,
Hard stones, strong trees, and siluer-running streams,
Shall simpathize our woes, grieve at our words,
And wish that they our sorrows might redeem;
Whilst wicked men, that wrought our misery,
Feels not the sting of hard extremity.
131
As for the heavens they have seen our wrongs,
And in their good time will revenge this deed;
There justice sits, and renders what belongs
To men's deserts, and what is there decreed
She executes on earth they will not bliss
Those bloody hands, bad minds that wrought us this.
132
When ere I sleep, my dreams shall be of thee,
And when I eat, how bitter is the bread
Which I must taste without thy company?
And waking, if I see not thee I am dead.
Thus sleeping, waking, eating, all I do,
Without thee, do all agrauate my woe.
133
With that he stopped, for tears commaundes his tongue
To cease, whilst they succeeding in their course,
Perfect his grief, for these two parts belong
Unto true sorrow; words, and tears, have force
To move compassion, in the savage minds
Of brutish people, reason-wanting kinds.
134
Great Duke (quoth she) depressed by my fall,
It Is not eternal banishment from hence,
Me ought dismayes, but that hard hap withal,
That exiles me from thee, so one offense
Or rather none, and I that never meant
To do them wrong, have double punishment.
135
Forget thou to lament, and let me grieve,
For if we sorrow both, we both shall dye:
It Were good that one, endeuour'd to relieve
With cheerful words, the others misery.
Leave thou to mourn, and I shall better see
A hopeful time, of my recouerye.
136
It were no reason thou should bear the weight,
Of my misdeeds; but I my self alone
Will undergo the burden, it is my right,
Let it then go with me, least when I am gone,
The envious minds of enemies repine,
This land shall harbor any thing that's mine.
137
Who lives in Egypt must say black is white,
Because their beauty is a Sunburned skin:
So must thou change thy mind, and in dispite
Of virtue, teach thy old tongue to begin
An vnus'd note, for who so has to do
With deep desemblers, must desemble too.
138
If thou wilt do ought for me, this lesson learn,
So shall good Gloucester live in better ease:
For if the envious eyes of foes, discern
Thou grieuest at my exile, it will displease
Their humors, and set them a work to see,
How they may hurt thee, as they have injured me.
139
But foolish as I am, why do I strive,
Teaching a river to ascend a hill?
To turn the course of nature, and to drive
The spheres of heaven, back against their will?
To teach thy tongue that never stepped awry,
Now in thine age, to flatter, fawn, and lie?
240
My reason is, because I would preserve
Thy life from the danger it scarce can miss:
Men are not measured now as they deserve,
But as the bad conceits of tyrants is.
From whose unrighteous doom, fair heavens defend
Thy holy life, that hopes the better end.
141
With that Sir Thomas Stanley (her sad guide)
Breaks off their intermissiue pittious tears:
Lady (quoth he) the due obseruant tide,
Has filled the hollow vast, and empty shoares
Of this our haven, and his swift foot course,
Bends back unto the sea his matchless force.
142
Full loath (God knows) am I to be the man,
Appointed to dissolve so strong a bond,
As linkes true love: yet will I what I can
Labor to keep it still, except command,
(That ouer-rules good meaning) make a way
To bring it to a sodainer decay.
143
Call but to mind Sir Thomas (says the Duke)
What it is to part true friends, and thou shall see,
It Is such a sin as gentle kind rebuke
Forsakes, and says it is worthier to be
Reserved for punishment, we cannot give
Eternal fire, whose furies ever live,
144
Yet I confess I do thee wrong good knight,
Thou art commanded to convey her hence:
And being a subject, must obey the might
Of mighty men's commands, though the offense
To God and all good men: for all men say,
Kings were made to command, subjects to obey.
145
Yet use her well to quallifie the deed,
Smooth oils desolues hard stones, fair words enforce
Pity in flinty hearts, there will proceed
From thy kind usage, reasons of remorse,
To move the heavens to forgive this sin,
And to remove the plagues tho'art falling in.
146
With that they parted, for they might not stand
On longer terms, nor would their sorrows let
Their words dilate their griefs, but does command
Their dutious tongues to silence, and they set
Mild, quiet, patience, before their eyes,
And to her shrine do solemn sacrifice.
147
Now where is the doleful muses; that should play
In tragic scenes, the parting of these two?
Will none assist me? then well may I say,
It is indeed a story of such woe,
As if but tongues, and pens, should strive to express
Their pains, would make the sorrow but seem less.
148
Then as we wonder at the countlesse stars,
Numberless sands, the infinite increase
Of men, birds, beasts, and all things that inferres
An admiration: so let our tongues cease
To talk, of what we cannot comprehend,
As wondrous things, whose numbers have no end.
149
This done, the Duke repayres to th'Court again,
Performs his office, labors to forget
These sorrows: but alas the growing pain
Of this deep festred wound, will never let
His thoughts, or deeds, or life, have any peace,
Till thoughts, and deeds, and life, and all shall cease.
150
Then sought the Nobles for to match their King,
In marriage with some Prince of his estate:
So that from him more royal seed might spring,
To wear the English Crown, and prop agate
The Common wealth, for subjects most desires
A royal issue to succeed their syres.
151
And he by private means, without th'consent
Of his Protector Gloucester, willing is
To marry, and withal was well content,
That William Duke of Suffolk, one that was
His uncles foe, should betroth in his name,
One borne unto small wealth, and to less fame,
152
Margaret daughter to Reynard Naples King,
Enriched by this match, who else was poor:
A king only in name, without the thing
That makes men mighty, and in steed of dowre,
They buy her of her Father, with more store
Of lands, and goods, then ere he had before.
153
Look as great Cynthia, in her silver Carre
Rides in her Progress round about her sphere,
Whose tendance, is the fair eye-dazling stars,
Trouping about her Chariot, that with clear
And glorious shows, makes every eye delight,
To gaze upon the beauty of the night.
154
Or as the spring comes to regreete the earth,
Clad and attended with the worlds delight:
So is the Queen in Majesty brought forth,
Tended with Princes, that a fayrer sight
This land of ours, a long time had not seen,
And well't had been for them, had that not been.
155
And though the Duke unwilling was to have,
His Kingly Cosen marry with this Queen:
Yet since it was done, it was too late to crave
Assistance to disioyne them; that had been
But labor lost, a toil unto no end:
Wise men let faults ore-passe they cannot mend.
156
And what his duty and his service ought her,
That he performed, and ever was content
To do her good, and his endeavor brought her
More friends, who else in grievous discontent,
Had put on arms against her, but that they
Saw him content, and for his sake they obey.
157
But as most women else, even so was she
Unconstant, and that wavering power did guide
Her fickle thoughts, that nothing could agree
With her conceit, but new devises, pride
And women's toys, who children-like affected
Loves trifles, whilst good things are quite neglected.
158
Good Duke to what misfortune were thou borne?
How was the heavens conjoined at thy birth?
Thy younger times, might better have out-worne
These troubles that thy latter years brought forth.
But subtle fortune, turned her fatal hand
Against thine age, not able to withstand.
159
But whether it were the fortune of the place,
(Th'Duke-dome of Gloucester), that thus crossed thy bliss,
I know not, but I guess, for all the race
Almost of Dukes, that were instal'd in this
Unlucky Duke-dome, made an end like thee,
By hard and unexpected casualty.
160
Thomas of Woodstocke, and Hugh Spensers thrall,
(May be great reasons to persuade this thing)
And thine, and after thee an others fall,
That was once Duke there, though he dyed a King,
Richard the third, yet was his life so bad,
That he deserved a worse death then he had.
161
Yet let thy soul forgive this sin of mine,
That puts thee in amongst a company
Of wicked men, whose lives were worse then thine,
Though death amongst you all dealt equally,
For he is impartial, and with one self hand
Cuts off both good and bad, none can withstand.
162
The Queen that now had lent her youthful ears,
To the vain pleasures of these foolish times,
To be employed, considered not the cares
That troubles grauer heads, whose wisdom climes
To higher steps of judgment, and nere cease
Striving to keep, their idle lives in peace.
163
The droane should dye, did not the toylesome Be
Work to supply her need: the silly snake
Had starved in cold, had he not bin set free
From the congealed frost, whose force did make
Passage for death in his friends bosom warmed,
From frost and snow, and killing winter armed,
164
Yet see how these kind favors have an end,
The Drone starues the poor Be, that got her meat:
The venomed snake requites his careful friend,
By stinging him that did procure the heat
That preserved her: so did the Queen requite
The Dukes kind deeds, with malice, wrath, and spite.
165
For whilst he labored in the commonwealth,
And sought their good, by governing the King:
Incroaching danger comes on him by stealth,
And ere he wist had slyly drawn him in.
Such is the manner of bad minded men,
They work their hurt that seeks to preserve them.
166
Now hold they secret counsels to invent,
How the Dukes person might be brought in danger,
Persuade the King against him, with intent
Sooner to spoil him, but he now no stranger
To their devises, seeks in what he may,
To keep himself from falling to their pray.
167
To plead his guilt less case it was no boot,
They knew it well enough, but would not know it,
That all men were his foes, was out of doubt,
Yet the King loved him well, but durst not show it.
There Is almost none dare come to him to cheer him,
And even his servants feared to come near him.
168
And that his honor might the sooner fall,
They took away his office, for say they
The King's at age, and needs no help at all
Of a Protector, but himself shall sway
The Scepter: nor was it convenient
He should live under others government.
169
With this the Duke as willing to resign,
As they were to desire it, on his knees
Yeeldes up his charge, and though he did divine
Some ill ensuing mischief, and he sees
All men look sadly on him, yet he rests
Contented, and turns all things to the best.
170
Great King (quoth he) that from thine infant spring,
Through the channel of thy youthful time:
Have run securely without daungering,
The hope of manly years, and now can climb
Up to thy throane thy self without my hand,
And there hold all things at thine own command:
171
Here do I yield mine office, which God grant
Thy Princely hand may hold even to thy grave,
But sore I fear me, some will seek to scant,
The royal power such a King should have.
And greedy of that gain, without all shame
Keep from thy hands, all thine, save thy bare name.
172
Yet hope I thou shall have a fayrer Reign,
For me thinks that this royal name of thine,
No meaner bounds or lymits should contain,
Then all this Western world: how long a time
Has victory been seated on thy throane,
And stays thine answer ere she will be gone?
173
Let times to come that talks of thy renown,
Speak no less good of thee then of thy Sire.
And as tho'art heir unto his land and crown,
Be so unto his virtues, let th'desire
Of honor, conquest, time-consuming fame,
Advance another Worthy, of that name.
174
Whose memory, when stones and toombes of brass,
Deep graven Epitaphs, and hollow graves
Shall quite consume, and their memorial pass
Down to the shady groves, and darksome caves
Where dead oblivion dwells, in whose black breast
Lies buried, all that former times possessed.
175
Thy name, like to the still enduring Sun,
Shall out-liue all, and be the worlds great wonder,
I, and when Sun, and Moon, and Stars, have done,
And their concordant Spheres broken a sunder,
Thy light succeed their lights, and as now we
Admire their glory, so they may do thee.
176
I see no reason why thou should not flourish,
As thy great Grand-sire did, and be as good,
For that same clime, and earth, and ayte does nourish
Thee, that fed them, the issue of their blood
Thou art, ah why then should we fear,
That thou should be less famous then they were?
177
There is no reason, for after that th'spring,
There Is no man doubts, but harvest comes of course,
When as the dusky morning does begin,
To break the nights thick fogges, and by his force
Desolue the shady clouds, the night out-worne,
We Are certain of a fair succeeding morn.
178
But I shall never see that happy day,
For leane-fac'd death, tended with painful hours,
Hangs on my weary limbs, and makes his way
Through hollow bloodles veins, whose weakened powers,
Scarce able to support this careful head,
Says (fore that day) old Gloucester shall be dead.
179
And he fore-tolde his end, for it was not long,
Ere many seu'rall treasons were pretended
Against him, and by fierce iniutious wrong,
He Is charged with offense, that nere offended.
Yet this his hope is, heaven will harbor them
That are unjustly punished here among men.
180
That they accuse him of, is, he devised
New punishments for such as did offend;
Such as our laws inflict not, and he prized
Before them other laws, which in the end
Say they, will ouer-turne our settled state,
And leave this now-good Kingdom ruynate.
181
Of these he is accused, for these arrested,
Committed to the Tower, there laid in prison,
And though with tears, and prayers he often requested
He might but know his fault, for law and reason
Play both the advocates upon his side,
But their requests is lawlesly denied.
182
For grief of which hard dealings (some men say)
The good Duke dyed there, but some others guess,
His ancient enemies devised a way.
There to cut off his days, and disposses
The world of her chief good, o times accursed
That spoils the best things, to preserve the worst!
183
Like to a morn, whose evening shuts in clouds,
Making a dark end of a glorious day:
Falls this good Duke, and in his ending shrouds
The beauty of his youth, yet all men say
His Sun-bright virtues, showed through this dark veil
And poisoned enuies, deadly aim did fail.
184
For he lies buried in famous Regestry,
Where (save himself) scarce any are retained:
Other great men have writ their memory,
On walls and stones, and yet their names remained
Nothing like his, whose Epitaph is placed
In men's conceits, that never shall be rac't.
FINIS.

