THE Foreste or Collection of Histories, no less profitable, then pleasant and
necessary, dooen out of French into English, by Thomas Fortescue.

Aut vtile, aut iucundum, aut vtrumque.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston, for Willyam Jones.

1571.



A VIRTVTE ORTA OCCIDVNT RARIVS.
Haec tua prima, haec antiqua sunt, non alia pene.



To the worshipful Ihon Fortescue Esquire, master of the Queens Majesty's
great Garderobe, Thomas Fortescue wissheth continuance of health, with
increase of worship.
Passing hence into some the parts beyond the sea, not yet long since (righe
worshipful) of part for mine experience to acquainte my self with the nature
of strangers, to se their order, and government, in the administration of the
weal public, to see the soil it self; and the commodities thereof, to savor
of their language, with others the semblable but chiefly for mine increase, in
the study of good letters, wherein as England lacks not good schools, for
that purpose, so thought I them less able yet, in the other respects to
satisfy, and answer my desire. Where afewe months after mine arrival,
the world grew to be such, so tumultuous, and troublesome, that no man
could assure himself, or promise him self safe being: gates each where were
shut, tounes and holds were fenced, castles, and fortes furnished, all
passeges straightly, and diligently observed, the fields full of armed men,
ready to the battle, and in fine, throughout one only face, and
countenance of hostility. By means whereof, the laws were lockte up, as if
they never had been known, justice was then to none, or sure to few men
ministered, all arts Mechanical, and Sciences surceased, every corner full of
cloase, and whisperyng mutterers, no man from others malice, or safe, or well
assured. In schools now were the chairesvoide of their learned doctors, no
man delivered laws from Justinian the Emperor, the solace of the sick
Hippocrates was then, and Galene eke unknown, the sciences exiled then, the
scriptures were not taught, the tongues were all forgotten, Philosophy, the
love of wisdom, there a stranger. Besides these I nothing speak of the
great number of houses, churches, chapelles, and villages, utterly wasted, and
consumed with fire, of the wilful profusion of wine, oil, corn, and the
semblable: of the most lamentable, and marvelous penury, and want of
necessary victualles, of the pitiful complainte of the indigente, and neadie,
of the frownyng faces betwixt neighbor, and neighbor, of the little trust
the master had in his servant, the father eke in his child, or one manne in
an other. Thus therefore, when all things grew on, to such disorder, when
policy gave rome, and place to hostility, when arms, and armed men had all
things in possession when none lived void of fear, when no state was
assured, then knew I not what better to do, or how better to spend the
long, and weary hours, then at times to busy my self in some light, and
pleasant study. By means whereof, I chose to wade into this Foreste, wherein
I must confess, I had such present likyng, as seldom my hap has been or
never to find the semblable. So having then both read him, and read him
through again, with due consideration of the excellency, and great learning
of the aucthour, I thought I could not better spend that so weary a time,
then in translatyng this Foreste, into our natural language, to gratify my
country therewith, to which not to our selves we live still, and still are
borne. Especially for that I knew it written, in three sunderie tounges, in
the Spanishe first, by Petrus Messia, a gentlemanne of Siuile, and thence
dooen into the Italian, and last into the French, by Claudius Grugette, late
Citezein of Paris: wishyng that we were so labourous, and so diligent, that no
thing emongeste them were written, which we with them imparted not. And yet I
must confess, that in this present vertion, diverse chapiters are left out
of purpose, and advisedly, not by oversight, by sloth, or by negligence,
which I thought I might with as good warrante do, as others some to add, or
change at their pleasure, especially for that the matter so depends not, one
part of the other, that the first without the second, or the second without
the third, or that without them both, might please or content in any thing
the reader. For being as it is a collection of sunderie matters, the lack of
one annoieth not, or maihemeth not the other, yet for my full discharge, and
purgation herein, I wish that the skilled in the tounges, at their leisure
should consider, what they are, how many, of what weight, or importance, that
whileste my desire was only to give that, which was profitable, and pleasyng
therein, I might not be thought more dainty, then trusty to carue him at my
pleasure. Neither would I again be thought so rough, and hard a censor with
idle superfluity, to charge in ought the aucthour, whose virtues and
learning, I reverence and honor. And farther do promise, that if it may be
thought expedient, at some time hereafter, to collecte also the remnante. In
the mean season, I beseech your worship to accept herein my doings, guard
and defend from wrong this little Foreste, for whose cause only, I took it
first in hand, of part, that if the reader conceive herein any likyng, that
he therefore stand bound to none, but to you only, of part also, to leave you
some small show, or token of my poor mind, ready always, and vowed to do
you all kind of service, trustyng that you will as favorably accept it, as
in cases not dissemblable, has been your wonted usage, which if I may
perceive, (whereof I never doubted) it shall cause me to atte^pte some other
thing in time to come, percase with my greater pain, and labor. And this
trustyng that this rude, and simple vertion shall find some grace, and favor
with the indifferent reader, shadowed especially with the countenance of your
willing, and favorable protection, I end, wishyng you many, and good days in
this world: and in the other to come, eternal joy, and felicity.

Your worshippes where so it shall please you to use or command him, Thomas
Fortescue.

TO THE GENTLE READER
Never was I ignorante (gentle reader (to how many dangers he willyngly
expoposeth himself, that for thy sake takes pain to publish any thing in
writing, so dainty, and so diverse are the judgments of men, so prone to
deprave, and contemn the sweat of others. How be it, to do thee pleasure, I
would not leave to hassarde my credit, most assured that I shall not please
all, and glad not withstandyng, if I might content some. The learned I trust,
will take all in better part, coueryng, and excusing whatsoever they find
less absolute, or perfect, knowing that there never yet wrote any so
advisedly, who had not, or at least neded not, the file again of some one
other. And as touching the others, I no more dread their hard, and sinister
judgment, then I hunte, or thirste in any thing, their praise, or
commendation. To profit nevertheless generally, was my desire, but chiefly
the less learned, with this present Foreste, which for good cause me thought,
I so might name, or title, for that being a collection of diverse, and sundry
matters, is as a Foreste, well furnished with many trees, birds, and beasts,
of different, and contrary natures. And if ought herein may please thee, or
profit thee in any thing, accept it thanckfully, other price thou paiest
none, and give by thy good example, occasion to the studious, and learned in
good letters, to take in hand, or attempt with like good will some other
thing, to thine only profit, furtheraunce, and commodity. Assuryng thy self,
that none in any sort, do better deserve of their country, that none in any
exploite do toil, or travail longer, that none swincke, or sweat with like
pain, and anguishe, that none in like sort hassarde, or adventure their
credit; that none desire less stipende, or salarie for their travail, that
none in fine, are worse in this age recompensed. Show thy self therefore
grateful, be thankful to the aucthour, enter into his Foreste, disportyng
thee therein, some laune, some range, perchance may please thy indifferent
mind, some walk, or some thing else, may lend thee contentation, nothing I
trust shall grieve, or annoye thee hedgde therein. And as for me, this only in
recompense I crave, that thou favorably will accept, and judge of these my
pains, which if I may perceive, I will not leave to grieve me, to do thee
greater pleasure. Fare thou well, and such let be thy censure, as is
toward thee my meaning.

Such faults as have paste in Printyng, as they in deed be many, and every
where aboundante, so of thy courtesy excuse us, whether they be but letters,
whole words, or otherwise, and as the sense shall lead thee, so amend what
so thou findeste, or lackyng, or superfluous, assuryng thy self, that it
somtymes paste us, in more perfect wise, then thou in these receiuest them.

Giudica de gli altri come vorreste di te sigiudicasse.
An aduertismente, written by the translatour, to his book.
Go hence thou little book,
go show thy self about:
Go room abroad and vewe each place,
go seek some harbor out.
Go up and dou^ne I say,
no time do thou mispende:
Go seek the learned, and serve thou them,
on them do thou attend.
Be glad and joyous then,
when they thee in hand shall take:
And when they thee do open then,
to read thee for my sake.
Beak then, and bow thee low,
stoop down with all thy might:
Let then thy painful service make,
thee gracious in their sight.
And fear not every wieght,
his force that straight will bend:
With censure hard thee to oppress,
of folly to condemn.
But think then with thy self,
revenge none look thou seek:
That such with ease more sooner will,
comptroll then do the like.
And fear not though again,
thy papers faults do fill:
In Printyng which escaped have,
and paste against our will,
Correctours hadste thou few;
and Printers often do miss:
The sense and meaning easily,
the reader yet may guess.
Ne dread though stranger thou,
and geaste unknown shalt run:
Though French sometime and Thofcane eke,
from foreign land doeste come.
In such eftsoon the best,
and learned crewe do like:
And them each where some thing to learn,
with careful iye do seek.
And yet no stranger great,
though new come to this laud,
Sith that in English hahite thou,
in England now dooest stand.
Great things do promise none,
ne make thou show of much,
Among the meaner sort go on:
content thee to be such.
For they that soar a loafte,
and over look the rest:
That matters great do promise, and
compare them with the best.
Of times do prove but fools,
and shoot wide from the mark:
They promise more then they do pay,
they pay not half their part.
Therefore be thou content,
where so thou hap to come:
To promise least what so thou pay,
this is of all the sum.
That I to thee in charge,
before the world give:
That I still would thou shouldste observe,
whileste ought of thee does live.
Farewell I can no more,
thy fathers blessyng have:
Be mindful of his precepts, and
thine honor look thou save,
And sith thou never shalt,
to him return again,
Work thou him good if that thou canste,
for he thee peude with pain.
The First part of the Collection of Histories.
Why in the first Age men lived longer, then in this our Age present. Chap. 1.
WHo so ever is studious in Holy Write, ought in manner of necessity to know,
that in the First Age, and before that for Sin, the general Fludde ouerranne
the whole World, Man's life was then longer, then it is now presently. For
euidente is it, that Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years: Sethe, nine
hundred and twelve: Caine, nine hundred and ten. And so afterward
descending from the one unto the other, who so lived least, lived seven
hundred years. And in these our days, few reach to eighty, or nintie:
which who so at any time passes, rare is his hap, very strange, and
marvelous, in such sort, that we live not the tenthe part of their time.
The Learned therefore, as well Divines, as natural Philosophers, which have
hereof carefully discoursed, findinge the same Nature, which has geeuen us
cause of Beeinge, to be the very same, with that of these forepassed Ages: and
that these our Forefathers here lived so long naturally, and not by Miracle:
feeling them selves not a little herewith trobled, began curiously herein to
search the causes, or reasons. The which thing, as well unto M. Varro, as
also unto infinite others, in the works of Nature appeared so difficill, that
they supposed the years of the former Ages past, not to have been such, as
are these of our time. Which opinion is open folly, an error too too great,
and altogether inexcusable, as we shall make euidente in the Chapter
following, having here first remembered the advice of certain grave, wise, and
learned Authors. When therefore I read the judgment of others, and in fine
thence descend unto mine own opinion, the principal reason, me thinks, why
we in this time, live not as long as did others in the first, and Old Age,
is, that our Forefathers had not then any the causes, which in us new
engender diverse maladies, and diseases, whence necessarily ensue Stoopinge Age,
and Death. Here must we also consider, that our first Parents, Adam, and
Eve were created, and framed by the very hand of God, without any other aid
or mean: whence it is to be presumed, that he perfected them with complexion
most excellent, with a true Sympathia, and proportion of humors, the cause of
their continued health in these their many years. By means whereof, their
Children, issuinge of Parents of such perfect constitution, as also their
Ofspringe risinge to them again, which naturally lived so long, and many
days, must resemble their Elders in like perfection, and constitution of
body, as men taking either their beginning, or beeinge, of a matter most
pure and simple, until such time as by the change of Ages (whose property
is to alter, and to impair al things) the state of Man began to weaken,
yeeldinge his days in number fewer then before. Again in that Age, one thing
to them was very helpinge, and profitable: the which same to us is very
noisome, and contrary: which was the great temperancy used in Drinkinge, as
well in quantity, as in quality also, with the small change, and variety of
Meats: for neither had they so many sorts, or sundry dishes, as we, ne
knew they any, or new, or dainty inventions. To eat Fleashe, what it was,
before the general Floudde, was unto Man altogether unknown. Further, some
hold for common, and most assured opinion, that both Fruits, and Herbs
without all comparison, were in those days of far greater efficacy, and
virtue, then any, found any where in this our latter Age: for that they then
sprange out of a new, and fined soil, and not of such as now it is worn,
wasted, weryed, and consumed. For the General Inundation took from it, his
woorthe or fatness, leauinge it in respect, infertile and barren, restinge
salt and unsavory, by the rage of the Sea, which many weeks flowed over it.
These reasons then are good, and each of them sufficient to conclude, that it
neither was so straung, or marvelous, but rather a thing most agreeant unto
nature, that men then lived longer, then in these days presently. Farther it
may be said, (that which we for an assured truth hold) that Adam well
knew the virtues of all Herbs, Plants, and Stoanes, which also his
Successors, of him in such sort learned, that to the like perfection after
them, never any attained. This then was granted them of sum part for the
preservation of their health, for the continuance, and protraction of their
days in this world: who to expel the causes of diseases, if any grew on
them, only used to minister Simples, abhorring our venomous compoundes of this
Age: which in place to purge, and purify man's body, weaken, and dispatche
for the most part the poor patiente. Again in these above remembered first
years, both the life, and health of man was propte, and sustained by the
course of the Heavens, with ye influence of the Stars, and Planettes, then
far more beneficial, then they presently now are: for that then there
neither had paste so many Aspectes, Conjunctions, Eclipses, with other infinite
Impression Celestial, whence now proceed so many chaunges, variations, and
alterations on the Earth, and emonge the Elements also in those days
principal occasion of health, and continuance, contrary now in this our Age
of all sickness, and death. But above all that, that we have here alleged,
or by reason have any way proved, I now maintain the many years of these
our First Fathers, to have proceeded of the only, and inspeakeable providence
of God, whose Majesty would their continuance should be such, and so long,
and that these above remembered causes, aided mutually one the other, to the
only intent, that of two persons might then increase many, that the Earth
might be inhabited, and mankind increased. Also farther consideringe, that for
as mutche as Man after the fludde, lived not so long as before: God licensed
that they should enter into the Arc, and there save them selves, more Men and
Woomen then him self in the beginning, and at the first had Created, to the
only end, that the world might the sooner be inhabited. S. Augustine, of this
matter, writing some thing, reports, that our Forefathers Li. 15. de
Ciuitate Dei.
had not only in health, and many days, advantage of us, but also in huge
and great statures of body, as is evident, remembered by many, their boanes as
well found in their Sepulchers, and Graves, as also at times under great
Mountains and Hills: in such sort that some assuredly hold, that they were
the boanes of such as lived before the Inundation. The same S. Augustine
affirms, that being at Vtica a town in Aphrike, beholding there the boanes
of a dead man's body, among others, found there some of his Jaws, so great
and weighty, that they well would have poised an hundred of these in our Age.
Notwithstanding though yet our life be short, yet may we not for just cause
any where complain: for that, if we abuse it in contempt of the Divine
Majesty, a rare benefit receive we that they to us be so shortened: for we
will now no longer acknowledge our God: and yet if we would as becomes us in
all fear to serve him, a time sufficient has he to that purpose lent us, for
that the bounty of our Savior is so great and ready, that he receives for
Atonement sufficient, man's bowinge heart and humble spirit.

That the opinion of those, that supposed the years of the former Ages paste,
to have benne more short then these of our time, is false. As also which was
the first City of the world, and finally that our Forefathers had more
Children, then these that are remembered to us in the Scriptures. Chap. 2.
FOr that it appeared unto some, that the space of nine hundred years, in our
first Fathers seemed a thing altogether impossible, less able to co^prise or
receive these above remembered reasons by us alleged, the only and sole causes
of that so long a life. And where as they durst not to deny the foresaid
number of years, so plainly and openly specified, and given us out of holy
Write, they affirm, that the years of the first age, were far more shorter,
then these of our time: so that the advantage of long life, which is unto
them attributed so far above us, is not so great as it has benne supposed.
Sum others emonge them would also assure us, that one of our years,
contains ten of that age past. Also many others have said, that each
course of the Moon yielded unto them one whole, full, and complete year,
which it pleased them to term, Annus Lunaris. Others some also dreamed, that
three of our Months gave to them a year: so that this accoumptinge, four of
their years lends us just one, and no more. For that in this sort, as well
the Chaldeans, as also the Arcadians parted their years, as remembers
Lactantius. M. Varro a most learned Roman, in others many, besides this
matter, was of the opinion, that these Anni Li. 2. Diuinaru^ Institutionum.
Lunares, were to be numbered from the Conjunction of the Moon, until the new
Moon again, which may be the space of xxix. days, and certain odd
hours. Pline in like manner reckeneth it fabulous, that any in the first Age
should live so many days, affirminge that the Inhabitauntes of Arcadia so
numbered their years (as we above have remembered) by the space only of three
Months without more. There is also emonge us Christians, a certain Book, of
the Ages of the world, written by Eliconiensis, where he also seems to be of
the said mind, and advice. Notwithstanding it appears most evidently, that
the years mentioned in the Holy Scriptures, were none others, then these of
our time, and that if there were any kind of difference, such it was, as was
not almost sensible. Which thing is very well proved by Josephus, as also by
Lactantius Firmianus, but yet more perfectly, and more plainly by S.
Augustine: by whose authority, and reasons, easily may be confounded who so
leans to the contrary. Touching the first, that each Moon in that Age
gave them one full year, accoumptinge evermore from the one Conjunction unto
the other, it rests an eroour most open, and euidente: for that we well
know, that, that contains not thirty days full, so that one hundred years
following this our accoumpte, would mount unto above one thousand and two
hundred of theirs of that time. Whence it would follow contrary to the
opinion of all, that men in our Age now presently live longer, then they did
immediately after the Creation of the world, for that never was there any man,
that lived one thousand and two hundred years, which nothing surmounteth
this Age of ours. It also is apparente, that sum emonge us live an hundred
years, sum also (though rare it chance) an hundred and twelve, which
would rise to more then a thousand and three hundred years, accoumpting them
according to the course of the Moon. Like error to this, was not also
theirs, which affirmed ten years of the first Age paste, to be just one,
and no more of this our time? For had that their opinion been true, then should
men have benne able in the act of Generation, at the Age of seven, eighte, and
ten years, which squareth with no rule, or part of Philosophy. For proof
whereof, we read in Genesis, that Seth the son Genesis. 5.
of Adam begatte Enoch, being then old an hundred and five years. If then
ten years of that Age, had answered by just proportion but unto one of these
ours, it then should follow, that these of the first Age, at the Age of
ten years and a half, of this time present should be strong and able in
the act of Generation. Cain also having issue at threescoare and ten
years, should have also benne Father, followinge our account at the end of
his first seven years, yea and that which more is, at a far younger Age, if
one of our years had counterpeased twelve of the first Age, as diverse have
not leafte lightly to surmise. But we shall more plainly yet unfold this
their foul fault, and by this reason weaken their inexcusable error. If
their year were but the tenth, or tweluth part of ours, then consequently
must it follow, that their year had not twelve Months, or at least that their
Month had but three days: which is false, for that the said text of the
Scripture says, that the general Floudde began the seuentiene day of the
second Month: whence we euidenily learn, that the months of that time,
where none other then are ours. Concerning the others whose opinion was, that
a year in the first Age, was but the fourth part of one in this: their year
being the space of three months only, is proved by the said piece of
Scripture, to be in like manner false. For in the same place is it readde, that
the Ark of Noah flottinge on the waters, arrested it self, the seven and
twenty day of the seventh Month, which (the waters fallen) first staide it
self in the Mountains of Armenia. Again, after is it written, that the
waters Genesis. 8.
daily diminished until the tenth Month, and that in the first day of the
said month, the tops of high Hills and Mountains, each where discovered
them selves. Whence now lie evident the errors of those, which measured for
their year, the only space of three Months, for that mention is here made
both of the seventh and tenth. Then may we well learn, that the ancient
year had also twelve Months, as have in this last Age semblably ours, for
that remembringe the tenth, it minds less nothing then the end, or the
last. And as ill also may that be said, that their Month had but three days
only: for of the seven and twenty day of the Month, plain and express
mention lies open in the Text. But least of all may it be supposed, that
their days had of length but two or three hours, for that the same Text
again reports, that it reigned, and the windows of Heaven were opened, by
the full space of forty days and forty nights. So now then is it evident
that the days were natural of four and twenty hours, the Months and
years none other then are ours, or at least very small and insensible was the
difference. Which thing to that end, I only have spoken, for that all men
accounted the course of the Heavens as we do, so that this order among the
learned, the Hebrews I mean, as well as the Egyptians, has benne reverently
each where, and always observed: among whom Moses the Historiographer was
brought up, Author of those holy Books, where these long lives are recorded.
Now if we would subscribe to the opinion of many, who affirm the Hebrews to
have measured their Months by the course of the Moon, geuinge forth their
year complete by the twelve Months Lunaries, each Month having only niene
and twenty days, and fouretene hours, or at the least very little more or
less, by means whereof, the year might end about twelve days shorter,
then that which we measure by the passage of the Sun, which is three
hundredth, thirty and five days, and six hours. This difference
notwithstanding, ne yet leaves doubtful, or of any part uncertain, the
long and great Age of our forepassed Fathers: for a small matter is it in niene
hundred, or a thousand years, to exempte twenty, or thirty: for that the
Months Lunaryes were not full thirty days. Hence then conclude we by this
authority, certain, that the nine hundred and thirty years which Adam
lived, the nine hundred also of the others, were such, as were the hundred
three scoare and fiuetiene of Abraham, and such also as are the three scoare
and ten, and four scoare of of our time, for the most part, the extreme
term, and end of our lives. There is also one other, and semblable
consideration to be noted, to this purpose alleged by S. Augustine. Admit
(says he) that in the Scriptures Li. 15. de Ciuitate Dei.
no mention be made, that Adam, and his Posterity had any other Children
before these that are in the said Scriptures remembered: yet is it for a
verity assuredly to be maintained, that both before, and after, they had
diverse, and sundry, yea and that in their tenderer Age also, then is any
where in holy Write, in any wise specified. Whereof to yield more sufficient
proof, when it is said, that Caine had builte to him a City, the first of
all others that ever was in this world (of which Josephus Josephus, Lib. 1.
de Antiquitatibus.
reports, saying: That it was bewtified with diverse Towers, environed, and
compast with assured good walls: to which he gave the name of his Son Enoch,
which was to him then very newely borne), it has small show of trothe, that
there should then be but two or three men in the world only, for that the
Scriptures make mention of no more unto us: but to build a City the aid of
many men, was of necessity to be required: the Text notwithstanding
remembers only the principal doers thereof, as appears, where it is said,
that their Sons, and Daughters begat also others, whose names in holy Write,
are no where remembered. The semblable we find in the holy Evangelists, as
whereas S. Matthew treatinge of the Genealogy of Christ, according to the
Fleashe, begins from Abraham, thence descendinge unto David, saying:
Abraham begat Isaac, remembringe not one word at all of Ismael, and
incontinently followinge, Isaac begat Jacob, not speakinge of Esau, no, though
they were in deed, as is evident: their Elders, lineally mindinge to descend
unto David, who not being of the Line of Ismael, neither here remembers, or
Ismael, or Esau. Straight again, Jacob begat Judas and his Brethren, Judas not
being of them the Eldest. In such sort that treatinge of this Generation, he
only remembers those, from whom, in right line he descends unto David.
Sufficient proof, to force the gaynesayers to think, that Moses also used
the said practice in his History, and that our Forefathers had also other
issue, then these that are to us remembered in the Scriptures.

Of the excellency of Secrets, and in what forte a secret ought to be
covered, with certain Examples seruinge to that purpose. Chap. 3.
ONe of the perfectest notes to know a Wise man, is, if he well can cover the
Secret committed to him by an other, holdinge evermore his own affairs
cloase and unknown. Who so of the time paste will read the Ancient
Histories, shall find that a number of virtuous enterprises, miste far, and
fowly failed of their desired end, in time of Peace, as well, as also in that
of War, by the only reuealinge of some devised Secrets, whence infinite
mischiefs hastily insued and followed. But among sundry examples, one we
find excellent and surpassinge the rest, as immediately, or directly,
proceedinge from God: who to him self so well reserueth his Secrets, that he
ne reuealeth to any the things that shall happen, or betide us tomorrow: as
also neither they that lived in ye Ages past, could at any time Divine any
thing, of the things this day present. Whence it is easy for each man to
consider, that unto God him self, to conceal well a Secret, is a thing
agreant, acceptable, and pleasinge. Who though he have for man's sake, to him
discovered some thing, yet to let, or prevent, his provident intention, was
never to any Creature yet of any part possible. By means whereof the wise,
and sage in all Ages, have loved and learned, to conceal, and cover their
Secrets. We read that Cato the Censour confessed oftentimes to his Friends,
that he of three things right often, and grievously repented him: The first,
that he to any body had unfolded his Counsels, or Secrets, but above al others
especially unto a Wooman: The second, that he had paste some iourneys by Sea,
which he more safely might have past with little pain by the Land: The third,
that he idly, and without fruit, had spente in his time any one day. The
two last, merit well of all men to be noted, and the first well aunsweareth
to this our present purpose. Alexander on a time, receiuinge from his Mother
certain letters of importance, which after he had perused secretly with
Ephestion, closde up his lips, with his secret Seal or Signet, geuinge
openly thereby to all men to understand, that he to whom a man in his Counsels
affieth him, should evermore have his mouth well closde, and shut up. When
the King Lisimachus had offered unto the Poet Phillipides, what so should
please him to ask or demand, he incontinently answered: the greatest good
turn that your grace can do me, is not to communicate with me any part of
your Counsels. Antonius Sabellicus retcieth to the said purpose, surely a
notable and marvelous example. In the time of Pope Eugenius, says he, the
Senate of Venice had a Captain named Cremignoll, by whose Treason, and
disloyalty, the Army of the Venitians was to their great harm discomfited. By
means whereof the Senators driven to further consultation, how and in what
sort they should deal with this Captain, some being of the opinion
presently to send for him, to lay him in hold, and to d^ justice on him: but
others yet then were of opinion contrary. In fine therefore this was their
conclusion, that presently, and for that time, they would dissemble the
matter, as though they nothing had felt of his barbarous treachery,
attendinge notwithstanding sum fitter occasion then that, mindinge evermore
to execute him, that so justly had deserved it. This their determination was
deferred for the space of eight Months, duringe which time (so well could
each man conceal these affairs) ye though they were in number many, many
also most assured friends of the said Cremignoll, some poor, and of mean
condition, which to have advertised him of these news, might have received
large and ample rewards. These things not lettinge, their passed
determination, was at the end of these eight Months yet then close and
Secret, at which time it was decreed that he should come to Venice, where the
Senate, with many words, and with fair countenances received him, which
notwithstanding, the next morninge apprehended him, and did him forth with for
his disloyalty to die. This then might serve for example, unto al Senators,
Judges, Counselors, and others of our time: to the end that they better keep
and conceal their affairs, then others some that have revealed things to
their great hurt, shame, and detriment. To the confusion of which, I shall
here remember a pleasant discourse, recited by Aulus Gellius, Noctibus Atticis,
as also by Macrobius in his Saturnales, and has this. The Roman Senators
enteringe into their Senate at Rome, accustomed each one to bring with him his
Son, and that as soon as he was ones able to go, and to the Children of the
Nobility was granted this Privilege, until they were fully seuentene years
old: to the intent, that beholding the reverent order of their Parents, they
in time to come afterward, aduaunsed to ripe Age, and fit for Government,
might the better be instructed in common and Public affairs? So carefully
besides were these Infantes instructed, that out of the Senate they never
discovered, or disclosed any thing. It happened on a day, the Senate then
sittinge on great, and weighty matters, and besides their accustomed hour of
departure, longer continuynge that their assemble, the determination
notwithstanding reserved until the morrow, with straght inhibitio^, that in
the mean time no word were thereof in any respect spoken. But among other
children then that day there present, there was one young boy, the Son of
Papyrius, of one of the most Honorablest families in Rome. This Child at night
being returned home, his Mother first by entreaty, in flatteryng sort
desired him, to learn her, what matters were debated that day in the Senate,
consideringe their long abode, besides the woonted manner. To whom the boy
answered that he might not well disclose it, consideringe it was prohibited,
thereof to speak any thing. She this mutche understanding (as is the common
woonte, and usage of Woomen) waxte then mutche more earnest thereof to feel
some thing, in such sort, that neither, by fair words, nor flattery able
to get any thing, would with threats, and rods finally force him, to
answer her less honest, and hasty importunity. Whose malice to avoid, this
wise, and wilye Boy, aduising him well of this pretty guile, said: that this
deferrent was amongst them that day carefully handled, whither as well for
the state Public, as also for the augmentation, and more speedy increase of
Mankind, it might be more conducible to the whole Empire of Rome, that one
Man should have two Wives, or contrary that one Wooman, should be given to
two Husbands, which both parts failed not, of most earnest, and assured
Factours: who the nerte day (says he) will conclude on some final and
resolute determination. The which thing, thus ones understood by the Moother,
to which she lightly added, both faith and credit: moved therewith, and
something perplexed, aduertiseth other Ladies, and Dames of these news: to the
end they might let, and distourne that devise, of giving two woomen, as
wives to one man, furtheringe the other part to the uttermost of their might,
to enritche each Dame with two Husbands at the least. On the morninge
following a great number of the Roman Matrones, were in flocks assembled at
the Gates of the Senate, effectuously, and in many words requitinge their
Lords not to pass on any so unjust a Decree, as to give to one man in
Marriage two wives, but rather to go forewarde without stay to the contrary.
The Senators less wetinge to what purpose this tended, amazed, in entrance,
one after the other into the Senate, demanded each of other, whence might
proceed this so rare, and shameless inciuilitie, altogether unable, thereof
to yield any cause, or reason. But in the end, the young boy, the little
Papyrius, did them out of pain, layinge before them, what had chanced him the
night passed with his Moother, and how that for fear of her thunderinge
threats, and great words, was forced for his discharge, in this pretty
sort to deceive, and beguile her. The matter thus then understood by the
whole House, they highly commended the secret constancy in the child.
Concluding notwithstanding, that thencefoorthe no Father should bring with
him his child into that place, besides the young Papyrius, which only after
entered, to the intent Papyrius.
that by these means, no secrets should out of that House, or Place be
revealed. By the practice of this child again, may the Elders of our Age,
what to do in their affairs, be very well advertised: consideringe that if a
Private Secret be not to be disclosed, mutche less then a Common, and
Public Secret, principally emonge the Aged, and men of assured Judgment.
M. Brutus, and Cassius, with the others all, their accomplices, which had
conspired the death of Julius Caesar, supposinge it for the state Public, no
less expediente, then it also was necessary, for the maintenance of their
Liberty, having laid their plotte, and devised the manner how to put these
things in perfect execution, would notwithstanding thereof imparte nothing
with Cicero, one of their especial, and most assured friends, who also above
others most effectually desired the abolition of that tyranny, not for any
diffidence, or mistrust they had in him, but for that he only was reputed a
simple, and badde Secretorie. A thing assuredly worthy of admyration,
consideringe how many they were, that conspired his Ruin, in how privy
manner, and how long they concealed it, and that from their approved, and
best beloved friend. Fuluius sommetime revealed a great Secret to his wife,
which, not long before he had received of the Emperor Octauian: which after
discovered by his said wife, notis thereof came immediately to the Prince, who,
for his over mutch lightness, in manner most sharp, rebuked him tauntingely.
By means whereof, he entered into desperation, determining to do present
force on him self: but first charginge his wife with the great wrong that
she had done him: who said, that he no reason, nor just cause had at all
to grieve with her, consideringe the many days that they had lived together:
he yet had not felt her fickle complexion, or otherwise knowing it, that so
londely would abuse his own knowledge therein, reposinge his trust, and
affiance in her. Wherefore though her Husband were the cause of this error,
yet determined she to suffer the first pain due therefore, and with the same
laid violente hands on her self, after whose death, poor Fuluius did the
same. It is readde in the Life of the Emperor Nero, that his death being
conspired on a time Nero.
in Rome (a thing most expediente, as well for the Romans, as also for all
others his rare cruelties considered) he, to whom it belonged by couenaunte,
to do the deed, met by hap a certain Prisoner, which by ordinance of
the tyranny, was then on passage, to place of Execution, and consideringe with
him self, that the wicked, and perverse nature of the Emperor was such, that
none, whom he apprehended at any time, escaped death, and therefore the
Prisoner, which sorrowfully lamented, might no way escape his bloody, and
merciless hand, drew something nighe him (not remembringe that his affairs
demanded secret dealinge) Pray to God (says he) that it may please him to
preserve thee until to morrow, for if thou do pass this day unto an end, I
will assure thee, that Nero shall not do thee to die. Which thing
understood by that miserable Prisoner, who incontinently suspected that which
in deed was, seeking the only means to save his own life, declared the
matter foorthewith to the Emperor, aduisinge him to take good heed to him
self. By occasion whereof, Nero immediately apprehended him, that had
comforted him in such sort, the above remembered Prisoner, and by change of
torments, forced him to confess the Coniuration. By reason whereof, him self
was cruelly executed, their Determination made frustrate, and void. Pline
recoumpteth the plain contrary of Anaxarchus, who being apprehended for the
Lib. 7. Cap. 23.
semblable matter, curragiously bitte of his tongue, with countenance
unappalled, to the intent that he never would disclose therewith any Secret,
spittinge it manfully into the face of the Tyrante. The Athenians curiously
framed a certain Image of Iette, in the honor of a common wooman, who hight
Lyonna, in memory of her excellent constancy, for that she so well, and so
secretly Lyonna.
had kept, both silence, and consell in a certain conspiracy: which Image
was framed without any tongue, the better to give forth the force of a
Secret. In like manner the Vassaules, or Servants of Plancus, are in Plancus
Val. li. 6. Cap. 8.
this place for just cause to be remembered, for that no torments sufficed to
make them confess any thing of their Master to the enemies, which sought
him, and would have slain him, where so ever they might have found him. The
Page of Cato, that famous Oratoure, Cato.
privy of a fault committed by his Master, was tormented in Rack, to
confess thereof sommethinge, and yet for what so ever might be done to him in
the world, never would he be brought to witness against him any thing. Q.
Curtius remembers, that the Persians Q. Curtius.
had a Law, more straightly to pounishe, then for any other fault, these that
unadvisedly revealed any Secret. For confirmation whereof, he says, that the
King Darius, vanquished by Alexander, not knowinge how to escape, hid him
self: but no pain, or pounishment on the one side, or hope of reward on the
other, might move them, that knew where he was, any thing to speak of him.
And again he reme^breth, that the Persians maintain for an opinion, that no
man should, in the man less close and secret, affye him self, in cases of
charge, and importance. To be a good Secretorie then, is in all things
necessary, especially in War, that which all aunciente Captains in the Age
paste, well observed. Philippe the son of Antigonus, Successor to Alexander,
demanded of his Father in presence of certain others, when, and at what hour
the Camp should march. To whom the King in high disdeigne answered: Art
thou so deaf, that thou fear, thou shalt not hear the Trumpet, as well as
others. Letting him thence plainly to understand, that by that his Demand,
he had committed an error, which merited no answer in the presence of
others. There was a Tribune in ye Host of Cecilius Metellus, a Captain
Roman, which asked his C. Metellus,
Determination, upon certain points in their wars. To whom he answered:
If I wiste that my Shurte knew, whereon I have resolved, I would forthwith
and out of hand burn it. Horace, in his Laws of Feastinge, commands that
each man keep well to him self, what so ever shall there be said, or spoken.
By means whereof, the Athenians had emonge them such an usage, that when so
ever they met together at any Feast, the most aunciente, should show to
the others, the Gate, whereat they entered, saying: advise ye well, that no
one word hence pass, that at this present shall emonge us be spoken. The
first thing that Pythagoras learned his Scholars, was to hold their peace,
and carefully to keep silence, so that he ever kept them a certain time
without speakinge, to the intents they might be learned well to keep a
Secret, and never to speak, but when time requires. Which suffices to learn
us, that to conceal a Secret, is of all others a most principal, and rare
Virtue. For proof hereof, when Aristotle was sommetimes demanded, which was
the most difficill, and hardest thing in the world, he answered, that it was
to hold our peace, and talk not. S. Ambrose also to this purpose in his
Offices, lays emonge the principal foundations of Virtue, the patience that
man should use in silence. The Romans emonge other the vanities of their
Gods, had a Goddess Pline, Lib. 3. Cap. 5.
of Silence, which had to name, Angeronna, which they painted evermore in
token of silence, with finger continually priest on her mouth. Pline also
writes, that on the xxii. of December they Sacrificed still unto her. Which
also witness M. Varro, Solinus, and Macrobius. A God of Silence was in manner
semblable honored of the Egyptians, which, they, as the others, with finger
in mouth purtrayed. In like sort has Catullus, and Ovid described this
Idolle. And hence is well known, how they reverenced a good Secretorie, in
that they adored these Idolles as Gods. Solomon in his Proverbs says, That
a King should drink no Wine, for other reason none, save that, who drunk is,
can in no wise keep, or Silence, or Counsel: and supposes him further most
unworthy to Reign, that cannot well cover his Secrets of importance. And
again he says, That who so discloseth a Secret committed to him, is a
plain, and open Traitor: and who so well keeps it, is a loyal, and
faithful Friend.

How commendable a thing it is, to talk, or speak few. Chap. 4.
Few times to talk, and then to be short, and Sententious, is a thing most
rare, and commendable, never sufficiently praised of the Wise, and Learned.
Solomon says, That mutche talk is never without offense, and who so well
brioleth, and moderateth his tongue is prudent. And again, He that maistereth
his tongue, saves his soul: but who so bableth inconsiderately, lies open,
and in danger to infinite discommodities. Here might be alleged the
Testimonies of sundry wise, and learned: but of sum part may suffice that
text of the Gospel, That we shall assuredly yield accoumpte of every idle
word. The Lacedaemonians emonge all other Nations, pleasured most to be
Sententious, and brief: in such sort, that when any used few words in
talk, they said, that he discoursed Lacedemonianlike. Philippe, the Father of
Alexander, on a time sent to them, that he would pass over some part of
their Country with his Army, and that they speedely would certia^e him, in
what sort he should pass, either as their friend, or as their open enemy.
To whom they answered in few, without any heap of words: Neither as the
one, nor as the other. Artaxerxes in manner semblable, King of Asia, sent
them word, that he would comme to spoil, and sack their Country. To
which their threats, they in none other sort answered, but, come hardly,
and do what thou will. Me thinks they could not in long proses of words
have framed him an answer more fit then that. The Ambassadors of the
Samyans pronounced on a time, weary, and long Orations in their Consistory:
in such sort, that they mislikinge of their tedious discourses, finally
framed them in few, this answer. We have foregotten the first part of
that you have uttered: and as concerning the rest, we do not understand it.
Also to other Ambassadors of the Abderites, as well for that they were too
curious in vtteringe their Embasye, as also that they demanded in great
haste their dispatche, by Agis the King of the Lacedaemonians, was in this
sort answered. Ye shall say, returned unto the Abderites from us, that we
have given you so long audience, as it pleased you here to speak. On a
certain time, one talkinge with Aristotle, continued his discourse beyond
measure, so long, that in the end, him self feelinge Aristotle.
his own error, and fault, concluded abruptly, with his excuse, saying:
Pleases it you to pardon me, that I have failed, in vsinge so many words
before so grave a Philosopher. To whom Aristotle framed this so courteous an
answer: Friend, it needed not, that thou should have craved in this ease,
any pardon, for I never thought otherwise then to pardon thee vndemaunded.
Which answer, as well served, as it was fittinge to that purpose. An other
example read we Liuicus.
of those that robbed, and slew the Poet Liuicus, for as they oppreste him in
wide, and open fields far from company, and out of all sight, he espied a
company of Cranes flyinge over his head, to which with loud voice, he spoke
these his last words: O Cranes, ye shall be witnesses of the wrong that is
here done me. After whose death, this matter lay yet many days unknown,
till on a certain time after, it chanced a solemn Conuente of people was
made in the said place: emonge whom, were also present the two Murderers of
Liuicus, which hearing, as before, Cranes cryinge over them: the one advised
his fellow thereof in laughter merrily (supposinge in the mean time not to have
been perceived of any) Hearken companion, behold here the true witnesses of
the blonde, and death of Liuicus. It chanced, that one nighe them, hearing
these words, and not well perceiuinge what they might signify, suspected
foorthewith that which in deed was, aduectisinge the Maiestrates of that
which he had heard. To conclude, these two Roysters were incontinentely
apprehended, and according to equity, Justice was done on them: which
happened by words paste them without advise, or regard. For this cause a man
ought principally to be ware of that which he will say, before it escape
him, with consideration also before whom, and in what place. Hecates a Greek
Oratoure, was on a time Hecates.
reproved, for that sittinge at a Bankette, he would sa^e nothing. Which
understood by Archimidas, answered in this sort for him: Art thou
ignorante, that one, that can so well speak as he, knows not also the time
to keep silence? Infinite examples, out of diverse Histories might be borrowed,
of Times, Dangers, Infamations, and Death: in which, by too mutch talk,
men eftsoons have been entrapped. Wherefore we should be circumspecte, and
wise, that before we do our mouth open to speak, we well consider of it,
whether it may be to us prejudicial, or not. The great Cato, surnamed
Censorius, was even from his Cradle very sober in words: whereof, at times
reproved of many, as one that observed to austere silence, said: I grieve not
at all to be argued of Silence, for that no man shall have occasion to reprove
me of my lyuinge: for then, and not before will I break into words, when I
have learned to speak these things that may not be concealed. Isocrates in
his Book written to Demonichus, says: That there are two times conueniente
to speak in: the one, when to speak is in deed very necessary: the other,
when one speaks of these things, he well knows. Plutarche Plutarche.
compares those men that talk, not knowinge whereof, unto void, and empty
Vessels, which give forth a greater noise, then these that are filled.
Plainly instructs us the Philosopher Zeno, that for other cause none has
Nature lent us two ears, and one tongue, but Zeno.
only to speak few, in bearinge, and receiuinge mutch. Horace advises us
far to fly their companies, which Horace.
pleasure mutche in many demaundes, and questions, for that they commonly be
captious Ianglers. Suetonius recoumpteth in confirmation of that, that was also
reported Suetonius.
by others, that the principal cause that moved Octauian so mutche to
fantasy, and favor his Minion Mecaenas, was, that he was very secret, and
not prodigal of words. Cicero affirms that Cato the Oratoure, Cicero.
never would commit to Paper, any his Orations, saieinge: That if it ever
happened him to repent him of that he had said, yet that, that he had written,
should not aggrauate his sorrows, for that he never might deny the thing,
that his Pen should witness against him. But to the end, that arguinge here,
the less advised, and runninge tongues of others, I seem not to incur the
said error my self. I end with the Ppilosopher without any more:
concludinge, that it oftentimes repents me to have spoken, but to have held
my peace, that I remember, never.

Of the strange opinion of the Egyptians, touching the term, or end of
Man's Life: limitinge the same by the proportion of his heart. Chap. 5.
THat which I shall say here, will seem unto many very strange and new,
but unto most men fond, and ridiculous: for that it is a thing very
difficill to be proved. Wherefore neither will I bind my self to the
probation thereof, although the authority of those that seem to approve it,
should either yield it a trothe, or unto a truth sommethinge semblable, and
likinge. Pline, and Marcus Varro, writing of the time Pline, Lib. 11. Cap. 36.
M. Varro.
of Man's Life, affirm, that the learned Egyptians had found out by
experience, that Man according to the order of nature could not live above an
hundred years, and that if any reachte to a further, or elder age, it was by
sum particulare influence, and force of the Stars: a thing in the works
of Nature very strange, and marvelous. Hence grounded they their foundation,
upon the heart of man: in which by often, and common Anotomyes, they found,
and perceived certain marvelous Secrets. For said they, when Man was of the
age of one year, then poised his heart only two of their Drammes: when be
was two years old, then poised it four, and so forth how many years so
ever he lived, by proportion still grew his heart to be of like number of
Drammes. In such sort, that being ones fifty years old, Man's heart
should wieghe then an hundred Drammes: and from thence, by like proportion
still he loses of his weight, each year two Drammes, even as before he
increased. So that at the end of an hundred years, the Heart by continual
decrease, is becomme nothing: so that consequently of necessity, Man then
must die, if before he be not prevented by sum accidental occasion, which
both can, and does commonly in such manner abridge our days, that very few
of us live the one half to experiment this matter. Though to sum this matter
seem strange, yet be we assured, that the Egyptians held it for certain:
as plainly have leafte us the above remembered Authoures. Of our time also
Ludouicus Celius Rodianus, alleaginge in like manner to that purpose,
Dioscorides, who remembers thereof sommethinge, emonge other many matters: to
whom also comes Petrus Crinitus, in his Book of Honest Li. 10. Antiquarum
Lectionu^. Cor. Ag. Li. 2. de Secretis Philosophiae.
Discipline. Galiotus de Nargni, in his Book of Man, as also in like sort
Cornelius Agrippa. I was desirous to remember here all these Authors, for that
the matter might otherwise hardly be digested. Now remains it to be deemed
of, as to the Reader it shall be liking. And now that we have taken on us to
speak of Man's Heart, and of the excellencies of that one little part, to the
intent we treat not of one point alone, it shall be expediente that we
learn, as recoumpteth to us Aristotle, that Man's Heart lies lodged in the
leafte side Aristotle.
of his body: but in other Creatures is found evermore in the middle of
their breast, which he records in his first Book of the nature of
Beasts. Further emonge the Philosophers Natural, it is maintained for an
opinion Common, that the first part that comes in Man to any form, or
proportion, is the Heart, the root of al others his parts, the fountain, and
only spring of natural heat: as also the last member that loses his
mouinge, and dies in him. It is assuredly a most delicate, and daintye
member, and su^che as may not be touched, but Man foorthewith dies. Pline
records a strange Pline. Li. 11. Cap. 37.
matter, which he for true affirms, saying: That there was one found,
which had his Heart roughe and hearye: and further, that who so has the
same, is evermore valiante, and curragius. Which thing was found true
(being opened) in Aristomenes, who with his own Aristomenes.
hand in one Battle, had slain three hundred Lacedaemonians: who after
having escaped, by his rare force, sundry dangers, and afterward dyinge in
his Bed quietly, was opened, and his Heart found, as is abouesaide, hearye.
Suetonius Tranquillus, in the Life of Caligula, as also the said Pline,
together affirm, that who so dies, done to death with Poison, his Heart
will at no time consume, or waste with fire: which was proved in Germanicus,
Father of Caligula: which also happens Germanicus.
to them that die of the Fallinge Evil. Further it is euidente, that the force
of laughinge, or Laughter it self, rests in the little cheastes, or seats
of the Heart. For proof whereof, the aunciente Historians writing of certain
Swoordeplayers in Rome, avouch, that these, by mean of whose wou^des, the very
threedes, or veins of their hearts fell out, made change of this life, with
extreme Laughter. Also as this quality of Laughter proceeds from the heart,
so Melancoly thence semblably takes his beginning: as in like sort, all
virtuous, and naughty imaginations. All words first there engender, and
begin. Many also maintain, that it is the chief seat, and principal
restinge place of the Soul. Which seems to be well confirmed by our Savior
him self, saying: That wicked imaginations, and naughty thoughts proceed
directly from the heart, and that, that enters at the mouth sayleth not the
man, for that these be but things indifferent. Further Venerable Beda Beda.
in his Comme^taries on S. Mark, remembers the chief seat of the Soul, not
to be in the Brain, as mainteineth Plato, but rather in the Heart, as learneth
us our Savior.

Of the first beginning, and spring of War: as who were they, that first
invaded strange Countries, with the Inuentours of certain Weapons, and Arms:
who also first found the use of Artillery. Chap. 6.
IT is evident, that War, and discord among men, took their first hold, or
stay, on the sin of our Forefathers: as appears, in that one of ye first
borne sons of Adam, who leaft not to lay violent, and bloudye hands on his
Brother: so that loosinge even here our Original Justice, malice and discord
afterward never leaft their reign amongst us. In such sort, that War,
and Enimitie began even emonge the first borne. But the science of War, or
the Art military it self, with the perfect manner to order many in Battle
against many, (for that the first fountain thereof is of sin, the middle
also continually, and for the most part the end is nothing but cruelty,
blood, and miserable impiety) is now in such worthy, and Honorable
reputation, that the Art it self, and the well skilled therein, are far
now advanced above the Fautours of all other prudent, and industrious
exercises, as most esteemed above all other virtuous practices in the World.
Diodorus Siculus, with others, affirm that Mars was the first that ordered,
and devised, the subtle polices of War, for which causes the Poets termed
him (but fabulously) the God of Battle. Cicero attributes the Honor of this
Lib. 3. de Natura Deorum.
invention to the Goddess Pallas, by means whereof she was named (as he
says) Bellona, unto which opinion accorded diverse Poets, gaynesayinge the
opinion of that first, and ancient spring of War, which Josephus in his
first book of his Antiquities, even in the first Age, and before the Floudde,
attributes unto Tubal, the most expert therein, in his time, who by his
industrious, and painful practices, perfected him self in the guiles, and
aduauntages of War. Others sum suppose that it first began after the
floudde, so that to learn the truth it seems very difficill, who was the
very first beginner, and Father of this matter. Which how so ever it was, it
well appears, that in the beginning, Wars and dissentions only grew
among Princes, more for Ambition, and desire of Honor, then any where to
impouerishe or spoil one the other. Iustine, and Trogus Pompeius, report that
Nynus King of the Assyriens, was the first that leadde an Host out of his
Country, for Avarice, and to Conquer the Territories of an other. Fabian the
Praetor, affirms well the same, in the beginning, of that little part, that
rests unto us, of his History: to which also condescendeth S. Augustine.
This Nynus so bare him self in this practice of War, that he subdued in
short time many Cities, and Countries, which he left in quiet possession to
his Successors: which continued from time to time, unto his posterity,
according to the computation of S. Augustine, Eusebius, and Diodorus Siculus,
thirtene hundred years, descendinge evermore from the Father unto the Son,
with out defaulte at any time of Heirs in right line, by the number of thirty
and three Kings, and as some others report, thirty and six: until in the
end it came into the government, of that Monster Sardonapalus, in whose time
this so long continued an Empire, came then into the hands and handlinge of
the Medes. This Nynus then, as record these Authors, was the first
Conqueror, known in all the world, although we read of certain Wars
before him: but it appears as we have said, that it was not, to possess
and Conquer the Countries of others, but for pride only, and glory of the
world: as is written of Vessor King of Egypt, who paste out of his Country
against Tanais Prince of the Scythians, which met him, and gave him
Battle, and remained victorious, who not withstandinge never deposed him from
his Crown, or Country, as had practiced the above remembered Nynus. Wherefore,
he may be thought the first, that ever gave forth any Laws of Arms,
grauntinge to the Conqueror all the possessions and treasures of the Conquered.
Touching their Weapons, wherewith they invaded, defended, putting in execution
their wrouthfull, angry malice, and ire, it is to be supposed, that in the
beginning they used none inequality of Arms, but as the Poet Lucretius
recoumpteth, they first began with the nails and teeth, and after that to
acquainte them with the staff, and stoanes, which this day yet are only
used of certain barbarous Nations, not yet by the malice of man, having
drawn out of the earth iron, to do force, and oppression on their
Neighbors. Pline writes that in the first Wars of Lib. 7. Cap. 16.
the Moors, against the Egyptians, they entered the field only with Pikes,
and Iauelins, and after that by little and little, it came within few days to
such pass, and end, that men were provided of such strange kinds of
Arms and Armoures, that it was rare to behold, the one still to kill and
murder the other. Of the inuentours of these things, we find diverse
opinions. The Poets in their Fables, attribute the invention of these Weapons
unto Mars. Pline reports that the Etoliens were the first that ever bare
Lance in field, and adds also, that the Lacedaemonians first found the
Pertisan, the Sword, and for defense also the Headpeece. But Herodotus says,
that the Egyptians first framed the Tergotte and Sallette: As also Midas of
Misena, the Lib. 4.
Coat of Maale, and the Breaste plate, and finally one of Etolia, the first
Darte that was used. It is said that Pantasilia Queen of the Ammasones,
first fought in field with Gleaue, or Halbarte: And Scythus Son of Jupiter,
first found, how to use the Darte or Arrowe: but others sum think the
contrary, attributinge it to Persea. And Diodorus, not alone, asscribeth it to
Apollo. The inhabitants of the Isles, Baleares, (called now in our time
Maiorque and Minorque) as has Vigetius, in his Book of the Art of War,
were they that first found to cast Stoanes with the Slinge. So that men
according to the time, their affairs, and variety of invention, have
searchte, and found out sundry sorts of Weapons. And this has it chanced,
in my fantasy eftsoons, that in one, and the same time, in places far
distant, the same kind of weapons have benne framed by diverse, not one, at
all wetinge of others devise or practice. Wherefore the less to annoye the
Reader, I leave to geather more variable opinions, which well might serve here
not impertinent to our purpose: as to recoumpte in like sort, who were the
inuentours of so many strange instruments and devises of War, to shake, and
overthrow great Walls, and Fortresses. Eusebius affirms, that Moses was
inuentour of these Lib. 9. de preparatione Eua^gelica.
huge and strange Engines. Plutarche adds, that Archilas Tarentinus, and
Eudoxus were the first that reduced this Art to a perfection, and that they
devised sundry instruments, to weaken walls and great houses. The Beliers,
as has also Pline, found the use of the Swoorde at the siege of Troy: but
as Vitruuius reports, it rather was at the siege of Athens. The Scorpion
wherewith they used to throw huge, and great Stoanes, as again has Pline,
was first devised by the inhabitants of Crete and Syria. The Phoenicians
first aduantaged them selves with the sharp, and pearsinge Rebute: but these
al were trifles of little weight and importance, far surpassed in cruelty,
by the invention of Shot, in diverse sorts, and Artillery. The first
invention of which, sum attribute unto an Almayne, whose name we find
nowhere, as unworthy of memory. As report Blondus, and R. Volateranus, the
first that used shot to their behoof and profit, were the Venetians,
against the Inhabitants of Genua, in the year of our Lord a thousand,
three hundred, and four scoare. Howbeit, in my judgment, this invention was
yet more Ancient, for that we Read in the Cronicle of Alphonsus, the
eleventh King, by just account, of Castille, who at the Conqueste of the
City Algazare found, while he besieged the Town, in the year of our
redemption, a thousand three hundred forty and three, that the Moors from
within, threw out among the enemies certain thunders through long Morters, or
Troughes of iron: and this was almost forty years before that, that Blondus
records. Again before that, it is reported by the said Alphonsus, which
semblably conquered Toletum in Spain, that one Petrus Bishop of Logio, writes
that in a certain Battle done on the Sea, betwixt the King of Tunnye, and
Morus King of Sibilia, whose faction Alphonsus favored, that ye Tunnigeniens
threw on their enemies, certain Bo^bardes or Tons of fire: which by all
likelihoode might be deemed Artillery, although it were not in such
perfection, as now, and that was four hundred years before and more.

For what cause Man goes upright: as also why fasting, then when he has
Eaten, he evermore is found more weighty, and poysant: and why in conclusion
he poyseth more dead then living, with others, such not impleasant
Accidents. Chap. 7.
OF the Composition of man sundry are the considerations, of which Lactantius
Firmianus a part, as also sum others, have written, large, and weary volumes:
in which one thing, among others many, requires sum exact and particular
examination. Which is, that it has pleased God to frame al Creatures, Man
only excepted, with the head hanginge, and stoupinge forewarde, their eyes
still fixte, or for the most part, on the Earth: and not only brute Beasts,
but al Plants and Bodies vegetable. As is seen in trees, which have their
heads, or roots fast lockte, or hid in the earth, the bows, or branches
mounting into ye air on high. But Man he has created with eyes bente
toward Heaven, his body straighte and right, his face aduaunst on high,
Gods works still to conte^plate, and consider. And although for this
matter, it might suffice to allege the only providence of God, yet seems
it to savor of sum Mystery, or Secret, and therefore worthy of sum
further consideration. Our Disposition then most assuredly learneth us, yea by
most plain, and euidente sign, that we are not created, and framed for the
Earth, to have in admyration things base, and transitory: but to be busied
in things on high and heavenly. Of which with Man, no other Creature may
communicate: unworthy, and incapable of such, and so great benefits: Man
only for them, even from the first ordained. God has created all creatures
with head hanginge, and bente still to the ground, to show, that he to Man
has given over them, all kind of Rule, and Authority to order them. Which
thing is well noted of Lactantius Firmianus, who says: That God having
determined to create Man for Heaven, al other Creatures unreasonable, only for
the Earth: he made Man a creature capable of advice, right, and straighte,
naturally ordained, and instituted to Celestial Contemplation: to the intent
he only might reverence him, that he might honor the place of his first
spring, and beginning, that he might acknowledge the Country that he is
borne to: shapinge other Creatures bowinge and stoopinge, as having no part,
or participation of Heaven. Aristotle, who had of the true faith no feelinge,
Arist. Lib. 2. de Natura Animalium.
says: That only Man, emonge other Creatures marches vprighte: for that him
self, and his Country are not Terreane, but Celestial. And further, That the
office of Divine minds, is to understand, and perceive, in which function,
neither should Man have known how skilfully to have ordered him self, had he
been of a lumpishe, heavy, or vnfittinge shape: for that the weighty mass,
and huge lump of the body, yields the memory, and recordation with other
parts of the Soul, insensible. S. Thomas, who leafte no matter untouched, or
unexamined, in his Exposition of Youtke, and Age, has to this purpose,
such words as follow. For two causes was Man formed right, beholdinge
Heaven: The one, for that he should be the perfectest of other Creatures, and
such as should taste, or sauer of all Celestial qualities. The other, for
that in the proportion, and temperature of his body, he is more hoate then any
other Creature, and that the nature of heat is evermore to mount, and ascend
vpwardes. Other Creatures, as far inferior, as also less perfect, less
participate in these Celestial qualities, and less natural heat have they
in any sort to advance them. For which cause, neither are they of the same
frame, or proportion with Man. It seems, that in this place S. Thomas followed
the opinion of the Platonistes, who affirmed that natural heat, with sundry
the Vital Spirits in Man (in which he more abounds then any other living
Creature) are the only causes that he marches uprightly, advanced in manner
so perfect, and so seemly, for that by the force, and vigor of the foresaid
powers and bloudde, he addresseth him self vpwardes. That which his endeavor
more perfectly to accomplish, he further again is aided by the true
proportion, and mixture of the Elements: of which he borrows his first
spring, and beginning with such equality, and conueniente weighte, that he
fitly, and commodiously walks, addressing him self to look on the
marvelous frame of Heaven. Now then since Man, of part, by the perfection of
his Soul, as also of part, by the excellent feauture of his Body, is
beroughte with the love, and co^templation of Heaven, he should only work,
think, and devise things Heavenly, and Spiritual, disdeininge the Earth,
with all things thereon transitorye. But we be in such sort enamoured with
the vile consideration of worldly pleasures, that for the most part having our
eyes, and countenance bente to Heaven, the heart lies soylde below upon the
Earth. Again concerning Man, of whom we have here spoken, Pline remembers
an other thing, which though it be not of such importance, as are the
others, yet may it of sum part content, and please the Reader, especially
to whom experience has not revealed it, found notwithstanding daily to be
true, of all such as please carefully to experimente it. He says, that Man
dead, poyseth more then when he lived: that which he also affirms in all
other kind of Creatures. Again he says, that Man having eaten in the
morninge, poyseth less, then when he was before fasting. Which thing is by
Erasmus in a certain Probleame of his confirmed. Who also in the same
remembers other sum things not unworthy of readinge: yeeldinge the same
reasons, with Pline, for the confirmation thereof, grounded on the
consideration of the Vital Spirits, and Air, as is above rehearsed. Whereas
the contrary seems to have sum show of truth, for that who so shall take
at any time his refection, lays up within him self, the poyse and weight
thereof. Notwithstanding, it is evident, that the refection always increases
the vital Spirits, which solace, and comfort man, increasinge, and
multiplyinge natural heat within him. Hence comes it, that when one man from
the ground assayeth to lift an other, the lifted is then more weighty, when
he does breathe or conuaye his wind out, not redrawinge it again for the
small time of that practice: the which when he retayneth in his body and
keeps in, is found by mean thereof, more light then he was before: Again
who so fast runs, neither may he for that time either breathe, or blow
mutche, for restrayning his breathe, he finds him self more agile and
quick, for that the Air being an Element very light, desires to rise up,
and to mount alofte, where his natural place is, of rest or aboade: as
experience may learn us, in a skin or bladder, which empty, and not pufte
up, thrown into the water, sinketh continually, and rests on the bottom:
but full of wind, or blown out, swimmeth still on high. Pline in the same
place again records, that man's body in the water drowned, and after a time
risinge from the bottom on high, if it be a man, he evermore has his face
turned from the Earth vpwardes, but if it be a woman, she continually floteth
in manner and sort contrary, which thing Nature has only in such wise
provided, to cover the parts of woomen, which always should be secret.
Again, also an other reason may be given, for that wooman before, by mean of
her pappes or breasts, is found more weighty, but man behind, because of his
shoulders, more gross or greater, then are those of woomen.

Of the excellency of the Head, above all other members of the Body, and that
it is not good to have a little Head, or strayte Breaste, as also whence it
is, that we account it courtesy, to take of the Cappe, or Hatte, in
salutinge an other. Chap. 8.
IF it be an especial Prerogative, among all other Creatures, granted unto
man, that he should have his body, of such perfect, and such desired
shape, his face advanced of Heaven evermore, and heavenly things to advice
him. Then assuredly the Head, which in man far surpasses, both all, and
every part, which also is the highest among the others all, ought by reasons
law the advantage to have, and preeminence in each respect and case. As in
deed each part imployeth his skillful pain, loyally to guard, and keep the
Head from harm, in such sort, that when so it is in danger, or any peril
else, forthwith the Foot, the Hand, the Arm with the others all, toil to
defend the Head from all grief and annoye, for in the Head consists the
well being of them al: and the Head if it be pained, each part complains
forthwith. S. Ambrose especially commendyng that part of the body, says:
That the frame or composition of man, represents of sum part, the face or
countenance of the World: and as Heaven thereof is the chief portion most
eminent and bewtiful, the Fire, the Air, with the other Elements, to it
inferior: so the Head in respect surmounteth each other part in Man, as
Queen, Mistress, or Empress all alone: which as a hold or Castle, in the
middle of a City, builte on sum Rock alofte, wherein, both Counsel and
advise continually do lodge them, where power and authority have chosen to
them their being. And Solomon, the eyes of the sage, are in the inner parts
of his Head. Lactantius Firmianus says, that God has given to man his Head
in place above, to the intent he should have rule and Empire over Beasts.
Galene to it attributes principality Gal. Lib. 1. de Morbis acutis.
over all other parts in man: and Plato in Timeo, in consideration of the
prerogative thereof, terms it, the whole body. It being then of so great
importance, the Fountain also and chief spring, of each the powers in man,
it is of necessity that it should be of fit proportion, and form
conuenable. Whence it comes that Paulus Eginetus, in his first Book, De
Medicina, says: that a very little Head is a sign certain of a weak
judgment, and that who so has a very small Head, wants withal just
quantity of brain. The same reason alleges Johannes Alexandrinus, saying:
the little Head is as noisome and incommodious, as is the less compassed, or
over straight Breast, for as (says he) the breast, is the harber of the
Heart, and Lounges, which without many discommodities, may not tolerate or
endure to be too straightly imprisoned, especially for that ye heart being too
closely shut up, cannot commodiously without annoye at any time move it. By
means whereof, natural heat throughout all the whole body fails, digestion
also waxes fainte and feebleth: in semblable sort must it by like consequent
follow, that the head, in which nature has so artificially couched, the
Orgaines of so many puissances, or powers of importance, should be of
proportion and quantity convenient. Galene in like sort unto these accords,
saying: that the little Head is sign of little wit, and of a brain less
firm or stable: but if it be of quantity, conuenable and decent, it then
argues a good wit, as also a sure and fast memory. The Philosophers
affirm, yt Man having his Head once stricken of, incontinently becomes unable
to move or stir, although ye force of respiration should not thereby be
extinguished, but for that the Veins are sundred, the only means, and sole
instruments of Motion in all Creatures living. How be it, Auerrois reports, yt
he sometime beheld a poor unfortunate patient, who being beheaded, walked
hither, and thither afterward, in sight of all the people. It is also written of
Dionysius Areopagita, that he, his head being stricken of, went
notwithstanding from the place of execution, one full Leage or more. But this
no doubt, was more myraculous, then natural. Among al other Creatures
living, Man only and Horse, as affirms Pline, wax white, or hear toward
their later days or end. And Man, for that he Pline, Lib. 2.
has his head more round, higher advanced, and voidest of putrefaction, is
therefore known more sure, and able, as on the contrary, who so sauereth
most of this imperfect moisture, is found most commonly, of weak, and simple
judgment. Sum valiant personages have had their head, and parts thereof
so well affected, and hard, that they continually, and in all places endured
to be discovered. As among others, Julius Caesar, Hanibal of Carthage, and
Massinissa King of Numidia, who never would, no not in his extreme age,
either to avoid the force of Rain, Wind, Snow, or Heat, wear Cappe,
Hatte, or any other kind of couerture, or light, or less fittinge. The
semblable read we of the Emperors Adrian, and Seuerus, as also of sundry
others. But for as mutch as we have of the Head sommething now here
entreated, it shall not be impertinent, in few also to speak, for what cause,
or whence it is, that we accoumpte it courtesy, when one man does of his
Cappe before an other, in token (as we see) of duty, or of reverence. Which
thing, though it be of less force, or importance, yet neither may we with
^^lence in this place well pass it. Plutarche in his Probleames supposes,
Plutarche*
that it hence comes, for that they, who in the ancient time did Sacrifice
unto the Gods, held, during the said time of Sacrifice, their Cappes upon
their heads: and that Princes, and great Personages, to do fit honor, or
reverence to the Sacrificatour, in most humble, and lowly manner discovered
them selves before him, to the intent it should appear, that in
consideration of his function, they reckened them selves continually his
inferiors, as inferiors also to the Gods, by dooinge this duty to their
appointed Minister. Further he says, That it was the manner, that when any
man met anywhere his enemy, or any one other whom he in heart did malice, he
foorthewith, and incontinently would cover then his head, so that it seems
on the other side conuenable, that before his Prince, or other friends, he
should discover the same again. M. Varro, as is readde in Pline, says, That
this in the beginning was not done for any reverence, that in the presence of
Pline, Lib. 28,
any Maiestrate, or any other, men discovered them selves, but only by the
lack, and not wearinge thereof to harden them selves: for which cause only,
and to show them selves such, and not for any duty, as sum suppose did
they it. Galiot of Nargni is of this opinion, that Galiot, Libro suo de Homine.
who so, in dooinge reverence to an other, discovers his Head, gives him
also with the same to understand, that in vncoueringe the head, the chief,
and principal part in Man, he also becomes his loyal Vasaule, at the only
will, or commandment of the other, with the same acknowledginge to the
other, his inferioritie. L. Celius, in manner alleaginge the same reason,
says: L. Cel. Lib. 2,
As the Head in man's body is the most chief, and principal member: in
defense of which, all the others imploye their busy pain. So is it a great
sign of courtesy, or reverence, when the same is discovered, or bowed unto
any man. To conclude then, which so ever of these opinions be truest, it is
notwithstanding both noisome, and discommodious to do this reverence
continually to most men, or to all: and better were it, with courteous
words, then otherwise, to discharge that duty.

That Man's death is to be accoumpted Fortunate, or less Fortunate,
according to the estate that him self shall die in: with certain examples
serving to that purpose. Chap. 9.
TO die ones, is a thing to all men common, but to know how, when, or in
what sort, that yet hitherto has never been revealed to any fleashe: The
whole only consists at our departure hence, in the state that we be found
in, or perfect, or less perfect. In such sort, that no death may be
judged unfortunate, but such as finds man in state less perfect. For
Death, as it comes to many men, a geaste unthought on: so commonly lies he
hid in the corners of our houses, where we least suppose to find a
stranger, such as is he, so hard, and so inexorable. Wherefore Man should
be continually vigilante, and circumspect, well armed in Christ, against his
unknown coming. To this purpose, of the strange death of many, we find
every where infinite examples. Of which we only will here remember sum,
consideringe it to be a thing not altogether so rare, and marvelous, having
thereof each where continual experience. A. Gellius reports, which also
Valerius Maximus out of him A. Gellius. V. Maximus.
avouches, That there is in Italy a certain Town called Crotonna, in which
there was an inhabitante, who highte Milo, in all kind of Plays, or practices
of manhood, or dexterity, the most valiantste, and most happiest that in
his time lived. This man (such was his hap) in trauelinge on a time, as he
passed under the side of an high, and great Mountain, which drew him self
aside out of the common path, into the shadow, perhaps, with mind sommewhat to
have arested him: where, emonge other trees, he found an Oak half cliuen, or
sundred by force of Wedge, and Bitle: in which sum Wedge also was leaft then
deeply fastened, who incontinently desirous to perfect the said work,
laid hands on the tree right against the said Wedge, and with such force
assayed to sunder it, that it to him a little yielded: by means whereof, the
said Wedge slipte out. But immediately, were it (for so might it be) that his
force failed him, or that he less supposed any danger in the matter, he
yielded a little, as though he would have arested him: by means whereof, the
Oak incontinently reioyned again, both his hands fast lockte within the
tree: in such sort, that not being able thence to escape, nor any man there
passinge to healpe him in that danger, with pain and hunger, died a prisoner
miserable: a fit, or fat pray to the Wild, and Savage beast. If the
death of this Milo may seem to any man strange, no less strange also was
the Death of the Poet Eschilus: for on a time goinge forth out of a
certain Town in Sicile, of purpose only to take the air, and sun him,
the weather then having benne sommethinge sharp, and cold. This poor
unfortunate man, whose head was each where, either balde, or hearlesse, after
having made sum little short walk, arested him on a Hill, for his most
advantage in the Sun, where pruninge him self, with open head, shininge, an
Egle by hap flewe over him in the air, which having in her paws a great,
and heavy Tortois, espyinge the glitteringe balde head of the poor Poet
Eschilus, supposed it to have ben^e sum hard Stoane, or Rock: wherefore,
lettinge fall her Tortois, with mind thereon to have broken it, for her present
need, or dinner, threw it so right, that she nothing failed of her desired
mark, but struck the sely Poet, and sundred therewith his head, whence he
fell down suddenly dead: a thing right strange, and marvelous,
considerings he was then mounted even to the top of the Hill, assuringe him
self that from above nothing at all might grieve him. Baptista Fulgosius in
a certain pretye Book of his, written of examples, remembers emonge many
other things, the unfortunate Death of Charles. King of Navarre, who being
old, and very sickly, feelyng inces^ant, and insupportable pains, creepinge
and runninge through all the veins of his body: to which, that his disease,
his learned Physicians could find, or frame none, but this sole, and only
remedy, which was to fold him in a Sheet bedewed with Aqua Vitae, which
when it was sowed up, or stichte on every side, in defaulte of a Knife to cut
the threede of, one took in hand the Candle, the flame whereof, as soon as
it had touched the Sheet, set all on fire suddenly, in such sort, that
before they could shape him any kind of remedy, the sick King was
scorchte, and burnte almost to ashes. Which was for his Veins, and all other
maladies, his sole, and last remedy in this world. The Death again of
Philemon might appear to most men marvelous, which beholdinge on a time
an Ass eatinge Figs of from a Table, brake into such, and so extreme a
laughter, that he in that sort there ended his life. Consider we then, if any
where Man may assure him of his being, if Laughing, and in iolitie, Death
gain of him the maisterie. Sum also affirm the same of Philistion, a Poet
Comicall, as also of sundry others, who with extreme joy, made sudden
change of life. Emonge whom, we read of Denis, the Tyrante of Sicilia, of
Diagoras also, and of that famous, and worthy Romish Matrone, which beholding
her Son returned, whom she supposed to have benne slain in Battle, with
joy in excess fell straight into an Extasye, whereof again she never after
ward recovered. The adventure also of the Sheepehearde Cratis, was in manner
semblable, rare, and marueilons: who being asleep on a Mountain in the middle
of his charge, was slain of a Maale Goat, ielous of his mate, with which
Cratis most abominably had subverted the Laws of Nature. Whose strange hap
(deserved notwithstanding). Ludouicus Celius, and Volateranus, alleaginge also
to that purpose sundry Greek Authors, in many confirm for assured truth,
and verity. Infinite such others I leave here to remember: as Pope
Bonifacius, who through hunger only, miserably sterued in foul, and
stinkinge Prison. The Archbishop of Magonce, slain, and devoured of a troop
of Rattes, that each where pursued him. The Emperor Decius, of whom Emilius
Victor reports, that having vanquished his enemies, was found dead drowned
in a little small lake. In manner semblable in our time, died Jews King of
Hungary: and Sforce, Father of that most famous Captain Duke Fraunces Sforce,
who bowynge him self something to have aided his Page, was as the other, most
miserably, and infortunately drowned. Andrew King of Prouace, was by his own
Wife, sum other Dames healpinge her, as not to be boughte with price or
Prayer, in cruellest manner that they might, most dispitefully strangled. The
Emperor Tiberius was also impoysoned of his wife Agripina. Whence we
conclude that Kings, Princes, and great Personages, are as well subject to
these strange deaths, and infortunes, as are any their poor Vassaules or
subjects: although perhaps they make (propte up with swellinge and pompous
pride) small reckeninge, or account of these forepassed dangers.

What speech was used in the beginning of the World, and how first began
the diversity of Languages. Chap. 10.
IN the first Age, or beginning of the World, even until the Fludde, and
many years afterward, men generally throughout had feelinge but of one
Language, al diversity then hid, and unknown manner of speakinge. No man
then spoke with tongue, or strange, or less familier, no voice was from other
in any thing then different, no new devise in speakinge was then known, or
thought on. The diversity then first, or confusion of tongues, the Mother of
each mischief, and cause of all annoye, the sole Nurse of litigious, and
impacable debates, was for man's sin and pride (as a just scourge) on him
laid. Moses in the History of Genesis records, that Nemrod Nephewe to Noe,
by the line of Cain, with others more like proud, and of like ambitious
nature, were then borne, when first among Genesis. II.
men, presumption and malice reigned without al reason. At that time this
Nemrod, with his unadvised company, determined together, to frame or build a
Tower, which from the Earth might reach to the face of Heaven it self.
Which thing they only did, having in memory yet the late forepassed Fludde,
to escape the hand of God, if he at any other time should wash the Earth
again. Josephus in the first Book of his Antiquities, Josephus.
says: that he from all parts had such syeedy healpe, for the erection of
his buildinges, that in short time it grew both marvelous proud and
pompous. And again he says, that they laid the Fundations thereof so deep
and so broad, that though it were of so incredible height, as the Scriptures
make plain mention, yet by all conjectures possible, the breadth thereof was
more. But God who justly chastised this proud presumptuous enterprise, though
not with pain deserved, gave in that present instante, so many diverse
tongues, so strange, and so unknowen, that these who all before spoke one, and
the same Language, spoke then threescoare and twelve, so far and differente
from the first, that few among them had feelinge, or meanings of the others
mind. By means whereof, such enmity, and present discord grew, that not
only this work then rested there imperfect, but every man with those, that
understood his speech, retired to possess sum place aparte, or Country to
them selves. For which cause it ever afterward was called the Tower of Babell,
which is to say, of confusion. Isidorus affirms that Isidorus li. 15. of
Etimologes.
it was high five thousand one hundred, three scoare and four pases, all of
Brick, laid with claye, or ^lime in steed of Mortar, of which in that
Country great plenty was each where found. In the said self place, whereas
this Tower was builte, as has Josephus, Isidorus, S. Josephus. Isidorus. S.
August. Orosus.
Augustine, and Orosus, was builte also that most ancient, and most famous
City, of which so worthy and so great matters are yet reported, called
Babylon, situate or seated on the River of Euphrates, of which the Countries,
or Territories adjacent, took their first or principal denominatio^, as
Chaldea, and Mesopotamia. The Scriptures Genesis. 7.
also record, that the beginning of ye reign of Nemrod was also in Babylon,
wherefore it is reason that we be of ye said mind with the above remembered
Authors, that Nemrod also built this famous City of Babylon, which
afterward was walled, became Rich, and Honorable, by the careful pain and
industry of Semiramis, and Nynus. But to return to our purpose of Tongues,
or Languages, it might here be a question disputable, what Tongue it was, that
was that first, so common and general, which only and alone was known,
before the division, and confusion of the others. S. Augustine discoursinge in
many, upon this matter concludes, that it was the Hebrew, the very same that
the Jews speak yet at this day, which, as far as it may be gathered, by
any mean possible out of the Scriptures, and as S. Augustine also deemeth, was
conserved in Heber, of whom descended Abraham, and the Hebrews: for that
neither he, nor any of his kindred, would healpe at all any thing in erectinge
this Tower. By means whereof, him self, and his family, which would not
condescende to this sinful, and proud attempt, felt not thereof the due
deserved pain. Wherefore we may presume that in Heber, and his family, the
ancient, and first Tongue remained perfect, and entire, without any
corruption or confusion of the same, in that Lineage only pure, and nowhere else
in the World: whence it came to pass, that of Heber, it had his denomination
Hebrewe. Sundry Hebrews his Successors affirm, that this Language was that
same, that was first spoken by Adam, as also of all the others, of that
Ancient and first Age, conserved in Heber, and those that followed him,
Abraham and Jacob. In this same also wrote Moses his Laws. This then is the
opinion of S. Augustine, and Isidorus, to whom we should give more assured
credit, then to those that affirm, the Chaldean Tongue the first, which
notwithstanding may be of part excused, for that these two Languages have a
marvelous vicinitie, their Characters almost uniform and like, as also well
agreynge in other things many. Notwithstanding, in this matter, some curious
have doubted, if two children, or a greater number, fostred in place secret
void of all company, where they never might hear the voice of any other,
what words they would frame, or Language in the end. Sum have thought
that they first would speak Hebrewe: others sum the Chaldean Tongue. But
Herodotus says, that on a time experience in this case was Herodotus.
made, by mean of a contention, or emulation then grown betwixt the
Egyptians, and Frigians: each nation pretendinge by antiquity of their
Language, preeminency above the other. For determination of which differente in
fine they concluded, that two Children should be nourished in manner above
rehearsed, in such sort that they should never hear any word spoken at
all, and that Language, that these children first began to profit in, should
be reputed the first, and most Ancient, and they that spoke that, by
consequent of most antiquity. He adds again afterward, that a certain
King of Aegypte, caused to be fostered two children in a deserte, to which no
man ever spoke in any sort in the world, which when they were full four
years old, he caused them without more, to be brought into his presence,
where they eftsoons uttered this only word Ber, which does in the Frigian
tongue signify Bread: for which cause the Frigians were of all men reputed
as most Ancient. This writes Herodotus, whom many herein approve, and allege
for authority. Notwithstanding were it (as he reports it) a truth, yet
might it be that these Children by hap, some where should learn it, as by
sum Beast, Bird, or Sheep in the Field, which might frame the same, or
some such like voice, they doing their pain to frame the same after them.
But as for my part, I rest of this mind, that two Children in this sort
fostered, would speak none other but the first Language, Hebrewe: although I
also durst in manner semblable to affirm, that to them selves they would shape
sum new, and strange Tongue, geuinge to all things their names unknown
and unheard, as we see, that Children of them selves naturally: give names
less known, to things of them desired, so that of part assuredly it
appears, that nature would learn them a Language all new, before they
should be perfect in any their Fathers. In this case experience may
sufficiently school us, if any very curious, desire to know the effect
hereof. In the mean time each man may here rest, of what opinion it best
likes him, nothing above, said withstandinge the contrary.

Of the Division of the Ages of the World, with a brief discourse of diverse
Notable matters chanced also in them, as also in fine, of the beginning of
Realms and Kingdoms. Chap. 11.
ALthough most men have sum pleasure, and likinge to talk, and discourse
of the Ages of the World, to remember perchance things done in this, also
not to pass what has chanced in that: yet are there a great many that
less know the true division of these times, ne what years each Age
demands to his accomplishmente. The Age therefore, or Life of the world,
even from the first, until this day present, is divided by ye most part
of approved Authors into six only parts, or Ages: although diverse reckon,
and accoumpte on seven, according to the only computation of the Hebrews.
But I, herein have determined to follow Eusebius, and the common opinion of al
Historiographers, arestinge them on the above remembered number of sire. In
division of which, there is found emonge many, such great confusion, and
difference in reckeninge, that hardly a man may herein assure him of a truth.
They that deal herein, are divided into two parts: of which, the one
follows the computation of the threescoare and twelve Interpreters, which
translated the Old Testamente from the Hebrewe, into the Greek. The other,
the Hebrews, and common text of the Bible: whose opinions I will, for
contentation of all parts, hereafter remember. The first Age therefore, The
first Age.
or part of the World, according to the common, and general accoumpt of al,
was even from ye Creation of the same, to the Inundation, or Drowninge of it
again. Which was the Infancy, or tenderest Age (as sum term it) of the
World. Which Age was long, and of great continuauce. Duringe which time,
it is to be supposed, that great, and marvelous matters chanced unto men,
although we thereof find no record, or History, sauinge that the Scriptures
have, that after God had created Adam, and Eve, as also before him all other
Creatures: over whom, he gave him general Dominion and Rule, as well over the
beasts on the Land, as fishes in the Sea. Adam then begatte two Sons,
Cain, and Abel, which afterward also begat diverse others: by whom the world
began then to be well peopled. Moses writes, that Cain builte him, in the
East part The first city of the world.
of the world, a City, which after his Sons name, be called Honoch. In
that time Lameth having buried his wife, hardened him self to choose again
the second, (being the first Bigamus that ever was in this world) on one of
the which he begat Tubal, who first found the mean to Singe, by Art, the
Violles eke, and also the Organs. Cain found the skill to work iron, and
ingraue thereon. In this Age, the World had also Gyantes: of which, sundry
good writers thus mutche report, that they were of excessive stature, and
force, marvelous roughe to entreat, and enemies to Mankind. Finally, by the
insupportable burden of Sin, the general Floudde washed the face of the
whole Earth. By means whereof, all mankind, Noe^ only reserved, and such as
were with him in the Arc, was drowned. And The contrariety of opinions
concerning the first Age.
this first Age of the World, according to the accoumpt of the Hebrews,
Filon, Beda, S. Hierome, and the common Text of the Bible, continued a
thousand six hundred fifty and six years. But as the threescoare and twelve
Interpreters, Eusebius, and other Historiographers with them say, it had two
thousand, two hundred, forty and two years. S. Augustine, two thousand,
two hundred, seventy and two. And Alphonsus, King of Spain, two
thousand, eightehundred, eighty and two. The Second Age began in Noe^,
immediately The second Age.
after his coming out of the Arc, which continued until the birthe of
Abraham, and had according to the opinion of these Interpreters, Eusebius,
Isidorus, and most part of all Chronicles, nine hundred forty and two
years. But the Hebrews reckon many less, as only two hundred, nintie and
two. With whom Filon, and Josephus accord. S Augustine to that Age
attributes a thousand seventy and two years. Little certainty find we
of any thing done, or chanced in this time: for no particulare History at
all remains. In general, concerning the beginning of Realms, and
Kingedomes, somewhat is found, as also touching the first Inhabitants of
Countries, and Provinces. Noe issuinge out of his Arc, planted to him self,
with busy pain, a vineyarde: where, what chanced unto him, each man well
knows. He, and his children begat many others, so that the world began well
again to be peopled. Came, the second son of Noe, begat to him Cus: of whom
are descended the Aethiopians. He also had Came.
Mesrain, of whom are descended in sort semblable, the Egyptians. And last
of all, Canaan, from whom issued the Cananites. His other Son Iapheth,
engendered Gomer, and Magog, of which other Nations descended, too long here to
remember. In this time was the Tower of Babel builte: by mean of which, also
then chanced the confusion of tongues. Whence, as Josephus records in the
second Book of his Antiquities: Men sundred to inhabit Countries, and Isles by
them selves, such, and such together as were skilled of a language. Duringe
which Age, Tubal, Son of Iapheth came to inhabit Spain, framinge there to
him self a Realm, or Kingedome. Other sum say, that he indifferently was
called either Subal, or Tubal, the Son of Falech, and Nephewe to Heber. In
this time the Reign of the Scithians began in the North, which evermore
pretended Antiquity above other Countries: as well notes Trogus Pompeius, and
Justin. By mean whereof, great enmity still grew betwixt them, and the
Egyptians. The Art Magike, and Incantations began then by Came, surnamed
otherwise, Zoroastes. About the end of this Age, something before the birth
of Abraham, according to the account of Eusebius, and Beda, the most famous
and puissant reign of the Assyrians The beginning of the Assyrians.
began, having for their first Prince or King, Belus, which diverse supposed to
be the God Jupiter: some the second Ninus, which (during whose time was borne
Abraham) conquered and subdued sundry towns and provinces. Besides this an
other kind of reign was there in Aegipte, called Dinastia, where the first
that was of supreme, and highest authority, had to name Vexor, or otherwise
Vezor, as has Eusebius: who about the end of this second Age, instituted the
Reign or Kingdom of the Sicionians, in Peloponesus, now called Morea, where
Agis is supposed to have been the first King. In this time began now Idolatry
and Gentilitie. This much confusely have we gathered of this Age: in the end
of which also the most worthy, and most renoumed City of Niniue, was builded
of marvelous and incredible bigness: which as we find in holy write, was in
compass no less than three days iourneyes. Incontinent after this, began the
third Age, even in the birth of Abraham, The Third Age.
until the Prophet David, which without all contradiction, or gaynesaying of
any, continued nine hundred, forty, and two years, unto which only Isidorus
adds two: which Age we may call ye Adolescencie of the world, for that, in
that time all things were maruelously augmented, and increased. In the
beginning of this Age Semiramis the wife of Ninus, not only attempted, but
ended also, and perfected, sundry renoumed, and valiant exploites, having
taken on her man's apparel, and faining her self to be the young Prince Ninus,
after which sort she lived and raygned long time, conquering with the sword
many Lands, and Countries, she reedified, and walled the famous City of
Babylon. About this time happened the Peregrination of Abraham by the open and
express commandment of God. Then also obtained he his happy victory against
the four Kings, redeeming Loath, whom they carried away prisoner. Now also
began the first Reign of the Amazones. The Pharaoes, Kings of Egypt now also
began to flourish. Sodom Pharao, in the Egyptian tongue, signifies King.
and Gomorra were destroyed in these days. In the time of Isaac, began the
Empire of the Argiues in Thessalie, and while his sons lived, Jacob and Esau,
the Kings of Costa began also their reign, of whom the first had to name
Acre. A little after this was Joseph sold to the Egyptians, in such sort as
has the History, as also how his Father, his brethren, and their children
went also into Egypt, where such Israelites as descended of them, lived, as
accompteth Beda, four hundred and thirty years: with whom accords S.
Augustine in his book, De ciuitate Dei. Duringe this Age Hercules of Libya,
came into Spain, where he reigned* and after him Iuer, Brigus, Taga, Beto,
Gerian, and others, of whom Berosus, with other good authors remembereth us. In
this time was also first founded the City of Siuile, which is accounted for
one among the others of most antiquity in the world, as well records
Berosus, with others. First this City had to name Ispalis of Ispal ye son,
or Nephewe of Hercules, Ispalis.
who long reigned, or ruled there: who also, as some say, laid the first
foundations thereof, or buylte it, although Isidorus affirm that it was named
Ispalis, for that it was seated in a place watery, or in a marish, where they
were compelled for better assurance of their foundation to beat into the
ground great stakes, beams, or trees, which how so ever it was, this City
of Ispalis, was after called Spain, as writes Trogus Pompeius, Iustine, and
others. And after this again Julius Caesar called it Siuile, enriching and
amplyfiing it in such large sort and manner, that it after was the seat there,
or resting place of the Romans, being also before that very noble and
honorable. But to return to our purpose, after this again was Moses borne,
under whose conducte the Hebrews, came out of Aegypte, in which time also
lived Job, the just. And after this came that general The Inundatio^ of
Thessalye.
Inundation on Thessalie, when great Kingdoms grew then in diverse Lands, and
Contryes. In Aethiopia then first reigned Ethiopus, in Sicilia, Siculus: in
Boecia, Boecius. So that Countries then received their denomination of Princes,
as of Sardus, Sardina also, the first King or Prince there. In these days
flourished the famous Troy: then also was Jason busied in conqueringe the
Fliece of Goulde, whence in like manner proceeds the known History of
Medea. Now were the Amazones of greater power, then in any other time, and now
began the Kingdom of the Latins in Italy. About this time Paris also
ravished Helena, the only cause of the long war, and destruction of Troy,
of the coming of Aeneas into Italy, as also of other things innumerable,
which in few may not be spaken. Then ended this third Age, and the fourth
began, even in the beginning The Fourth Age.
of the reign of David, second King of the Hebrews: which continued until
the transmigration of the Jews into Babylon, four hundred, four score and
five years: but Beda rekeneth fewer, four hundred seventy, and four only.
This Age might well be termed the lusty Mundi Iuuen^
Age of the world: during which, infinite matters happened, whereof all
Histories are full. Now that good King David obtained sundry victories, as well
against the Philistians, as also against the Ammonites, revenging him self, for
the injury done to his Ambassadors: he did also to die the Captain of the
Assyrians. After him, in that place succeeded the wise King Solomon, who buylte
that rich, and famous Temple of Jerusalem, after whose death the Kingdom was
divided, Jeroboam succeeding in ten families, and Roboam his son in two.
After this the Empire of the Assyrians, which then had continued twelve
hundred years, by the death of Sardonapalus, was utterly subverted, he was one
of the richest and greatest Monarchs in the world, who not withstanding by
Arbactus slain, the Empire came into the hands or possession of the Medes.
About this time the Princes of Macedonie began to frame their Empire, as the
Greeks in manner semblable now used to account their years by Olympiades,
which were certain feasts and practices Olympiades.
of agilitie, which they continually used every five years, with Prises
appointed for such as best deserved them. Dido now builte the renoumed City
of Carthage, as Rome also by Romulus, and Remus then began, where the Roman
Kings continually aboade and arested them. In this time the great City of
Bizance waxed mighty and honorable, which afterward lost her name, and was
called Constantinople. After this, wearye wars grew in most places, and
inpacable dissensions, with alteration and change of great Segnories and
Empires. Whereof the Histories of that Age, are each where full and abundant.
In the end of this Age Nabuchodonosor, King of the Medes and of Babylon,
besieged Jerusalem, which he sackte, and subverted, as also the Temple, whence
he brought the people of Judea prisoners with him: and thence is that, that we
now remember, the transmigration of Babylon. When, or at which time began the
fifte Age of the World, which continued until the The Fifte Age.
Birth, and Nativity of our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, both God and
Man, five hundred, four scoare, and nine years, by common account of all
men. In these days were many valiant and puissante Princes rich, and
politic commonweals and Contryes, in such sort, that it great marvel is
to read, and consider the strange and miserable subuertions, immutations, and
change of estates, the rare raising and gathering of huge Armies, and troops
of men, such were they, so terrible, and so common withal, that better it is
thereof nothing to speak, then to speak in few. Not long after this, began
that famous Monarchy of the Persians, (which as well by mean of other
victories that Cyrus echewhere obtained, as also that he vanquished and subdued
Cresus King of Lidia) waxed of all others most rich, and renowned:
notwithstanding Cyrus, after he had reigned fully thirty years, was him self
discomfited, and beheaded by Tameris Queen of Scithia. Three Tameris.
scoare and ten years of this Age accomplished, the Hebrews were delivered
out of bondage and captivity, and the Temple was reedified by Solomon at
Jerusalem. The Romans now altered their state of government, they deposed
their Kings and choase to them Consuls, of which the first was L. Brutus,
and after him L. Colatinus. In Greece now flourished good Letters, and
Chiualry, so that thence issued, no less famous Philosophers, then Capitaynes
excellent. Thither came Xerxes to have Conquered it, with a multitude
incredible, but was forced to retire again with equal shame and detriment.
After this began Philippe his reign in Macedonie, which subdued Greece, the
Mother of Learning and Chivalry, which in that time fostered Demosthenes,
Themistocles, Epaminondas, Agesilaus, Zeno, Plato, Aristotle, with many such
others. Philippe dead, his Son Alexandre dwelte not still in Greece, but
went thence into Asia, which in short time he conquered, subuertinge the
Empire of Persia, and by means of the victory obtained against Darius, he
remained ever afterward the only Emperor, and sole Monarke of all the whole
world. But after his death, division was made to his Capitaynes, of all and
every his Segneuries, by mean whereof mutch enmity, and discord grew, and
thence also wars generally throughout all Asia, as also through a great
part of Europa withal. Now began the Romans, and the people of Carthage
to grow great and mighty, each of them labouringe to be the only Lords and
Princes of the world. Long wars then continued betwixt these two Cities,
in such sort, that each noursed for their defense most honorable and
valiant Capitaines. As Carthage, Asdrubal, Hannon, Hannibal: Rome, the Fabians,
the Scipioes, the Marcels, the Emiles, and such others. But in fine after
long wars, and mutche blouddeshedde, Rome remained victorious: Carthage
spoiled and sackte, and Aphrike became tributorie. This victory obtained, the
Romans proud, and envious of the prosperity of Greece, sought by all means
possible, war also against them, by occasion whereof Greece also became
tributorie as the other. Not content with these, Avarice yet forste them to
stretche their foot farther, and so passinge into Asia, vanquished Antiochus,
and after him Mithridates, titlinge them selves Lords of all Asia the less,
as also of Siria, Palestina, and Egypt: and on this side, of al France,
Spain, England, with the greater part of Almayne. In which Conquestes their
chief Capitaines were, Metellus, Sylla, Marius, Lucullus, Pompeius, and
Caesar, with many others. Now came it to pass, envious ambition inflaminge
their hearts, that civil wars, and commotions burste out emongst them, each
seekinge preeminencye and authority over other: but in fine the Empire
remained only to Caesar: unto whom, after many good happes in this life, his
Nephewe, or Son adoptiue, succeeded Octauian, who having once broken the
force, and courrage of his enemies, enjoyed the Crown in quiet peace, and
tranquillity, so that living in concord, and amity with all Princes, he
caused to be shut up the gates, or doors of his God Ianus, which in wars
were never at any time opened. The accomplishment of time now coming, this
fifte Age here ended: at which time was borne, the redeemer of mankind Jesus
Christ the just, in the year from the Creation of the world, according to
the Hebrews, three thousand, niene hundred, fifty and two years, and
according to the three scoare and ten Interpreters: Eusebius, and the most
part of Historiographers, five thousand, one hundred, four scoare and
ninetiene: but accomptinge after Orosus, five thousand and twenty years:
after Isidorus one year less: but according to Alphonsus, six thousand,
niene hundred, four scoare and four, which are many more then any others
account of. In the Birthe then The Sixte Age.
of our Savior began the sixte Age, which has continued until this day,
and shall do until the last, and dissolution of the World. Duringe which
time, a great S. August. in. 15 16. and 17. De Ciuitate Dei. Beda. Eusebius.
Filon.
part of Christiantie, has benne governed only by the Emperors of Rome.
Which from time to time successively, by the space of certain years, lived
in great pomp, wealth, and prosperity. But shortly after the Goths, as
also sum others. And last, that false and accursed Prophet Mahomet, did in
such sort shake, and weaken this Empire, that it became less, and less
able, then in a few years before, so that in sundry parts of the said
Empire, were instituted new Kingdoms and Segnories: by which insued
continual discordes, and slidinges from the Faith. The enemies of Christ, and
of his Cross, taking now good occasion to moleste the poor Christians,
robbinge, and spoilinge them of their lands and revenues. The computation of
these Ages, which I have here remembered, are only taken of these Authors
above remembered, to wete, of S. Augustine, Isidorus, Beda, Eusebius, Filon,
Orosus, men all of singular authority and learning: Vincentius also: and of
our time Petrus de Aliaque: and above all the others, Johannes Driodonus, a
faithefull commenter on the sacred Scriptures. The Ports have reckened of this
world, four Ages, and no more: the first of Gold, which they called Golden:
the second of Silver, which they termed the Silver Age: the third of Brass,
or Steel: the fourth of Iron, which as before they called the Steely, and
Iron Ages, geuinge forth by the same, that as the malice of Man began each
where to grow, so did the excellency of these mettalles in manner semblable
diminishe: unto which it pleased them to compare these above said parts of
time. And in this manner has Ovid in his Metamorphoses divided them.

Of the strange Life of Diogenes, surnamed Cinicus, as also of his Sentences,
Propositions, and Answeares. Chap. 12.
THere were five ye had to name, Diogenes: of which each one for his Virtue,
and excellent Learning, merited well in this place to be commended to the
Posterity. We notwithstanding will speak but of the one, Diogenes Cinicus,
whose Life, and Doctrine surpaspassed far the others: his Manners, and
Conditions, as they might of part appear to any, straung, so were they
nenerthelesse founded on bountye, and Virtue. He evermore lived in voluntarye
Poverty, exposinge his body to al toil and travel. In the Summer he would
lie on the Sands, in the face of the Sun, to able him self the better to
endure all force of heat. And in the Winter, he embraced great lumpes, or
heaps of Snow, to acquainte him self with s^che extremity of Weather. He
fed on gross meats, and such as were of vile price, to the intent he
might never feel want of Sustenaunce. He never had any place, that he could
term his place of aboade, or his home: euerywhere, where it chanced him to
be, he did eat, drink, and sleep without respect: he never spoke any
thing, but when it was necessary, or behoofull: neither in the day ware he
any other apparel, then his woonted Night Gown, or ragged robe of no price.
He had a little Bag or Pokette, wherein he keapte his meat, poor and simple,
such as it was: his staff also to stay on, served him in steed of horse,
when he was sick, or weary. A wooden dishe had he to drink in as he travailed
through the Country, which he immediately brake, espyinge on a time a boy
drinkinge in his hand, saying: What needs me to use a vessel framed by
Art, sith nature has lent me one, as fit as any other. In like sort
used he his Trencher, that he usually carried with him, beholdinge an other man
that had framed him one not unfitly, of Bread. This Philosopher spente the
greater part of his time in Athens, whither he retired, bannished from his
Country. Long time for his dwellinge house, he had none other, but a Tun,
or Tubbe: of nothing made he any accoumpte, but of Virtue only, utterly
detestinge to committee any sin. Touching Honor and Riches, he so little
regarded them, as he also did all those that posseste them. Of custom he used
to say, that he never sufficiently could marvel at the unadvised follye of
men: which contentiously would quarrel, murtheringe each the other, often time
for the wall, or inner part of the way. But which of them most studiously
embraced Virtue, thereof could he never see any matter betwixt them. He
compared the Ritche man, ignorante, to a sheep of Gold: and when he asked any
thing that was unto him necessary, he said: that he begde it not, but
desired restitution. Geuinge him to understand, that the goods of the Ritche
were gathered of the poor. An other usage also had he, which for the
appearance, or show that it maintained, of folly, had yet notwithstanding a
secret, or cloase Mystery. For oftentimes most humbly he would desire an
Alms of Images of Stoane, Timber, or semblable matter, as though they had
benne men perfect, having Life: which he did, he said, to arm him self
with patience, when any where in his need, he should be of any refused. And
when he at any time sought an Alms, he used these words: If thou of custom
use to give to the poor, then give thou me sommethinge, for of all others, I
stand in greatest need: and on the other side, if it so be, that thou never
haste given to any, begin then to bestow now some present on me. On a time
he entered into the house of a certain man, which before had benne very ritche,
and prodigal, but then was very poor, needy, and indigent: in such sort,
that he nothing had to Suppe on, but only an unsavory, and sower Sallet. By
means whereof he said: had thy diet heretofore not been much better, thou
should not now have Supte so simply. Geuinge him thence in few to
understand, that the excess, that he sometime vnmeasurably had used, had cast
him into that gripinge, and pinchyng penury. One demanded of him an other
time, what beast it was, that bitte most grievously: To whom he answered,
emonge beasts, savage, and furious, he that sclaunderously, and ill reports:
but among tame beasts, evermore ye Flatterer. An other demanded of him, why
Gold lookte yalowe, or as it pleases some others, more properly pale: Because
all men (says he) assault, and lie in wait for it. Again an other
demanded, If he needed not a Servant: To whom he said, no. The other replied,
and asked who then should bury him after his death: he, says Diogenes, yt will
dwell in my house. Being demanded again, at what time a man should marry
him: The young man (says he) must marry him self very timely: as for the old,
or aged, he now needs it no more. By which he would infer, and conclude,
that it was in truth less expedient to marry: although it be supposed, that
he more spoke it in mockery, then that he would have maintained it for an
infallible Verity. Now as Diogenes was, in Life free, and in manners: so also
was he in any word that paste him. For on a time as he paste through a
streate, vewing there a hawtie, and sumptuous buildinge, belongyng to a
Gentleman, of an infamons, and suspected Life. Over the gate, or entrance of
which was written, that no man dishonest, might enter thereat. Turning him
self about to such as thereby passed, incontinently demanded, which way
enters the Master of this fair Lodging into it? Traveling as was his hap
on a time through ye Country, he by chance drew nigh to a very little
village, altogether poor, and simply peopled: the Gates of which were large,
wide, and very great, whereat, as loud, as he could, in laughinge manner, he
said: Ye Inhabitauntes, shut up these your wide Gates betime, least
happily your Town run out thereat. Espyinge an other time a certain
company shootinge in the Cross Bow: emonge whom there was one less
practiced, or unskillful: by means whereof, he still failed very mutche of his
mark, whose course when it came among the others to shoot, he immediately
would step in before the Butte, justly covering or shadowing the white or
mark, whereat ye assistantes were strau^gly amazed. But Diogenes said: I
suppose I may more safely stand here, then else where, so ill, and so far of
shoots he from the mark. Of a young boy very fair and well favored, but of
manners lewd and dishonest, he asked, why carriest thou so uaughty, and so ill
favored a swoorde, in a scabberde so good, and so well fewtered. A certain
company commended one, that had presented to Diogenes, some small gift or
present: but Diogenes said, why rather commend ye not me, who well have
merited whatsoever is given: letting them thence, by his answer to
understand, that it far better is to deserve a good turn, then to perform it
to him, that well has merited it. He ones desired contrary to his woonte,
(for never would he ask Money in gift of any man) of a prodigal fellow, a
great sum of monye, where at the other something moved, said: why ask
thou of me only a matter ss unreasonable? It is says he, for that of others
at some other time, I stand in hope to receive something, but of thee after
this ones, never again: taringe with the same, his unmeasurable expenses.
Being also demanded, whence it came to pass, that men more willingly
bestowed their Alms, on the Lame, ye Blind, the Dismembered, the Gout^e,
Maungye, and on the Vlcerus, sooner then on Philosophers, and men to them like
Learned: He said (an answer in mine opinion very pretty, and fittinge) for
this cause only moved, do they it, for that they rather fear they shall be
such, then Philosophers: and therefore more willingly they comfort and
assiste those, like to whom they may sooner be, then to the troop Learned.
The sentences, and sage answeares of this Philosopher, were infinite, which in
silence I here pass, as well known to all the world. He was very sobre and
discrete, well learned in all the Sciences, he was the Scholar, or Disciple of
Antisthenes, in the time of Plato, and Aristotle: he had in contempt all
Arts, and Sciences, of which grew no profit or gain, as also those that
studied them, more for curiosity, then for the love of virtue. He argued
Astronomers, that only busied them selves in the contemplation of the Heavens,
less regardinge what they had to do on the Earth below. To Musicians would
he say, that they well knew how to accord their instruments, but not their
rebellious and disordered affections. Hearing a certain Astronomer, skilfully
discoursinge of the Stars, he demanded when he came last out of Heaven. Unto
a Sophistical Logician, toylinge to prove, that there was in things no
motion, no answer would he frame, but in derision forthwith, walks up and
down before him: Seems this (says he) to thee a motion, yea, or not? In
this sort began to grow now ye renoumed fame of this worthy Philosopher
throughout the whole world, so that Alexander the Great, coming by chance
to Athens, would needs see, talk, and devise with him of certain points
concerning Virtue. After sum conference, at which time, his Majesty
bespake him in this sort: Diogenes, I well see that thou art poor, and
stand in need of many things, therefore demand what so thou would
have, and I will give it thee: to whom he said: which of us two think
thou, lives in greatest necessity, I that desire nothing but my dishe here
to Drink in, and a piece of Bread when I hunger: or thou, that being King
of Macedonye, exposest thy self to all kind of dangers, only to enlarge
thine Empire and Dominion, and that also in such sort and manner, that the
whole world scarce suffiseth to assuage thine A^arice? On a time he was also
taken of certain light horsemen, Athenians, by means whereof, though
imprisoned, he never yet became either faynte hearted, or dismayed: whence
afterward removed, in place common to be sold, to any such without respect
as should offer most for him. Where immediately a certain Merchant demands
of the Trumpeter, or public Officer, whither he had authority to sell him,
as also whither he were a bond man, or naie. Whereat Diogenes said to the
Officer, answer him that thou haste here to sell a servant or bondsman, but
such an one, as well knows how to command and govern his Master. Aulus
Gellius, and Macrobius report, that he in such sort bespake Geniades, who
was the above remembered Merchant that bought him, who also after gave him
Master to his children. The same day therefore that he first had bought him,
coming with him toward his Inn or lodginge, Diogenes said to him, as if
him self had benne the Merchant: take heed now Geniades, it stands thee on
to obey me, in all that I shall anywhere, counsel, or command thee. To whom
Geniades answered, it were far besides al order or reason, that the Servant
should prescribe laws, to his Lord or Governor: but Diogenes said, seems
it not unto thee good reason, that the ill affected patient, prouidinge to him
for his Money, sum good and learned Physician, should in all things what so
ever, obey and follow him? In manner semblable, the more warely and safely to
conducte him, if the good Mariner for wage chose to him a Pilote, must he not
do in all things his commandments? If then it be true in this case, as
also in the other, concerning the infirmity and weakness of man's body:
how mutche more then ought he, that stands in need of counsel, and comfort
for the soul, to obey the learned and advised Philosopher? All these things
observed well Geniades: and in every of his affairs used the advice of
Diogenes his Servant, committinge to his charge, for instruction, his children,
whom he in virtues lore, in short time mutche profited. In this sort, and
after this manner this Philosopher lived ninety years in this world. Sum
suppose that he died being bitten of a Dog. Others sum, that saying him
self very old and feeble: without any force now, or farther desire to live,
with the very same courage and constancy that he had lived, did him self to
die, and made change of life the same day, that Nature to great Alexander
had for his last also assigned. A little before his end, his auditors saying
him so old, and so near his death, demanded him where he meante, or desired
to be buried: to whom he said, his desire was to be laid in the wide and open
field, whereat they all meruaylinge, replied, he ill advised them, for that in
such poor, and simple manner bestowed, the Birds and beasts would devour
his Carrion: then says he to avoid that inconvenience, cause ye that my
staff be set there by me: at which incontinently they brake out into a
laughter, arguinge him forthwith of manifest folly, for that the dead neither
sees nor perceives any thing: to whom, if they lack (says he) these
remembered senses, what mattereth it then, if rather the Birds and Beasts in
their hungry necessity, pray on me, then under the Earth I should be of the
worms consumed. Diogenes had none then so great a desire, to imploye (as
does many this day, less advised) their Treasour or Riches, on pompuous
Funeralles.

Of the Excellencye and commendation of Travail, as also of the damages that
grow of Idleness. Chap. 13.
IT lies us on, of necessity, both by the Laws, and Commandments of God,
to swincke, and toil in this world continually: For our first Father having
broken the Commandment of God, was bannished, and chased out of Paradis
Terrestrial: the Earth lotted to him for his portion, or inheritance: with
charge notwithstanding to labor here, in continual pain, and travail.
Which charge, he neither received for any term or time, but for ever without
cease, as long as he lived: which neither appertained to the First man
only, but unto all his Posterity, and Succession to the end. And although
this necessity of Travail be laid on man, to call him to penance, yet is it
a fit Medicine to assuage the wrong passed: for that by our labor we
regayne that, which was lost by disobedience: and so mutch the more (although
it be unto us a present scourg) for that God has condemned nothing that was
of it self less good, granting to Man Travail, to turn, and labor the
Earth. Also Job says: That Man is borne only to sweat, and to pain.
Consider again, how our Savior, and Redeemer Jesus Christ, Man's only
sovereign Lord, and Master, to the example of us all, lived in continual
pain, and labor, even until the time of his Death, and Passion. Besides in
his Parables, he sharply rebukes such as any where consume, and waste the
time idly, imbrasinge all those that are virtuously busied: vsinge in an
other place these words to this purpose: Comme unto me, all ye that are
heavily laden, and I will refreashe you. If we will pain our selves to read
the Scriptures, we shall find, that the ancient Saints spente all their
days, and Life, in continual exercise of Virtue, and Godliness. Further,
travail is not only conducible to the Soul, but also preserves the health
of the Body. For it by daily practice, becomes agile, strong, and well
disposed: in it are augmented, and increased the Vital Spirits: the naughty,
and superflous humors consumed. As touching the mind, it thence exileth all
impi^ous, and unchaste thoughts, preuentinge al occasion of error, and
offense. Certain is it, that nothing of weighty importance, reaches without
pain to the desired effect or end, as on the other side, that ease, that is
purchased with pain, is ever more then all others, more pleasant, and
likinge. He that takes great pain, reposeth him self in ease: for to the
weary man all things are fittinge, and agreeant: His Meat to him is sweet,
and sauery: He soundly sleeps without dream or vision: and all pleasures
whatsoever, are to him both grateful, and acceptable. Who so trauaileth not,
nor never becomes wearye, his repose to him lends imperfect contentment.
But to return to the commodities of the Body, woonted exercise frames a man
discrete, vigilante, well advised, and sage: and what else is profitable, thence
issues it, and springs contintinually unto man. Travail is it that
ordinarily provides a man of all things: the same it is, that frames to him
fair houses to dwell in: commodious lanes, and paths to walk in: for the more
ease of the poor passenger, great ships to cross, and ouerrunne the
tumblinge Seas: and armor to defend us from the force of the enemy:
briefly, innumerable commodities thence take their beginning. By Labor the
sterill soil becomes fruitful, and plentuous: to such as are dry, and
withered, it conueigheth streams of Water, opening the bowels of the earth,
whence Springes issue abundantly: it aduaunceth the ground, where so it is
behouefull, ouerthrowinge Hills, and Mountains that any where annoye us: it
alters the course of great Rivers, to moist therewith dry Countries: it
also helps, and aydeth Nature, forcinge her to give forth, that of her
self she would not: it tameth, and makes gentle the Savage, and Wild
beast: it fineth man's wit, and sharpeneth his memory, as also the other
parts are thence only quick, and ready. To conclude, who so acquainteth him
self with painful Labors, reapeth thence pleasinge fruits, such as him
self desires. God will not that his elect possess Heaven by sleepinge. If
the pompous, and sumptuous buildinges, which thou each where beholdest: if the
ritche Castles, and Palaices of Princes: if famous Cities well peopled, seem
to thee great matters, know it to be the Sweatte, and toil of thine
Auncesters. If in manner semblable the Arts, and Sciences content thee, know
that they first sprange of the Divine Labor of such as here lived in the
forepassed Ages. When so thou beholdest the green and pleasant Fields,
dainty Gardens, and well ordered Vineyardes, accoumpte that they be all the
sole fruits of Labor. For the Ideler knows not how to frame any thing, but
rather disordereth what so he finds any where perfected. By buste industry
men attain to immortal renown. That was it, that commended these Sages to
the Posterity, Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, with all the Learned crew: which
never ceaste to pain their bodies, and minds, studying, writing, readinge,
and disputinge, not mindinge at all, when they might at their pleasure eat,
or sleep, or curiously, as most do, cover their carrion: to the use of these
things notwithstanding, when necessity forced them, it was a thousand times
to them then more pleasinge, and sauery, then to any of these idle, and
delicious gluttons. Whence comes it, that Hercules lives, to the Posterity
so famous, if not by the mean of his twelve Labors? Whence grew Alexander so
renowned through the world? Julius Caesar also, with infinite excellent
Kings, and Capitaines, if not by their vigilante, and incessante Travail?
And on the other side, Sardanapalus, with such others, effeminate, as was he,
by their careless security, fell into ruin, and destruction, and in the end
died infamous, and miserable wretches. By means whereof, it lies euidente, of
al men to be perceived, that if Idleness by painful care, be not done to
exile, then all Offices must flide, and comme assuredly to nothing:
Mecanicall Arts, the study of Learning, and good Letters: all polices, and
Civil Government: Justice her self: the Laws: and in fine, the Nourses of
Wealth, and Peace, must all without Labor and Pain, be subverted. By her
each where Virtue florisheth, and reigns: and without her, withers without
grace, or verdure: for who so in the Common Weal would minister Justice,
must continually be busied to order things rightly. To be short, no Virtue
may any where be put in execution, without the assistance of careful Pain,
and Diligence. Thence comes it, that Hesiodus said, That Virtue was only by
Hesiodus.
Sweatte acquired. Advisedly, if we will, and exactly consider all, what so
ever God has in the world created, we shall find, that those things
surpass the others in perfection, wherein he has bestowed most pain, and
travail. Behold we the Heavenly bodies, void of immutation: the Sun
moves continually: the Moon aresteth never: the Heavens them selves: the
Stars, and Planettes, have benne, are, and shall be in perpetual motion. The
Elemente of Fire rests not void of sum operation: the Air without cease
turns it self from one place to an other. From the parts beneath, the little
springes and fountains mount up perpetually: the Rivers still flote, and shall
do for ever: the Sea also uses his times to comme, and go: the Earth,
although in deed she areste her immovable, (for so is it requisite, to the
intent man may pass on her to and fro indamaged, reposinge him self at
times, as nature requires) yet is she nevertheless either idle, or vnbusied,
but gives forth to the use of us, Herbs, Plants, Trees, and Mettalles, as
she that of duty is bound to maintain, and nourishe such a number of
Men, and Beasts, as on her dwells. So that if we now of these things with
iudgyng eye consider, we shall find, that Nature so mutche affects nothing,
as without cease continually to busy her self in toil, and travail, as to
form, frame, make, and unmake, to produce, to overthrow, to alter, and to
change, to perfect, and organize things in their kind: not reastinge, or
surceassing by any manner of means in the world. For confirmation whereof,
the Old, and Aunciente forepassed Philosophers, never thought that they had
spoken enough in commendation, and praise of virtuous exercises. Virgil says,
that incessant Labor surmounteth all things. Horace in his Sermons, that God
to man has given nothing without Pain, and Travail. Euripides, Travail is
the Father of Honor, and Renown: and that God assisteth him (says he) that
lives in Sweat. And again, That, that only is the pathe unto Virtue: and
without it, there is no honor, praise, or good adventure. Menander the Poet
writes, and in my fancy advisedly, that he, who in health lives at any time
idly, with more ieopardye hasardeth, then the afflicted, of an Ague. Like
grace also has in these words, Democritus, Voluntary Labor, sauereth of no
Pain. Hermicon, being demanded whence he had learned his Science: Of Labor
(said he) and of long experience. Pythagoras commands, that man live
honestly, and that he never leave, in Virtue, to pain, and weary him self:
for custom (says he) in the end, makes it pleasant, and likinge. Solomon
refers the Ideler, to the example of the Ante. If I should here remember
all the examples of those, that by Pain have posses^e the Chair of Honor,
longer should I dwell hereon, then necessity requires. It suffices then, in
few to say, that there was never man famous in Martial affairs, or
Chiualrye, in Learning, or else in chaste, and Virtuous manners, in no kind of
Science, or Art Mecanical, but by continuance of Sweatte, and Travail. And
further, no one in the whole troop of Loyterers, was ever in any Age renowned
with Virtues Title: or if any such were borne of Honorable Race, or Lineage,
certain is it, that he either came to ruin, and miserye, or otherwise lost
his Honor, and Life: or at the least, he no where could with warrante assure
him self: Damage, and shame the only and infallible fruits of foolish
idleness, and security: of which also spring vices innumerable, as is in
Ecclesiasticus approved in these words: Idleness ingendereth all kinds of
mischief. Ovid remembers, that Venerye is no where thought on, but only
among nice, and delicate Idelers: for (says he) who so he be, less busied in
Virtue, imagines unchaste things, and inuenteth Treasons, puttinge in
execution all vice, and treachery. Ezechiel accoumpteth Idleness, emonge ye
other Sins, for which Sodom was, in such sort as we read, destroyed.
And for my part, I know no thing, that with the slouthefull man prospers.
The fire, if it be not fostred, and covered with Wood, it faints, and
wastes, and in the end is extinguished. The Air, in obscure, and dark
place, void of desired motion, becomes foorthewith noysomme, and infectious.
The Water deprived of her course in runninge, putrifieth without stay,
annoyeth, and impoyseneth. If the Earth be not opened and labored, she gives
none other fruits but Brembels, Thorns, Thistles, or such like. Gold, that
desired metal, if it be not wrought and polished, loses utterly his beauty:
iron also, with others the semblable, if not continually labored and kept,
ruste and waste, as experience learneth us. Whole Provinces, and Countries, not
inhabited or peopled, are evermore barren and very infectious, in such sort
that it appears, travail to be thereof the sole, and only Medicine. Houses
and fair lodgings not inhabited, fall into ruin. High ways, and common
paths, not frequented or used, are in short time closed, and shut up
against the passenger: whence it now is open, and manifest, that whatsoever
lies unused or unlabored, shortly consumes and wastes to nothing. Example
in man, whose wits if they be not in continuance of study exercised, wax
cankered, and with pain perform the woonted duty: the heart and mind also
languishe and fainte, as unable to do any thing: and in fine all their forces
quail and fall as dismayde. As I then before have said, that continual
exercise frames man agile, and disposed to all things: so say I now, on the
contrary, that idle security annoyeth the complexion, and wastes the good
humors, increasinge the superfluous, in excess in man's body. Galene says,
that it is a thing impossible, that a man should live not labouringe his body.
Auicenna to the same accords, as also Cornelius Celsus, with others very
famous and excellent Physicians. The Horse him self, with others such,
brute, and dull beasts, being pampered still in stable, loose their pase, and
other qualities. The ship that still rides at Anchor in the Haven, geathereth
mothes and rotteth, but does not so in voyage. The Soldier then marreth, when
he long time reposeth him self, void of fear and careless. Again it is
reported, that the improuident security of Hannibal at Capua, was the only
cause that the Romans gave him there the overthrow. Who so in Battle best
trauerseth him ground, fights, as is known, in most assured safety, but
to him that loy^ereth, and arresteth him in his place, many dangers are
assigned, and inevitable discommodities: the sun also on him, more then on
the others, has greater advantage. The Archer never shoots to the bird that
flees, but to her that arresteth her, or pearcheth any where, bends he his
Bow, and fitteth his boltes. Further we see, that all kind of instrumeutes,
not touchte or playde on, immediately becomme discordante, harrishe, and
unpleasant: but kept in hand, and continually plaide on, feeds the hearer
with sweet notes and pleasant Harmony. Some kinds of Wine are there, which
unless they be continually wrought too and fro in their vessels, corrupt and
putrify, to be served to no man. The precious and rich stoane not wrought and
polished, lacks his natural commendation and grace, but perfected by the
skillful and light hand of the Iueller, makes show of it self, and commends
his virtue: yea the iron it self, the more often that in any your uses you
imploye it, the brighter shall his Glass be, and the fayrer still it looks.
Emonge brute beasts, these are to Man most likinge, and acceptable, which
most can sustain, of weary Pain, and Travail. Here might we auoche, and
allege sundry the opinions, as well of Poets, as also Philosophers,
condemninge with one mouth the unprofitable Ideler, whose only authorities
might accomplish, and perfect that, which we presently labor to prove in
many. The Saints them selves, and Holy Fathers of the time past, accurse
them: the lovers of Virtue, and the Learned deteste them: Ovid, Plato, Horace,
Claudian, and Virgil, with all the whole heap of learned Poets write, and ^gh
continually against them: each History besides is full of the discommodities
ensuinge Idleness. Plato, and Aristotle condemninge this voice, exalte above
measure, the practice of Chinalrie: whence, what so ever in War is
necessary, is skilfully each where put in dre, and practiced. The Emperor
Adrian, on a time advanced one Turbus, a Turbus.
careful, and trusty Minister in the affairs of his Master: whom on a time
as the Emperor behold, too painfully busied, as him self thought then
presently, said: I would not, Turbus, that then should kill thy self, or
with too much perseverance, hazard thine estate. To whom he answered: if it
please your sacred Majesty, the man that is favored, and advanced by an
Emperor; must on his feet die where he goes busied. Q. Curtius Q. Curtius.
says: that the maladies or infirmities, which issue or spring of
idleness, are perfectly plaistered by woon^ed exercise. The Old Romans
accustomed to begin their day continually at midnight, to the intent that in
the morninge, at the first show, or appearinge of the Sun, each man in his
vocation might follow his affairs: and farther they also thought, that even
then the one half of the day was paste without any profit, or good at all
done. A certain Roman on a time persuaded with the Senate, that they
should not in any wise distroye or sack Carthage, to the end, that being
possessed thereof, they might not live in continual quiet, and idle security.
To this purpose Scipio Nasica said: S. Nasica*
consideringe that sum assured then, the present state of Rome, for that
Carthage was then tributorie, and Greece subdued, nay rather said he, we
now live in danger and hazard, for that we at this time, dread or fear no
enemy. By which his answer, he this mutch inferred that surceasinge now
from Arms, and bathed in delices, this their security more hazarded their
estate, then the wars, or any other their Neighbors, enemies to the Empire.
And again, Fear (says he) more assuredly warrenteth the estate of Rome, then
careless to live, as though no man durst to touch us. Unto the which words
or advice of Scipio, the French Proverb answeareth of part, not unaptly.
Better is it to loose, then to cease or be idle. Apuleus highly commended the
Apulcus*
Masters of Defense, or swoordeplayers of his time, who in such sort
detested all kind of Loyterers, that the Masters in that Science, never
would permit their Scholars to eat, before they had fully accomplished and
ended some commendable exployte, and laudable practice. Cicero to this purpose
remembereth these words: Man is borne to be busied i^ virtuous exercises,
whereof (says be) our Soul or Mind is a sufficient argument, which no
where, or at no time, arresteth her idly. Emonge all other decrees, of the
renowned Draco, Lawegeuer to the Draco.
Athenians, none was more worthy of commendation then this, that he punisshed
with death, all those that any where, were found vnbusied, or that walkte up
and down idly for their pastime and pleasure. How the Gentiles were
affected toward all those, that perseuered in any virtuous actions, is
euidente, for that to this purpose especially and above all others, they had in
Adoration three Idolles, or Goddesses: the first hight Strenua, which is to
say, Dexterity: the second Agenoria, Three Idolles of the Gentiles.
which signifies, Virilitie: the third Stimula, which sounds as mutche as
a Spur of honor or Virtue: in such sort reverenced they incessant
travail, that they erected these three Idolles in the name of them, to be
reverenced for ever. But we will not arrest our selves on the opinion of the
Gentiles, but will descend to the authority of the Scriptures, which no
less binds us to the above remembered, then it charge us to abstain from
things that be profaned. Solomon in his Proverbs, emonge many other places
where he sharply argues idleness, in one, to this end, utters these
words: He that in Winter cease from labor, shall receive for his portion,
indigent beggerie. S. Paul, a Doctor emonge the Gentiles, never ioyed so
mutche for any thing, as for that he at no time was found a Treuante, or
Loyterer, extollinge above al things, paineful Labor. In this sort writes
he to the Thessalonians, admonishinge them in all things to imitate him, for
never was he found idle emonge them, ne at any time did he eat, not having
first deserved it: he toyled day, and night, not to annoye, but by all means
to profit them. And again, Who so labors not, neither must he eat, as is
commanded. To the Corinthians in manner semblable, he writes, remembringe
them, for their better instruction, of his restless Pain, and incessant
Travail, which the same he also doothe in many other places. Imploye we then
hereafter, our time in virtuous exercises, avoiding, to the vttermoste of our
power, ye contrary: whence never issues any thing that is commendable.
Neither give we this our commandment with such extreme vigor, as though
we would have no time exempted to eat, drink, sleep, and honestly repose
us: for these things are necessary, as also moderate recreation at times is
likewise commendable. For this cause Cicero so mutch extolleth Scipio, in that
he said, that he never was less idle, then when in deed he was idle. And
further adds Cicero, that this saying of his was most assuredly and
doubtless notable, for that thereby he gave others to understand, that when
he idly, had arested him from his studies, he then notwithstanding had in mind
the whole course of his affairs, and that then, and at such times, of them,
he earnestly, and with advice consulted with him self. Seneca the Moral Poet
affirms, that Seneca.
Idleness without sum practice of study, or good Letters, is to man a very
perfect Grave or Sepulcher: and that those that study Wisdom, are they,
that feel and enjoy the true Idleness. Plutarche writes, that the Wise man
spends his time in the only exercise of virtue and Learning. Let Man then
advise him how he spend his time, which passes without stay, and is
altogether uncertain, for that he must yield a strait accoumpte thereof,
yea and of each word that shall pass him rashely. Cato, though he were a
Panym, yet could Cato.
he thus much say, that all great and hawtie personages were as well bound
to yield an accoumpte of their time, without profit spente, as to receive
just guerdon for that they well had employed. For conclusion, in such honest
exercises, should we pass our few days, that we might reap the fruit
thereof in the Kingedome of God, which is provided for those that are called
into the Vineyarde, to Labor it, where they shall receive the debt to them
belonginge. To this purpose such fittinge words uses S. John: Blessed are
those that die in the Lord, for that their Spirits repose them now in quiet
from all Labor: but their Works, and their travails, such as they were,
shall follow them. Which authority well proves, that pain only and
travail, is the Marchandice of this world, which is bought, sold, and
delivered into Heaven, as S. Paul him self not unfitly remembers, whereas he
says, that each man shall receive his Salery or payment, according to that he
has travailed in this world.

How detestable a matter Cruelty is, with sum examples seruinge to that
purpose. Chap. 14.
Among all other vices repugnant to man's Nature, which also yield men most
abominable, and Monsterous, Cruelty is assuredly the chief and principal:
for as mutche as Man, a Creature most Honorable, framed to the Image and
similitude of God, borne to use courtesy and compassion, by Cruelty is
transformed into a brute beast, terrible, furious, of nature accursed, and
enemy to God, who is the sole and sovereign Clemency. Aristotle says, that
Cruelty, fierceness and inhumanitie, are vices incident to some savage and
wild beast. Seneca in his second Book of Clemency, terms it the
execrable felony of the Soul, whence he concludes it opposite and contrary to
the virtue of compassion and humility. Cruelty is capital enemy of Justice,
and of reason: and mutche worse is this vice then either pride or malice: for
that wroth or malice, seems to proceed of sum certain displeasure, as
when we behold any one, that either annoyeth or wrongeth an other: but emonge
such as in their Cruelty, outrage, we find many that even laughinge, and
without any suspicion of crime, only of pure malice and disdain, miserably
do to die, and murder the innocent. So is it then a capital enemy to
Justice, which permits not any, fautlesse, to smarte of undeserved pain:
as it on the other side also charge with moderate, and measurable correction
the fautie or culpable, without respect of person. Seneca in his Book of
manners, says: That commonly we term those, merciless tormentors, that in
correction of vices hold no kind of measure: what title then to those men
shall we justly attribute, that by strange devised means, soil them in
Innocent and harmless bloudde? Examples of such Monsters we read
infinite, emonge whom, we find Herod King of the Jews, which reigned in
the birthe of our Savior Christ. Who after the death of so many innocents,
thinkinge among them also to have slain him, who then was newly for man's
redemption borne, would yet make more ample, and more full show of his tyranny,
not only in the time of his wretched life, but also in the instant and moment
of his death: so that him self perceiuinge his death to approach, caused to be
assembled all the chief of Jerusalem: whom, as soon as they at his
commaundment appeared, he caused without stay to be safely imprisoned: geuinge
charge to his Sister, that in the same point of time that he should make
change of life, she also should do to die all the foresaid Elders, which
to do, she failed, God workinge to the contrary. Which things he did (as
him self somewhat before his death confessed) for that he knew the
inhabitants of Jerusalem would rejoice of his change, and to the intent it
otherwise might succeed to the people, then they at that time assuredly
supposed, he of accursed and detestable pretense, to the intent they al in that
day should mourn and lamente, determined to cause to be done that horrible
murder. The tyranny also of Abimelech, Son of Gedeon the Great, was no
less strange and marvelous, for the intent he only might reign alone, he
traitorously slew three scoare of his Brethren, whose merciless hand none
escaped but only Ionathas, which by the only permission of God, fled, to
the intent the Ionathas.
Traitor might never live without suspicion, or fear of revenge. And yet here
again is it doubtful to say, whether the treachery that he used toward the
Sichimites, were more tolerable then this or not: on whom, for that they had
chaste him out of their City, into which afterward reentering by force in
the night, revenged him self by the universal slaughter of them all, for he
committed to the swoorde all them that he there found, Man, Wooman, young and
old, and certain such as for there safety ran into the Churches, he
forthwith inuironned with great heaps of wood, which as soon as it had
taken fire, the heat and smooke thereof was such, and so intolerable, that
the prisoners that thought to have lived in assured Sanctuarye, were scortcht
each one, and wasted there miserably to powder, this after he had then
distroyed the whole Town, with ploughe he turned in despite the soil,
coueringe it with Salt in steed of other grain. A. Regulus, by the people of
Carthage, was in manner semblable entreated, who being A. Regulus.
there prisoner, upon his promise of gainecome, was sent unto the Romans,
to conclude a peace, or at the least to practice the permutation of Captives,
but being returned, less answearing their expectation (not by constrainte,
but for performance of his promise) was shut up, into a great pype or
tun, thick set with sharp nails pearsinge on every side, so that he
could on no side, either lean or arrest him self, in which sort they did
him cruelly to die. All Tirannes are ordinarily of nature cruel, but who so of
them is blouddy, is more execrable then the others. Phalaris King of Sicilia,
a most wretched tyranne, who although he executed sundry without cause or
reason, yet, in truth and justly to consider of him, he was in heart and
affection then in deed more cruel. This manquayler had a Bull of Brass,
which one Perillus had skilfully wrought him, in which A Bull of Brass.
when he had enclosed, whom he minded to torment, having under the said Bull
a great and hoate fire, the poor patient gave forth thence his sorrowful
Notes, as though it had benne the bellowinge of an Ox: which he did to this
intent only: that by the lamentable shrikes under a Bulls voice uttered, he
might in no wise be moved to pity or compassion. One thing did he while he
lived honestly, for the first that ever he tormented in this his Brassy Bull,
was Perillus him self, the author thereof. Strange was the unnatural and
vnreuerent Cruelty, practiced by Tullia, daughter to Tarquine King of ye
Romans, which to inioye the Crown, caused her Father before his time to be
murdered, which him self would have given her, had she never so little
tarried: and that which is more again in her to be noted, her Fathers body
laid forth dead on the ground, she advanced her self in her coche,
incontinently, paste forth over it, at al not appalled, and although the
Horses that drew her, trembled at that sight, and would have chosen some
other way to have paste it, the Cocheman also that drove them, feeling sum
prick of conscience, would in like manner have chosen some other pathe, to the
intent the King being dead, might not be so shamefully dismembered and bruised:
but so much still pleased she in her cruel affection, that even that which
the insensible beasts of pity would have refused, in despite she brake them
of that their choice and will, forcinge them to pass over the martyred body of
her Father. The Scithians, a people in war very furious and valiante, are in
sundry Histories taxed of Cruelty. But emonge other sorts, this one gives
full cause of marvel: They would kill great beasts, as Oxen, or Horses, in
whose bellies they enclosed such as they meante to execute, whom they caused
in such sort, and so fast to be bound, that they never could move, or by
any means comme thence: where continually they gave them (as nature asks)
sum thing to eat, to the intents that they lyuinge thus, might rotte, and
corrupt with the stinking carrion of the beast, their Grave or Sepulcher:
and to aggrauate the matter, that they might be also consumed lyuinge, by the
worms that of custom grow still in such lothesome, as were these, and
putrified carrions. We read again of Maximianus, Emperor of Rome, who also
practiced so horrible a Cruelty, as hardly might enter into the heart of man:
He bound men lyuinge, to such as were dead, which he caused to be leaft
straightly in this sort coupled, until the dead had infected, and impoysoned
the living. The very semblable to this, records Virgil of Maxentius. Again
we find of the strange tyrannies practiced by Alexander Fereas, who buried
men quick, linckte face to face, and grapled fast, as before, together.
Others sum he would apparel in the skin of a Woulfe, or other Savage and
Wild beast: whom, after he had in best manner so attyred, caused to be
carried out into the middle of sum field, where he bayted them with
Mastyues, until they were miserably dismembered and eaten. I know not whether
any man may hear to speak of the accursed bouchery practiced by Astiages,
King of the Medes, against Arpalus, one of his greatest States, and approved
friend in Sum others have Harpagus
necessity. This Astiages, by occasion of a Dream, which here to recoumpte
should be long and tedious, gave to Arpalus in secret, commission, speedely
to dispatche and murder a young Son of his: who moved with compassion,
beholdinge the poor infant (which afterward had to name, Cyrus the Great)
as also that he feared the Moother of the young Prince would in no wise
accomplish that commandment of Astiages, but on the other side dissemblinge
it, did his careful pain safely to foster him. Long after, the Tyrante
advertised that his child yet then lived, without semblant of displeasure,
called unto him, Arpalus, whom in consideration of his clemency used toward
the little Cyrus, privily did to be slain a young Son of his: calling the
day folowinge the Father to him to dinner, whom emonge other meats he fed
with the body of his own child: of which Feast, the unhappy Father had no
kind of misliking, as one that knew nothing whereof he had eaten. Astiages
not yet content with this insupportable Tyranny, proceeds yet further with
an unheard cruelty: for in steed of the last Seruis, or Dishes of
pleasance, he caused in large Chargers solemnly to be served in, the head,
feet, and hands of the young Martyred child, unto the good Father, to the
only intent he should not be vnweetinge that he then had banqueted, and eaten
of his own Son. Marius and Silla, two capital enemies, on both sides so
raged in execrable Tyranny, that they contended, as appears, who might
surmount and surpass the other in villanye. Silla bouchered in one day four
Legions of Soldiers. The Prenestines also, a people of Italye, crauinge with
tears his favor and grace, for that they had received the Captain Marius,
could notwithstanding by no means escape his cruel hand. For generally
without excertion he murdered them all, and gave their bodies for a pray to
the Crows, and Ravens to feed on. The semblable did also Marius his Companion
in bouchery. The Emperor Tiberius, Successor to Octauian, surpassed, I trow,
all others in his time: who after his fainte clemency in the entrance of his
Raygne, passed no day, in which he spilte not the blood of sum Innocents.
Besides, he divised such a merciless policy, as tofore had never benne in
any place heard of: he inhibited, that under pain of death, none should be
so hardye, to deplore, lamente, or make any show of mournful semblant at the
death of those, that it should please him any way, for any cause to execute.
A Cruelty strange, and such as has not benne known: for I deem there can
be no greater pain, then to inhibite the poor heart, that it unload and
discharge not it self of his dolours, by alarmes and tears. Also when he did
to die any young maidens, he first committed them to his Tormentours to be
deflowred of them, to the intent that with their death, they together should
lose their honor, and Chastity. He so much was pleased in spillinge of
blood, that understanding one had stain him self, whom he before had
Sentenced to death, of purpose to escape his merciless, and cruel hand,
sighed with hawtie voice in lamentable manner, saying: Oh how unhappily has
this Crows escaped me (by which name it pleased him to note the Condemned).
For you must understand, that he in such sort tormented the poor patient,
before he would suffer him by any means to die: that they supposed present
death to be to them both a gain, and a grace. Strange were it to write,
what inventions he used, and new torments in Execution. Sommetime he forced
the Condemned excessiuely to drink, and immediately would cause the Cundittes
of their Urine so straightly to be bound, that they by no means possible might
ease them selves that way: and so would he suffer them, in excessive pain to
languishe, till death should take order, for change of their life. And
further, for his sale and only pleasure, he caused other sum to be thrown
into the Sea, from an exceedinge high Cliffe, or Rockys bank in the I Will of
Capraire, adioyninge unto Naples: and for because that after that sort to die
in the Sea, was, as he thought, a death too gentle, he caused certain
Mariners, and others, with Pikes and sharp weapons in Boats to stand
directly underneath the said Rock, which received, and bloudely martyred
the miserable patientes, before they might enjoy the benefit of the Water.
Now after the shameful death of this incarnate Devil, such in deed as him
self had well deserved, Caius Caligula succeeded in the Empire: who either was
equal, or rather surpassed his Predecessors in all kind of monsterous, and
accursed tyrannies. He on a time, with great affection wished, that all the
Inhabitauntes of Rome had together but one head, to the intent that at one
blow he might strike it of. He strangly complained of the infelicitie of his
time, for that there chanced not, during his Reign, any Famine, Plague,
General Inundations, Subuersions, and Diuastations of Countries, with many
such other dreadful, and miserable calamities. Of a certain man he
demanded, bannished by Tiberius, how he lived, or what he did duringe his
Exile: who in perfect flattery answered, that he incessantly had prayed to
God, to call hence Tiberius, to the end that he might succeed him without
stay in the Empire. Which thing considered of by this monsterous Traitor,
and doubtinge least so many thousands which he had exiled, should in like
manner pray to God for his death, sent foorthewith into all parts to call
them home again: whom immediately after their speedy return, he commanded
to be executed without respect of any. He straightly charged all his Tormentours
that they by little and little should tormente the afflicted Innocents, so that
by small pains they might begin to die, protractinge their death as long as
was possible: for he would (he said) that they felt how their life failed in
them. He also said, that others eftsoons, of his complexion said, The people
wish me ill, for that they fear me. After this, Caligula succeeded Nero in
execrable malice, not at all his inferior. For proof whereof, he practiced
such a merciless tyranny, as well in it comprised all other petie
Treacheries. For without any regard to things holy or profane, to the
Maiestrate, what so ever he were, or private Subject, he caused the City of
Rome to be set on fire, inhibitinge all men under pain of death, by any
means what so ever, to quench or assuage it: never would he that any man
should save any part of his goods. So continued this fire, wastinge and
consuminge the City, seven days fully and seven nights, to the end him
self out of a high Tower, not far of, beholdinge it, reioysinge at this
dolorous, and mournful spectacle. He with villainous hand murdered his own
proper Moother. He also did to die the Husbands of Octauiana, and Sabina,
both Octaniana, and Sabina.
which he married, but soon after beraughte them in manner semblable of
their lives. Assuredly this was he, that beyond all others raged most in
cruelty: for he was the first that persecuted the Christians, and in his time
was the first, and greatest Persecution of the Church. He made open she we of
his surpassinge cruelty, of his unmeasurable, and furious brutalitie: for
hearing on a time a Greek verse, in effect thus mutche signifiynge:

Would God the Heaven and Earth,
the Sea, and what so is:
After my death might cease and end,
as eke all hope of bliss.
But I far otherwise would, that it chanced by my life time (said he). I
could well be contented to take mine examples from barbarous Princes, not
touching any more the Emperors of Rome, but the Successors again of the
above remembered, in life and manners so outrageous and execrable, force me to
dwell still emonge them, rippinge and vnfoldinge their tragical insolency of
Domitianus, Vitellius, Commodus, Maximianus, and others their semblables, I
speak at all nothing. But of Diocletian (whose manners so unsavory, and
bestiall fury, Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical Histories recites) Sommething
must I speak, before I pass him utterly, to the intent that all
blasphemers, and feeble Christians of our time, may see what they suffered in
the Primitive Church, for that they never leaft to acknowledge their Lord and
Savior Christ. This wretch trained many at the tails of Horses through the
streates, whom, after he had in most despitefull manner broken and bruised,
ordained that they immediately should be brought back again to prison,
where he lodged them not able to move, on prickinge sheardes, and sharp pieces
of earthen pottes broken, to the end that lyinge on so restless a couche,
their pain might be double to the other above remembered. Sommetimes by
Ingins, and policies he caused to be bowed down, the arms and branches of
great and high trees, to which he would bind the legs of the Condemned,
and then suddenly letting again the branches to slip, tent them most
lamentably in pieces, and quarters. In the City of Alexandria he caused to be
cut of, the ears, the noses, the lips, the hands, and the toes of
infinite innocent, and harmless Subjects, only leauinge to them their e^es,
the longer to live and dwell in that pain. He made to be sharpened many
splinters of wood, which, as far as was possible, he caused to be thruste
in betwixt the nails and the fleashe. Into boylinge Tin or Lead, other
sum he did alive to be thrown: and weemen fast bound to Scaffoldes or
Fourmes, he commanded to be scortcht with hot yrons on the back. So that by
these means, spilling still innocent blood, without any feelinge what he
thereby did, sent unto Heaven great numbers of Souls, holy, pleasinge, and
acceptable to God: which often times uses the merciless Tyrante for an
instrumente, whereby he glorifieth the just, and chosen. These strange
Cruelties, and news divised torments, are written in approved and faithful
Authors: of which, the greatest part we have taken out of the Scriptures:
the rest are readde in Josephus, in his Antiquities, and War Judicial, in
Suetonius Tranquillus, Plutarchus, T. Liuius, Justinius, Valerius Maximus,
Eusebius, P. Orosus, Julius Capitolinus, with others of no less credit, and
authority.

How for the most part, cruel Kings, and Blouddy tyrannes are the Ministers
of God: and how notwithstanding they continually end in state most
wretched, and extreme misery. Chap. 15.
WHho so has, or lives subject under any of these accursed Monsters, must
for his consolation or comfort consider, that for the most part though they
be terrible and cruel, yet be they notwithstanding the Ministers of God. The
Scriptures in many places, as we find still, terms them by no worse title,
then the servants of God, for that by them, it has pleased him to chastise
the wicked, perfectinge and confirminge to him self, such as love and fear
him. The Hebrews were long time governed by Judges and Priests, among whom,
when Samuel waxed feeble and old, the malice of the people, and contempt of
God each where growyng, Kings then from God, at their request were given
them, which chastisement (for greater then that might never any have chanced
them) they received as having before both deserved and desired it: Samuel
therefore was given them for King, who in the beginning was meek and
merciful, but shortly after became tyrannous and cruel, spoilinge them of
whatsoever they had, without respect in their possession, as also of their
desired freedom and liberty. Who although he were void of no kind of vice,
yet in Holy write is he called the anointed of God, by mean whereof the people
were amazed and trembled. But leave we here him, as also al others, which
both knew the Law, and lived under it: and turn we our pen, to write of
Idolaters, which also are called the Ministers of God in the Scriptures, for
this says our Savior by the mouth of Esaie: I will, that my Capitaines
enter at the gates of Babylon, I have commanded my Holy ones, and have called
together my men valiant, and disposed in my wroth, to the intent they
glorify themselves together in my Glory. The Prophet spoke these words, of
the two Kings, Cyrus and Darius. Behold then how he calls the Medes, and
the Persians sanctified, which notwithstanding neither were, either just or
sanctified, but only executours of Gods just will, for the punishment of
Babylon. And in an other place by the Prophet Ezechiel: I will bring forth
my Servant Nabuchodonosor, and because he has well served me nighe unto Tire,
Aegypte will I also give him in possession. Yet was he not the Servant of God,
for as mutche as he neither served him, knew him, or any way believed in him:
only he executed his Justice on the rebellious, and in this respect was called
his Seruante. The accursed Totila King of the Goths, was named the Scourge of
God, and reputed for the same. The great Tamburlayne, that raygned not so many
years hence, a Captain no less blouddy then valiant, which also subdued so
many Countries, and Provinces: being demanded, why he so more then
tyrannously used his Captives, whereunto he answered: forewrapped in collar.
Supposest thou me to be any other, then the ire of God? whence we have in fine
to conclude, that all such cruel and incarnate Devils, are instruments
wherewith God chastises sin, as also, with the same approves, and tries
the just: and yet they notwithstanding are not hence held for just, ne
shall they escape the heavy judgment of God. For necessary is it, that
example of ill happen, but woe be unto him, by whom it happens. Further in
this life, God assuredly at sometime does punish them, besides that in an
other world, Hell and damnation is certainly allo^ted them. Neither at any
time has it almost benne seen, as we have remembered in the forepassed
Chapter, but that such Merciless, and Transubstantiate Monsters, have died
of sum violent, and ignominious death. Phalaris was miserably consumed in
the same Bull, in which he had tormented many an innocent, roringe the same
Notes, which he to hear of others, had to fore, so great likinge. Plutarche
records, that Silla was filthely devoured of Lyse, and that he never could
find any plaster for that pain: And Pline farther says, that he died in
such sort tormented, that with extreme and miserable anguishe, he gnewe,
tear, and with his teeth horribly dismembered his own loathsome body and
deformed carrion. Marius also his Capital enemy a perfect pattern of
bestiall feritie, fell in the end into such extreme misery, that flyinge
and seekinge a place to hide him in, was glad to lay his Head in the hands
of Poncius Teselinus, to the intent that he should strike it of. The Emperor
Tiberius was stifled betwixt two pillowes, or bolsters, and so ended in the
hands of his own Servants: How be it Suetonius says that he was impoysoned.
Caligula that infernal fury, after he had received thirty great wounds, by
Chereus, as well, and Cornelius Sabinus, as also by the others of that
coniuration, made change of life, to the contentation of many. Cruel Nero
before he died, was deprived of his Honor and Empire, judged and pronounced an
enemy Capital to Rome, and hidinge him self in an infectious sink of man's
ordure, would there have slain him self, but his forces failed him, in the
execution of that so meritorious a deed, whence he used in that exployte the
healpinge hand of an other, and so in wrestinge and mowinge with his evil
favored mouth, gave forth his Spirit to the whole Senate of Devils.
Diocletian in manner semblable deprived of the Empire, died of poison, by his
own hands ministered. Domician, being by Stephanus, Saturnus, Maximus and
others, in seven sundry places deeply wounded, departed hence to Nero, to
raygne with him for ever. Tullia, of whom we have something above remembered,
banished from Rome, died no less a beggar, then a wretch most miserable.
Astiages, graundfather to Cyrus, whom, he commanded Arpalus privily to
murder, (to whom for that he had not executed his commandment, he gave to
be eaten in banquette his own Son) was deposed by Gods just judgment, by
the very same Cyrus. Herod also, with others infinite, whom all to remember
here, would be long and tedious, died a death to the others not dissemblable.
Let those therefore, that rule and govern the world, in any wise leave to be
blouddy and cruel, leaninge on the staff of compassion and clemency, to the
intent they may live assured of the hearts of their vassaules: for the best
assurance of his state that the Prince may have, is to be beloved of his people
and Subjects.

Of a strange case, which at two diverse times chanced, after one and the
same sort, unto two Romayne Knights of Honorable Families. Chap. 16.
THe chief and principal that conspired the death of Julius Caesar, (as
Plutarche at large with others records) were Brutus and Cassius, which both
with all their adherentes were after exiled, declared for open enemies to the
Romans, by Octauian, Lepidus, and Marcus Antonius, who commanded as they
pleased throughout the whole City. Of the faction of Brutus and Cassius, was
Marcus Varro, one emonge all the others of most fame and honor, who being in
the field with the other coniurates, were discomfited by Octauian and Marcus
Antonius, who the better to save, if he might his life, and to be reputed for
none other then a common Soldier, changed forthwith and incontinently his
apparel, thrustinge him self into the heap or company of Captives, and so
without more adoo was sold for vile price emonge the others, unto a certain
Romayne who hight Barbulas: who within very few days, perceiuinge well his
honest demeanoure and dealinge, supposed him to be (as truth was) a Romayne,
although in very deed he knew him not for such a one. On a time therefore,
he with drew him aparte, earnestly intreatings him, to learn him what he was,
promisinge that if he would disclose unto him what he hight, and of what House
or Family, he would assuredly purchase him grace, with M. Antonius, and
Octauian: but M. Varro would for nothing utter him self, so that in fine
Barbulas, far otherwise then he first deemed, concluded with him self that
he was no Romayne. Within few days, now Octauian, and M. Antonius returned
them to Rome, as also Barbulas with his late bought Servant, who perchance
notwithstanding was better Gentleman then his Master. It chanced him there
shortly after his arrival (waiting at the Senate door, Barbulas his Lord
about his affairs within) to be known of a certain Roman, who
incontinently advertised Barbulas thereof, which without any semblant that he
knew any thing, or without any word paste thereof unto him, wrought so with
Octauian, which then ruled in Rome, that he easily obtained him grace and
pardon, by mean whereof forthwith, he frankly infranchised him, and brought
him to Octauian, who courteously received him, and from that time forth held
him in the number of his friends. After this now Octauian, and M. Antonius
fell out, in such sort that Barbulas leaned to Antonius, whom Octauian in
field ouerranne and discomfited. Barbulas then dreadinge the wroth of
Octauian, used for his safety, the above remembered policy practiced by Varro,
that is to weete, he did on him the coat of a poor Soldier. M. Varro, then
for that he long before had not seen him, as also for that he had changed
his apparel, among other Captives unknowen, bought him for a bondeman. But
after short time, remembringe him again, he so practiced with Octauian, that
he obtained him pardon, doing him to be free, possessed of woonted liberty. So
that each of them, repayinge the duty of courtesy to other, leave us example
sufficient of the less staide assurance of great states in this life: with
admonition to all, of what degree they so be, that they never leave to fear
the fall, no not then, when they highest shall sit in Fortunes Chair, as
also on the other side, never to despair when the same Fortune shall lay them
under her angry, and disdainefull foot.

Of the distinction of the Age of Man, according to the opinion of most
Astrologians. Chap. 17.
BY the common division of Astrologians, as well Arabies, Caldees, Greeks, and
Latins: as also by the particular opinion of Proclus, Ptolomie, and Al.
Rasellus, the life of Man is divided in seven Ages, over every one of which
rules and governs one of the seven Planetes. The first therefore is called
Infancy, which continues the space of four years only, during which time
the Moon has principal masterie on Man, for that the qualities of this Age
fitly answer to the influence of that Planete, for our bodies then are
moist, delicate, tender, feeble, and flexible, rightly agreing with the
qualities of the Moon. For in this time, for small cause man easily is altered,
with none, or very little toil, he waxes straight werie, his body grows and
increases, almost sensibly to be perceived. And this generally now chances
to all of this Age principally, and chiefly by the influence of the Moon, yet
notwithstanding, not equally, but more to sum, then unto some others, for as
mutche as some other dissidente qualities, by the influence of the Heavens, and
aspecte of the Planetes in man's Nativity, or time of Birthe, cause some
secret, and privy alteration in all men, as they favorably or with less
favor behold each the other.

The second Age continues fully ten years, and ends in the fourtenth of
our life: which Age the Latins call Pueritia, the end of Infancy, and
beginning of Adolescencie. In this part chiefly rules an other Planete,
Mercury, whose place of arrest is in the second Sphere. He easily alters
and changes his countenance: for in aspecte with the good, he also is good,
as with the naughty he turns and becomes naught. Duringe this Age, nature
composeth her self to the qualities of this Planete: for now young children
make their first show of their inclination and wit, be it either in
readinge, writing, singinge, or the like: they are also then very tractable
and docill, in their devises notwithstanding, light, vnstayde, inconstante,
and unstable.

The third Age contains eight years, and of ancient writers, is called
Adolescencie, and begins at the end of the fourtenth year of our Age, and
continues until the last day of the two and twenty: during which time,
rules principally the third Planete Venus. For then Man begins first to
be prone unto Venerie, apt, and able in the act of generation, busied in
Love, and pleasinge in the company of Woomen, given to Play, Pleasure, Music
and Bankettes, with such other wanton and unprofitable trifles. And thus
lives he, for the most part of Nature bente to this folly: yet
notwithstanding Man has continually without left or impeachment, his free
choice, no necessity bindinge him to this or that inconvenience, of sufficient
puisance to follow, or to withstand these inclinations, for that no force of
Planetes, or influence of Stars, binds Man against his will to any
necessity, although it incline the apetite sensitive, as also other parts or
members of the body, in such sort that man in cases, has either likinge or
dislikinge, free notwithstanding from inevitable necessity.

The Fourth Age continues, till Man have fully fortye and two years, which
Age men commonly term, and call Youth, it abides with him twenty years to
the end. Of this Age the Sun is chief Lord and Governor, and possesses
as his Kingdom, the middle or fourth Sphere, called of ancient Astrologians,
the fountain of all Light, the eye of the Earth, King of the Planetes, and
heart of the World. This Age is the most perfectst, and most excellent of the
others, it is the beauty and flower of man's life. Duringe this Age, the forces
and powers, both of the understanding, and body, acquire, and retain their
virtue, and vigor. Man therefore in this time, well advised and hardy, becomes
skillful to know and choose, that is good for him, he seeks and searches
Honor and Riches, he laboreth to be accounted great and renowned, he busieth
him self in laudable and virtuous Actions: Brief, generally in all things,
he evidently declares that the Sun over him, has rule and dominion.

The Fifte Age in Latin, is called Aetas virilis, and has fiftiene years for
his continuance, subject unto Mars, who of him self is evil and dangerous,
fierce and hoate, inclining men to Avarice, he causes diseases, and increases
Collar in more then just quantity. In this Age man lives temperate in
diette, constant and firm in all his deeds, words, and couenantes.

Then join twelve to fifty six, and there arriseth sixty and eight, which
fully shall term, and end this our sixte Age, in Latin called not improperly
Senectus, of which Age is Jupiter the very Lord and Master, a Planete very
Noble, and significatour of Equity, Religion, Piety, Temperance, and
Chastity: prouokinge men to leave all toil and travail, seekinge a quiet
life from sweat and pain. In this Age man follows and pursues Holy
works, louinge temperancie, virtue, and Charity, now seeks he Honor by
his honest demerites, accompanied continually with praise and commendation,
now is he just, perfect and honest, fearinge shame, obloquie, and dishonor.

The Seventh and last, by order of these Ages continues fully twenty years,
ending at the end of eighty and eighte, which very few in our Age, either
reach or attain to. This Age, by the mean of Saturn, which orders it
wholly (the most slow, and most high of all the other Planettes, which also
enuironeth, and compasses in all the others) is stoopinge, and decrepite. We
in this Age are cold and dry, of complexion none other or better, then
Melancoly, angrye, weamishe, hard to please, and envious. By this mean we
live alone and solitarye: now also grow on us, pain, grief, sorrow,
thought, sickness, vnreaste, disdeigne, and anguishe. This Age weakeneth our
force, and harmeth our memory, it lodeth and charge us with perpetual annoy,
with long sorrows, and languishinge diseases: with deep thoughts, chiefly
desiringe to attempt close and hidden Secrets: and in fine we desire
principally to be Masters and Governors. And if any emonge us pass now this
Last Age (which assuredly happens very seldom in these days) the same
then returns to the state, in manner of Infancy, and ones again shall have
the Moon for his Lady and Mistress, which ordered, as is above said, the
whole matter in the four first years: by reason whereof, these Aunciente and
white headed Fathers show them selves none other, then little Babes or
Suclinges, wholly resemblinge their conditions and qualities. I have said in
the beginning, that this division of Ages, was leaft us of the Old, and Learned
Astrologians: each man notwithstanding may divide them as it pleases him.
Return we therefore now to these partitions also, which we find given us of
renowned Philosophers, Physicians, and Poets, which were emonge them selves
of diverse and differente opinions. And for that in this discourse, we find
many things likinge us, something will we touch, to please therewith the
Reader. The great and Learned Philosopher Pythagoras, how long so ever the
Life of man seem, leafte thereof to us but four parts only, which he
compared to the four parts of the year. Infancy (he said) resembled the
Spring, in which all things began to budde and flower, to grow, to wax
great, and to comme to perfection. The youthful Age of man, be compared to
the Summer, for the heat, force, and valiant courage that man has in that
Age. The Age Virill, or Man's state, he compared to Autumn, for in that time
having experience of the world, he becomes ripe, and sound of advice and
counsel, with assured knowledge in all kind of differentes. Old Age
resembles perfectly Winter, a time sad and envious, and such as reapeth no
kind of fruit or commodity, only enioyinge that, that we receive at other
times. M. Varro, a Roman, for his Virtue and Learning, famous in his time:
he parted the Life of Man into five sundry and equal parts, attributing to
each one, the whole and full space of fiftiene years: in such sort, that he
called the first fiftiene, Puerilitie: the Second, Adolescencie: to weete,
the time of growinge, for that man then springs up to his full, and stayde
stature. The Third Age reaches to the five and forty year, which not
unaptly may be termed Youth: in Latin, Iuuentus, coming; or descending of
the Verb Iuuo, signifiyng a fit time to help or aid in: for in this Age
man bears Arms in the field: he serves, and defends with force his
Country, and then only is he most hable in all exploytes of manhood. From
thence until the sixty year continues the Age of perfect Man. For that in
Latin these men are called, Seniores: that is to say, beginning to war alde,
in respect of the former Ages, for that in this time men first begin to
decline, lookinge toward Old Age, which hasteneth him onwardes,
accomplishinge the residue of Man's Life, these first three scoare years
ended. This now then is Varro his division of Man's Life, as well collecteth,
and recites Censorinus. The Philosopher Hiporas into seven: giving seven
years to the First, and as many again to the Second, which both together
mount to fourtiene. The Third from thence reaches to the eighte and twenty
year. The two next Ages folowinge have each again seven, which with the
others by computation give forty and two. The Sixte has fourtiene, and
ends with fifty and six: and that remains, what so ever it be, he
refers it to the Seventh Age. Solon also, as the abouesaide Censorinus
records, divides these Seven into Ten, justly sunderinge the Third, the
Sixte, and the Seventh in the middle: in such sort, that every of these
ten parts contain only seven years, and no more. These are the
Distinctions of Ages then that we find emonge Philosophers: sauinge that
Isidorus, as also sum of the abouesaide, divide them only into Six. Of
which unto the First he gives seven years, and calls that Age so, young
and tender Infancy. The Second, to this in time, equal Puerilitie: from
thence until the end of the eighte and twenty year, he accoumpteth on the
Third Age, and calls it Adolescencye, a time wherein we grow best, and
reatche to perfection. The Fourth is from thence until the end of the
forty year, which Age in Latin he calls Iuuentus. The Fifte, to which he
gives the full space of twenty years, which with the others mount unto
sixty. He notes for the declininge Age, or if you rather will, the first
entry into Old Age. The remanent of Man's life, he attributes to stoopinge
Age, which how mutche so ever it be, ends only the last part. Horace, a
most excellent, and most renowned Poet, divides this whole matter but into
four parts, as also did, as we read, Pythagoras: In Pueritiam, Iuuentutem,
Aetatem Virilem, and Senectutem: which he artificially describes in Art
Poetica, with all the conditions proper and incidente to these Ages. And yet
according to the rules of natural Philosophy, man's life is only to be parted
in three parts: The first is that time, that he has to grow in: The second
while he arresteth and dwells at one stay: The last when he declineth, and
begins to stoop forewardes. For as says Aristotle, what so is engendered,
in the beginning augmenteth Lib. 3. De Anima.
and increases, and afterward stays for a time, arrestinge in his
perfection, but in the end declineth and sauereth of diminution. So that hence
to conclude, a tripartite division is not of the others all, least proper or
fittinge. Of this opinion also were the most part of the Arabian Physicians,
although Auicenna, a man of rare learning, and of an excellent judgment, has
lotted out man's time by four distinct Ages. The first he calls
Adolescencie, the full space of thirty years, for that, duringe that time man
yet still is growinge. To the second be gives name, of a well stayde Age, or
of an Age, wherein beauty in all men perfecteth: this part continues until
the five and forty year, in which we live seized of absolute perfection.
Next follows the third, a secret diminution, and privy pathe unto old
Age, which holds on fully the space of fiftiene years. Now order gives us
in his place the last, a weary, a feeble, and an unable Age, such as men
term a Decrepite, or Caduke Age. Here must we notwithstanding note and
consider, that although it pleased him to give us this his quadripartite
division, yet no where forbids he us to subdeuide again the first part,
which contains, as we said, the space of thirty years, lottinge the said
part into three distinct parts, or several Ages: by this means according
him with those that before part (as is remembered) the whole course of ^ans
life, into six sundry portions. But here consideringe these variable opinions,
I know not where, most safely to arrest my self, neither may any man give
assured determination, as well for diversity of complexions, and dispositions
of men, as also that we inhabit diverse Lands and Countries, the
consideration of our distte mattereth also somewhat, as whether we feed on
meats sauery, of light and easy digestion, or of gross and less pleasant,
hardly concocted: by means whereof and of the semblable, man either sooner or
later altering, becomes at times differente, old and decrepite. For this
cause says Galen, hardly may man limite any times Lib. 6. De Regimine sanitaus.
unto Ages: which well considered, cause that these so dissonante and so
sundry opinions, seem not all thing so strange, and so exiled from reason.
Seruius Tullius King of the Romans, who (as of him records A. Gellius) was
only still busied in betteringe the state Public, as then especially, when he
first distinguished five sundry or several estates emonge the Romans: of
the life of man remembringe but three parts only, naminge the first
Puerilitie, the space of seuentiene years: the second by his account reachte
unto the six and forty year, in which Age he enrolled his Soldiers, as
most able and fit then to all exploites of Chivalry: but who so longer
lived, those called he wise, mature, and men of advised Counsel. This
division, for that it is vninersall, is of no part contrary or repugnant to
the others, includinge the less and particular members, making some show and
certain semblante of the woonted divisions, which of custom ordinarily
sunder and seioyne the green Age from the riper, and that again from old
Age. This green Age I say, from the day of our birth, until the last of
our youth, by some computation contains forty five years, not mutche more
or less, as by account appears. Virgil also uses the very same Epitheton,
Viridisque iuuentus, which is to say, green youth: ripe and mature Age
thence continues until the sixty year, in which time who so lives, Seruius
calls them men of assured stay and advice: the residue of our life, is old
and feeble Age. These three parts may again be well subdeuided, to accord,
and conform the forepassed varieties, which seem to be so dissidente, and
contrary in appearance.

Of certain years in man's life, which the Learned in times paste judged
above the others to be marvelous dangerous, as also for what cause they
esteemed it to be so. Chap. 18.
THe ancient Philosophers and Astrologians, by diligent observation, have
curiously noted certain years in man's life to be assuredly perilous, which in
Latin they call Annos clymactericos, alludinge unto the Greek word Clima,
signifiynge as sum will, the staff of a Ladder, or a degree in any thing.
Whence they note that these years are in such sort, and manner limited, as
are steares or steps, that aunsweare by just proportion in any thing, very
dangerous in the whole course and tracte of man's life. For as they maintained
for an approved verity, the seventh, the nienth, and the fouretienth day in
all kind of sickness, and infirmities, to be then the rest continually more
dangerous: in case semblable also easily perceived they, that this account
also by force of the numbers, had in like sort place in these odd years,
throughout the whole course also and time of our life. Pythagoras, Themistius,
Boecius, and Auerrois, with others many, learn us, that the influences of
naughty Planetes, as if I would say of Saturn, which at several times
rules, and in several Ages, causinge great chaunges and alterations every
seventh year, in such sort, that themselves felt the force thereof: as
well remember Marsilius Ficinus, Censorinus, and A Gellius, supposinge it to be
a thing assuredly impossible, to pass those years without great hazard or
alteration of our life, estate, health, or complexion. So that by this
occasion, the seventh year, the fourtiene, the one and twenty, the eight and
twenty, the five and thirty, the two and forty, the niene and forty, and so
forth by order every seventh year was above the others mutche to be feared.
And farther for that they held the number of three to be of great importance
or efficacy, they said that three times seven, which mount to twenty one,
was a number above all the rest marueilously to be suspected. As mutche again
is said of the niene and forty year, for that the number rises of seven
times seven: But the most dangerous year of all others, is the three and
sixty: for as twenty one rises of three times seven, so sixty three mount
again of twenty one three times, or of niene times seven, or seven times
niene: which numbers be famous, and as well known, so feared of the wise and
learned. So that when they first entered the first day of the said year,
they became (beyond the woonted manner) very diligent, circumspect and
curious, to preserve their health and life, by all practiced polices taught
us, either by experience, nature, or Physic, attendinge from day to day
some dangerous mutation, or sudden change of state, which in deed
oftentimes happens, as well remembereth Julius Firmicus in his books of
Astrology. To this purpose A. Gellius makes mention of a certain letter,
sent by the Emperor Octauian, unto his Nephew Cassius, letting him to wete,
what joy he then lived in, for that he had escaped the three and sixty year,
and now was entered into the sixty four. In such sort that he then intended
to celebrate his second Nativity. For these causes thenour Learned
Predecessors marueilously feared this above rehearsed year, consideringe that
it was the fatal term assigned by nature unto many: duringe which time,
Aristotle with others renowned, and famous personages, died. And as I also
above Aristotle.
remembered the number of niene to be perilous, so said they, that who so
paste the sixty and third year, should not at all escape the eighty and one
year, for that, that year rises of nine times niene. At this Age died the
divine Plato, the great and Lcarned Geographer Erastothenes, Plato.
Erastothenes. Zenocrates. Diogenes.
Zenocrates, a Platoniste, and Prince of the ancient Schools, Diogenes
Cinicus, with others many, the only honor and beauty of their time. But these
things more for experience sake, and for that it seems unto many a novelty,
have I written, then that any man should hereon dwell so mutche, that he should
think it of necessity, and a thing inevitable, although it otherwise be not
a matter impertinent, ne yet exiled from the lore of reason. For as we see
that diseases, and complexio^s, leave, and end at times in men: and as in most
kind of Creatures teeth grow, change and fall, the voice alters into a
sound more base or shrill, the grass also or Corn springs at their terms
appointed, besides infinite other assured effects and operatio^s of nature,
which observe their course and times without alteration or change: so why
should we not in manner semblable believe, that these abouesayde terms of
time, and clymactericall years should have their proper force in ye alteration
of man's fortune or state of his body. Why also think we not, that man's body
is ordered as well by celestial influence, as by any predominant quality or
humor, and that by some secret and hidden operation, though man be yet
subject to the pleasure and will of God: who as he has framed all things
supernaturally and miraculously, yet will he notwithstanding that his works
be natural, these only excepted, which by him were wrought contrary to the
laws of Nature by secret mean, inscrutable proceedinges and judgment.

Here ends the First part of the Collection of Histories.
The Second part of the Collection of Histories.
What danger it is to murmer against Princes, as also what commendation they
gain by Clemency. Chap. 1.
A Woonted saying it is, and found emonge the most ancient Proverbs,
Princes have hands broad, and long cares, hence none other thing at al
inferringe, but that Kings and great states, can a far of revenge
themselves on these that offend them, as that they also understand what so of
them is spoken in place couerte or secret. For so many are there that seek to
live in his grace and favor, that on the multitude has rule and dominion,
that nothing may be kept from him either unknown or hidden. Whence to all men
is given by the Learned in counsel, that of the Prince we speak in secret
nothing, for that in such case the Walls both hear and disclose again
our Treasons: and Plutarche, that the Birds carry these words in the Air.
And farther if it be dangerous, to utter unto Princes a truth frankely and
boldly, what shall we judge of them that mutter against them privily? The
examples, that a man might to this purpose allege, are infinite: emonge
which, both in the Greek and Latin Histories we read, that Antigonus one
of the Capitaines and successors of Alexander the great, his Camp not
marchinge, but arrestinge in open field, being on a night a bed in his
Tente, heard certain of his Soldiers without, pass in traitorous talk
against him, supposinge not to have benne understood of any, but he without
any farther semblante of wroth, in change of voice, as if he had benne some
other, bespake them this softely, without great brute or noise: when ye
speak any such words of the King, see that ye go farther from his
Tente, least he hear you. An other time the said Antigonus, marchinge with
his Army in the dead of the night, paste through a place very foul and
mirie, his Soldiers almost forweried and tired, by means whereof, they
uttered sum distoyall words against him, thinkinge that he had benne far
of and behind him, but he being present and understanding their treachery,
not known from an other by means of the darkness, after having done his
pain to help diverse of them out of the mire, that had so liberally talkte
against him, said with voice as before well counterfeited, speak of the King
hardly what so ever you please, for that he has brought you into so watrie a
soil, but of me you have good cause to think and say well, for that by my
help you are now paste the danger. The patiencie of Phyrrus King of the
Epirotes, meriteth no less to be remembered of the posterity: who when he
lay in Italy in Arms against the Romans, both he and his whole troop in
the City of Taranta, he heard after supper certain of his young Soldiers
sittinge at their table, to outrage against him, whom when he had caused to
be brought before him: demanded, whether they had paste against him in such
words, or not, to whom, one of them with countenance less altered, said:
King what so ever thou haste charged us with, that all have we spoken: and
farther be thou assured, that if the wine had not failed us, we had yet again
spoken many worse then are these: lettinge him thereby, for their excuse to
understand, that the wine in this sort had forste them to exile from duty and
reason. At which his words, Phyrrus waxte not only angry, but rather on the
contrary side, brake out into a great laughter, sendinge them back to their
lodging without any annoye or hurt what so ever. The Emperor Tyberius,
though otherwise a tyranne most cruel and execrable, has left us also to
this purpose somethinges worthy memory: for perceiuinge on a time that one
had composed an infamous Libel against him, and farther that the people with
words disloyal, complained each where of his excessive cruelty, wherefore
persuaded by sum to do sharp animaduersion and straight Justice on them,
said: that all Tongues ought to be free in a City: then straight again moved
by some of his Council, to make diligent search and busy inquiry, to find
out the Author of the fore said Libell, which he also refused as before,
saying: that he was not yet so void of affairs, that he would trouble him
self with so simple a matter. Great also was the Clemency of Denis tyranne
of Sicilia, used toward an old wooman of poor and mean condition: for
being advertised, that she daily prayed for the continuance of his Health and
Honor, sent for her to know the cause why she so mutche affected his assured
state and maintenance, consideringe all other his Subjects desired his death
generally, whereunto she answered: know right mighty Prince, that when I
was a young Maid, there raygned in this Country a most fell and wicked
tyranne, wherefore I prayed continually to the Gods for his sudden death and
destruction, by mean whereof in short time my request was fully
accomplished. But after him succeeded then an other, far yet more cruel, and
more blouddy then the first, for whose death, I never left on the Gods
incessantly to call, till it had chaunst to him, as to the other above said.
After both these now come thou, the woorste of the three, a Monster in
faith most malicious and loathsome: and yet because an other might follow
most detestable of all, I never leave to pray for thy health and,
preservation, wishinge thee many years in health, to thy contentmente. This
bold, and hardye answer naught grieved at all this Tyrante, nor therefore
disdeigned he her, that of custom disdeigned al others: but pardoned her to
go without annoye or offense. When Plato, the Father, and Prince of all
Philosophers had made his long aboade with this foresaid Denis, in the end
required his favor to pass home again into his Country: which obtained, the
tyranne him self in conductinge him of part out of Sicilia, demanded what he
would report of him at Athens emonge the Philosophers. To whom Plato, without
stay freely and boldly answered: these that live in Athens, are not so idle
nor have they (know thou) to loose so mutche good time or leisure, that they
once will inquire, either of thee, or of thy behavior. Whence although in
deed he well perceived, that for his naughty life he that had only spoken,
yet patiently he took it, not malicinge the party. I remember again other
two old weemen, which with like freedom bespake their Kings or Princes,
the one a Macedonian to the King Demetrius, Son of the above remembered
Antigonus, the other a Roman to the Emperor Adrian, to whom both they
framed both one, and the same answer: for each of them crauinge justice at
the Kings hands, received for answer, that they presently could not
attend on them: then said they, if you may not understand of our
complainte, give over then your Crowns to them that will do Justice: which
words the two Princes took both in better part, acquaintinge themselves
with their cases, and did them forth with right. Phillippe King of Macedonie,
taking his leave of the Ambassadors of Athens, and offeringe them such
courtesy as is usual in like cases, demanded in the end, whether they would
that he should do any thing yet for them: to whom, one of them that had to
name Democrates, knowinge that he in heart hated the Athenians, less able to
hide that which in heart he thought, said: we would that thou should go
and hang thy self, and besides that, nothing. At which answer, as well al
his companions, as the others then there present, fearinge the Kings
indignation, were not a little troubled: but the King, as was his woonted
Clemency (or it may be dissemblinge) not alteringe to wroth in any other
manner, turned him to the other Ambassadors, and said: you shall say to the
Athenians from me, that he that can supporte these such opprobrious words,
has mutche more modesty then the sagest of Athens, which are so little wise,
that they know not when nor where to hold their peace. Domaratus coming to
see King Phillip, on a time when he was freashly fallen out as well with his
wife, as with the young Prince Alexander, of whom among other things the
King at the first demanded, if all the Cities in Greece were in peace and
well acquieted. But Domaratus that well knew, nothing was to him more
likinge; then to hear of perpetual discord among his Subjects: answered
him right boldly, but reverently withal, as well became a subject. Assuredly
King, for that you live disquieted still at home, you ask me what dissentions
may be in these your Cities abroad: but if you were in peace with these your
people here, it should stand more with your Honor, then thus to inquire of
the adversities of others. Whereat the King found not him self at all
aggreued, and consideringe that for just cause he honestly had reproved him,
immediately grew to a perfect atonement with the Queen, as well as with his
Son and others. In what bold freedom and liberty of words, Diogenes
bespake that famous Prince Alexander, as also with what modesty, and how he
accepted it, is evident in the first part, where something is said of the
life of Diogenes. Farther if we affecte examples of Christians, Pope Sixtus
the fourth of the order of the orde of saint Frances, may serve in this
place, as fittyng to our purpose. To whom on a time elected, and chosen Pope,
came one of his brethren, an old religious Friar, which, after salutations
past to and fro, on both sides, withdrewe him self with the Bishop, into his
secret rreasurie, where as he showed his poor brother great heaps of
costly stones and iuels, and said: fratermi, now can I not say, as some time
said S. Peter, gold or silver have I none. It is true quam the other, neither
can you say to the impotent and diseased, as said he, rise up, and go,
lettyng him there by privily to understand, that the Popes in these ages, were
now more vowed to riches then unto virtue, or holiness: who perceiuyng, that he
nothing straied from reason, yielded there to, without contradiction, quietly.
The semblable happened to an Archbishop of Colonne, who as he paste the
country, with a houge troop of horse men, curiously all armed, according to
the custom, and manner of Almaignie, found by hap a poor workman, toilyng
hardly for his living, which at the first sight of this prelate, brake out,
into a great laughter, the cause of which demanded, the poor man for the
with said: I laugh at the folly of that good priest saint Peter, prince,
and master of all other prelates, which lived, and died here in extreme
poverty, to leave his successors, in such pomp, and iolitie. But this
Archbishop again the better to acquit him: fellow I ride thus as thou
see, for that I am a Duke, as well as also a bishop: where at he laughed
again more heartily then before, and being demanded the second time, of that
his vehemente passion, answered right boldly, with a sure, and stayed
countenance. I demand of thee, right honorable, that if the Duke of which
thou speak, were hence fallen into hell, where supposeste thou this good
Archbishop should find his quiet harbor. Where by he well inferred two
contrary professions, agreed not well in one person, and that offendyng in the
one, he could not acquit himself, by any gilful pretext or shadow of the other.
At which this gentleman, then presently graueled, not having what to say,
departed with shame to much, and paste forth on his way. To speak also of
Gentiles, Artaxerxes king of Persia, understanding that a certain captain of
his, which he at his cost, from his cradle, and infancy, had nourished, had
muttered against him in manner, no less traitorous, tha^ in truth disloiall,
whom he would other way none punish, but sent to him by an other, that he
might at his pleasure talk of his prince and master, for that he again of him
might speak, and do the semblable. Philippe father of Alexander, advertised
that Nicanor had abused him in words, was advised by certain his friends, by
process (as the manner is) to call him to his trial: to who^ he answered, that
Nicanor was not the worst man in Macedonie, and therefore first would know,
whether he had need of any thing, for that he felt hymfelf bound in conscience
to aid him: so findyng him very poor, in steed of deserved correction, in
presence of many gave him, a great, and rich present incontinently. This done
the same that before had accused him, said, that Nicanor now spoke great good
of his majesty, to who^ the king said: now see I well Sinicus (for so hight
this foresaied accuser) that to be well or evil spoken of, it lies only in
mine own hands. This said prince, by his friends an other time was advised,
to exile a certain subject of his, less circumspecte in his talk, and
intemperate of tongue, which to do he utterly refuced, and said, for as
much as he has spoken of me his pleasure here, I will not that he do the
semblable, in other strange lands, and countries, lettyng others understand,
that which he had dooen of magnanimity, and clemency, proceeded of sad
advice, and assured counsel. In these and such like matters, this prince
excelled all others of his time. He said he was much bound to the governors
and princes of Athens, for that it pleased them injuriously to talk still as
well of him, as also of the order and manner of his government: for by his
daiely industry and change in things, from better to beter, he proved them
to be but slanderous liers. He never chastised any that outraged against him,
only he would cut of the occasion, that moved them. Which his vsages, if they
were of all men well observed, two notable commodities should thence be
gathered: the first, th'amendment of our own lives, and manners, the second,
the perpetual exile and banishemente of all detractours, and slaunderers. A
rare virtue is it assuredly, for a man not to account of that evil, that he
well knows to have been spoken behind him: but a great note of temperancie
is it, not to wax or bilius, or angry, for the injury that is dooen us in
our presence, and openly.

Of what country Pilate was, and how he died, as also of a river so called,
and of the property of the same, and finally, of a certain cave, or den in
Dalmacia. Chap. 2.
PIlate of all the judges that ever were, or shall be, the most detestable and
accursed, was a French manne borne, and of the City of Lions, how be it
diverse of the said country deny it, saying: that this name Poncius, descended
Poncius Freneus.
out of a certain family in Italy, from Poncius Freneus, I mean, capitain of
the Samnites, which also did to slight, and vanqnished the Romans. Which
how so ever it was, this Pilate (either for the only respect of his
personage, either in consideration of the family, whence he issued) aspired to
most honorable estate among the Romans, and being familiarly acquainted with
Tyberius successor unto Octauian, as of him record both Josephus, and
Eusebius, was sent by him, in the twelueth year of his Empire, as lieutenaunt
general, to the city of Jerusalem, which titled there himself, proctour of
the Empire. So governed Pilate then this holy city, as also all the Province
of Judea, called Palestina. He continued, in this office.x. full years, in the
seventh of which, which was the.xviij. of the Emperors reign, as account
Beda, and Euseblus, he gave sentence of death, against Beda in his book of
time. Eusebius in his first book of time.
the savior, and redemer of mankind, our Lord and maker Jesus Christ, both
God and manne, when came to pass these things, which the holy Evangelists
remember us of, in his death and passion: whose resurrection was such, and so
manifest in Jerusalem, although they labored, what in them was to obscure it,
that it was well perceived of Pilate (were he though a wretch, of all others
most impious) that this resurrection, and other miracles wrought by Christ,
were not by man done, but by God only. For which cause, as records Paulus
Orosius, Eusebius, and Tertulian in his Apologies, he advertised the Emperor
at length of the matter: for it was the manner that the Consuls, and Proconsuls,
should continually write, to the Senate, at least, or to the Emperor, of all
matters, whatsoever, with in the compass of their Province, or territory.
These novelties then much troubled Tiberius, which without stay,
communicated them to his Lords of the Senate, aduisyng him with them, whether
it were expediente, to honor, and adore, this Prophet for a GOD. Which he
for this cause only did, for that without the authority of the Senate, he
could admit no new God in Rome, besides, or beyond their supersticious
Idols. But as the divinity needs not, nor yet can confirm it self, by the
sole, and only approbation of man, so God here in permitted, that the Senate
should then do nothing. Yea, on the contrary rather (as sondrie good writers
have) they held them ill contented, for that Pilate had not to them hereof
written also, as he then did to the Emperor. This notwithstanding Tiberius
ordained by Proclamation, that no man should be so hardy, to touch or lay
hand, on any professed christian. Now after this Pilate arrested him in Rome,
confirmed by the deuell, as his assured servant, did never any thing justly,
in any his charge or office. Of which, accused before Caius Caligula,
successor to Tiberius, as also to have profaned the temples, and churches,
erecting unlawful Images and Idolles, and farther that he had robbed the
common coafers, and threasories, with other great crimes, and intolerable
treacheries, was banished in fine, and sent home again to Lions. Others say
to Vienna, and that he was there borne, where his intertainment was such, and
so much pleasing, that he incontinently murdered him self: which thing
assuredly chanced him, by divine, and heavenly permission, to the intent he
shamfully might dye, by the hands of him self, the most vileste and unjust
wretch in the whole world. These that hereof have written, are the above
remembered authors, Beda in his book De temporibus, and in his Ecclesiastical
history, on thactes of the Apostles Eusebius reports that he thus slew
himself, the eighth year after the death of the innocente lamb, Jesus, judged
to death, and delivered to the bloody Jews, by him. Of whose death, and
passion, this accursed devil, never sought by any means his remission, or
pardon, but paste hence in despair, to Satan his patron: for the bounty of
God is such, and so great, that though in deed he had sentensed his only
soonne to death, yet if he had repented him of that his sinful crime, the
very same whom he had condemned to the cross, had not withstandyng yet
granted him his portion in joy with Christ. Farther a lake there is, or
river, which also men call Pilate, within the territories of Sueuia,
adioynyng to Lucerna, in a certain plain, environed on all sides with high,
and great mountains, from the highest of which (as some affirm for truth) he
threw himself down, and was drouned in that water. The common opinion is,
that every year ones he makes there show of him self, in the habit of a
judge: but who so ever he be, manne, or woman, that by hap then shall see
him, dies assuredly, or the year be fully expired. For proof whereof, I
refer you to Ioachimus Vadianus, a man singulerly learned, whose commentaries
written on Pomponius Mela are extant: who also of this lake reports yet, an
other thing, no less known for true, then very strange and marvelous. He
says that this water, is of this nature or property, that who so casts
into it, either a stone, clotte of earth a piece of wood, or any other the
semblable, this water forthwith so rages, and rolleth with such violente, and
te^pestious impetuositie, that it passes his bands, drouneth and annoieth the
whole country about it: whence the inhabitauntes are often times indomaged,
in their corn, fruits, trees, and cattle. And again that which most
strange is, if these things be not thrown in willingly, and of pretensed
purpose, but by hap, or fortune, as least though one do slide in, it then
neither alters, nor rages in any kind of manner. Further also says this
foresaied Ioachiamus, a Swiser borne, that there are laws, and constitutions,
forbiddyng all men, under pain of death, to cast, or conueigh any thing, into
the said lake: and that diverse have been executed, for infringyng this
ordinance. Which whither it be natural, or miraculous, I durst not affirm,
although waters have strange, and marvelous proprieties. For some of which
it should not, be hard to yield good reason, but for others difficill, or
rather I judge, impossible. The semblable unto this, recites Pliny, saying
that there is in Dalmacia, a very deep dark dungion, or den, into which
if any throw, any stone, or weighty matter, there issues thence immediately
such a violente, or blusteryng air, or rather if I so might say, a whirlyng
wind, that it tourneth into a dangerous tempest, greuyng, and annoiyng all
the inhabitauntes of that country. It may be, which I dare not to affirm,
that the body of Pilate was thrown into that hole, and that the devil there,
by divine permission, to his everlasting shame and ignomine, executes these
strange, and incredible effects.

In what degrees, and at what age a man and woman should marry. Chap. 3.
THe ancient Philosophers moral, were of sondrie opinions, touching thage in
which man, should marry him self to a woman, to the intent that the years of
the one, might answer in proportion unto the others, Aristotle, groundyng
here on, so may it be, that women both naturally conceive, and bear children,
even until the si^tieth year ended of their age, and that man is also able in
his kind, until the seuenteth expleate, said that they orderly should marry
at such time, as both parties might leave together, unprofitable, and unable
in thacte of generation, in such sort that by the rule, or prescription of
the Philosopher, man should have about twenty years more then his wife.
Hesiodus an Xenophon, grant him yet some thing less, supposyng it sufficient,
that a man of thirty years, take a wife at fowertene. Licurgus law geuer to
the Lacedemoniens, conformeth hymfelf to the opinion, and censure of Aristotle:
for generally he forbadde marriage unto all men, before they had past the seven
and thirty year, but unto women the seuententh only. This Lycurgns his law
was approved of many, for that in her more perfect, and more ripe age, she
more easily acquainteth her self, with ye manners and behavior of him, that is
given her for housebande. For as writes Aristotle in his Economiques, the
disparitie of manners, and difference in conditions, let perfect love betwixt
the parties coupled: and yet neither approve I this ordinance of Aristotle,
which wills that man should have twenty years more then woman (without
offense, or prejudice be it meant, unto so worthy a personage) my reason is
this, that man being fully sixty years old, although he yet then can do
some thing, in the act of generation, most commonly if he live longer, in the
residue of his life, he is charged with infinite, and daily increase of
maladies, so that before his wife aspire to the age of forty, he to her shall
be a great charge, and weary pain, in place of a friend, a patron, and a
housbande. Wherefore when there is less difference in their ages, they are in
like manner mortified as it were at one time, their minds and intentes are also
more conformable, then when there is so great inequality of years Neither do
I here say that man, should not at all be elder, but rather that the space of
eight, or ten years might suffice, so that the man at the age of twenty five,
might choose to him a wife, at sixtene, or seuentene years, having some respect
to the course, or order of man's life. Also let man take to wife, a woman
young, a maid, of perfect, and good complexion, not old, no widow, framed
to the manners, and humor of an other: for assuredly in their tender youth,
they are flexible, and bendyng, to what so man would have them* obedient, and
subject still to his will, and pleasure. To which purpose we may remember
here, thexample of Timotheus, on the Flut, of all others, most excellent and
cunnyng, which for honest stipende, imperted of his skill, to such as would
learn of him. This Timotheus, before he would begin with any (whatsoever) his
scholar, he usually demanded if that he could play any thing, for of those,
yt had some manner of beginning, he evermore received double wage or salerie:
his reason was, for that his pain was also double, first to make them forget,
and forgo, their first corrupt, and disordered use in play, and then a fresh
to instruct them, according to his skillful loare. Which observation of his,
well serves us for widows, which are all ready trained to the perverse
appetite some time, and fond fantasy of others, and therefore hard to be
drawn back, from the wonted, and strange devises, of their first friend,
or housebande. For which cause I prefer, the marriage of a maid, before that
of a widow besides the singular affection, and assured remembrance, which
commonly lies rooted in the hearts of women, toward these, with who^ they
first of all were acquainted. Concerning the parentaige, or riches of the wife,
a certain young man, a Greek borne, came on a time to Pitacus, one of the
seven sages of Greece, requestyng his advise, in his affairs of marriage. One
offered me says he, my choice of two young maids, the one throughout mine
equal, in substance, and in birthe, the other far surpasses me in
worship, and in gooddes, what shall I do here in, which shall I choose to
wife? To whom Pitacus answered, see thou yonder children, that practice them
selves at wastreles, go offer thy self to play emo^gest them, and they shall
give thee good counsel, which he did, and as he approached, and offered
himself for one, they perceiuyng that both in force, and in stature of body,
he paste them, refused his company, saying: that every man should betake him
to his fellow, and equal. Whence he well, knew for wife, who^ he should take
in marriage. Plutarche in his treatise, of thinstructio^, or brin gyng up of
children, wills that manne marry not his son, to a wife either more rich,
or of better family then he, saying, that who so alieth himself, to his
superiors, and betters, in place of frie^des and alies, he finds none but
masters. And farther if a rich woman, shall choose a housebande poor, pride
immediately possesses her, and mistres must she be, and sowryng a lought
continually with proud checkes will she serve him. And farther, Menander
says, that who so being poor, and takes to wife a woman rich, makes a
plain gift of himself to the woman, which he espouseth, and not she unto
him. Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians ordained a Law, that no man with his
daughter, should give any kind of dowry, to the intent they travailed,
t'indowe themselves with virtue, for that cause and none other, to be desired
in marriage. Although this law might seem now rigorous to some, yet assuredly
was it both honorable, and necessary, for being ones well observed in one,
it likely also was, thai it should be in an other: as for example, if the
father in marriage of his wife, was of no part inrichte, neither in gooddes,
nor in money, he then the less to his daughter, was bound to impart with any
thing. Whence it lies evident, that who so at any time, enters into the
sacred laws of wedlock, should have if he well do, no consideration at all
of riches. But what? much time should I lose, if I attempted to persuade here,
for that all men are soiled in this loathsome abuse, wiueuyng for none other
cause, but for pelf only. Yet say I, notwithstanding, that when a rich man
marries, he should not consider of the wealth, or substance of the wife, but
of her assured virtue, and modesty, borowing fit example of Alexander the
great (who though he were so famous, that all the world spoke of him) took
yet to wife Bersina, the daughter of Arbasus, not rich, or glitteryng, but
virtuous only, and descended of noble parentage: and yet in these days, who
so most has, most busily hunteth, and hungereth this dross. Hence comes
this often mislikyng in marriage, for having withdrawe^ the money, that
covers, for the most part, all kind of vices, they incontinently lie open,
more then manifest unto all men, which first we would not see blinded, with
detestable avarice, or at least seeing the^ would dissemble it, as guilefull
doublers. Neither here mislike I, that man in race like, or in like family,
seek to him the best, or most fittyng to his apetite: as on the other side, I
think it both ignominious, and dishonorable, to match in baser state, for
the only love, and desire of money. It needs not that I herein long dwell,
for the earth it self in this case, scholeth us sufficiently: bestow who so
please, seed fine and delicate, in a roughe soil, less pleasant, and
unlabored, and he shall reap there of fruit, little dainty, and unsavory,
yea, though it spring of a seed, as is before said, very delicate: and on the
other side, who so bestows his seed less sauerie, in a soil fat, and
fertile, that which he thence repeth shall be sweet, and delicate. Besides, if
we do our careful pain, for the better prouition, of a good breed, or race
of horses, how much the more should we then be circumspecte, concerning our
children, our successors, and posterity? In my fantasy, that man makes
small account of himself, and evil satisfies that obligation, where unto he
is borne, if he leave not his child, of as honorable a lineage, as himself
received, by dissente from his father, which is impossible, if he take wife,
of wourse estate, or meaner condition, then himself. Farther, if he account of
honor, or have it in reputation, he thence heapeth to his children more ample
possessions, and greater dignity, then himself at the first, received from
his father. How great is man's debte then, and what should his care be, to
leave his children of no imbased race, but rather to better it, if it be
possible, to the intent his posterity, find no cause to complain them of.
Paulus Emilius records, that Manestias an Athenian, soonne of Iphicrates, a
most renoumed, and famous captain, whose mother was of base, and vile
condition, which notwithstanding Iphicrates had espoused, was demanded, whom
he best loved his father, or his mother, who answered, his mother, where at
they meruailyng, demanded again why: for that my father, said he, with small
regard begatte me, of part a Thracian, and soonne of a poor mother: but she
on the other side, has borne me, of part an Athenian, the son, and heir of
an excellent captain. Concerning the beauty of women, leauyng to speak of
those, that counsel us to refuse, both the fair, and the foul, prefarryng
only those, whom mediocritie commends: my advise is, that man choose evermore
the best, that he possible may find, the fairest I mean, and of cleareste
complexion, so that she be virtuous, as we before have said: otherwise, wish
I, that he choose the hardeste favored, chaste with all, and honest, rather
then the faireste, of leude, and light demainure. My reason is, that we
should always prefer the faireste, if for none other, yet for generation,
and cause of the posterity only, to the intent our children, be such as we
would wish, of most perfect, I mean, and amiable complexion. Virgil
remembers, that the gods Juno, desirous to gratify her beloved Eodus,
promised to give him one of her faireste Nymphs, to the end she should bear
him, children in beauty, resemblyng her self. We read again, that
Archiadamus king of the Athenians, was condemned in a pecuniall pain, for that
he had married a wife of small stature, his counsaille hardly chargyng him,
that he mente to leave the race royal, of little, thin, wretched, and
impotente bodies, as if they were but half men. To conclude, therefore, what so
is, in any place above remembered, mine advise is, that it be taken, as
counsel, and no commandment, which you may execute at your pleasures,
without danger, or difficulty, as also without all exception of persons. For
Matrimony contracted, with the harder favored, is as holy as that other,
with the most faireste, as good with the poorest, as also with the rich, with
the widdowe also, as with the maid, or virgin, for that every of them is
lawful, verteous, and honest, groundyng on love, which in greateste
differentes, and cases of inequality, woorketh ever more a perfect
conformity, and union.

Of the cordial and hearty love, that should be in maerriage, with diverse
examples seruyng to that purpose. Chap. 4.
THE mutual love, and affection, betwixt man and his wife, both is, and ought
to be, for just cause commended, for that marriage of it self, is a thing so
excellent, as well for respect of him, which first did institute it, God,
with the place also, of that institution, Paradis, as also that thence
proceeds, the only propagation, and continuance of mankind, with remedy
sufficient against all sensual appetites, and concupiscencie of the flesh.
All other amities incident in man's life, with whom, or in what sort, so ever
they happen, are loves improper, and affections less perfect* in respect of
this so holy* and divine. This is that same, that ioineth both body and soul
together, this is that, that is confirmed, and sealed unto us, by a sacred
miracle, neither is there any thing betwixt the married, in particularitie
proper, for that betwixt the honest couple, the body, and will is one, that
which never happens in any other kind of amity, which for small cause
oftentimes is dissolved and broken: and that also which worste is, the most
assuredste of these affections, continues but for a time, for gain, or
advantage: for proof whereof, we rarely have heard of any, that without
change, have still held on, and never broken until death. For so dainty,
and obnoxious, to all chaunges is man's mind, that commonly we see new
friends, to remove, and dispossess, for little cause, the old: but that love
holds still, which is betwixt man, and his wife, neither may it be sundred
by any adverse fortune, by infirmity, poverty, mishappe, or change of
beauty, only death has power, to cut this knotte in sunder. Some times it
also lives, and continues after death, as we have seen in certain widows,
of which we could remember infinite examples, amongst whom above all others,
we may consider of the mutual love, or affection, betwixt our first parents
Eve, and Adam, unto whom the fruit of life, under pain of death was
prohibited. Adam notwithstanding, to gratify his wife, refused not to hassarde
himself by breach of that commandment. When Paulina the wife of the sage
and learned Seneca of Cordoua, understood that cruel Nero had done to death
her husband, who by openyng all his veins in a bathe, gave up his spirit,
would not only dye, to accompany him by death, but also did choose to end her
smart, by the said manner of tormente, for more better accomplishemente whereof,
the did her self to be prickte, as did before her, Seneca. Whereof Nero, with
speed advertised, and knowing that it proceeded of assured love only, caused
her with great diligence, to be saved from the danger of death: for being
even then on the poincte of passage, he caused her veins skilfully to be
bound, carefully attendyng on her, that she to her self, did none other kind
of violence: by means whereof, this chaste and verteous matrone, paste the
rest of her life in great pain, and misery, pay, and coulerlesse, in sign
of loiall love, that she bear to her husband. In the life of the Emperors,
we also read, that Lucius Vitellius, brother to the Emperor Vitellius, being
on a night, in a perilous battle, his wife, which hight Triata, by the
great, and inspeakable force of love only, came thrustyng in among the
souldiars, to aid, and assiste Vitellius, mindyng in that strait, to live, or
dye with him, where she then so did her painful endeavor, that she utterly
forgatte all feminine debilitie, with small account of her life, or safety,
without her husband. Q. Curtius recites, that the king of Aira, vanquished by
Alexander, spoiled, and deprived of a great part of his realm, patiently
bare it, with a valiant, and manly courage, without any show of pain, or
anguishe, but when news was brought him, that his wife was dedde, in token
that he more loved her, then he did his kingdom, brake out into tears, and
wept very bitterly. Ouide, Iuuenal, and Marcial with others, affirm that the
wife of king Ad^etus, chose willyngly to dye, to save her sick and diseased
husband, for having received answer from thoracle, that the king should
live, if any of his dearest friends, would vouchsafe to dye for him.
Notwithstanding, for the little credit, that men commonly give to Poets, I
had hereof said no thing, had not saint Hierome himself recoumpted it.
Pliny the younger, in a letter of his writes, that a certain Fisher, being
sick of an incurable disease, or malady, by means whereof, he daiely endured
such torments, and pains, as was almost impossible, for man to sustain,
where at his wife moved with marvelous compassion, as she, that intierly, and
heartily loved him, seeing no hope of health, or recovery, nor any where could
find any kind of remedy, having sought it every where, to the vttermoste of
her power, persuaded with her husband, by death to make an end of these
gripyng pains saying: sith that to death at some other time, of necessity
you ^ste yield, preuente her coming, to end there by, this insupportable
anguishe. To which her advise, this poor wretch accorded: wherefore, passing
forth both to the top of an high rock, this woman there bound her self
very fast to her housebande, whence castyng them selves down, where
dismembered together. Baptista Fulgosius the like history reme^breth, of a
poor labourer, or housebande man of Naples, which walkyng with his wife, upon
the sands, or sea coast, but she, for some her affairs, for slowyng her pace,
was immediately apprehended, by a small skiffe of Moors, which thing her
housebande, when he ones had perceived, began to screche, and torment himself
lamentably, and in fine took the water, swimmyng after the boat, with most
doleful tears, criyng still on the Mariners, to take him also, sith they
had his wife away with them, for prisoner, so was he in the end, to them also
received, not without less marvel of the Moors, then tears of his wife.
Shortly after this, within few days landed, they both were presented unto the
king of Thunnis, who understanding of all things, as they truly had happened,
was moved to compassion, and granted them perdon. To witness of the good mind,
that Artemisia bare to Mausolus, we only must not consider, of that famous
Sepulcher, which she to him builte, and called Mausoleum, which also this
day, for the sumpteous, and curious work thereof, is accounted, not the
least of the seven wounders of the world, but also of others, her honest
deserts toward him. The singular affection also, of Tiberius Gracchus,
toward his wife, is then the others, no less strange, or marvelous, whose
history, though it be common, read in Valerius Maximus, yet in few to touch
it, shall not be superfluous: he therefore, on a time findyng, two Serpents
in his bed chamber, straungely amassed at so l^thesome a sight, demanded of
the augurers, or sothsaiers, what it might portende, to whom was answered,
that of necessity he must kill one, but if the male, then himself should
first dye most assuredly before his wife, but if the female, then contrary
wise, his wife before him: he then that better loved his wife, then himself,
made perfect demonstration, of his loiall affection, for he rather did choose to
dye first himself, then to see his wife to dye before him, and so in killyng
the male serpent, made change of life forthwith, as is above remembered,
leauyng his wife after him a widdowe, for some other. But here a man may for
just cause doubt, whether she were more happy, that had such a housebande,
or more unhappy in deed, that so infortunately lost him. Hard were it to
say, which of these two followyng, should be argument of greatest love: to
wete, whether that woman, which willyngly, would have dooen her self most
painfully to dye, only for the grief, conceived of her housebandes death: on
the other side or she, that continually so mourned, that by languishyng pain,
and tears, with sorrow to death consumed. Concerning the first, for that
part, already some thing above is said: as touching the second, a notable
example find we, of a famous gentlewoman, of Iulia to wete, the daughter of
Julius Caesar, wife also to that valiant, and renoumed captain Pompie, to
whom one presentyng a certain robe of her housbandes, all stained, and soiled,
with the blood of one freashely wounded, supposyng incontinentely her
housebande, traitorously to have been murdered, before she could have time,
there of more to understand, she suddenly so altered, with sorrow, and
displeasure, that she became straight senseless, deprived of her feelyng,
delivered also (wherewith she then went quick) of an abortiue, and so
forthwith made change, of this uncertain life. By whose death, that general
peace. which by her means only, was then continued, almost throughout the
whole world, was changed into war, and bloody hostility, principally, and
first, bet wixte Caesar, and Pompie. The chaste loialtie of Lucretia, was such
toward her housbande, so well known, and so notorious, that super^luous were
it to speak of it, for unkindly abused by force of an unchaste lecherer, s^ue
her self in the presence of diverse worthy personages. The marvelous love
also, of the wife of Fernandus Goncales, an Earl or Count, is no less in my
judgment commendable, then was also her policy, by which she deceived the
king, and well delivered the country: for she in stature, not much unlike to
her housebande, did on her his apparel, arrestyng still in prison, and he
attired as woman, paste for the by her advice, fled thence, and escaped the
angry wrath of the prince. Here might I longer dwell, with infinite examples,
which I leave to remember, not mindyng to be tedious, which although the
laws of God forbid, that we do no murder, are notwithstanding, worthy of
perpetual memory, especially being executed, of Panimes, and Gentiles, which
had no kind of feelyng in Godslawes, and ordinances.

Of the strange customs observed by our elders in marriage. Chap. 5.
Marriage is contracted by the sole and only consent of man, and woman: but to
the end this consent may the better be authorized, it is farther requisite,
that it be manifested by certain exterior signs, and words, for that GOD
only knows, and searches man's heart. Whence it comes, that men, in this
case, have instituted sundry ceremonious, and solemn ordenances. Concerning
these, this day in ure among the Christians, they are evident, and known
sufficientlye unto all men: Wherefore I will pain my self presently to
speak, of certain ancient customs, practiced as well in sundry barbarous
countries, as also among the old Romans them selves, especially in their
Esponsalles and Marriages, of which (so may it be) the diversity may lend
some contentment to the reader. The ancient Romans as writes Cicero married
them selves in two sorts, lottyng unto them two diverse kinds of wives,
according to the diversity of their matrimonial ceremonies. The one was more
common, and called her self matrone, the other more proper, and was named
mother of the family. As touching the latter sort, it may easelie be thought
that they so married them selves, as do in manner all Christians in our
days. For the husband would demand of his wife, whether she would be
mother, and ruler of his family, and she aunsweryng yea, would in case
semblable also ask him whether he mente to be father of her family again,
to whom if he gave affirmative answer, then should they take each other by
the hand immediately, in token of assured faith, and amity, and this contract
was reputed for most perfect and excellent. By which means the wife so gained
such place in the husbands house, as otherwise she should have had, had
she been his own sister, for that she now came as by adoption, to be of the
said line, and as true daughter to her father in law, came to the
inheritance at that instante with her husband. This gathers Boecius at
large, writing on the second of the Topiques of Cicero. The other ceremony
was much more common, and therefore they were not reputed for mothers of the
family, though they otherwise weere honored by the name of matrones. Farther
the Romans had again this custom, that when they first brought the young
wife to her husbands house, she arrested her with out at the door or gates,
as one that might not enter before she weere drawn in, there at by force,
geuyng the world thereby to understand, that they by constraint, and not
willynglie came thither, where they should loose their maidenhoode, or
virginity, and afterward when they would give the maid, to her husband she
sat her down (such was the usage) in her mothers lap, whence the husband
again drew her, the second time by force, the maid imbrasing her mother, as
hard as she might possibly: which they chifely did in memory of that, that
some times the Romans had in manner sembleable taken, the Sabine maids out
of the arms of their mothers, by means where of Rome came in short time to be
well peopled. Yet again after these, before he might bed her, the maid
presented at one time both fire and water unto him, which they did to
signify as has Plutarche and Lactantius, by these two elements the secret
of generation, for that they be the principal causes generatiue, in all kind
of things natural. Others affirm for this cause, that the maid thereby
should promise sincerity in heart, and loyalty in behavior, for the water
naturally purges all ordure and immundicitie, and fire fineth and tries all
manner of metalles, sunderyng and partyng the purer from the gross. Farther
they supposed all marriages unfortunate contracted in the month of May, and
that for certain fond vanities, and superstitious imaginations, without
ground or reason, and therefore remenbred of no man. Of these things we read
more largely in Ouide and Plutarche. Ovid. in fastis. Plaut. in problematis.
An other custom was this, that when the wife first entered into her husbands
house, the husband should utter with a hawte voice these two words, Caia
Cecilia, and she in manner semblable must answer him, Caio Cecilio, which
they used, for that in the time of Tarquinius Priscus King of the Romans,
there was a damsel in Rome chaste, discreet, sober, gentle and wise, adorned
besides with all other virtues, rare in the feminine kind, which had to name
Caia Cecilia, but before she came to Rome called her felfe Tanaquila: for Caia
Cecilia. Tanaquila.
which cause the young man pronounced these words, to mind his wife to
immitate the other. There was also carried usually before the maid, the
first day that she came to dwell in her husbands house, a Distaffe charged
with Flax, and a Spindle hangyng at it, to the intent she might be mindful
to leave by her labor. Hereof writes Pliny, to whom I refer him that more
Pliny lib. 8. Cap. 40.
herein desires. Besides all these an other thing was yet practiced by the
Romans, which was, when any espoused, or took to wife a Widow, the
marriage was solemnized evermore in a holy day, but if a maid, then
contrariwise continually on a work day. And this Macrobius and Plutarche
record at large, and again says Plutarche all such solemnizations finished
on festival days, were of purpose only don in such times, to the intent
that all the people then occupied in plays, and pleasures, might not
understand of these second marriages of Widows: but maids contrariwise were
married ordinarily on labourynge days, to such effect that the whole world
might witness of such matches. Macrobius also says, that therefore unto
maids on these days such solemnities weere prohibited for that, as is above
said, they used a certain ceremony to take the bride by force out from the
mothers lap, which to do on the saboth, or holy day, was a thing unlawful.
I leave here to speak of other ceremonial solemnities, ordinarily practiced
among the old ancient Romans, some thing to speak now in this place of
the Babilonians, which in this sort following, gave in marriage their
daughters. In one appointed day continually in the year, they ordered in
public place all the young maidens marigeable in each City, where the fairest
and most beautiful, were not married with any money, that their fathers, or
other friends, should at that time bestow on them, but unto such, as would
most largely and most frankelie disburse for them, which order they healde
in them that were next fair, without respect of degree, or lineage orderly
descending from degree unto degree, until they also came to the less fair or
hard favored, which they also bestowed on those, that were contented to take
least sums of money with them, which evermore was taken of that, which was
given for the fairest, so that in fine the latter sort, was as well married as
the first, without any kind of charge or cost to their pare^tes, these only
enricht, or domaged that pleased to take them. Marcus Antonius Sabellicus
writes, that the Venetians in old time used also this order: here must you
notwithstanding, in this place consider, that all those that were of
indifferent beauty, neither to be esteemed fair, or ill feutered, were neither
bought, nor sold, but at even hand delivered. Long since in France, to the
intent their daughters should never justly complain them, that they against
their will or likyng were married, they accustomed, when the father meant to
marie his daughter, to make a solemn or dainty bankette, unto which the
father would inuit a great many of young men of semblable parentage, and
degree unto himself, of which all placed there at table together, the father
grants free liberty of choice to his daughter, who to make show of him,
that in that company best pleased her, presented unto him in presence of
thothers, a basin of water to wash after his diner. In a certain town of
Africa called Leptina, the Leptina.
manner was, that the first day that the bride should come to her husebandes
house, before she came, she should send unto her mother in law, desiryng her
to lend her, as having need thereof, an earthen pot, which should refuce,
with sharp words, to do her that little courtisie, to the intent only that
from the first day, she might begin to acquainte her self with the
importunities of her mother, and by this hard, and unkind refusal, learn to
supporte what so after might follow. Among the Mesl^gites, they ordained that
each man should have Messagites.
his wife, and yet every woman besides, was common to them all, and all their
wives again in manner sembleable were not denied to any man. Eusebius writes,
that the ancient Brytons, lived in like sort scarce different in any thing.
The Arabians, those only I mean Britous. Arabians.
of Arabia foelix, had a law, or rather an usage, that the woman that married
her self, should forthwith be as free, to all her husebandes kinsemen, as to
her huseband, who^ she only had espoused: and as Strabo recoumpteth, when
any of them went to use, or have her company, he should hang up at the
door or gate a certain ring, to the intent that if any other in the mean
time should come, he by the said Ring should know, that the place was
possessed, and therefore was unlawful at that time to enter: and farther again
they had this respect also, that who so hardened himself to seek
thacquaintaunce of any woman, were he not of the said race or alied unto the
others, he should furthwith be dooen to die for it, without longer let or
stay. But it chanced on a time, a woman very fair, and of perfect
complexion, was above the rest very buselie sought on, only by the alies, I
mean of her husebande, by mean whereof, and of such busy importunity, she
fastneth a Ring at her gate her self to the intent that who so among them at
any time came thither, should suppose that there was some other with in with
her, which her honest gyle stood her in good stead certain days, the ryng
still hangyng at the gate without, till on a time all the kinsemen of the
husband meetyng together, one among the rest determined to visit her, who
findyng the sign up, as though there had been some mau there, and
rememebryng that he had left them all before together, immagined that she had
gotten some new and strange adulterer, wherefore he goes, and immediately
thereof advertised the others, which all together with the husebande
approachyng, found her contrary to their expectation void of company and
alone, which in their presence confessed the cause why she had done it. Which
her intention considered of, and found grounded on virtue, eschuyng the less
chaste acquaintance of so great a number of riuals, and further desirous to
live a more co^tinent life, though contrary to the brutal usage, and manner of
the country, having by their assent here in some reason, was rather well
thought of, then of any part discommended.

Of the excellency of paintyng. Chapt. 6.
THere has been, both among the Romans, and Greeks, most excellent men, in
the skill of Paintyng. And although also in our age, there have been deuers,
singulerly well practiced, and learned in this art: yet suppose I the^ far
to be inferiors, to these of the old time, and fore passed ages, considering
what we read of their fined labors. As for example, of the two tables
finished by Aristides, a painter of his time renoumed, and famous, which as
records Pliny, were boughte by Julius Caesar, for no less price then four
score talentes, only to dedicate them to the goddess Venus. And assuredly
though Caesar were a very rich prince, yet was this price excessive, and
great, considering that the talent, as well by the account of Budeus, as also
of some others, curious in this matter, counterpoyseth six hundred French
crounes, now current: so that Caesar, by this valuation, paid for these two
tables 48000. Crounes of good and lawful money. It also is written by the
said Pliny, that Attalus king of the less Asia, disbursed fully an hundred
talentes, which value, by the first account. 60000. Crounes, for one only
table painted by the above said Aristides. We may in this place then safely
presume, that according to the increase, or decrease, of Prices, the
excellency of these sciences grew also, or deminished. Brife in those days
paintyng was so much honored, that it was reputed in number of the liberal
sciences. Pliny ^aieth that the Greeks in such sort accounted of it, that
it was not lawful for any their servants to learn it: only the Noble
men only admitted to painting
soonnes of great estates, and honorable personages were permitted to
exercise theimselues, in this practice. So grew this skill then to be famous,
and worthy, and not altogether assuredly without cause, for that who so
therein affects to be excellent, of necessity must be learned in many
other matters. Geometry to him is requisite to understand his perspectiues:
also he should be learned in the other arts and scieuces, with an absolute
knowledge in infinite other things, the more perfectly to order and observe
his proportions, with an assured consideration of the nature of al things, as
shall be to the beauty of his work, decent and necessary, throughout to be
skilled as a Poet in all things, for that paintyng is nothing else, but a
dead or dumme poeste. Besides this, his lineamentes, and proportions must be
such, that the eye it self miss and fail therein, in judgment, as we
read it some times happened to Zeuxis and Parrasus, both excellent painters,
concerning the outward show, or appearaunce of their work. By Zeuxis and
Parrasus.
mean whereof they accorded willingly together, that every of them should
frame the finest piece he could, to thentent that who so wonde then the price,
by common judgment, should be reputed of the other, for most perfect and
absolute. Zeuxis then presents a perfect piece, a table, in which he had
with such skill, and so artificially depainted certain bounches, or clusters
of Grapes to the quick, that certain Sparrowes espiyng it, and supposing they
had been grapes, arrested them to beak thereon, or preie, as is their usage,
which thing appeared merueilous and strange in all men's iudgmente. Parrasus on
the other side presented eake a table, on which, with such perfection he
wrought had then a Curtain, that being brought to Zeuxis, to judge or to
consider of, (now drouned almost in pride, for that he had the poor and
senlis birds deceived) demed it to be, that which in deed it was not,
stretchyng forth his hand to have withdrawn the Curtain, as though some
thing had been close hid, or wrought there under, said with loud voice that
some man should take away the Curtain. But afterward perueiuyng that foulie
he had failed, gave sentence without more that Parrasus was his better,
considering he had deceived him that was master of his science, which was in
deed much more, then by some gylefull show, to draw or to delude the poor
and foolish birdde. An other time this Zeuxis, in like table also depainted a
young boy or child, having in his hands a dish well charged with Grapes, with
so much art in deed, so well and finely fashioned, that the birddes again as
before, came fleeyng to beak thereon, whereat Zeuxis as all foreraged, greuing
and misliking with that his own work said, if that with equal skill I had
depainted also the boy, the birddes with fear would then have held the^ all
a loofe, neither would they have been so bold to approach so nigh the boy.
Pliny which records these things affirms, that Zeuxis was a man of great
wealth in his time, for what soever he wrought, he never sold it, but for
price excessive, reputyng his devises to be of such excellency, that if he
sold them not at his own pleasure, he rather would give them, then take but
little for them, and farther would say that no money (if he should in deed
esteem of his doings, according to their perfection) were able, in what
quantity so ever, justly to value them. This Zeuxis with such perfection
depainted Penelope, that himself therein, besides others, had most perfect
likyng, by means whereof, he subscribed these few words, commended of all
men: more easy shall it be, to all such as shall behold this, unkindly to
envy it, then with filed hand learnedlie to follow it. He besides these did
many other things, so perfect, so absolute, and in such sort estimed, that
Pliny reports, that even until his time, there was reserved of his doing, a
draught of Helena in Rome, as also some other things most curiously
depainted: and yet was there, as has Eusebius, from the time of his death,
till Pliny afterward was, and did these things to writing, by just account,
five hundred and eight years. The Agrigentines became suitors unto him, to frame
the^ some skillful purtratie, which they might offer unto their Goddess Juno,
but he to them accorded nothing, before (by his commandment) they had
presented unto him a great number of naked maids, of rare and comely
beauty, out of which he chose five, which among the rest he deemed to be
fairest, and best feutered: who taking from every of these, that which in
them best liked him, he finished this excellent, and this fore desired piece.
Of Parrasus his competitor, strange matters also find we: Strabo writes,
that among sundry other things, Strabo in his 14. book.
he fashioned in the I^le of Rhodes, a Satyr standing fast by a certain
Column or Pillar, on the highest part of which, he had depainted a Partridge:
but although this Column, and Satyr were absolutely done, yet this Partridge
so far surpaste them in perfection, that in the judgment of all men she
seemed to have life, so that without regard of the other part of the table,
each man was amassed at the excellency of the bird, whose perfection in deed
was such and so absolute, that they placing before the said table certain
tame Partridges (as presently we may in cages very easelie keep them) began
to call, and offered to fly to him, being as is above said, only painted. By
mean whereof Parrasus besought the Magistrates of Rhodes, that he might with
their license deface and remove him, considering it stained the beauty of the
other parts of the table, which were assuredly most famous and excellent.
Pliny also writes of him matters strange, and merueilous, affirming that
some of his works were also fonnde in Rome. And farther adds that among
others, sundry his perfections, he had a subtle or secret kind of practice,
besides his open and seemly proportions, whereby he gave men, plainly to
understand the nature or conditions, of what soever he depainted, as is
written, he did in the Idol of the Atheniens: which in such order and manner he
handled, that besides the rare beauty, and excellency of the subject, each
man might see the ordenaunces, manners, and customs of the Atheniens: who as he
was assuredly a prince in that his art, so was he in all other things of a
most sharp and fined wit, neither in drawyng his lines, or proportions was
he bolder, then he was pleasant, with all men, merry and well disposed. Whence
he often times would say that paintyng had well schooled him, in the perfect
loare and usage of wisdom, and knowledge But being entered, into the
consideration of this matter, it shall not be besides the purpose, some thing
to speak in few of Apelles, Prince and master of all other Painters, as also
some what of Protogines, singular Apelles. Protogines.
also, and excellent in this art.

Of that excellent Painter Apelles, as also of Protogenes an other in his time.
Chap. 7.
THat of one, and of the said subject, we have here presently written two
chapiters, is though for some others, yet chiefly for two causes: the one, for
that the length, and continued prorsis, wearieth commonly, whatsoever the
reader, which some times before they come to the end, forgette what they
read at the first, or beginning: the other, for the dignity of him, of whom
our pen shall speak here presently, well deserves, or meriteth his chapter
a part, to the intent, it may the better be considered of the readers. This
then is Apelles in the skill of Paintyng, the only Phoenix, and mercour of all
others. He had to master one Panphilus, Pamphilus Apelles his master.
very excellent in his science, who never took scholar by the year, for less
price, then for one whole talente Attique, valuyng by our account, six
hundred cro^nes sterlyng. In the time of this Apelles, Protogines also lived,
in this art most famous, such both, and so perfect in their profession,
that hardly men knew, which merited higheste commendation. By mean whereof,
Apelles advertised of his excellency, determined on a time, to go, to visit
him, and happily in few days arriuyng at Rhodes, where at that time
Protogines dwelt, dissimulyng, that he was driven thither, by adverse wind and
weather, and entering at the gates, or house of Protogines, found him not,
whom he sought, then presently at home, and having demanded, where he might
be, of an old woman that kept the house, took leave to depart about other his
affairs, but this old woman said, whom shall I say you are, that have
sought here Protogines? Apelles straight taking in hand a pinselle, which he
there found, tournyng to her, said, thou shall say to Protogines, that he,
that drew this line here, would gladly have spoken with him, and in vttryng
these words, framed there so curious a line, so straighte, and so well
proportioned that it well argued what he was, that with learned hand had drawn
it. Now after this, Protogines immediately retournyng, advertised of all
things, as is before said, who after he had advised him self, of this
skillful line, said, that besides Apelles, no man that lived, could do it:
and so incontinently takes in hand an other pinselle, and with a contrary
color, upon Apelles his line, draws then the second, so fine and so well
fashioned, that besides him self, none could, by common judgment do it,
commanding forthwith his woman, that if he by hap returned, that she should
show him that line, as also farther learn him, that Protogines had done it,
whom he so much desired. Apelles then retournyng, the other being for the, the
old woman, as she received in commandment of her master, presents
forthwith to him, this second line, to consider of. Where at, as all amassed, at
the great advantage, that Protogines had gained, took in hand again, the
second time the pinselle, and sondereth in the middle Protogines his line
again, which hardly might be seen, so small it was and subtle, but with the
third color, Apelles notwithstanding, in such extreme perfection, parts
both the others, that for the fowerth he leaves, no kind of place in the
world. Protogines then retournyng, and seeing what had chanced, confeste the
truth, Apelles to be in deed his better, and runs all about, with
painful care to seek him, to the only intent, he might do him convenient
honor, lodgyng him in his house with him, and with none other. After this,
this table with these three lines only, was brought unto Rome, where it long
was kept, reputed for a miracle, until the reign of Caesar, when as by
sudden fire, with great sorrow, it was among other things consumed. Apelles
when he had nigh perfected any work, he usually would set it in open
street to the vien, himself close hid behind it, to listen, and to epsy, if
any man with reason, therein reproved any thing, acquaintyng him self with the
judgment, and censure of the people. Now on a time it chanced, that a Shoe
maker should pass that way, who highly commendyng the resude of the work,
found some little fault in the latchette of a shoe: by mean whereof Apelles
upon the said table, writes forthwith these few words, or sentence,
Apelles has dooen this, but yet has not done it, giuyng all others thereby to
understand, that he not yet accounted it, or perfect, or absolute. He lived
in the time of Alexander the great, of whose grace, and favor, in such sort
he was assured, that Alexander commanded by edicte, or proclamation, that none
should be so hardy to draw, or depainte his purtraite, but only Apelles,
among so many others. Farther he eftsoon would go visit him, when he was
workyng in his shop alone, which argues the great reverence, and estimation
of that science, as also that Apelles surpassed every other. Besides this, lo
an other, a rare show of his friendship, for Apelles at his commau^demente,
having drawn to the quick, and curiously proportioned, one of his fairest,
and best boloued concubines, which had to name Campaspa, who was in deed
Campaspa a concubine of Alexanders.
so fair, so perfect, and so well feautered, that this poor Painter, now
became of her enamoureb: which thing, as soon as Alexander ones perfectly
understood, determined to leave her, as in deed he did, giving her for wife
now, to his sure afflicted, and tormented friend Apelles. Which thing might
well be regestred, among his most famous victories, for that subduyng his own
proper affections (which is of all others the best, and happieste conqueste)
he contented himself to forgo her, bestoweyng her on an other. Some report
that afterward, upon the said purtraite of Campaspa, he with excellent skill
depainted ye figure also of Venus. He could so artificially counterfaicte to
the quick, that on a time Ptolomie, as well one of Alexanders successors, as
also king of Egipte (after whose death, he lived still in Ptolomies
indignation) ordained a great, a rich, and a solemn banquet unto the which,
in plain derision, and mockery, Apelles was invited a geast in the kings
name, whom, when the king espied, in great ire, and disdain, demanded whose
geaste he was, and who had called him thither: which when he understood, he
took in hand a cole, and without any answer, suddenly proportioned a
certain face, or visage, which as it was known his, that unhonestly brought
him thither, so was it there by euidente, that he to name had Planus. Many
other things right mernailous, were also dooen by him, which in this place
would be long, and tedious to remember. In histories, notwithstanding, we
read of things almost impossible, as that he should depainte the scorchyng
beams of the Sun, the lightnynges also, and thunders, with others the like,
and semblable. His works to conclude, were such, and so excellent, that a
certain table of his, of part by mishappe stained (in which Venus was
purtraied, as issuyng out of the sea, which also Octauian, as an especial
orname^t, did to be placed in the temple of Julius Caesar) could never after
be mended, for none durst be so bold, to take the thing in hand, not able
to conform it to the first, and ancient pattern. Not long before his death
(the last thing that he did) he yet began an other, or draughte, or
pourtraite, of the said Venus, so perfect, and so absolute, in all respects,
and parts, that diyng before he ended it, none after might be found, ye durst,
or could well end it. He depainted also a horse, in such extreme perfection,
that other Painters took it for a patron, and example, whence having in the
end pourtraied many a curious steed, and pricked with emulation, each huntyng
after fame, would make some final proof, which nighest touchte the mark, and
so doing to be brought, certain horses out of a stable, leadyng the^ before
these others now depainted, which past, and past again, as nothing there at
moved: but when Apelles his horse was brought into the place, the other began
to braie, and stir, as is their common usage, which thing to do, they
refused at the presence of the others: whence how far he surpaste the^ in the
excellency of this work, was euidente without more, and plain to be seen of
all men. Besides this, his happy wit was not only seen, in his passing
skill of painting, but further, by his learned, and philosophical sentences:
for being commended of Protogines, as one that far excelled all others, in
that his art, answered, you are quoth he Protogines, mine equal, and my
fellow, only one fault you have, that you never solace your self,
foredulled with incessaunte with weary toil, and practice. Learning him
thereby, that continual pain, and labors, without convenient cesse, or
moderate recreation hurts, and annoieth the spirits, and understanding, as
on the other side some pretty pleasant exercise, comfort the weried man*
and hardneth him a fresh, the better now to tolerate what soever his first,
and principal endeavor. An other showing him a certain table of his doing,
vaunted that he had done it, in short time, and in have to whom he said, I
see it in the work, though thou had told me nothing. Now might we in
this place speak also of Protogines, of his fined works, his grave and
worthy sayings: although in this respect for his honor and renoume at the
seige of Rhodes, the sole and only practice of Demetrius might suffice. Who if
he once would have given fire to a certain part of the town, had entered at
his pleasure, and conquired the whole, but being assured that in the said
place, there was reserved a table depainted by Protogines, would by no
entreaty attempt the thing that way, but rather would fail to sack, and
spoil the city, then to burn this table of such price he esteemed it. The
first day therefore that he by hap beseiged it. Protogines was found without
the City in a small or little gardine, busied at his work as if there had been
nothing, who although in deed, he knew the presence of the ennimie, yet
would he not leave to follow, therefore his wonted practice. So being brought
forthwith, unto Demetrius, was demanded how he durst in such sort to tarry,
and arrest him without the city. I assured my self said he, that thou wast
here in arms, against the Rhodians only, and not against good sciences. This
done, this prince committed him to certain of his souldears, to the intent
that while he was busied in his paintyng no man might disturb, disquiet, or
molest him, whom also while he wrought, Demetrius in person came often times to
be hold him. Besides these, hard were it to remember how many have excelled
in this skill, or science, as Aristides, Asclepiodorus, Nichomachus, Paneus the
brother of Fidias, with a multitude of others, which Pliny in his five and
thirty book remembers. And to the intent that men herein, challenge not to
them selves, all honor or praise, as to them belongyng only, we may
remember women their fellows, and their equalles, which have done strange
things, as any above remembered: as for example, Timerata the daughter of
Miconis, which in such passing excellency depainted for the Diana, that it
long times afterward was most carefully kept, and honored still in Ephesus,
Irena, Calipsa, Olimpia, Lala Cizicena, with others also many, like famous for
their skill in all ages to be honored. In this our time also many a good work
man leueth, of whom I will write nothing, lest remembryng one or two. I
should wrong a greatar number.

Of a strange manner of exile used in Athens, by means of which the most
honorable and worthiest personages were oftentimes banished, without any
offense, or fault at all committed. Chap. 8.
THE seigneurie or common weal of Athens (as is to all men well known) was
one of the most honorablest and richeste in the world: for after it leaft to be
governed by kings, restored again unto desired liberty, it fostered and gave
forth, great numbers of worthy men, in arms no less excellent, then in all
kind of good letters, of which all histories are every where well furnished.
But among all other profitable laws and customs, which they carefully
observed, for the only conservation of their government, and liberty, there
was one among the rest as well very strange, as to them only proper,
which they notwithstanding deemed very fit and necessary, as well to
repress and chastise, the proud ambition, and intolerable audacitie, of
certain their nobles, which waxed in oppression, and tyranny so cruel, that
the poor cold no where live exempte from their malice, which was such as
here after follows. At one certain and determinate time, all the inhabitants,
of what estate or condition soever, had full authority to exile and banishe
(yea were it though without cause or reason) any one of their peers, without
respect, for the full space of ten whole years, as if they hated him, or
feared lest he should by tyranny usurp, or ambitiously choose to him, the
whole government or state, or if for any other cause in common, they either
did malice, or disdain his person, they proceeded once assembled, in this sort
and manner. The magistrates first of all, to whom only this charge was
committed, having (as is said) assembled the multitude together, gave to every
one of them a little white stone or tile, in which each man should write the
name of him whom he desired at that time above all others to be banished, which
after their inscription they restored again immediately to the 'officers, which
stones or tiles, the Greeks called (Ostraci) whence this manner of exile was
also termed Ostracismus. These stones with their inscriptions Ostracismus.
this brought in again together, they began forth with orderly to number, and
if at least there were not found with one inscription six thousand (for in
these assembles, no man was against his will forced, to write any man's name in
his stone, unless he found himself grieved, or otherwise for his pleasure
would unkindly do it) they exiled for that year no man at al. But if there
were found six thousand or more altogether agreeyng on one, and the like
number again perhaps on some other, then would they carefully account, and
number their stones, and he that was of most in this sort remembered, were he
though some times the most virtuous, and most rich within the city, yet was
he incontinently banished for the space of ten whole years, without any kind
of pardon, mitigation, or remission. Notwithstanding in the mean time, no man
deprived him of his possessions, neither in his gooddes, or lands suffered he
any damage, but according to his pleasure, or fantasy, he in all poinctes
ordered them, reapyng the fruictes or commodeties thereof, in as ample and
large manner, as if he never had been forced to exile at all. Neither was this
law, or custom only ordained, to chastise and correct the ambious
extortioner, but also to appease the rage of the common people, moved at times
or incenste against their Princes: so that by general consent, the Commons
inioynge this authority or priuelege, banished sometimes those, whose absence
in deed, was to their coutrie very profitable^ some times such again, only
by unkind and unadvised ingratitude, whom for their honest service done to
their country, they neither could, nor should without their great harm or
detrement have wanted. For proof whereof Themistocles that excellent
captain (by whose only counsel and diligence, Xerxes was vanquished, and
chaste out of Greece. His navy also discomfited and scattered on the Sea,
neither was Athens only by him restored to liberty, but also all Greece to
their desired freedom) was by this practice unkindly exiled. Like salerie
received Simon that renoumed Athenian, which lived even then in the same time
with the other, which also so often times had been in field for the safety
of his country, where, by his prowes, and counsel, he accomplished such
enterprises, as peradventure shall never any one man again after him, to
weete he subdued the Persians on the Sea, and took of them at one time two
hundred Galleys, and the same day not having throwly yet quailed their
corrage, landed in good order with all his army, giving present bataile to the
resude of that company, which were then landed before him, a houge and great
number, whom all notwithstanding he victoriously conquered, by Sea and by land
a most fortunate Captain. Besides these his excellent virtues, he was also
very large and liberal unto al men, making small account of his goods where
with fortune above others had largely endued him: he did continually to be
opened his fildes, and gardeines, to the end, the indigent might thence gather
such things as they had need of: he secretly also gave to all men large
alms, throughout the whole City, he peetied the afflicted, and comforted the
needy. He farther by express commandment, gave charge to all his
servants, that if they any where found an old man bare or ill appareled,
they forthwith should bestow on him, that theimselues had on presentlye,
contented to take for change, their mean and poor arraie. To conclude he
daily provided a great feast, for all poor men, without respect, within the
compass of Athens, by means whereof in short time, he very nigh had
consumed whatsoever to him was left by his father Milciades. All these
notwithstanding his princely demerites, neither could or were able to exempte
him from this exile, from the unknown cruelty, and ingratitude of his
country, as to their perpetual ignominy at full records it Cratinus a
Poet comicall, and Gorgias Leontinus. In manner semblable was banished
Aristides, the soonne of Lisimachus, who for his excellency, and virtuous
life, was of all men for good cause surnamed the just, notwstandyng the people
both feared, and suspected him continually. About the time then that they
should proceade in these affairs, behold his strange hap, worthy of
consideration, there approaches unto him one of the citisens, which as he
cold not write, so neither knew he at all Aristides, but by fame for his
virtues only, requestyng him to write upon his tile or stone, the name of
Aristides, whom he said he would help at that time to banishe. Whereat
Aristides, as altogether amassed (for he never suspected any such matter)
called him, and said: friend come hither, has Aristides done thee any
displeasure? Noe said he, but it greueth me to hear him surnamed Aristides
the just. Plutarche in this sort records this matter, but Paulus Emilius
affirms, that he framed him this answer: I know not Aristides, but I
suppose it will little profit him, that with such diligence, and in so short
time, he has attained to that fame, and honor, to be called (as you hear)
of all men Arististes the just. How be it, Aristides at all, gave him no
answer, but wrote, as his will was, his own name in his stone. By which
means afterward, unkindly exiled, neither waxte he angry, or grieved with
his country, but contrariwise most quietly departing, in presence of the
multitude, and before them all said: I pray the immortal Gods, that the
Athenians never fall into any such kind of misery, that they should have
need of, or desire Aristides again. And in deed so came it to pass, that
within few days afterward they repented them of their folly, acknowledging
with great grief their fault and error: for before these ten years of his
exile were expired, yea in the sixte year, by common consent, and suffrage of
the people, he was called home again, to his perpetual honor, but to their
ignominy, and the inexcusable shame: after which his return, he did sundry
valiant, and worthy exploytes, being in person present, in that dangerous
conflict, on the Sea adjoining to the Isle Salamina, where Xerxes was
vanquished, as also present, at the overthrow of Mardonius. So that as I
first said, this lotte' of exile for the most part still fell on the most
worthy, Mardonius was one of Xerxes Capitaines.
and most renoumed personages. Notwithstanding though hence grew infinite
discommodities, yet had it never the less, a certain show, or countenance
of honor or majesty, especially that it held men from usurpation an
tyranny, dreedyng the displeasure and authority of the people. Plutarche
writes that the seignorie of Athens on a time florishyng as well in wealth, as
in martial affairs, and chiualry, there were two great estates in honor
like, excelling all others, Nicias the one, Nicias, and Alcibiades, each envious
of others honor.
and Alcibiades the oath: which both in all things were very curious and
dainty, like ambitious and desirous of glory, pursuing each the other with
envious emulation: the time now of this Ostracismus very fast approaching of
which we have above remembered, both fearyng the imminent inconvenience, and
peril, did what in them was, to assure theimselues from the hard sentence of
exile. In this time there also was in Athens one that had to name Hiperbolus, of
base condition, proud, notwitstanding, and very seditious, which, not
ignorant of the emulation betwixt Nicias, and Alcibiades, practiced by all
means, to increase the same, sowyng betwixt them seeds of impacable
discord and dissension, hoping by this policy, to gain some reputation as
also presupposing, that these two, this remainyng (as he well trusted)
enemies, the one of them should be banished by the Ostracismus followyng, by
mean whereof, he imagined to gain his place, and honor, and so consequently
to be accounted one of the cheifest of the whole city. But they both very
shortly, well skilled of his practice, disdainyng that he of so mean estate,
should by this means become their equal, secretly assuaged their ire, and
malice, plightyng present frendshippe, and amity, each to other, better likyng
to cease from their rancour and malice, then to abide the hassard of this
present shame, and infamy. This done each of them attempted now busily
together to exile by the Ostracismus, the malicious, unfortunate, and unhappy
wretch Hiperbolus. Wherein they so carefully and so wisely traueiled, that
they in deed accomplished, that they so then affected, folding him in that
snare, that he provided had for others. At which thing ye whole multitude brake
out into a laughter, beholding a wretch of so vile condition, in exile to be
sent forth, whither so many, and so valiaunte a prince, had past before him.
But in the end this mirth so changed into rancour, that this custom
therewith ceaste also for ever.

Of sundry excellent personages, which by the ingratitude of their Country,
have unkindly been banished. Chap. 9.
ALL histories are every where full, of the sundry and manifold
ingratitudes, practiced by the most aunciente, and most famous Cities, even
against those, that most honorably have served, and defended them, in their
necessities. We therefore shall remember here not many examples, for that to
the studious in good histories, it should be less necessary, and superfluous.
The great father of the Roman eloquence, and Cicero.
most sovereign orator, or since, or before him, which from the perilous
coniuration of Cateline delivered that proud, and pompous city Rome, was
notwithstanding at the suit of his enemy Claudius, in recompense of his
deserts unkindly banished. Which his exile, in Rome, was so much bewailed,
that twenty thousand in one day wore mourning apparel for him, by mean
whereof, he was restored to his pristinate liberty, called home with great
joy, to his inspekable honor. Demosthenes the sole prince of all greek
eloquence, patron, and protector, of his country Athens, was also by the
Athenians in his old age, banished, and yet had they had, some countenance of
occasion, sufficient should it not have been, to have exiled of theimselues,
such a one as was he. He lamented excessiuelie, and be weapte his departure,
so that he went thence in great sorrow, and melancholy, who meetyng as he
paste, certain Atheniens, his heavy enemies, began to have some fear, and
to doubt them merueilously, which not only did him no kind of outrage, but
contrariwise did solace, and aid him, in what soever was to him or fittyng or
necessary. Which thing some time, considered well of him, as also that he was
reproved, for bewalynge his departure, said again to those, that did him
these curtisies. How would you, that I should not beweepe this my partyng,
seeing my self banished, from my native soil and country, where also mine
enemies, are such, and so honest, that I must think my self most happy and
fortunate of al men, if in some other place I may find friends, as assured and
comfortable? Metellus surnamed Numidicus, in reward of his victory, which he
obtained against Iugurth king of Numidia, received unkind, and hard sentence
of exile, only for that he would not accord unto a certain law, which
some others, at that time desired to establishe. Hannibal after that he had
painfully in sudry dangers well served his country, and although besides he
was the most honorable, and most renoumed Captain of his time, yet might he
not inioye the liberties of his country, but banished, was forste to range, an
unhappy pilgrim about the world. Camillus was also unjustly exiled from Rome,
at which time the Gauls held it in besiege and took it, and finally as they
assaulted the capitol it self, he being chosen again in his banishment
Dictatour, and Captain general of all his country, entered, flewe, and
discomfited them, and restored the City, delivering them out of prison that
before had exiled him. Seruilius Halla, after having preserved the liberty of
Rome, from the ambitious oppression of Spurius Emilius, Captain of the horse
men, which by all means possible, affected the croune, and had also done him
openly to die, in fine received in steed of just guerdone, through banishment
to live, an exiled Roman. No country any where read I of more bound unto a
man, then was Lacedemonie unto Licurgus, especially for his laws which he so
prouidently gave them. And although he also were of most holy, and virtuous
conversation, courtuous and of a gentle spirit, and nature, of whom, as of him
reports Valerius Maximus, the oracle of Apollo Pithius, this doubtfully
answered, that he knew not whether he might account him, either in the
number of the gods, or else of mortal men: notwithstanding he often times was
pursued of the citisens with stones, beaten, and driven by force out of their
town, and in the end having pluckte one of his eyes out of his head,
banishte him also out of their land and territory. The semblabe was also
done, to Solon, by the Atheniens, which also gave them like laws, and
ordinances as the other, which if they had (as was his will) continually
observed, their Empire, by all presumption, had yet still continued. Besides
that he also conquered, and recovered the City of Salamina, unto them, with
the same also, aduertising them of the rebellious coniuration of Pisistratus,
which by usurpation and tyranny, busily sought, and affected the Croune, was
yet notwistandyng in his old, and stoupyng years, with most rigor exiled,
not able by any means, at their hands to obtain any one extreme coruer, or
end, hpon their frontires, wheresoever it should please them there to make
end yet of his werie life, but to conclude, inexorable, they exiled him, into
the Isle of Cyprus. Scipio Nasica, which was reputed for the most virtuous,
and worthiest manne in Rome, which also neither merited less honor, in the
administration, and gouernemente of the weal public, then the other Scipioes
by their prowes, and courage in the field, he notwitstandyng after he had
delivered Rome, from the malice, and tyranny of the Greeks, understanding of
the envy, and sinister opinion, that diverse Romans had conceived of his
virtuous dimerite, fainyng that he went some where in imbasie, withdrwe
himself,, of purpose, and willingly into Pergama, wherwithout malising again
his ungrate country, ended the rest of his days there in peace. In like
manner Publius Le^tulus, after he had with honor defended his country,
repressyng also the furious attemptes of the Greeks, was with like courtesy,
for his pains exiled: howbeit before his departure thence into Sicelie,
besought the gods immortal in the presence of the multitude, that they never
would permit that he returned again, to so unkind as were they, and so
unthankful a people. Boecius Seuerinus, a man to the above remembered in no
poincte inferior, was by Theodoricus the usurper, dishonourably expulsed,
only for that he supposed, he would pain himself, to restore his country
again to liberty. For this cause also Denis, that execrable tyranne, exiled
that most worthy Captain Dion of Siracusa, who by his exile afterward
became so puissant, that he again reentred, and banished the tyranne,
depriuyng him, of that his seignorie for ever, restoryng his country to the
pristinate, and ancient liberty. The very semblable happened to Trasibulus,
a Captain Athenian, which by the fatal malice of thirty tyrauntes, that
then held the whole country in miserable subjection, was also unnaturally,
and unkindly exiled. But he notwithstanding to revenge himself on them,
assembled together diverse others before expelled, with whom, as with the help
also of Lisander, a Lacedemonian, returned in arms against Athens, and
delivered it from servitude. Publius Rutilius Consul of Rome, banished by the
favorites, or fauters of Silla, though, after desired to return again, refused
saying: I will that Rome rather take shame, that she has so unjustly exiled
me, then thank her to return again, that so rages with tyranny. Terquinins
the proud, though not without cause in deed, but for his leude demainoure,
cast out of Rome, lost his honor, and royalme, for the unchaste rape done, by
his soonne, on Lucretia. Milo Patricius an honorable Roman, somewhat
susspected, touching the death of Claudius, whose cause though it were of
Cicero defended, was notwitstandyng exiled into Marseilla. Clistines was the
first, that instituted the law of banishment in Athens, and the first that by
the law was thence exiled. Eustachius Pamphilius Bishop of Antioche, was
banished for that he reproved the schismatic sect of the Arians, in the
time, and reign of Constantine the great. Paulus Diaconus that famous
historiogripher, writes that Pope Benedictus the first, was contrary to Gods
laws and man's laws, driven out of Rome, by his ennemie the Emperor Auton.
The said Auton vanquished the Emperor Beringerius, with his soonne Albert,
and sent them both into perpetual erile. Hence we learn now, that
infinite great personages have been expelled from their countries, and in Rome
it was esteemed for so great a punishment, that none was thence banished,
before all the people had throwly, consulted of the matter. And assuredlye the
affections that man bears, or often to bear to his country, is continually
such, and so vehemente, that we can not exile without extreme pain, and
languishe. For the consolation therefore, of all such as shall be banished,
Plutarche has written a singular treatise, as also Erasmus, to the said
purpose a notable Epistle. Seneca in like manner, in his book of consolation,
dedicated to Paulinus, touching the said subject discourses very learnedlie.

Of a strange adventure betide a certain prisoner, and how after his weary
imprisonment, he was in the end made free and delivered. Chapt. 10.
AS things strange, and miraculous should not to lightly for any cause be
remembered, so neither mind I in this place to pass, or to report any thing,
not left us by some other of sufficient warrant. Alexander of Alexandria, a
man as is above said, well skilled in the sciences, writes this among other
things, as a truth most certain. There was says he in Italy, the place he
names not, a certain greateprince, or governor of that country, whom by
name he also leaves, in his discourse to remember, in all poinctes mercilis,
cruel, and tyrannous. It chau^sed that a poor vassaule of his, a man of mean
condition, against his will, and by hap, slew him a graye Hounde which he
much esteemed, whereat this tyraunte waxte forthwith so wroth, that presently
he did him to be thrown into a great and deep doungeon, lockte up with
many kayes, under safe and good guard. Shortly after his keeper, in bringyng him
(as was his manner) his repaste or diner, found all the doors lockte, and
barde, as he before had leafte them: but enteryng into the place where usually
this prisoner arrested him, found him not, but his chains or fetters all
whole, and not sundred. Which thing reputed for strange, and merueilous, was
incontinently presented unto the above remembered Governor, who with most
diligence, that was to him possible, made general search for him, from house
to house, but failed to hear of him, any thing in the world. The case, in this
respect, seemed therefore miraculous, for that the fetters were all found in the
prison that bound him, not crackte, or disriueted, but fast and surely
ioygned, the gates eke so posted that nothing might pass thereat. Three days
after this, the prysone so remaynyng, as before still fastened, the keepers
then void of al charge, or care, heard notwithstanding a soden skriche, or
cry, in the same place, where of custom this poor wretch before was lodged,
and hastynge to the place, to see what it might be, found the poor prisoner
there crauyng his dinner, who was as before, fast folded in his fetters, his
face pale, wan, dreadful to look on, his eyes hollow, and staryng,
resemblyng more perfectly, a dead corse, then man living. These keepers
hereat, altogether amassed, demanded him where, or in what place he had
suggerned, but he again would answer them nothing, but that they forthwith
should bring him to the gonernour, for that he had to acquainte him with
matters of importance, whereof his lord, and seigniour advertised, was brought
incontinently, acco^pained of many, before whom and in whose presence, he
presented thus his charge. Findyng my self says he, prisoner, in so loathsome
and obscure a prison, I entered with very pain, into deep despair, calling
on the Fend for sucker, and assistaunce, to the intent he thence would carry
me, whither soever it best might like him: who after small suit in terrible
form appeared, with whom in all points I throwly agreed, so that he thence
would, and out of prison deliver me. Immediately then he took me, and removed
me thence, I know not how, which way, nor whither, suddenly descendyng into
certain deep places, terrible, tempestuous, obscure, and dreadful, where I
beheld infinite millions, and millions again of people, which with
unspeakable torment of fire, as well as otherwise, were so afflicted, as my
tongue in no sort can speak or utter, their tortors were ougly, and rampyng
deuilles: there saw I all sorts of people whatsoever, as Kings, Popes,
Dukes, Prelates, with diverse of mine own acquaintance, late dead, and
departed hence. Farther there found I an old friend of youres, of al others
some time, most faithful and assured, which of you demanded me much, of
your behauour, and manners, and whether you yet remained such as you were wont
to be (to weete) a fell, and most accursed tyranne: to whom I answered yea,
and that you still remained, without change the same, that he at his death,
and departure hence left you. By means whereof he most instauntly besought me,
that at my first return I should, from him earnestly advertise you, to make
change of your life, to leave this your tyranny, with none unreasonably
taxis, to charge or grieve the people, with many such others, the like and
semblable, for he assertened me that your place was there lotted out with him,
where you Eternally should smart for it, if in time you repented not. And to
th'inte^t you the better should credit me, he gave me to remember you, by this
sign or token: tell him said he, that when we both were in filde, and in arms
together, that he remember, that one a time our watch word was such, which,
such as it was in deed, the prisoner faithfully recounted. This understood,
this great lord or governor, began forthwith to fear, to tremble and
appaule, assured that God only, his friend, and him self, knew of this
watch word, and besides them none other, and then demanded what apparel,
his friend had on him presently, who answered that he was none otherwise
cladde, then he was wont to be here, attired sumptuously in crimsin Satin.
How be it said he, in deed, it was none such as it appeared, for it nothing
else was, but a burning, and continual fire, for proof whereof said he, as I
approached to have thouchte him by the sleeue, I burnte my hand, as you
presently may here see. Besides these he spoke of other visions, both
fearful, and terrible, of which all when this gentleman had well considered,
he willed him to be at liberty, in his own house or palace. Some report
that he was so pale, and ougly, that hardly his own wife, or other his
friends could know him. He after this lived not many days, skarce of
perfect mind, f^antike and weak. Notwistandyng how few soever they were, he
spente them yet virtuously, prouidynge only for the health and safety of his
soul, for having ordered how his goods should be after him distributed, he
continually spent the time, in bewailyng his offenses. But how this matter
profited, or called to repentance this noble man, thereof writes Alexander no
one word at all, only affirmyng this history to be true.

That the bloodde of a Bulle causes them to die that drink thereof at any
time, as also, who first brought the Bull to the yoke. Chap. 11.
FOr as much as a Bull is a beast so common, and ordinary, that we as well
feed on him in every our necessities, as of that which he ingendereth man's
principal provision, it might appear strange and contrary to nature, that
his blood drunk warm, with out any kind of mixtion, should impoyson, or
cause man presently, to sterue, and to dye. Dioscorides notwithstanding, as
also (...). in his* 6 book. Pli. in his. 28.
Pliny affirm that his blood warm, is very pestilente, and venomous, and
that it kills whosoever thereof drinks. Plutarche writing of Midas, of whom
so many good histories, and fables also make mention, says that he being
troubled with certain terrible imaginations, or visions, in to which without
amendmente he daily entered farther and farther, by no means able to find any
kind of remedy, determined (which he also performed) to drink the bloodde of
a Bull strangled, whereof incontinently, and forth with he died, Themistocles
an Athenian, and excellent Captain, which defended all Greece from the
violence, and invasions of Xerxes, exiled from his country, went thence to
the court of Artaxerxes, unto whom (for just cause grieved with his unkind
country) he promised to utter a certain mean, how he should easily subdue
and conquire all Greece: but when after the king called on him for the
performaunce thereof, he then again with mind wholly altered and changed,
desired rather to die, then to acquit him of his promise, and so fainyng that
he first would sacrifice unto Diana, drancke the bloodde of a Bull, which he
then had sacrificed, whence he presently dyed as records Plutarche. Plutarch
in the life of Themistocles.
The cause or reason that may hereof be given, why I say, the blood of a bull
droncke warm should kill, is borrowed of Aristotle, Pliny, and Dioscorides,
who to Aristotle in his third book, de animalibus. Pliny in his leuenth book
Dioscorides in his sixte book.
geather affirm, that it is, for none other cause, but that this bloodde so
druncke straungely congealeth, and hardneth incontinently, yea much more then
the bloodde of any other beast: so that in quantity, once entered into the
stomach, it curdeth, causing faintnes and suffocation, and stops with the
same the forces of respiration, and feelyng, whence sodenlie of necessity
follows also death. Pliny writes, that Colewo^rtes boiled in the abouesaide
bloodde are very medicinable against an opilation: this bloodde then by it
self drouncke is pestilente, and venomous, but in composition mixed with other
things, is both wholesome and profitable. Manne (to whom god has framed all
things subject) has by this beast no less profit, and service, then by
the others of that kind, which he alone ingendreth. For which only cause
Columella prefers him before all other beasts, affirmyng that to kill a
Bull, was in times paste, a crime very heinous, and almost in deed capital.
Pliny writes of one that was banished, for that he kilde a bull. The first
that tamed the Bull, and laid youke on his Diodorus in his fourth and fifte
book.
neck, was as Diodorus reports one Denis, or Dionisius, the soonne of
Jupiter and Proserpina. But Pliny in his seventh book deemeth the contrary,
affirmyng that it was an Athenian, and hight Briges, others some suppose that
it was Triptolemus, of whom Virgill in this sort seems to say, that he an
infant, was master notwithstanding, and inuentour of the crooked Plough.
Seruius indifferently attributes it as well to Orsiris, as to Triptolemus. I
suppose that Virgill leafte thereof to discover the name, of the inuentour of a
thing so profitable, and necessary, for that (as it may be presumed) it was
not the invention of one sole man only: but rather the want and lack thereof,
has forced man in this case to devise or inuente some thing, to which some
others to perfect it, have also after added some what. Trogus Pompeius
recounteth, that Auidis King of Spain, was the first that laid maisteryng
hand on the wild and savage Bull, the first also that fitted them to the
yoke, or Plough: but in fine whosoever it were, very necessary is his
service, and profitable in man's affairs. This beast feeds contrary to all
others, for in taking his repaste he goes always backwardes, all others, of
what soever kind, marchyng still on wards. Aristotle writes Aristotle in his
third book de animalibus.
of a certain kind of Bulls in Frigia, whose horns are not fastened in the
inner part of their heads, and in the bone, but tossyng to and fro, grow
only copled to the skin, by mean whereof they so turn them at their
pleasure, as their ears, which thing Elian in like sort plainly records.
The first that tamed Bulls in Rome, and kilde them for man's use, was Julius
Caesar, which thing Pliny records largely. This beast has this property
of nature or quality lent him that he skilefully prognosticateth of the
weather continually, for when it shall rain, he foresheweth it, in mountyng
his snoute, breathyng into the air, or otherwise in seeking some couerte
besides his wonted manner.

How necessary water is in all the uses of man's life, of the excellency of
this element, and how to find or try, the best water from the other. Chap. 12.
IN all, the uses of man's life, no one thing is found more necessary, then
the elemente of water, for if he lack at any time bread, he may with sundry
kinds of meats as herbs nourishe the body, and if fire fail him, sunderie
things are yet good, and wholesome to be eaten raw, so that man may continue,
and live of them for a time: but without water, neither can man, beast, or what
so else is, live, or continue in this world at all. There is neither herb,
neither plant, of what sort so ever he be, that without water, gives any
kind of increase: for what so ever is, without exception it needs some times
water. Whence Thales Milesius, as also Hesiodus, imagined, that water was the
beginning of all things, the most ancient, and first of the other three
elements, in virtue also, and force, without comparison surpassyng them: for
as has Pliny, and also Isidorus, water moisteth and subuerteth great
mountains, it rules, and has dominion over the whole face of the earth, it
quenches fire, and changed, into vapors, it also mounteth, or passes into
every the regions of the air, whence after a time, again it descends to give
increase, and multiply all things upon earth. Farther, God so much esteemed
this elemente above the rest, that concludyng, to regenerate man again by
Baptism, would that his safety should grow of part by this elemente. And in
the beginning of the world, when he first divided the waters, he in such
estimation had it, as has the text, yt he almost next would place it
underneath the heavens, less mindyng in that place, that houge heap of water,
that boundeth, and limiteth the parts of the earth. The greatest torment that
the Romans, had at any time provided for the condemned, was that they were
interdicted, both from water, and fire, remembryng water in this place before
the other, for the more assertained, and assured excellency. Sith then water
is so necessary, in every the uses of man's life, here must we then consider
of waters, which are the better. For accomplishement whereof, this may be the
first note, who so will pass through places strange, and unknown, desirous
to learn, whither the waters be there wholesome, yea, or not, as also whether
they be to be carried any other where, as necessity, at times, or for causes,
may require, first let him diligently, and with advise consider, the places
adjacent about the spryng, or river, how long the inhabitants there live,
their disposition, and nature. Whither they be healthie, strong, and valiant,
and of good complexion, their iyes not infected, their legs of good
proportion, and able, such where so ever they be well witness of the goodness
of their water: but contrary, if you find them, then contrary must be your
judgment. But if your spring be late found, so that the fore said
experience, of no part help us, then will we refer you to the practices
followyng. Take a basme of Brass; or other vestell, clean, neat, and very
well polished, then throw some drops of that wate^ there on (of that water I
mean, of whose goodness you would make experimente) and if after it be dried,
you find at all no kind of stain, or mark; then is that water assuredly,
both good and wholesome* An other good proof may be, if you please to boil
of this water, in the said vessel, and after it has boiled, to let it for a
time; to stand, to settle, and to cool, then after when ye shall empte it, if
in the bottom, you find no kind of slime; or sand, then is that water to be
reputed for good: and of these waters, if ye make proof of two, that which
has least, is to be accounted, without more the best. Farther if in these
vessels, or in the semblable, you do to be boiled any kind of pulse, to make
there with some potage, or other meat, as beans, pease, or other of that
sort, that water in which they first sees, is best. You must consider also,
if certainly you will, judge of waters, in what place, or soil they spring,
and rise, if out of a sandy ground, clear, andneate, or contrary out of a
mirie soil, foul, and vnpure, and whither there grow any Rushes, or other
herbs, or weeds noisome, and pestilente: but for better surety, who so would
drink of a water unknown, or of such, as he deemeth to be indeed, less
good, let him with a small fire, first of all boil him, and then after
being cold, drink of him in his need. Pliny writes, that the Emperor
Nero, so boiled his water, and then coolyng it in the Snow, gloried that he
was the father of such an invention. The reason why water boiled, should
therefore be more conducible, is for that it is not pure, and simple in his
own nature, but is all together mixed, both with the earth, and the air:
notwithstanding, the part windy, as it easily resolves, by the fire into
vapors, so that other substance also terrestrial, by the said virtue, or
force of the fire (whose quality, is to try, and disioigne contrary natures)
descends to the bottom, and lower parts of the vessel. By which means,
this boiled water romaineth less vaporous, all the windy substance thereof
perfectly consumed: it also again is more subtle, and light, being this
purified from the gross and stimie substance, and so consequently more easy
to be kept, and conserved, compitently refreshyng, and moistyng the body,
without any alteration, or opilation at all. Whence it is euidente, that these
deep wells, or tie pittes, give none so good, and wholesome waters, as are the
others, principally for that, the water more sauoureth of some slimie nature,
and that it is at no time, purified by any show of the soonne, as that also it
more easily putrifieth then any other. How be it, the more that you draw out
of any such Well, the better, and the more profitable becomes the water, for
that by continual motion, corruption less ingendereth, and nothing better
from putrefaction preserves any water, then perpetual, and incessante
agitation: for ones corrupted, it impoisoneth the new waters, in their
springes them selves, as let or lackyng free course or passage: but still
drawn, new comes on more fresh still, and sauerie. For which cause the
water of standing pondes, and diches, is of all other most pestilente, and
venomous, which, for that it hardely springs, and hardely passes thence
again, putrifieth, and ingendereth sunderie impoisoned matters, and often times
(which worste is) it corrupts the air, whence the inhabitauntes there
about, are ordinarily infected. Consider we also, that these waters, which
flow toward the Southe, are not so wholesome, as those that run to the
North: for the air in the Southe, is more vaporous, and moiste, which hurts
of part, and impaireth the water: but in the North more subtle, and dry,
whence the water is more light, and more void of ill mixtions. For which
cause, that water is ever more best, which is most clear, most light,
most subtle, and most purified, for it is, as we fore said most free, from
the mixtion of the other elements, and being set over the fire, wareth also
warm, and boileth before any other. Farther also, a very certain, and
singular proof of waters is this, if ye circumspectly consider, which of them
first, or before the other boileth, being both putre in like vessels, over one
fire, with like consideration of time in them both, also which of them in
like manner, first retourneth to his natural quality, to be that, he first
was, cold in taste, and feelyng, for these are assured arguments, of a most
subtle, and pearsing substance: and for as much as the mixture of the earth,
with any kind of water, forces, or canseth some alteration in weight, it
shall be good to choose still, that which you find lighteste, which easily
you may prove in this sort, and manner followyng. You shall take two pieces of
linen clothe, of one and the same weight, puttyng one into one water, and the
other into the other, until they be both throw moistened, and weete, then hang
them in the air, where the Sun shines not on them, so long until they
both be perfectly dry, rewaight them then again, and the cloth which you
find to peise or draw deepest, argues his water to be undoubtedly most
waightiest. Other some have used for their more expedition to weigh them in
vesseles pure, neat, clean, in weight not differyng, with out any farther
curiosity at all. Aristotle and Pliny affirm, that the greatest cause of
diverse qualities in waters, is, and rises only of sundry substaunces, or
manners of their soiles, by the means of Stones, Trees Mines, and Mettalles,
through which these springes or Rivers run, and for this cause they become
some hot, some cold, some sweet some salt, some sauerie, some less
sauerie: wherefore it is a sure, and an infallible rule, that these waters that
have no taste, smell, or savor, are continually reputed, for the most
wholesome, and best. Al such notwithstanding, as have hereof written, together
affirm, that these springes, that pass through mines of gold, excel, without
comparison, by many degrees the others: for proof whereof, these rivers are
accounted most worthy of all others, which engender and preserve gold in
their fine, and small sands: but because we perticulerly, some thing have
said of the propriety of springes, and rivers, we leave here to weary the
reader with examples. Now then, since some things have been spoken of
fountains, and flouddes, it follows that we consequently treat of rainie
waters, which of some are reputed for very sovereign, and medicinable, but
of others some accounted less profitable, or necessary. Vitruuius and
Columella, with certain other Physicians, highly commend all rainie waters,
but these especially that are received clean, pure, without any kind of
gross, or terrestrial substance: for that of them selves, say they, these
waters, are light, and void of all mixtion, caused only of vapors, which by
their only subtilitie, are taken up into the air, leauyng, as may be
supposed, all impure, or slimie substance behind them. Some nevertheless,
say, that this water, descendyng in this sort from above, prutrifieth
incontinently, as is to be seen in standing pooles, or diches, which engender
infinite ordures. How be it, to speak indifferently, this is not to be
attributed, to any defaute, or imperfection in this water, but rather for that
it is reserved in so vile a place, into which most commonly flow, all
noisome sinckes, and unsavory gutters, with others of that sort, less meet
to be here remembered, as also of part, by the ordure, that it draws, and
brings with it, washyng the earth, as it flows into the above said
troughes, or diches, especially when it powers down, or raineth
abundantly. Wherefore, the cause of this sudden corruption, of part
proceeds from the extreme heat of the Sun, of part for that it is so pure,
and delicate, but mixte now with such contagious, and lothesome impurities,
that it immediately, and without stay, corrupts of necessity.
Notwithstanding, if this water so subtle, and well purified, were taken,
falling from houses, void of duste, or filthe, or rather before it touch any
house, or other thing, were received into sonie clean, and pure vessel, it
may be thought, that it would prove, more pure then any other, as also that it
longer might be, without putrefaction preserned. Others some there are, that
plainly affirm the contrary, as Pliny that writes it to be Pliny in his
32. book, and third chapter.
naught, and unwholesome, who also commands, that we neither drink, or taste
of it, for that these vapors, whence it in the beginning, and first of all
rises, issue, and proceed of diverse things, as also of diverse soiles,
whence it also receives diverse, and different qualities, good, and badde, with
like, and with the same facility. And again alleagyng some farther proof,
for his assertion, answers also to that, that we above remembered, less
admitting it for comprobation sufficient, as to say, that it therefore is pure,
or light, because it is drawn into the regions of the air, whether it (as is
euidente) not naturally mounteth, but is taken by secret force, and violency
of the sun. Neither are these vapors, says he, which in the middle regio^
of the air, by extreme cold are altered into hail, or snow, so pure, and so
perfect, as most men suppose them, but resolved into water, are rather found
in very deed pestiferous, and noisome. Besides which defecte, he this again
adds, that this rainie water, by the only euaporation, and heat of the
earth, becomes infected, even in the same time, and instante that it
raineth. For better proof of which impuritie, it only is to be noted, how
quickly, and how sone, it becomes putrified, of which we have experience,
often times upon the sea, where it impossible is, to preserve, such waters
from corruption. For these causes now cisternes, and deep wells, are of most
men less commended. How be it, touching these differente, and contrary
opinions, each manne may sentence, according to his fantasy: as for my
part, I willynglie would not prefarre, a rainie water, before the others,
although in truth it be, in cases more fittyng, and necessary, and although
also Pliny, which other wise, discommendeth it, lets not to report, that
fishes in sta^dyng pondes, and lakes, quickly wax fat, but then most
especially, when it most abundantly raineth, so as they may be thought
still, to please most in this water. Theophrastus says, that all herbs in
the gardein weeds, or grass, what quantity of water so ever you bestow on
them, spring thence, notwithstanding, in no respect so well, as with some
pleasant, or small showers of rain. In manner semblable writes Pliny, of
the reed, or bulle rushe, which the better to grow, or prospere, thirsts
still for rain. Such also is Aristotle's opinion, and consonante to the
former, concerning the fattyng, or impairyng of fishes.

By what policy we may draw freash water out of the Sea: and why cold water
in falling makes greatet noise then it would do, if it were warm: finally
why a Ship on the salt water, bears greater weight then on the freashe,
Chap. 13.
ARistotle writes, as also Pliny, that we should frame certain vessels of
wax, hollow within, so bindyng, or closing them, that in them, be found no
hole, or vente, lettyng them down into the Sea, fastened in some Net, or
other fit matter, with long lines, or cords, whence, (after they there have
been the space of one whole day) if we again draw them, we shall find in
every of them a certain quantity of fresh water, such, and so good, as in
any spring, or fountain. The reason why the salt water becomes freashe, by
the entrance into these vessels, is in this sort given us of Aristotle, who
says, that the wax being a body both full of powers, and sweet, grants
passage to the most pure and subtle part of the water, which as it leaves
without his gross, and saulte substance, so pearsing it sauereth of the waxie
nature, sweet and pleasant. In truth if it be so, (I say again, if it be
so, for that I never yet practiced in any sort, this secrette) it might well
serve in sundry our necessities, which commonly betyde us, in infinite our
affairs. How be it, I suppose, that if this falte water wax freashe by the
only and sole enteraunce, in to the above said vessels, the said vessels in
like sort, filled also full with the Sea, should give us some small
quantity, or measure of freashe water, for filled, as is before said, why
should not the purer part, pass through these porie vessels, leauyng within,
the slimie, or saulte substance of the Sea, as being cast void into the Sea,
should receive there, by contrary order inwardes, water pure, and immixte,
without any drop at all of the other? The reason seems one, as tending both
to one end, unless we should dwell here, on some scrupulous difference,
arguing that by the same mean: and by the same facillitie, this freashe water
distilleth not out, of the full vessel, as on the other side it enters, into
the void, and empty: for that some appearaunce is, of greater force, in going
out, then is (as some suppose) at the entrance, or coming in: how be it, who
so curious is, may make easy proof, both of the one and the other. Farther
for their sakes, that please in these experimentes, one other thing shall I
write, in this place not less necessary. Who so fills at any time two
Bottles of one measure, the mouth, and neck, of like length, and widnes, the
one with boilyng water, the other all cold, and straigh ways will empte
them, after one sort, without gile (at one time, I mean, and in one instante
tegether) shall find that the cold water will, as well be first out, as also
that in falling, it assuredly will yield a greater brute, or noise: the
boylynge water slidyng, on the other side, slowly and with less noise. The
reason is, that the warm water less poyseth then the cold, which by heat
of the fire, has lost now the greatest quantity of his gross vapors: so
that when first the cold water begins to stream forth, that part that
is behind still, by his weight pusheth, and thrusts on the former, by
continual force, or fight as it were, in such sort, that the only weight
first causes the cold Bottle to empte, as also by the same mean, it noiseth
as is evident, or resoundeth something farther. Which answer as Aristotle, in
this respect gives, so also learneth he us, of an other the like practice,
which rather by experience, then reason, we see daily. A Ship says he, in
the Sea, or in the salt water, carries far a greater weight, then he does
in the freashe: for the Sea (adds he) is a more thick or grosser substance,
and bears a charge, or burden more houge then the other, being of a nature
in respect more pure, and subtle. For proof whereof, experience this
learneth us, that if we cast into a river an Egg, immediately it sinketh, and
passes to the bottom, but contrary wise, if you throw him into the Sea, or
salt water he swimmeth, as supported, by a greater force, or violence.

Of the renoumed and great Tamberlaine, of the kingdoms and countries that he
subdued, and finally of his practice, and manner in war. Chap. 14.
THere has been among the Greeks, Romans, the people of Carthage, and
others, innitfie, worthy and famous capitaines, which as they were right
valiant, and fortunate in war: so were they no less fortunate, in that some
others by writynge commended their chivalry to the posterity for ever. But in
our time we have had one, in no respect inferior to any of the others, in this
one point notwithstanding less happy, that no man has vouchsaued, by his
pen in any sort to commend him, to the posterity following. So that I, who
most desired somethynge to speak of him, have been forced together here, and
there little pieces, and pamphlets, scarce lendyng you any show of his
conquirous exploytes, the same also confusely, and without any order. This
then, of whom we speak, was that great and mighty Tamburlaine: who in his
tender years was a poor labourer, or husbandman, or (as other some report) a
common Soldiar, how be it, in the end he became Lord, of such great
kingdoms, and seignories, that he in no point was inferior to that prince of
the world Alexander: or if he were, he yet came next him, of any other, that
ever lived. He reigned in the year of our Lord God, a thousand, three hundred
four score and ten. Some suppose that he was a Parthian borne, a people
less honorable, then dread of the Romans: his farher and mother, were very
poor, and needy: he notwithstanding was of honest and virtuous conditions,
well fewtred, valiant, healthie, quick and nimble, sharp witted also, of ripe,
and mature deliberation, and judgment, imaginyng, and devising, haute and
great enterprises, even in that his most, and extreme penury, as though he
some times should be a master of many things. He was of a valiant and
invincible courage, so that from his Cradle, and infancy, it seemed he was
vowed to Mars and merciall affairs only. Where unto he gave him self, with
such painful endeavor, that hardlye a man might judge, whether he were more
happy in deed, in advised counsel, or princely dexterity. By mean of which
his virtues, and others, that we shall hereafter remember, he in short time
acquired such honor, and reputation, as is to be supposed man never shall do
again. His first beginning was, as writes Baptista Fulgotius, that being the
soonne of a poor manne, keeping cattle in the filde, living there with other
boys of his age, and condition, was chosen in sport by the others for their
king, and althought they had made in deed, this their election in play, he
whose spirits were ravished, with great, and high matters, forced them to
swear to him loialtie in all things, obeyng him as king, where, or when, it
should please him, in any matter to command them. After this oath then, in
solemn sort ministered, he charged each of them forthwith to sell their
troop and cattle, leaving this servile and base trade of life, seeking to
serve in war, acceptyng him for captain: which in deed they did, being
quickly assembled of other work men, and pastors, to the full number, at
least, of five hundred: with whom the first attempt that ever be took in
hand, was that they robde all such merchants as any where paste nigh
them, and after he imparted the spoil so justly, that all his companions
served him, with no less faith then love, and loyalty, which occasioned
sundry others, a new to seek, and follow him. Of which news in the end,
the King of Persia advertised, sent forth under the conducte of one, of his
capitaines, a thousand horses well appointed to apprehende and take him: at
whose coming, he so well knew in this matter how to bear him, that of his
enemy he soon had made him, his assured friend, and companion: in such sort
that they ioigned both their companies together, attempting, then before,
enterprises much more great, and more difficill. In the mean time a certain
discord, or breach of amity grew, betwixt the King of Persia and his
brother, by occasion where of Tamburlaine took part with the Kings brother,
where he so ordered the matter in such sort, that he deposed the King, and
advanced the other. After this, by this new prince, in recompense of his
service, he was ordained general of the greater part of his army, who under
pretexte that he would conquire, ad subdue, other provinces to the Persians,
mustered still, and gathered, more Souldiars at his pleasure, with whom he so
practiced, that they easily revolted like Rebels followyng him, subduyng their
Leage, and Sovereign. This having now deposed, whom he before advanced, he
crouned himself King, and Lord of that country. Now moved with compassion,
toward his own country, which long times had been tributorie, to the
Princes of Persia, and to the Sarrazins, did them to be free, from all
service, and exactions, lottyng to them for Prince him self, and none other.
After this considering with him self, that he presently had gathered a
houge and great army, moved privy mutenies and rebellio^s in other
countries, by means whereof, in prosis of time he conquired Syria, Armenia,
Babylon, Mesopotamia, Scythia Asiatica, Albania and Media, with others, many
territories, rich also and famous cities. And although we find written
nothing, of any his wars whatsoever, yet is it to be presumed yt he fought
many a bataile in open filde with the ennimie, before he had subdued so many,
kingdoms and territories: for as much as all those that remember of him any
thing, commend to us the haute exploytes, of this most valiaunte personage,
and farther that he so circumspectly ordered his company, that in his Camp
was never known, any brawle, or mutenie. He was very courteous, liberal,
doing honor to all men, according to their demerites that would
accompany, or follow him, feared therefore equally, and loved of the people.
He so painefullie, and with such care instructed his Souldiars, that in an
instante always, if it were behouefull, either by sound of Trompette, or any
other, one, only sign given, every man was found in his charge, or quarter,
yea though his army were such, so great, and so numerous, as never besides
him self, conducted any other. In few his Camp resembled one of the best,
and richest Cities in the world, for all kind of offices were there found in
order, as also great heaps of merchants to furnishe it with all
necessaries. He in no case permitted any robberies, privy figgyng, force, or
violence, but with severity and rigor punished, whom soever he found
thereof, guilty, or culpable, by means where of his Camp, was no worse of all
provisions furnished, then the best City in the world, in time of most safe,
and assured security. His desire was, that his Soldiars should evermore
glory, in their martial prowes, their virtue, and wisdom only. He paid
them their salerie, and wage, without fraud, he honored, he praised, he
imbrast, and kiste them, keeping them notwithstanding in awe and subjection.
This being king now, and Emperor, of sundry Realms, and Countries in Asia,
great troops came to him still, out of every quarter, besides these that were
in any respect his subjects, for the only fame, of his honor, and virtue.
So that his Camp grew in short time to be greater, then ever was that of
Darius or Xerxes, for soche as write of him, report that he had, four hundred
thousand horsemen, but of foot men a greater number, by two hundred thou sand
more, which all he ladde with him, at the conqueste of Asia the less: where
of the great Turk advertised, who then hight Baiaceth, Lord and Prince of
that country, but present then in person, at the siege of Constantinople,
having a little before subdued sundris provinces, and parts of Greece, with
other territories adjacent, and Tounes there about, thence grown to more
wealth, and more feared, then any Prince in the world, was never the less
constrained to raise his siege incontinently, passing thence into Asia with
all his army, taking up still by the way, as many as was possible, so that
as some affirm, he had as many horsemen as had the great Tamburlaine, with a
merueilous number of other Souldiars, both old, and of much experience,
especially by means of the continual wars, which he had still with the
christians. This Baiaceth now like a good, and like an expert Captain, seeing
that he no way else might resist, this puissante Emperor, determined to meet
him, and to give him present battle, having merueilous affiance in the
approved manhood, and virtue of his Souldiars. Wherefore marchyng on within
few days, they met each with other upon the confines of Armenia, where
both of them orderyng as became good Capitaines their people, began in the
break of day, the most cruel, and most terrible battle that erst was ever
hard of, considering the number on both parts, their experience, and
policy, with the valiant currage, and prowes of their capitaines. This
continued they in fight even almost until night, with merueilous sloughter
on both sides, the victory yet doubtful, til, in the end the Turks began
to fainte and to flee, more in deed oppressed with the multitude, then that they
feared or other wise, the most part of them with honor diyng manfully in
the filde: and as one reports two hundred thousand were taken prisoners,
after the battle was ended, the resude slain, and fled for their better
safety. Which Baiaceth, of part perceiuyng before the end, how it would
way, to courage his people, and to withdraw them from flight, resisted in
person valianntly the furious rage of the enemy. How be it, he thereby gained
such, and so many knokes, that as he was in the end, in deed vnhorste, so was
he for lake of reskewe presented to the great Tamburlaine, who incontinently
closed him up, in a Kaege of iron, carriynge him still with him, whither
soever he after went, pasturyng him with the croomes, that fell from his
table, and with other baddde morselles, as he had been a dog: whence
assuredly we may learn not so much to affie in riches, or in the pomp of this
world: for as much as he that yesterdaie was Prince and Lord, of all the
world almost, is this day fallen into such extreme misery, that he lives
worse then a dog, fellow to them in company, and that by the means of him
that was some^ times a poor Sheaperde or if you rather will, as some report,
a mean soldier, who after as we see aspired to such honor, that in his
time none was found that durst, or could abide him: the other that descended
of noble race or lineage, constrained, to live an abiecte, in most lothsum, and
vile servitude. This tragidie might suffice, to withdraw men, from this
transitory pomp, and honor, acquaintyng theimselues with Heaven and with
heavenly things only. Now this great Tamburlaine, this mighty Prince, and
Emperor, over ran all Asia the less, to the Turk before subject, thence
turning toward Egypt, conquired also Syria, Phenicia, and Palestina, with all
other Cities on their borders, of what side so ever, and besides these Smirna,
Antioch, Tripolis, Sebasta, and Damascus. Afterward being come, with all his
army into Egypt, the Soudan, and the king of Arabia, with sundry other
Princes, assembled altogether, and presented him battle, but in the end to
their inspecable detrement discomfited, were flaine, and spoiled at the
pleasure of the ennimie: by mean whereof the Soudan saved himself by flight.
How be it, Tamburlaine had easily taken from him all Egypt, had it not been,
for the great, and inaccessible, deserts in that country, through which to
pass with so puisante an army, was either impossible, or at the least verte
difficill, not withstandyng he subdued all such parts of the Country as were
next him. Some report of him, that he then him held best contented, when he
found his ennimy most strong, and best able to resist him, to the end he might
be occasioned, to make proof of himself, what he was able to do, and how
much in his necessity: that which well chanced him at the city of
Damascus. For after he had taken the most honorable, and most valiante
personages of the city, the others retired into a certain Castle or Hold,
such, and so strong, that all men accounted it inpregnable, where, never
the less, desirous to grow, to some composition with him, were utterly
refused, no entreaty preuailyng* so that in fine, they must needs fight it
out, or yield them to his mercy. And findyng no place, where he by any means
might assault it, builte fast by it an other more high and strong then that,
where he so painfully, and in such sort dispatchte it, that the ennimie by no
means cold or let or annoie him, so that his Forte in the end or equal,
or rather higher then the other, began his battery, such, and so cruel,
that it never ceaste day nor night, until at last he had taken it. It is
written of him, that in all his assaults, of any castle or city, he usually
would hang out to be seen of the enemy, an Enseigne white, for the space of
one full day, which signified, (as was then to all men well known) that if
those with in, would in that day yield them, he then would take them to
mercy, without any their loss of life or goods. The second day he did to
be hanged out an other all read, lettyng them thereby again to understand,
that if they then would yield, he only then would execute Th'officers,
Magistrates, masters of housholdes, and governors, pardonyng, and forgeuyng
all others whatsoever. The third day he ever displaied, the third all
black, signifiynge thereby, that he then had shut up his gates from all
compassion and clemency, in such forte, that whosoever were in that day
taken, or in any other then following, should assuredly die for it, without
any respect, either of man, or woman, little or great, the City to be sacked,
and burnt withal to ashes: whence assuredly it can not be said, but that he
was very cruel, though otherwise adorned, with many rare virtues. But it is
to be supposed, that god stirred him up an instrument, to chastise these
princes, these proud, and wicked nations. For better proof whereof Pope Pius,
which lived in his time, or at least, eight or ten years after him,
reports of him saying, that on a time beseigyng, a strong and rich city,
which neither on the first, or second would yield to him, which only days,
were days of mercy, as is above said, on the third day nevertheless affiyng
on hope uncertain, to obtain at his hands some mercy, and pardon, opened
their gates, sendyng forth in order toward him, all their women, and children
in white appareled, bearing each in their hands a branche of Olive, criyng
with haute voice, humbly requestynge, and demaundyng pardon, in manner so
pitiful, and lamentable to behold, that besides him none other was but would
have accepted their solemn submission. This Tamburlaine, notwithstanding that
beheld them a far of, in A barbarus cruelty of Tamburlaine.
this order issuyng, so far then exiled from all kind of pity, that he
commanded forthwith, a certain troop of horsemen to over run, to murder,
and kill them, not leauyng one a live, of what condition soever, and after
sackyng the City, resed it, even unto the very foundations. A certain
Marchaunte of Genua was then in his camp, who had often recourse to him, who
also used him in causes familiarly, and who for that this fact seemed very
bloody, and barbarous, hardened himself to demand him the cause why he used
them so cruelly, considering they yielded themselves, craving grace, and
pardon: to whom he answered in most furious wrath, and ire, his face read and
fiery, his eyes all flamynge, with burning spearckles, as it were blasing out,
on every side. Thou supposest me to be a man, but thou to much abbusest me,
for none other am I, but the wrath, and vengeance of God, and ruin of the
world: wherefore advise thee well, that thou never again presume, to be
found in any place in my ^ight, or presence, if thou will that I chastise the^
not, according to thy desert, and thy proud presumption. This Marchaunte with
out more then suddenly retired, neither after that, was at any time seen in the
camp of Tamburlaine. Those things this accomplished, this great and mighty
Personage having conquired many countries, subdued and done to death suudrie
Kings and Princes, no where findyng any resistaunce in any part of all Asia,
returned home again into his country, charged with infinite heaps of Gold,
and treasure, accompanied also with the most honorable estates, of all the
cu^tries subdued by him, which brought with them in like manner, the greatest
part also of their wealth and substance, where he did to be builte a most
famous, and goodly city, and to be inhabited of those (as we fore said) that
he brought with him, which altogether no less honorable then rich, in very
short time with the healpe of Tamburlaine, framed the most beautiful and
most sumptuous City in the world, which by the multitude of the people, was
also merueilously enlarged, abundaunt, and full of al kind of riches. But in
the end this Tamburlaine, though he maintained his estate, in such
authority and honor, yet as a man in the end, he paieth, the debte due unto
nature, leauyng behind him two soonnes, not such as was the father, as
afterward appeared by many plain, and evident signs: for as well by their
mutual discord, each malicing the other, as also by their insufficiency,
with the lack of age and experience, they were not able to keep, and
maintain the Empire conquired by their father. For the children of Baiaceth,
whom they yet held as prisoner, advertised of this their discord, and
dissension, came into Asia with valiant courage, and diligencie, by the aid
of such people as they found willing to assiste them, recoueryng their
possessions, and territories fore lost, which, in manner semblable did they
other Princes, which Tamburlaine before had also subdued. So that this Empire
in prosis of time so declined, that in our age there remains now no
remembrance at all of him, ne of his posterity or lineage, in what respect
soever. How be it, true it is, that Baptista Ignatius, a diligent searcher of
ancient antiquities, reports that he leafte two soonnes, Princes and
Protectours of all the countries, subdued by him, reachyng, and extendynge even
unto the River of Euphrates, as al so their successors after them, even until
the time of King Vsancasan against whom the Turk. Mahomet, waiged some times
bataile. And the Heirs of this Vsancasam, as most men surmise, advanced
theimselues, to the honor, and name of the first Sophi, whence now is derived
the empire of Sophi, which lives this day, as sworn ennimie to the Turk.
Which how soever it be, it is to be supposed, that this history of
Tamburlaine, had it of any been written, would have been a matter worthy
both of pen and paper: for that great exploytes, no doubt were happily
atchiued of him: but as for me I never found more, then I here presently have
written, neither suppose I that any other thing, is of any other man written,
this only excepted, where on all men accord, that he never saw the back, or
frounyng face of fortune, that he never was vanquished, or put to slighte by
any, that he never took matter in hand, that he brought not to the wished
effect, and that his courage, and industry never failed him to bring it to good
end. By means whereof we may, for just cause compare him with any other
whatsoever, though renoumed in times past. This then that I here give you, that
al have I borrowed of Baptista Fulgotius, Pope Pius, Platina upon the life of
Boniface the ninth, of Matthew Palmier, and of Cambinus a Florentine, writing
the history, and exploytes of the Turks.

Of many lakes, and fountains, the waters of which have sundry, and strange
proprieties. Chapt. 15.
IN the Chapter, where we above, some thing spoke in general, of the
perfection of waters, we promised to entreat of the propriety, or effect, of
certain springes, or lakes, in particular: of which all, the first shall be
the river of Judea, Asfaltida, which also was after called the immovable, or
dead sea. Of this water Pliny, Columella, and Diodorus Syculus, report many
things, both strange, and marvelous. First, that there ingendereth,
neither fish, foul, or any other living creature, and that nothing having
life, may there in be drouned, so that if you throw into it, a man, or any
other creature, he by no means shall perish there in, yea, though he be
bound in such sort, that he neither swim, or move. These things are
recited by Pliny: and Aristotle to give some natural reason for it, Pliny in
his 5. book, and Ar. in the third of his Mereo.
says, that the water of this river, is very salt, gross, troublesome, and
thick. Cornelius Tacitus adds also this, an other propriety, that it never
moves, or rises in any waves, for no wind, what so ever, or great, or
vehemente. These foresaied aucthours affirm, as also Solinus, that at one
certain time, there gathers together in this lake, a strange kind of
frothe, or slime, which is so good, and so strong a mortar, that hardly any
waighte, or other force dissolueth it. Diodorus Syculus terms it Bitumen, and
Asfalta, so that it seems to take his denomination, of this river Asfaltida.
Of other lakes we read, that engender the like slime, or mortar, as that, that
adioigneth so nigh unto Babylon, with the frothe of which, Semiramis did to be
built those famous walls of Babylon. Into this water of Judea, descends the
sloodde of Iordaine, whose water is most pure, and excellent: but enteryng
into the other, loses his pristinate virtue, by the only impuritie, and
imperfection of the other. It is written, that Domician sent thither of
purpose, to be ascertained of the truth, concerning this matter, and received
for answer, as is before said. Pliny remembereth us of an other in Italy,
called Aue^^a nigh unto the sea, or goulfe of Bayas: and this lake is of this
property, or condition, that there passes no bird, of what kind so ever he
be, over it, but immediately he falls down dead into it. The Poet Lucretius,
yeldeth this reason for it, saying: that by the means of the great number of
trees, that on both sides inuiron it, and of part by means of the continual
shadow, there ascends such a vapor, so gross, and so infectious, that
immediately it stifleth, or impoisoneth the birds: and farther he adds, that
it of part also proceeds, of certain obnoxious, and sulfured mines there.
Theophrastus, and Pliny, accord both tegether, of a river in Judea called
Licos, as also of an other in Ethiopia, of like and semblable nature, having
the proprieties of oil, or the like matter, which put into a lamp, give
light, and burn incontinently. Pomponius Mela, and Solinus, writing of
Ethiopia, affirm, that there is a lake, or river, very sweet, pleasante, and
clear, in which notwithstanding if any man wash him self, he issues thence
again all anointed, as if he came out of a bathe of oil. The semblable to
this reports Vitruuius, saying: that there is a certain floudde in Cilicia,
as also nigh unto Carthage, a well of the same property. Solinus,
Theophrastus, and Isidorus affirm, that they have heard of two diverse wells,
of the one, of which two, if a woman fertile, chance to drink, she from
that time ever after, shall live sterill, and baron: and contrary wise, if a
woman sterill, by hap, drink of the other, she forthwith becomes fruitful,
and bears children abundantly. They again remember us of an other in
Arcadia, of which who so drinks, stearueth immediately. Aristotle in his
questions natural, speaks of one in Thracia, of like, and semblable effect,
as also of an other, equal to it in Sarmatia. Herodotus has, which Pliny,
and Solinus confirm, that the river Hypenis, both great and wide, descendyng
down from Scithia, is a water right wholesome, and sauourie, into the which,
never the less, after the enteraunce of a little spring, or fountain, it
waxes so bitter, and so unsavory, only by the saltness, or vnpleasante
taste of that well, that it is impossible for any man, in any wise to drink
of it. The said aucthours again as also Isidorus remember us, of two other
fountains, or springes in Boecia, of which the one being drounke, utterly
takes from us our memory, the other preserves it, causyng these that there
of drink at any time, freshely to call to mind again, what they before had,
or lost, or forgotten. Of two others also, the one mouyng, and prouokyng
men to venerie, the other druonke cools, and mortifieth their affections.
In Sicilia there is a fountain, which the inhabitauntes call Aretuza, of
which (besides the multitude of fish therein, as also that it was an offense,
to take, or to eat of them) a strange, and thing incredible, is credibly
reported, which is, that within this water, many notable things have been
found, which in times long before, had been thrown, into the river Alfea,
which is in Achaia, a conntrie of Greece: by means whereof they maintain, and
affirm, that the water of this river, passes through the entrails of the
earth, springyng, and risyng again in the above said fountain, passing
under the sea, betwixt Sicilia, and Achaia. The aucthours that report it, are
of such credit, and learning, that they easily may harden an other man, to
write it again after them. Seneca affirms it, Pliny, and Ponponius Mela,
Sen. in the. 3. book of his natural questions. Pom. M. in his second book
Strabo in the. 6
Strabo, and Seruius commentyng on the tenth Eglogue of Virgil. Solinus, and
Isidorus have this of an other fountain, in to which, who so puts his
hand (for the affirmation, or negation of any thing) taking a corporal oath,
if he there proteste any thing, against the truth, or verity, his iyes
incontinently will dry up, and wax blind. Pliny records the very
semblable, also of an other river, which brunte of the hand of a perjured
wretch, which reportyng an untruth, swore by the said water, thrustyng his
hand into it. Philostratus in his second book, of the life of Apollo, says
that there was a certain river, in which, who so washte his hands, and feet,
being in deed a wilful, and reatchlesse periurer, was incontinently covered,
with a foul, add loathsome leprosy. Diodorus Siculus has the like also of an
other. But if these things to any manne, seem less worthy of credit, know
he, that Isidorus a man virtuous, and learned, in the report of them, has
followed in most places, the aucthours above remembered and writes also of
many others, as of the well of Jacob in Idumea, which four times in the
year, changes his color, and from three months, to three, waxes thick,
and troublesome, it now is black, now red, now green, and at last retonrneth
to his natural color again. Of a river also that runs through the
country, of the Troglotides, which three times in the A people in Africa
which dwell in caves and eat the flesh of Serpents.
day, and night, changes his taste, or savor, to weete, from sweet to
bitter, and from bitter to sweet again. Of an other water also in Judea,
which continually in the Saboth day, is found to be dry, which Pliny
assures us, writing also of an other fountain, among the Garamantes, which
in the day, is evermore so sweet, and cold, that it is impossible for any
manne to drink of it, and contrary in the night, is again so warm, that it
burns his hand, that presumes to touch it, and has to name, the
fountain, or well of the Sun. Of this fountain have written, as of a thing
most certain, Arrianus, Diodorus, Siculus, Quintus Curtius. in his history of
Alexander, Solinus, and the Poet Lucretius, Lucretius in his sixth book.
who there of has given a Philosophical, and natural reason. Besides these,
like strange is the nature of the well Eleusina, whose water is very fresh,
clear, and standing, how be it, if any man play on an instrument, sweet, and
musical, by it, so nigh I mean, that the water may be supposed to hear it,
it forthwith begins in such sort to swell, that it ouersloweth both
bank, and border, as though it had some pleasure, or secret likyng in music:
this reports Aristotle in his meruailes of nature, Solinus also, and the old
Poet Ennius. Vitrunius writes of the river Chimera, whose water in taste is
very delectable, and pleasant, but partyng into two troughes, or two
sundry channels, the one continues sweet still, the other bitter, and
unsavory, how be it, it may be supposed, that he borrows this alrered
quality, of the soil, or ground only, through which he passes, and so that
alteration is less to be meruailed at: as also it may be thought, that these
diverse proprieties, of these, other waters also, should not so much amase, and
trouble us, if we knew the occasions, and causes, of their effects. The same
ones again, make yet farther mention, of an other stream, hayung to name
Silar, which, what so ever is cast into it, conuerteth it straight into a
stone, or stony substance. In Ilirica there is a well, whose water is both
sweet, and pleasant, but burns what so ever is thrown into it, in sort, as
if it were a perfect fire. There is in Epirus an other fountain, into which
if ye put a Torche lighted, it extinguisheth, but if you put him in not
lighted, he takes fire thence, and burns: from noone ever more he ebbeth, as
it were, and in the end waxes dry, but the night growyng on, he grows
again with such speed, that at midnight, he is full, and begins to over
run his banckes, or limits. An other fountain is there also in Persia, of
which, who so drinks, loses incontine^tly his teeth. There are in Arcadia
certain springes, which distill, and drop out of the sides of sunderie
mountains, whose waters al, are so excessive cold, that there is no kind of
vessel, be it of gold, silver, or any other metal, that is able in any
wise, to hold, and keep them, but break them all, with extremity of
coldness, only the horn of an ass his foot excepted, which contains, and
keeps them, as if it were any other, common kind of water. We would hardly
credit in this place, that there are certain rivers, both great, and wide,
that suddenly pass down, entering into the boiles of the earth, which
afterward brake out again, in places far of, and far distante from
thence, if we had not experience hereof, and such as may not be denied, for
example of some, Vadiana in Spain, Tigris in Armenia, which springs in
Mesopotamia, Licus in Asia. There are certain springes also, of fresh water,
which passing into the sea, run wholly upon the sea, without any commixtion
in any sort with it: of which there is one, betwixt Sicilia, and the Isle
Enaria, adioygnyng unto Naples. In Egipte, it is euidente, that it raineth not
at all, but that Nilus ouerflowyng the country moisteneth it naturally, whence
it gives her fruit, of all sorts abundantly. Two rivers are there also in
Boecia, in the one of which, all sheep that are watered, bear only black
wolle, and besides that none other, the other contrary, cause them that drink
thereof, to bear white wolle only. In Arabia, there is a well, at which (as
before) what sheep so ever water them, bear there wolle, not as the others,
white, or black, but read all. Of all these waters, having such strange
proprieties, Aristotle disputes at fulle, and copiously. The river Lincestis
makes him drunk, as soon as any wine, that drinks of him. In the Isle of
Cea, as records Pliny, there was a fountaiue, of which, who so drank ones,
became forthwith stupide, and insenseble, of no more felyng, or wit, then an
Ass. In Thrace there is an other lake, of whom, who so drinks, or swimmeth
in him, sterueth without more, never to be recovered. There is also in Pontus a
river, in which are found certain stones, that will burn, which also then
take on fire, when the wind is ever more greatest, and by how much the more,
they be covered in the water, so much the better, and sooner burn they.
Besides these, diverse have written, of diverse other kinds of waters, as of
some that heal certain griefs, or maladies, of which sort there is one
found in Italy, called Zize, which remedieth, or salueth all hurtes, what so
ever in the iye: an other in Achaia, of which if a woman with child drink,
she shall be assured, of good, and speedy deliverance. Others also there are,
that remedy many other infirmities, as the stone, the leprosy, the fevers
both tertian, and quartain, of which Theophrastus Pliny, and Vitruuius
remember us. In Mesopotamia also is found an other river, whose water, if you
smell to it, is both pleasant, and odoriferous. Baptista Fulgotius, in his
recollection writes, that there is also, a well in England, into which, if
you throw any kind of wood it will within the space of one year, be
converted into a stone. He also faithfully confirms that, which Albertus
surnamed the great, in person experimented, in a certain well, in high
Almaignie: and Albertus writes, that he puttyng his hand into the water,
having in it a bough, that part that was under the water, changed into a
stone, the other part, as before, continuyng that it was. The said Fulgotius,
reports yet, another matter as strange, of a well also, about which if
happily you walk, not vtteryng any word, or voice, at all, the water then
continues, as before, still, and clear, but if you speak any thing, be it
never so soft, or little, it then begins to rage, and to trouble, as to
behold it, were very strange, and marvelous: he notwithstanding, reports
to have experimented it in person, who while he attentively beheld it with
silence, found it as is above said, both quiet, and clear, but when he ones
spoke, it then began to trouble, as if one, within of purpose, with some
instrument had labored it. In France also is another, equal in coldness with
any of the above remembered, and yet often times ^lames of fire, have been seen
to issue out of it. Pliny writes, that most men are scrupulous in these
matters, and make conscience to credit them: how be it assuredly, the secrets
of nature, are in manner inscrutable, though in deed, more evidently seen, in
this elemente of water, then in any other thing. And farther, in the world so
many things are, so strange, and so marvelous, that we justly may repute no
thing (though less common) therefore impossible: especially these that are
certified us, of men, of such credit, as are all those, whom we here have
alleged. Besides this, we are truly certified, even by those that have seen
it, living yet in our time, that in one of the Isles of Canaria, called Ferra,
being an Isle populus, and very well inhabited, in a certain place very nigh
the middle, they have none other water, then that which distilleth, as is well
known, most abundantly, out of the leaves, or branches of a certatne tree,
at the foot of which tree, neither any thing nigh it, is there to be found
any spryng, or other water, never the less this tree continues always so
moiste, that both from his branches, leaves, and boughs, it ever distilleth
in such quantity, and abundance, that both night, and day, they fette
there, to serve all their necessities, which hardly we should have credited,
had we only found it written. Wherefore, let it not seem strange, or
incredible to any, that which, we have here tofore recited: for this elemente
of water is very puissaunte, and marvelous, whose force, and hidden qualities,
are not to all men, so familiar, and well known. As concerning the sea also,
it is reported to be in Winter, more warm then in the Summer, as again more
salt in Autumn then in other times any. Most true it is also, that in some
parts of the sea, to weete, in those that be farrest of, from the land, no
snow falls, at any time, what so ever. Of all these things, sundry have
given sundry good reasons, of which, the greater part, attribute it, to
the only propriety, or quality of the soil, mines, stones, trees, and
mettalles, where fountains have their sprynges, where rivers, and lakes run.
For better proof whereof, that it so is in deed, by daiely experience we well
are instructed, that vines, and other fruictes, of one, and the same kind; are
more better, and more sauery in one soil, then in another, for that some are
sweet some sharp and sower, some good and profitable, others again
infectious, and noisome. The air also it self, then corrupts, and is
pestilente, when it passes over any country, less wholesome, or impoisoned.
What marvel then is it, if the water that washes, and penetrateth the
earth, stones, mettalles, herbs, roots and trees, with infinite such, and
others the semblable, receive wholesome, or less wholesome proprieties, or
natures, be they never so strange, so rare, or incredible, especially aided
also by some influences, of the stars, and Planettes.

Of diverse strange things, which happened at the birth and death of our
savior Christ, recited by sundry famous, and learned historians, besides
these that are recorded by the Evangelists in the scriptures. Chap. 16.
ALthough these things, written by the Evangelists, which happened at the
birth, and death of our savior, strange in deed, and very miraculous are of
all others most certain, and worthy of credit: yet it seems to me no thing,
or very little from the purpose, if we remember here some other things,
perhaps not less marvelous, fine, and considred of, even of those that have
written them. Paulus Orosius, and Eutropius writing of Octauian, with whom also
accords Eusebius, saying: that at the birthe of our savior Christ, into
this world, there happened to break up, even at that instante, a certain
spryng that ran with oil, by the space of one day, in an Inn, or common
Tavern, in the city of Rome. And it seems that this spryng, no thing else
signified, but the coming of Christ, to wete, of the anointed, by whom, and
in whom, all christians are. The public Inn, into which all men
indifferently, and without respect are received, and lodged, signifies our
true mother, the holy and true Church, the great Inn, or common lodgyng, for
all faithful Christians: out of which should pass, and proceed incessantly,
all manner of people virtuous, and loving God. Eutropius to this also
adioigneth, that as well in sundry places about Rome, as in Rome it self,
even in the full, plain, and clear day, was seen a circle, which perfectly
compassed the Sun round about, no less bright, or clear, then the Sun it
self, giving also as much light or rather more then it. Paulus Orosius in like
sort reports, that even at the same time, the Senate, and people of Rome to
gether, offered to Octauian Augustus, the title of chief prince, or sovereign
lord, and siegnior which he refused in any wise to accept, prognosticating
(less thinkyng there on) that an other more greater, and more puissante then
he was borne, to whom only, and alone, this title appertained. Commestor in
his history semblably affirms, that the Temple, dedicated by the Romans,
to the goddess Peace, then fell, and sundred on every side, or quarter: and
farther says, that at the first erection of this temple; the inhabitants
consulted with the Oracle of Apollo, to know how long it should continue, and
stand, which answered, until a virgin should bear a child: which they
esteemed to be a thing impossible, and that therefore, their Church should
stand eternally: how be it, at the delivery of the virgin, the mother of
our redemer, and prince of heaven, it fell down, and suered, each part from
other. Whence also Lucas of Tuy, in the Chronicles of Spain writes, that he
some times found in the aunciente Annaleis, or records of that country
(having by conference, and computation found out the time) that in the very
same night, that our Savior was borne, there appeared in Spain precisely at
midnight, a certain cloud that in such sort gave light to the country, as
if it had then been, the middle of the day, or noone tide. I also remember
that S. Hierome reports, that at the same time, when the virgin fled into
Egipte, with her son all the Idolles, and Images of their gods there, fell
down, and defaste them selves, upon their aultars, and other places, and that
the Oracles, that these gods, or better to say, these deuilles, to deceive
the people, gave forth then at times, then ceaste, never after giuyng them
any answer, what so ever. This miracle alleged in this sort by saint
Hierome, seems also to be approved by that famous, and most excellent,
though a Panime, Plutarche, who without any credit that he gave to these
things, as also that he knew not, or how or why they chaunsed, has written
never the less, a particular treatise of the defect, or end of these Oracles:
for even then in his time, which was shortly after the passion of Christ, men
perceived that these Oracles began to fainte, and fail: neither allegaeth he,
for it in his treatise, any other reason, but that there should be dead, as he
supposed, some spirits, which he spoke, as a man void, or less skilled in
the faith, for that he understood not, that the deuilles, or spirits, were
immortal. Notwithstanding, strange is it, and worthy of consideration, to
see how evidently the devil showed him self, to be conquered, and subdued,
and that after the death of our savior, he so remained discomforted, that he
never again was able, to frame in any such sort, an answer: and that the
Gentiles also, not able, in deed to yield any cause, or reason why, had some
feelyng of this default, and surceassyng from his function. By mean whereof
Plutarche took on him to write this treatise, in which among others, in
effect he has these words (of which Eusebius makes mention, writing to
Theodorus, as of a most notable, and marvelous matter) I remember that I have
heard say, says he, of Emilian the orator, a man prudente and wise, and
well known to many of you, that his father, on a time coming, by the sea
toward Italy, and passing on a night, by a certain Isle called Paraxis,
even when all in the Ship were then still, and quiet, they heard a great,
and dreadful voice, which srom the Isle called to them, Ataman, Ataman,
(such was the pilotes name of the ship, an Egiptian borne) and although this
voice were ones, and again understood by Ataman, yet was he not so hardy, to
frame to it an annswere, until the third time, when he said who is there? what
is it that calls me? what would thou have? To who^ this voice again, more
louder the^ before, said: Ataman, my will is, that when thou passest by the
goulfe, which has to name Laguna, that thou there remember Laguna.
to cry out, and certify the said goulfe, that the great God Pan is dead.
Which understood, all those that were in the ship, feared, counsailyng the
said pilote, to leave vndooen his charge, neither any thing to arreste, or
stay at the goulfe, especially if the wind would serve them to pass further:
but approchyng nigh the place, of which this voice, admonished him, the ship
arrested, and the sea waxte calm, not having wind to pass presently any
farther: by means whereof, they generally concluded, that Atman should there
do his legation, or imbacie, which the better to do, he mounteth up into
the poupe, or hinder part of the ship, where he cries as loud, as he could
possible, saying: I will that ye know, that the great God Pan is dead:
which word, as soon as he ones had uttered: they heard incontinently, such
terrible lamentations, and cries, houling and complainyng, above that may be
said: in such sort that the sea it self resounded these complaints, which
continued most dolorous, and lamentable a great while: by means whereof the
Mariners, though meruailously afraied, having the wind good again, followed
their course, and arriuyng at Rome, made rehearsal of this their, adventure.
Whereof the Emperor Tiberius advertised, and desirous to be certified of the
truth, and none other, found to conclude, as is above rehearsed. Whence it is
evident, that the deuilles every where sorowed the nativity of our Savior,
and redemer Christ, for that he was only their ruin, and destruction. For by
just, and true supputation of time, we find that this happened, at the time
of his Passion, or perhaps, some thing before, then I mean, when he banished,
and exiled them, out of the world. It is to be presupposed, that this great
God Pan (according to the immitation of Pan, the God of Shepherdes) which they
said was dead, was some captain, and master devil, which at that time
lost his Empire, as did also the others. Besides all these Josephus writes,
that at the same time was heard in the temple of Jerusalem, a voice (though in
deed there was no living creature with in) which lamentably cried, and said
thus, let us go hence, and leave this country in haste, as who would say,
they truly knew, that the time of their pain, and persecution was at hand,
and that it drew on fast, even by the death of him, that gave life unto
others. In the Gospel of the Nazarites it is read, that in the day of his
Passion, that sumptuous gate of their Temple, which they never left for any
cost, to adorn, and beautify, fell down to the ground, and was utterly
defaced. Consider now in that day, what strange, and marvelous things
happened, though the Evangelists have paste them, as things less worthy
memory. The eclipce also of the Sun, which continued three hours, the full
space in deed, that Christ was on the cross, was not natural, as are the
others, which by the only conjunction of the Sun and Moon chance us, but
was miraculous, and contrary to the course, and order of nature. Such
therefore as less know how the Sun is eclipsed, must understand, that it
only happens, by conjunction of the above said bodies, the Move passing,
or going betwixt the Sun, and the earth: never the less, this eclipse
happened, in th'opposition of these planettes, the Moon then full, and hundred
and eighty degrees, distant from the Su^ne, in the under hemisphere, then at
the city of Jerusalem: for proof whereof, besides the testimonies of
infinite good writers, the scriptures them selves, record it manifestly: for
certain it is, that the lamb was never Sacrificed, but in the.xiiij. of the
Moon, which Lamb was eaten by Christ, and his disciples, but one day only
before his death, as is commanded in the.xij. of Exodus, in Leuiticus also the
xxiij. And the next day followyng, which was the day of unleavened bread,
Christ the Lamb unspotted, was unkindly crucified, the Moon then of necessity
in her full, and opposite to the Sun, which then could no more eclipse the
Sun, then any other Planete. It then was to conclude miraculous, and contrary
to the order of nature, done only by the onmipotente, and sole power of GOD,
which deprived the Sun of light, for that three hours space. By occasion
whereof, that worthy personage Denis Areopagita, being at ye time present at
Athens, and beholding in this sort, the Sun to be obscured, and knowing on
the other side, as a learned Astrologian, that this eclipse was contrary to the
order of natue, said openly with a loud voice, to be heard of all men:
either the frame of the world shall be dissolved, either the God of nature
presently suffers. For which cause, as one reports, the sages of Athens
straungely disturbed, did to be builte incontinently, an altar, to the God
unknown, whether afterward saint Paul arriuyng, learned them, who was that
God unknown, and that he was Jesus Christ, God and man, our redemer, which
then, and at that time, suffered for our salvation: by means whereof, he
converted, great numbers to the faith. Some never the less have doubted,
whether this defecte were general, and universal throughout the world,
groundyng here on, though the Evangelist says, that it was sin upon the
whole face of the earth, that, that was only, but a phrace, or manner of
speech, as much to say as in all the country there about, of which opinion
was that learned doctor Origin: but what? We see that in Greece, yea, in
Athens it self, this defecte of the Sun was perceived of all men, which
leads me to suppose, that it was general, to be seen, and considered
through out our whole hemisphere, in what place, or where so ever the Sun
that time appeared. Which I therefore say, for that in all the other
hemisphere, where it then was night, no man could see any thing, no she we then
of the Sun at all there, for at one time he only lights the half world,
the other he obscureth with his own proper shadow. How be it, the Moon then
being in her fulle, not having any other light, then that, which she takes
or borrows of the Sun, and yet then being in the hemisphere, which is
under us, became also to be vehemently eclipsed, and darkened, by the only
want of the light, and she we of the Sun. By which means, an universal
shadow, covered the whole earth, the Moon, and stars, not able to give
other light, then that which the^ selves receive of the Sun.

Of many places alleged by sundry good authors, making mention of Christ,
and of his life. Chap. 17.
Eftsoon have I hard the question demanded, of many a curious, and learned
Clarke, whence it was, or whence it proceaded, that the Gentiles, and Paynimes,
so sildome remembered any thing of our savior Christ in all their writings,
of his life, and miracles so many in number, published and made common to the
world by his disciples, for as much as the said Painimes and Gentiles have
well remembered sundry other things, which were done, and chaunsed even in the
same time, in many respects of less weight or importance. Where unto I
answer, that it less true were to affirm, that these ancient historians
have here of written nothing, for in infinite places have they discoursed of
these things, of which some few notes I have briefly here gathered, for
their only contentation, that never were acquainted with these foresaid
historiogriphers. In the second place also we must consider, that the faith
and law of grace given us by Christ, begun by himself first, and by his
disciples, published, and received of certain that determined to live and die
therein: other some rebellious, and obstinate, so deep drouned in sin, that
they made no scruple to refuse it, but to the vtterest of their might pursued,
and persecuted it. Besides these the third sort were neuters, that healde the
mean, to whom, though this religion seemed just and virtuous, yet as well for
fear of persecution, and tyranny, as also for some other worldely
considerations, this virtuous profession was also of them neglected. The
world then standing this in three opinions divided, those that professed
Christ did things strange and miraculous, of whom many bear true, and
assured witness, of which number are Dionysius Areopagita, Tertulian,
Lactantius Firmianus, Eusebius, Paulus Orosius, with many others, which long
were here to recounte, or remember. These others accursed that persecuted this
Church, as a thing strange, abhorring from their law endeavored what in
them was, utterly to abando^ it, covering christ his miracles, his life, and
his doctrine, for which cause they refuced to write of him at all, or at least
they that in any sort, wrote any thing of him, did it to the intent to
stain and obscure his glory, of which predicament were these predestinate to
damnation, Porphyrius, Iulianus, Vincentius, Celsus, Africanus, Lucianus, with
others many, the members of Satan: against whom most learnedly has written S.
Ciprian, Origin, Augustine, and others. The others that for fear, or for
consideration of gain, have left to love Christ, to learn, and know his
Gospel, for the same causes have also, in their kookes leafte to remember of
him: or if at least any of them, have any thing spoken of him, the same
has been freaghted with skoffes, and lies passing him over, in as few as was
possible. Yet nevertheless, even as he, that would cover a verity, under the
shadow of disguised treatcheries, it eftsoon falls out, by the preuie
propriety, and secret nature of the verity, that he that fainest would cover
it, so evil fauouredly disguiseth, and fardleth the matter, that in the end
it ill sauoureth, the truth, mawgre his bearde, breakyng out most plain and
evident. Even so has it happened, to both these sorts, of these before
remembered people: which although they toiled to discredit, and to stain with
ignominy, the miracles wrought by our savior, and his professed doctrine, yet
came it so to pass, that as often times as they, thereof wrote any thing, some
thing they uttered, in such sort as was evident, both their dispitefull
malice, and purity of that doctrine. Here cold I remember many things,
written by the Sybilles, but for as much as that, yt they wrote, proceeded not
of theimselues, but from that spirit of prophicie, which God had lent or
granted them, though they were in deed nothing better then infidels, I will
leave of them to speak any thing, hastyng to thothers. Our first then and
most evident testimony, though also with the same not least common, is, and
shall be of the most and greatest ennimies of christianity, among others of
Josephus a Jew both by consanguinitie, Josephus in the second book of his
antiquities.
and nation, as by his life also, and profession: his words are these: In this
time lived Jesus a wise and learned man if it be lafull to term him a man, for
that assuredly he did things strange, and mearuailous, a master and teacher
of those that loved him, and sought the truth, he ioygned unto him great
numbers, as well of Jews, as Gentiles, this man was christ. And although he
afterward were accused by men of great authority, fautors I mean, and
fauourars of our religion, don to death also, and by the same crucified, he not
withstanding was never yet forsaken of those that before, had willingly
followed him, wherefore the third day again after his death, he appeared to
them alive, according as the Prophets by divine inspiration had before spoken
and prophicied of him. And even in this our time, the doctrine, and name of
Christians dwells yet, and ever shall do unto the end in the world. These
then are the words of Josephus, which wrote of the ruin, and destruction of
Jerusalem, a witness present in person, at that subversion, which chaunsed
full forty years after the passion of our redemour. Pilate in like sort
which gave sentence of death against him, witnesses in manner semblable of his
marvelous miracles, of which by his letters he certified the Emperor
Tyberius, by means whereof he consulted with the Senate, to know whether they
would admit Jesus Christ, to be reverenced, and adored for God, and although
they would, in no wise there unto accord, yet Tyberius of himself streatly
inhibited, that no man should be so hardy, to touch, or grieve a Christian.
As concerning the yearthquake, and darknyng of the Sun, continuyng the full
time that Christ was on the Cross, we have also good testimonies and assured
of Ethnikes. Flegon a greek historiogripher, borne in Asia, of whom Swydas
especially remembers, reports for a thing almost incredible, that in the
forth year, of the two hundred and tenth Olympiade, which by just account was
in the eightinth year of the reign of Tyberius, at which time our savior
suffered, there was a great Eclipse of the Sun, such as earste had never been seen, or written of, continuyng from the sixth hour, even unto the ninth,
and farther during the time of this defect of the Sun, such and so
inspekable, were the yearthequakes in Asia, and Bithinia, that infinite houses
fell down to the ground. It appears farther, that besides this Flegon that
in the same time lived, Pliny also felt it, and discoursed on the said
matter, for says he in the time of Themprour Tyberius, greater earth quakes
were then seen, then ever had been before, by means of which were subverted
twelve famous cities in Asia, with infinite and innumerable other houses, and
buildings: in such sort that the historiogriphers Gentiles, though less
weetyng the cause, left not yet to write the miracles of Christ. The other
miracle of the veale of the Temple that sundred, Josephus in like sort
records it faithefully. The cruel murder dooen by Herod, upon the
harmless innocents, is written, of on other Jew, which hight Phylon, an
historian of great authority, in his abridgeme^t of time, where he thus
much reports, that Herod did to be murdered certain young infantes, and
with them also his own natural soonne, for that he heard say that Christ, the
king promised to the Jews, was borne and this man lived in the time of Herod
the Tetrarche, as him self writes. This history of the innocents, is of
Macrobius also, more fully remembered, a man excellently learned and of great
antiquity, who in rehersall of certain pleasant, and merry conceits of the
Emperor Octauian (about the time of the birth, or nativity of our savior)
which said, being advertised of the cruelty of Herod, as well toward his
own soonne, as also the others, that he rather would be a Hog in the house
of Herod, then his soonne, which he said for that the Jews did never eat
any swines flesh, which pretty ieste is repeted by Dion in the life of the
said Emperor, so that in fine there were many miracles, written as well by
Jews, as by Gentiles less supposing to have witnessed them, to have been done
by Christ, besides infinite the others reported by Christians. What farther
shall I write of the ancient Emperors, and what they thought of our faith, as
what discourtisies they also practiced, against the true professors of Christ,
and his truth? The first good Bishop or servant of Christ S. Peter, S. Paul
also a faithful minister, were done to death at the commandment of the
Emperoar Nero, thirtiesix years after the death of our redemour, at which time
was the great persecution of the Church, of which the Gentiles left not to
make mention, as among others many, these two especially, Cornelius Tacitus,
and Suetonius Tranquillus, which lived at that time, both famous, and
honorable. Suetonius in the life of Nero, spekyng of certain his own
ordinances, faieth that he tormented, and afflicted with sundry and grievous
puishmentes, a certain kind of people which called theimselues Christians,
folloyng a new faith or religon. And Cornelius T. writing of the said Nero,
affirms, that he chastised and pursued with terrible torments, a sort of
people, named commonly Christians, the author of which name says he, was
Christ of Jerusalem, the very same, which Pilate governor of ludea, did
openly to be crucified, by whose death his doctrine grew more and more, and
increased. But consider we also what some other Gentiles have written, of
honor, and authority like unto the others. Pliny the younger, in one of his
Epistles, demau^deth of the Emperor Traian whose Liuetena^t he was in Asia,
how he would that he should punish the Christians, that were aceused, and
brought before him: and the better to inform his Lord of what soever he
found against them, he among other things many reports, that these
Christians rise ordinarily, at certain hours of the night, assembling, and
meetyng together, singyng Hymmes, and Songs of praise unto Jesus Christ, whom
they honored for their God and Messiah, and besides this meetyng in
congregations together, they made also vows not to do annoie, or damage to
any, not robbyng or taking from any manne what so ever, that they would not
commit adultery, that they never would false their faith, or promis, not to
deny, what soever had been lent them, or committed to their keeping. And
farther the said Pliny writes, that they always did feed, or eat
together, not holding or possessyng any thing, as proper or private. By these
are well known, what were even then, the exercises of the christians, as also
for what cause the world pursued them. Those things were recorded thus by an
idolatrous infidel, sixty years fully after the Passion of our Lord and
savior. Unto which letters the Emperor answered, for as much as they were
accused of no kind of riote, or wrong, he should in no wise afflict, or
chastise them; ^e yet make any inquisition, what so ever against them: not
withstandyng, when they should yet be accused before him, that he then did his
pain, to withdraw them from that Religion: but if they in no wise would
forgo, or leave it, that he should not for all that, do them any kind of
violence. How be it, true it is, that this said Emperor Traian, before this
as an infidel, and deceived by the guile, and fraud of the accusers, punished
both, and persecuted, the poor harmlis christians. After succided in the empire
his Nephew Adrian, of who^ Aelius Lampridius, an historiogripher, void of
faith, and idolatrus, writes that he began first to honor the christians,
permitting them to live after their loore, and order, and that him self also,
with the people reuerensed Christ, building, and grauntyng them Temples, for
their behoof, but afterward alteryng his good mind and zeal toward
them, began cruelly again, and odiously to persecute them, abused by the
masters of his false ceremonies, as by the Bishops also of his false gods,
perswadyng with him, that if he any way favored the Christians, that all the
world would shortly be converted to that law, whence a general rume would
follow to their gods and religion, all which is reported by Petrus Crinitus.
It is written in the life of Saturninus, that from Seuerinus the Consul, a
letter was written to the said Adrian the'mperor, wherein he certified him, that
in Egypt were sundry christians, among which some called theimselues Bishops,
of which all, no one was found at any time idle, but busied still every one
about some exercise, or other, and that there was none, no not the blind, nor
the goutie, but took some kind of pain, and lived by their labor, which all
honored one only god, which also was honored for God of the Jews. We
read also in the histories of that time, that this Emperor, this beginning,
to abuse the Christians, by the instigation, as is said, of his high priests,
and bishops, there was a certain his Ambassador Serenus Eramyus; an Ethnike
borne, as also was he, that wrote to him, aduertising him that it was no little
cruelty, to condescende in such sort, to the miserable ruin, and oppression
of the Christians, being of nothing else accused, but of the observation only
of their faith and religion, in no other respect or blame worthy, or
culpable. By means of which letter, the Emperor, inhibited Minutus Fondanus
then Proconsul in Asia, that he in no wise condemned any Christian what so
ever, not being convicted of any other crime, but of that only, of their
faith, and profession.

That men borne of base condition, should not leave, by all means possible,
to attempt to reach, and aspire unto honor, with certain examples seruyng
to that purpose. Chap. 18.
Generally we see, that men descending of a noble house, or family, become
also in time berie valiant, and honorable, immitatyng the noblesse of their
birth, and virtue, of their ^ncestours: how be it, for that there is no law,
nor no rule so certain, which suffers o^ admits not some kind of
exception, this also may be said, to fail with the others: for some times
the father wise, learned, advised, and honest, has a soonne idle, abiecte,
less wise and unprofitable: and yet again admit that this rule were more
certain, more intallible, and more assured, then in deed it is, yet should
not they, that descend of poor, and mean parentage, leave to attempt, by
incessuante pain, and industry, to aspire to the seat, of virtue, and
honor: for that these families, that this day are reputed for ancient, and
noble, haus taken their beginning, and spryng of virtue, noblyng their
posterity, and successors with honor. Wherefore, the better to animate men,
to asspire to great matters, I will remember the examples of some in
particular, issuyng out of mean, and simple parentage, which in the endo,
excolled in honor, and virtue. And in the first place, Viriat a Portugale, so
much renoumed among the historiens, especially Romans, on whom he eftsoon
did cruel, and bloody revenge. This man was the soonne of a poor Shepherde,
and in his youth a^ded his father in his charge: but having his heart inclined
to matters more high, and of greater importance, left to keep Sheep, and
other tamed beasts, followyng more busily the chase of the wild, and savage,
where in he excelled in courage all others. After this the Romans, inuadyng
the Spaniardes, he gathered, and assembled certain his companions, by whose
help he skirmishte, at times, with the enemy, at times also again, for
practice with his friends, where he so valiaunte was, so noble, and
courageous, that in few days he had gathered an army sufficient, with
which being entered the field, he gave battle to the Romans, in defense of
that country: which wars, or rather enmity continued fowertene years,
during which time, he obtained against them, sundry great, and honorable
victories. By means whereof, he grew in honor, and authority, dread, and
faired for his prowes continually of his enemy: but in fine, unkindly by
treason was slain, to the great discomforte, and sorrow of all his army, by
which he was (as duty would) most pompously buried. Arsaces king of the
Parthians, was of such base, and simple parentage, that no man could speak
of, or knew any of pis parents. Who, after he had withdrawn himself, from
the subjection, and obedience of Alexander, he ordained the first kingdom,
that ever was among the Parthians, a people, no less renoumed, then dread, in
deed, of the Romans. By means of whose only passing prowes, and
valiauncie, all other kings his successors, for the sole memory, and
reverence of his name, although they never were crouned, by inheritance or
succession, were called Arsacides, as the Romain Emperors, took also the name
of Caesar, for the love of great Caesar Octauian Augustus. That excellent
captain Agathocles, which for his surpassyng wisdom, and mandhoode, was
created king of Sicilia, and maintained cruel battle, against the people of
Carthage, was notwithstanding, of so mean a family, that as I remember, his
father was a Potter, whence he being advanced, to the honor of a king, did
never the less, as often times as he banketted, his table to be furnished,
with vessels, as well of claie, as also of gold, or silver, to the intent
he still might have in mind; and remember, the place of his beginning, his
fathers house, and family. The example also of Ptolomie, well serves to this
purpose, being one of the most worthiest capitaines of Alexander, after whose
death, he became king of Egypt, and of Siria, such, and so virtuous, that his
successors there would after him be called all Ptolomies. This Ptolomie was the
soonne of a gentleman, that highte Lac. the father of Ptolomie.
Lac, which never had better office then that, of common horse man, in the
ca^pe of Alexander. Iphicrates an Athenian, was in Marciall affairs, very well
skilled, he vanquished the Lacedaemonians, in plain, and open battle and
valiauntly withstoode, the impetuositie of Epaminondas, a captain Theban,
both renoumed, and honorable. The Same he was whom Artaxerxes king of Persia,
assigned captain general, over all his whole army, when he had to do, or
dealt with the Egiptians. Yet know we never the less (as is evidently written
of him) that he was the ^^^nne, of none other, then of a poor Cobbler. I had al
most paste over Eumenes, one of the most worthieste capitaines of Alexander,
as well for his valiauntie, as learning, and good counsel: whose life, and
famous gestes, are both recorded of Plutarche, and Paulus Emilius, who
concerning wealth and abou^dance of riches, though he were less gracious, in
the ^ight of Fortune, yet was he in the policies of war, second to manne,
reno^ed, and honorable, by his own only de^es, by no man advanced, but by
his only pain, and travail, being the son of a poor man, and as some
deem, a Carter. Emongall other se^gniories, and honors in the world, none was
there ever, so great, and so puissaunt, as was that, some times the Empire of
Rome, which was ordered continually, by such excellent person ages so ripe in
virtue, so absolute, and perfects, and yet for all that, sundry have there
attained even unto the highest, and sovereign degree of government, descendyng
of very simple, and of base parentage. Elius Part^x Emperor of Rome, was the
soonne of a certain artificer, his graundfather a libertine (which is to
say, such as was some times a bond What a Libertaine (...)
man, but was again afterward, for some just cause infraunchiste) that
notwithstanding, for his virtue, and honesty, was assigned by the Romans,
their sovereign, and Emperor, and afterward to give example, to others of
low condition, he caused the Shop, to be done about with Marble, curiously
cut, where his father before him, wrought, to get his living. Neither
asspired this Elius, issued of base parentage, unto the Empire only: for
Diocletian, that so much adorned Rome, with his magnificall, and triumphaunte
victories, was the soonne of none other, then a common Scribe, or Notarie, some
faie that his father was a book binder, and himself a bond man borne.
Valentinian was also crouned Emperor, but was the soonne, notwithstanding of a
Roper. The Emperor Probus, had to father a gardener. The renoumed Aurelius,
whom every age honors, issued out of so obseure a family, that the
historiegriphers, less agree among them selves, of his spryng, and beginning.
Maximinus also was the soonne of a Smithe, or as others some will, a Carter.
Marcus Julius Lucinus, as also Bonosus, by their prudente policy, governed the
said Empire, of which, the first was an housband man's soonne of Dacia, the
other the soonne of a poor, and stipendarie school master. Of this sort was
there many other Emperors in Rome, whom, all for breuities sake, I leave to
remember, as Mauricius Justinius, predecessor to Justinian. Gale^s also, in the
beginning a Shepherde. From this haute, and supreme dignity, let us descend
to the ^a of Rome, unto which asspired men, of like condition with the others.
As Pope Ihon the two and twenteth, which was the soonne of a Shoemaker, a
French man borne* notwithstanding for his learning, and wisdom, elected
bishop, which increased their rentes, and patrimony busily. Pope Nicholas
the fifte, having the name, tofore of Th^mas, was the soonne of a poor P^.
P^p^* S^ ^he fowerth, first called Frances, by profession a friar, had to
father a poor sea man, or mariner. I could in this place remember many others,
who^ al of purpose, I leave to name for that such offices, are less due to
nobility of blood, but rather to the learned, and virtues what so ever.
Whereof Christ himself has left us good example: for the first that ever satte
in that chair, whom also Christ himself there placed, was that good, and true
pastor S. Peter, which before labored the seas for his living, a Fisher, whom
from thence Christ elected, to be a fisher of men. Hence descendyng again
unto kings, and Princes, the Romans to them chose Tarquinius Priscus for
their king, the soonne of a stranger, and marchaunte of Corinthe, and that
which more was, banished out of his country, who never the less, augmented
the confines of his king dome, the number as well of Senators, as also them
of the order of knighthoode: he appoincted new estates, both for their
service, and ceremonies to the gods, so that the people nothing at all
repented them, to have chosen them a stranger, for their king and sovereign.
Seruius Tullius lived also long time king of Rome, he obtained great
victories, and triumphed three times, reputed notwithstanding, to be the
soonne of a poor bond woman, whence he continually held the name of Seruius.
The kings of Lumbardie, if they were not so aunciente, as the others of Rome,
yet were they in respect, no less famous, then they: The third of which
having to name Lamusius, was the son of a beggarly, and common strumpette,
which also being delivered at the same time, of two other children, as a
most wretched, and beastly woman, threw them into a deep, and stinkyng
ditche, in which also was some kind of water: by hap king Agelmonde passing
that way, found this child almost drouned in the water, and mouyng him
soughtly, with the end of his lance (which he at that time had present
there in hand) to the end he more perfectely might feel what it was, but
this child even then newely borne, feelyng it self touched, takes hold of the
lance, with one of his hands, not lettyng it to slip, or slide from him
again, which thing the prince considering, all amassed at the strange force,
of this young, little creature, caused it to be taken thence, and carefully to
be fostered, and for that the place where he found it, was called Lama, he
did him thence to be named Lamusius: which afterward was such a one, and
so favored of Fortune, that in the end, he was crouned king of the Lumbardes,
who lived there in honor, and his succession after him, even until the time
of the unfortunate king Albouine, when all came to ruin, subversion, and
destruction. An other matter like strange to this, happened in Bohemia, where
as one Primislas the soonne of a Plough manne, was then chosen king, when he
most busily, was labouryng the soil in the field. For at that time the
Bohemians, not knowing whom they might choose for their king, did to pass out a
horse unbridled into the fields, lettyng him to go, whether it best liked him,
having all determined, with most assured purpose, to make him their king,
before who^ this horse arrested, so came it the^ to pass, that the horse first
stayed him before this Primislas, busied then in turnyng the gleabe, a simple
Carter: so being forthwith confirmed (as is before) their sovereign, he
ordered him self, and his kingdom very wisely. He ordained many good and
profitable laws, he compassed the city of Prage with walls, besides many
other things, merityng perpetual laud, and commendation. The great
Tamburlaine also, whose famous exploites, are of part above remembered, was at
the first a Shepherde, as we before rehearsed. The valiaunte, and virtuous
captain, father of Frances Sforca, whose succession and posterity, even
until this our time, have been Dukes continually of Millaine, was borne in a
badde village, called Cotignoll, the son of a poor, and nedie work man: but
he naturally inclined to Martial affairs, of a valiant heart, and very
courageous, left that his fathers simple vocation, following a troop of
soldiars, which past through the country, and in the end by continuance, and
skillful practice, proved a most famous, and renoumed capitain. C. Marius a
Consul Roman, issued of simple parentage, borne in the village Arpinum, was
never the less such, and so Arpinum.
politic a captain, that all the world yet speaks this day of his
valiauncie: he seven times was chosen Consul in Rome, during which time, he
obtained such, and so great victories, that he also twice (to his perpetual
honor, and commendation) triumphed. M. T. Cicero, the father, and prince of
Latin eloquencie, well skilled also in every the Sciences, was Consul in
Rome, and Proconsul in Asia, and yet was he also borne in a simple cotage, in
Arpinum, by birthe, and parentage a very mean, and abiecte Roman. Ventidius
also the soonne of a most simple, and abiecte personage, was some times, by
profession a Muletour: but leauyng that vocation, followed the wars of
Caesar, by whose favor he obtained, through his prowes, and virtue, that he
shortly was appoincted captain of a band, and after that again under him,
general of the whole army, and from thence was called to the honor of a
bishop, and in fine, from thence mounted, to the estate of a Consul: who
wagyng battle with the Parthians, triumphantly conquered them, and was the
first that ever apparently, and thoroughly quailed their courages. It should
also be long, in this place to remember, all those that issuyng from obscure
race, or parentage, have notwithstanding, by their excellency in learning,
been aduau^ced to great estimation, and honor. Virgill was the soonne of none
other, then a Potter, yet aspired he to be called, the best Poet among the
Latins. Horace in mine opinion, excelled in poetry, no Prince of birthe, but
much like unto the others. Eustatius, and Pa^pinus, were the soonnes of two,
that had been bondinen, but both manumitted. Theophrastus the Philosopher, had
to father a badde Tailer, or Bodger. Menedemus also, to whom for his singular
learning, the Athenians erected a sumptuous Image, was the son of a poor
artificer. Besides these we read of infinite others, whom all I pass, as a
thing most assured, and euidente. By these examples, it now thus lies
manifest, that of what estate so ever, or condition manne be borne, he may if
he will, attain some time to honor, so that he walk still, in the pathe of
virtue, which only is acquired by incessaunte pain, and diligencie, with a
final consideration of heaven, our wished city, for who so other wise does,
if he in deed might possibly, conquer the whole, the wide, and the waste
world, what advantage should he have, for the same, to loose the soul, after
this life transitory?

Of the opinion that the old Romans, and other ancient countries had of
fortune, and how they plast her in the number of their Gods: in what form or
figure they also depainted her: and finally that there is no fortune at all
among the Christians, attributyng the cause of all things unto God. Chap. 19.
FOR as much as we have some thing written of the instabilitie of the world,
and that by sundry examples, of sundry worthy, and famous personages (that
which every of them attributed falsely unto fortune) reason would now that we
also in this place speak some what, of that, which the Gentiles, and Heathens
have immagined of this vanity, in fine concludyng, as is our promis with the
Christians. Among others many, and shameful errors, which the old sages, and
wise philosophers, have built upon man's only, and sole observation, not
feeling at all of that true, and heavenly wisdom, this was the chief and
principal occasion, for that not understanding the causes, whence these
effects proceaded, as also not why they were, or who ordained them, sundry
of them termed them the very works of fortune, as all soodden adventures,
things I mean some times less desired, or thought on: neither have they yet
stayed there, but fortune not being any other thing, then a plain
imagination, void as well of al quantity, as of substance or quality, have
deemed her to be some celestial or divine nature, some mistress of much might,
and particular Goddess, unto whom they attributed what so chau^sed in man's
life, were it, without respect, in things prosperous or adversity. They
supposed her to govern, or to hold in hand the bridle, of what so happened
to us either fortunate, or contrary, and so is this folly now grown to this
point, that Virgill fears not Virgill in the eight of his Eneid.
to name her, omnipotent, and almighty: and Cicero in his offices blustreth
out in this sort. Who is he that feels not the arm of fortune to be right
strong, and mighty, of equal power, and force, both in good and evil: for if
she vouchsafe to assiste us, with her prosperous wind, then mount we on high
to the top of our desires: but if it contrary, then live we afflicted in
miserable extremity. Salust a learned, and eloquent historiogripher, says
that fortune is maistris and lady over all things. With them also accords
Iuuenal in these words: if fortune will, of a simple advocate, thou shall be
made a Consul: if the same again, so please, from the estate of a Consul,
thou shall fall down to that, of a poor and needy aduocat, in such sort
that they attributed all puissance unto fortune. And yet merueilous is it to
see, how that being of this opinion, they so commonly and unfriendly blasphemed
still against her, terming her by names, and Epithitons, unkind exilyng far
from al reverence, far also from al honor. Pliny says, that through out the
whole world, in all places, and at all hours, and by all men of what degree so
ever, only fortune, and she alone is called on, she is desired, she is
accused, she is pursued with enmity, and malice, on her alone all men think,
she only is praised, she only is blamed, she only is charged with injuries
and reproaches, she only is honored, she only esteemed, she only is reputed
for uncertain, and mutable, of many she is accounted blind, and instable,
inconstant, fickle still chaungyng, and variable, and commonly to the less
worthy very large and favorable. The causes to her we attribute, of our
expenses, and receptes, and in all our accomptes, or like business to be done,
she holds still the one side, and the other of our book: in such sort that
we be of condition so servile, that this monster of us, is adored for a God,
and so by this mean would God to be uncertain. Hitherto Pliny. Our
ancestors framed to her sundry kinds of Images I mean of strange and diverse
figures, according to the diversity of effects, that they imagined to be in
her. When they would attribute to her the cause of any victory, they depainted
her in valiant shape, fearce, stout, and manly, having a temple perticularlie
dedicated unto mighty fortune, which (as supposes Liuie) was builte by the
Consul Camillus, with the pray, and spoils he got at the overthrow of the
Hetruscians: where in prosis of time afterward, it also was ordained, that
her feast should there be celebrated, the five and twenteth continually of
June, of part for that Hasdrubal was on that day vanquished by the Romans,
as also the same day Massinissa their friend conquired in like sort king
Syphax of Numidia. Besides this an other Temple was dedicated to her by the
Romans, two little miles, or there about from Rome, where she was purtraied
in shape like a woman, for that in that same place Coriolanus coming in arms
against his country, was won by the humble suit, and entreaty of his
mother, so that in fine he returned, and perdoned the City, which of purpose
he came to sack, to burn, and to destroy. And in this shape of a woman,
purtraied there in an Image, some accursed sprite or devil, by gile straight
entered, which often times thence spoke, reputed for an oracle. The third
temple also had they dedicated to ill fortune: at which time they so blinded
were in that their fond devotion; that they supposed all things should
prosperously succeed with him, that busily adored, or reverenced this fortune,
but unto him that sacrificed not, ne appeased her by offerynges, all things
should go amiss, where he so them attempted. And of all these abuses the
deuell himself was auther, to that intent only they should repose their whole
hope, and affiaunce still in him: as happened some times, for proof thereof to
Galba, who for that he had taken away, a collar of Gold, from this Image of
Fortune, to dedicate the same, or offer it to Venus, as is reported in sundry
good histories, fortune the said night immediately then following, appeared unto
him, with dreedfull words, minasing, whereof he also died or many days
expired. The vanity of this people was such then, and so aucthorised, that
they yet had also an other Image of fortune, semely bearded, imaginyng all
those, that had her in especial adoration, should have very fair beardes,
well colored, and well grown: but those that disdained her, or none at all,
or the contrary. All these things did they for diversity of respects, and
considerations in her: and withal to signify her omnipote^cie, or power,
which they deemed all she had, purtraiyng her in sundry, and diverse sorts a
goddess. The philosopher Cebes, depainted her in the shape, or figure of a
woman, but as furious with all, blind and with out feeling, mounted on a round
stone, denotyng her instabilitie. Vupal was the first in Greece, that framed
any shape or purtraite, of fortune, in the town of Smirna; which he depainted
with a veale upon her head, having in her hand a horn of abundance. The
Scithians purtraied her a woman without feet, having not withstandyng both
hands, and wings. Others some fashioned her, with the stearne of a ship in
one hand, as also with the foresaied horn of abundance in the other: thence
inferring that she had dominion over all, disposing all things, throughout
the world as was to her royal majesty best seemyng. Some others again of
fine, and brittle glass, because she was so fickle, with out all hold or
stay. Others also depainted her turnyng of a wheel, on the highest part of
which, some presently were placed, some also were climbyng, as thoug they would
get up, some also falling into ruin, and despair. One also resembles her,
not unaptly to a Commedie, in which some enter at times, with countenance, of
kings, and great Personages, and straight again chaungyng their habit, or
apparel, put on the faces, or countenaunces of bondmenne, for that in this
life, we have none other surety, to day to live in pomp, to morrow in
ra^cke beggerie. Socrates compared her to a common place, or theater without
order, where commonly it happened, the worthiest in deed, to be eftsoon worst
placed. Others some again, purtraied her all blind: and to this purpose
Apuleus, has these words in his golden Ass. For just cause did our elders,
depainte Fortune blind, for continually she gives, to the less virtuous, and
unhonest, never for his demerites, preferryng any person, void of all
election, or distinction of men for virtue, aduauncyng the ribaulde, and the
graceless tretcherer, whom if she had iyes to behold, or to consider, she
then would fly in haste, from these her accursed dearlynges. Infinite is the
number of aucthorities, that might be alleged, concerning the names, or
titles, that have been of many assigned unto Fortune. Valerius, and Claudian,
let not to call her dispitefull, and envious: Ouidius in fastis, right
mighty and puissaunte, but in his Epistles, accursed, and dispitefull.
Iuuenall in his Satires froward, and perverse. Lucian traitorous, and perjured.
Siluius Italicus, false, and subtle. Virgill in one place names her
omnipote^t, and almighty, but in others again inconstaunte, unfaithful, and
disloiall. Cicero of whom we also above some thing remembered, who also then
accoumpted her, a Princes most of might, and guide also to them that would, or
did live justly, says that nothing is so contrary to reason, and to
constancy, as is the same Fortune. And yet for all this, the vanity of the
ancient Romans, was such, and so great, that they still adored her, whom
they knew to be blind, falce, instable, and inconstaunte, dedicatyng to
the same, both sumptuous, and costly Temples, vowyng them selves, so busily,
to these superstitions, that the Emperors them selves, had evermore the Image
of Fortune, in their sleapyng chambers. But when any of them died, the same
was then transported into the chamber of his successor. The first that framed
a Temple, to Fortune in Rome, was Seruius Tullius, as records Live, the sixte
king by order; and just accoumpte of the Romans: though Plutarche in his
book of the fortune of the Romans, affirm that it was Marcius the fowerth
king there, which framed as is euidente, a Temple to virill Fortune. Seruius
notwithstanding, gave Fortune all these names, to wit, of valiaunte Fortune,
little Fortune, prosperous Fortune, adverse Fortune, triumphaunte Fortune, with
others more, such, to these the like, and semblable, to every of which, he
dedicateth a part, a rich, a fair and asumptuous temple. The first of virile
or rather valiaunte Fortune, stood nigh unto Tyber, where all young maidens,
that were of age mariagable, came to offer their presents, with all reverence,
and devotion: in which Temple they also did of all their apparel, all naked,
save their smock, before this Idol of Fortune, discoueryng their me heames,
and each their deformities, if they had any privy imperfection, immaginyng
that this Idol, would assuredly conceal it, and so for them work, by some
secret virtue, that those, thaut should marry them, should never at all
perceive it, that which Ouide reports in his Fastis. And as this Empire
grew still, to be more great, and puissaunte, so grew this fond devotion,
throughout among the Romans, erectyng to her Temples, according to the
difference, or diversity of her names: and this not only in Rome, or other
tounes about it, but in every the parts, what so ever, of all Italy. In
fine, then must we think, that all these vanities, with many others the
semblable, which may in this place be remembered, to this purpose, was a
plain illusion, and deception of men, walkyng in darkness, affiyng, and
trustyng in their own proper wisdom. For what so ever is, dwelling in this
world, in heaven I mean, in earth, or else below in hell, they still are,
and proceed, from the inscrutable providence, and wisdom of GOD: neither is
it Fortune, chance, or adventure, for that all in him have cause of their
being, by him they also hold their course, and eke their order. And again,
though many of us be found, of so gross a feelyng, or understanding, that
we either hardly, or not at all perceive, the increase, or success of
things, not to be of Fortune, but that what so ever is, or any way
multiplieth, the same to issue, and proceed from the principal, first, and
chief cause God, maker, creator, and governor of all, which for an assured
verity, we must acknowledge, and embrace, that would, or do desire, to be
numbered for Christians. Lact. Firmianus lets not to laugh at, or deride
those men, which attribute the adventures of the world, to Fortune. S.
Augustine in his retractations, repents him of his error, that he followyng
the common phrace, or wonted manner in speech, did attribute the good hap of
man, in like sort also to Fortune, highly co^mendyng in the said place king
David, for that he ascribed every his tribulations, to the inscrutable, and
secret judgments of God only. This then must we believe, that what so ever
is, or any where has his being, that the same both is, and proceadeth still
from God. Farther also, besides that sundry our elders, had some feelyng in
this matter. Saluste also saw it, and boldly therefore pronounced, that each
man was the first, and principal cause of his fortune, and in his proheme, of
his war of Iugurthe, says: that the slothful, and negligent person,
complains still of Fortune, but without any just cause, or reason. Iuuenal
more plainly in his tenth Satire affirms that where advice is, there Fortune
still exileth, though we repute her for a goddess, and lodge her in the
heavens. Other Philosophers were there, which though they also affirmed, that
Fortune of her self, could in deed do nothing, believed it notwithstanding,
that she was an instrument, or aid, to the divine providence, as if God should
stand in need of some other, to assiste him: which is no less vain, then
the opinions above rehearsed, and also others some, that in this place might be
remembered, which I all leave, as also to be tedious, only passing in few,
there by yet to admonish the ignoraunte, and simple Christian what so ever,
that he forsake his fond, and foolish custom, to grieve, or to mislike at
any time with Fortune, when any thing betideth him, contrary to his
expectation. For in fine, this must we know, that God disposes man's
affairs alone, to whom, and to none other, in every our necessities, we must
appeal, and cry, for his assistaunt grace and succor.

That sundry beasts, by some privy natural instinct, have foreknowleage of
things to come: as also of many countries, by the only force of little
worms, brought to be desolate, and forsaken. Chap. 20.
NOt only the natural instincte of sundry creatures, brute, and void of
reason, might suffice to learn us, the inward proprieties of things
infinite, as how, and in what sort, they might please, and profit us, as in
the use, or practice of Physic, or otherwise: but also a noumber of them,
birds, and fowls I mean, as well as any other, have some privy feelyng, of
every the change, and alteration of weather, as when we shall have rain,
wind, pleasant times, or tempests, instructyng here in man as if he saw it
presently. As then we see that Sheep, prognosticate of rain, when most
busily they disporte, in skippyng to and fro. The semblable is perceived most
plainly in the bullock, especially when he licketh directly against the
hear, liftyng his snoute a lofte into the air, bellowyng, and breathyng
eftsoon on the ground, feedyng with the same more busily, then is his wont, or
manner. The yeawe when she diggeth the ground with her foot: as also when the
goats covet nighest, to sleep together: when also the antes, walk thickest in
a rank in greater heaps also, then is their usual manner, runnyng each on
other, as troubled, or amassed, these all be marks assured of moisture, rain,
and weather. When Lions leave their wonted ranges, and soiles, and seek a new
to preie in other countries, then be you well assured, of great dries that
year followyng. Elian records, that the goats of Libia, know certainly,
when first the Caniculer days begin, and by evident demonstrations, both
feel, and perceive, when it will in deed, or likely is to rain. When Woulfes
draw in troops toward houses, and villages, and come nigher into the sight
of men, then is their common wont, an infallible rule is it, of a tempest
shortly followyng. Fishes also no less straungely prognosticate, and divine,
of every these chaunges, and mutations of times. When the Dolphines leap, very
busily in the Sea, discoueryng them selves, by mounting above the water, then
great winds shall follow, especially from that part, whence they seem to
come: but contrary, when they trouble the water, beatyng them selves there in,
a more certain sign then that, can none be of fair weather. When the frog
crooketh more, and more loud then is her wont, she fore learneth us of rain,
and of tempestious weather. Neither are birds exempted from this priuileage,
of which as much, or more, may we write to this purpose, then of all other
beasts, of what sort so ever. The fowls of the sea, when they refuse the
deapth, and hasten to the shore, denote some stormy blaste, and sudden
change of weather. If the Cranes fly in the air with out any brute, or
noise, then promise they a calm: but if they cry, and sly in heaps
disordered, then be ye well assured, they promise you the contrary. When the
crow flies from the maine land, to the sea, she there by as well
prognosticateth, some change of weather, and rain, as also when she plaineth
with mournful noise, and cry. If the shriche Oule, houle much, in any storm
tempestuous, it denotes some present change unto the better: but if in a
calm she sing, besides her wonted manner, it notes again, as on the other
side, some spedy alteration. Plutarche writes, that when the Crow syngeth
with a raw, and horse voice, not lettyng to beat her self busily with her
wings, she fore learneth us of wind, and rain in abundance. The same also
is evident unto us, by the said bird again, as when the Sun is falling in
the poincte of the Weste, if he skippe, and sing, mountyng suddenly into the
air, straight falling down again, as if he scarce could fly, beginning then
again his play, even as before, threatnyng as we might say, some blusteryng
storm, or tempeste. Great troops again of white birds, ordinarily
assemble, and mete in heaps together, immediately before some great change,
or alteration of weather. When the Cock, the Capon, with every other kind of
Pultrie, beat eftsoon their wings, advance them selves, and sing, as also
reioisyng in outward show, and apperance, it is as most suppose, a true
presage, or sign of present wind, and weather. When the Lark syngeth very
early in the morning, when also the Ducke does wash, or bath her self,
beakyng, trimmyng, and orderyng her feathers, it evidently denotes excess of
wind, and rain. When the Swallowe flies so nigh unto the water, that a man
would think, she still would touch, or strike it, a presage no less sure, of
rain, is this then the others. Elian writes, that the Snite has full, and
perfect felyng, of the increase as well, as decrease of the Moon. But I fear I
grieve the reader, with these fore paste examples: wherefore I now will speak,
of certain beasts, which have forced men to leave, and forgo, their
country, the same all not great, and mighty, but some also small, and
foible. And to this purpose Elian records, that in certain parts of Italy,
the roots of trees, and herbs, were in such sort by Rattes destroyed, that
the inhabitants in fine (though they did their pain to kill them) were
notwithstanding feign, through penury to foregoe, and to forsake their
country. Marcus Varro reports, that there was a great town in Spain,
situate, or standing in a sandy soil, which was by Conies, in such sort
undermined, that in the end it suncke, and came to extreme ruin. Neither
only have these things happened, in wide, and open countries, but also in
Islandes environed with the sea, where both Rattes, and Mice, have in such
abundance swarmed, that they have forste the inhabitants to leave their
place, and dwelling: for proof whereof, one of the Isles Ciclades, called
Gyare, was by the only force, of these foresaid vermaine, left void of man
destitute, and inhabitable. Thesaied aucthours again report, that there was
also in France, a famous town, which by the only multitude of Todes, and
Frogs there, was also by the inhabitauntes, left, and forsaken. The
semblable chaunsed, as is evident, in Africa, by the only malice of Locustes,
and Grasshoppers. Theophrastus The Palmer is alitte worm long and rough having
many legs, and in laune may be called bruchus, or campe^, or multipeda.
remembers of an other country, which was by Palmers destroyed, and forsaken.
An other Province was there also in Libia, very fruitful, fertile, and
abou^dant, from which the inhabitants were chaste, by the furious rage of
Lions: how be it, as it was no marvel, so neither was it shame, for man to
leave his country, by the malice of this beast. But the great weakness, and
imbecillitie of man, is sufficiently seen, in that which Pliny reports,
of a certain Province, upon the limits of Ethiopia, where as Antes,
Scorpions, and other small vermaine, did to exile thence all the inhabitants.
The people of Megaris in Greece, were driven by Bees only, to leave, and fly
their city: as in like sort, by the Waspe, some times also the Ephesians.
Antenor writing also of the Isle of Crete (as from him reports it Elian
again) says that a certain multitude of Bees, chaste out of a great city,
all the inhabitants thereof, vsyng their houses, in steed of Buttes, or
Hiues. Many such others strange, and rare matters, are read, and recorded in
old, and aunciente histories.

The end of the second part.
The third part of the Forest, or collection of diverse lessons.
How profitable a thing the invention of letters was, who first found or
invented them, as also how the Hebrew Characters signify some thing of them
selves, that which is incident to no other kind of letters, of what sort or
kind so ever. Chap. 1.
IF we account those worthy of great thanks, and praises, that have by
study found out, and invented the arts liberal, and mechanical, those also
that have left us diverse other things, and doctrines, as well appertainyng to
the comfort, and consolation of the soul, as also to the use, and exercise of
the body. How much then more stand we bound unto those, that first of all
have given us the use of letters, which only preserve, and keep, all other
inventions: for without them nothing may be reserved to the posterity, no
device whatsoever can live, or remain: besides that, that by letters also,
man continues in every succession as immortal for ever. By them what so was
done a thousand years hence is in such sort offered, and presented unto us,
as if betwixt us, and them no time at all had passed. By the^ man attaineth to
all discipline, and sciences, by them man in these days perfectly acquainteth
himself, with that, which others before him well knew, and were learned in,
as by the same again, what so ever man, in this present age inuenteth, is
preserved, and laid up for the posterity followyng. By them is fully sien,
and perfectly represented, what so at any time has in any sort been done, in
such assured wise, and in such ample manner, that it might seem always to
have continued still in doing, which never had been possible, but by the only
mean, and commodetie of letters. Nether Plato, neither Aristotle, neither
infinite other philosophers had held still the reputation, which their
learning merited. To conclude it can none otherwise be said, but that the
most worthy, and most excellent invention, that ever was by man thought on,
is that same, of the first findyng of letters, which who so would hardely
credit, let him chiefly consider of those things that be written, which all
should as well be utterly loaste, and forlorn, as also again that no new
thing might be reserved to the posterity. Since then by letters we reap,
such, and so great commodities, it were reason we speak some thing, of
their first aucthonr or inuentour. How be it, it is laborous to search here
in a troth, the diversities of opinions so different, and so many. The Gentiles
in this case disagree with the Christians, the Christians again among them
selves. Pliny, touching this Pliny in his seventh book,
different, remembers sundry opinions, and among others adds his advice,
which in my judgment has more show of troth then any other. First he says
they were found out by the Assirians, in Assiria, though others some attribute
it, to Mercury in Egipte. Some again affirm, that the Pelagians first
brought them invented by them, in to Italy: and that they were again
transported into Greece by the Phenicians, with Cadmus there captain, which
only then knew sixtene, and no more, and that after in the war of Troie,
Palamedes unto the first, adjoined other four: but Pliny after that he had
alleged the opinions of many, he concludes, that in his opinion, letters were
even from the beginning eternal, to weete, that they began, even at the
first, with the world. That the first knowledge of letters, never the less
came, by the Pheniciens in to Greece, Herodotus, with others many plainly
affirm it: the Egiptians notwithstanding vaunte theimselues as Herodotus.
well of the first invention of letters, as of the arts. Diodorus Siculus
attributes it, as is fore said to Mercury, how be it the same Diodorus
Siculus in his fowerth book Diodorus. Sic.
says, that some imagen that the Ethiopians, both first had, and knew this
excellent use of letters, and that the Egiptians, in truth, borrowed this
skille afterward of them, so that, of these writers we can not gather the
assured truth, which we so much desire. Concerning this matter, yet are there
others, Jews a great many, as well as also Christians, which attribute this
first invention only unto Moses, who was before any the letters, or writings
of the Gentiles, for that Cadmus of whom we fore spoke, whom we also said to
have brought the first letters into Greece, was in the time of Othoniel, duke,
and Captain of Israel, which lived forty and seven years, after the written
law was given unto Moses. These that are of this opinion, among which we
find Eupolemus, and Artabanus, heathen historiogriphers, affirm that the
Egiptians first learned there letters of Moses, and that they afterward
imperted of their knowledge to the Phenicians, whence after again Cadmus, past
with them into Greece. Artabanus notes, that this Mercury which all agree on,
to have made the first profession of letters in Egipte, was Moses himself
called of the Egiptians Mercury. Philon, an Hebrew, a man of great
authority, says that the invention of letters was yet again more ancient,
who says that Ada^ was the first author of them, and in deed they either
were invented by Adam, or by his children, or by them at the least of the
first age before the general fludde, or inundation preserved by Noe, and his
successors even until the time of Abraham, and from him again until Moses.
And thus is the judgment, or opinion of Saint Augustine. Which is verified
by the authority of Josephus saying, that the nephews of Adam, sons of
Seth, S. Augustine in his eightinth book, de ciuitate dei. Josephus in his
first book of his aniquities.
advanced or erected two sumptuous pillars, the one of stone, the other of
claie, in which they wrote, or ingraned all the sciences: affirmyng that
himself saw one of them in Syria. We find also that S. Jude the Appostle,
alleges in a certain Epistle of his, the book of Enoch, which also lived,
before the fludde. So that we must not doubt, but that Adam, and his children,
which were so wise, which also had experience of so many things, were also
they, that first found out the use of letters, and that Noe which afterward
was both lettered, and learned, carefully preserved them in his Arc with him:
how be it after that, in the confusion of tongues, which happened at the
erection of the Tower of Babylon, it may be that the greatest part of the
world lost then, and there the knowledge of the said letters again, which
only remained in the family of Heber, of, or from whom afterward descended
the Hebrews, who (as we fore said) never lost their first and aunciente
tongue. Which as it is true, so Saint Augustine reports it in his book
above alleged, Eusebius also in his first book, of his preparation
Evangelical, as also the greater part of the learned of our time. Wherefore as
well Philon, as also these others, which supposed Moses to have been the
first father of letters, were there in all to geather deceived, for that it is
evident, that these books and histories that were written by Moses were not
as they deem, the first of all others, ne yet before the ancient study of
Philosophy, the sad, and sage sayings also of the Greeks, as proves Saint
Augustine sufficiently in the same place, Josephus against the grammaria^
Apion, Eusebius also and Justinius martirs. I conclude then that letters, were
first, and before Moses, for that we find it recorded, that Moses himself
learned the arts, and sciences of the Egiptians, which I well know not, how
he cold have accomplished, if they before had had, no feelyng in letters,
although in deed, it be manifest, that they had certain signs, called
literae hierogliphicae, by means of which as is above said, every of them
sufficientlye and well understood the other. From Adam then draw we the
original of letters, as also that Abraham was after skilled of them in Siria:
whence it comes, that Pliny has varied in his opinion, which we have in
few now to fore remembered. It needs nothing in this place to search the
beginning, or cause, of the usual frame, or proportion of our characters, for
that each man may facion them, as is to him best seemyng, as we daily see
every man alter at his pleasure, adding signs, some times, in steed or place,
of letters, as affirms S. Hierome in the prologue, of his book of laws, that
when Esdras, the great scribe and doctor of the law, new wrote, or drew it
out, in to some better form, he found there strange, and new characters
of letters, which the Jews after used, even in the time of saint Hierome, as
they also do, even at this present day, which Hebrew letters, have a
private propriety incident to no other letters, of any country or nation: for
the voice, or name, of every of them, gives signification of some one thing,
or other. The first called Aleph, signifies discipline, the second Beth
signifies a house: Gymel, an other letter, fillyng up, or abundance: Daleth,
tables or books: the others also signify, and denote, other things, which
all I leave, as also to be tedious. Who so here in is curious, and desires to
know more may read Eusebius, in his first book, de preparatione Euangelica.

Where on our elders wrote before the invention of Paper, and with what kind
of instrument, how Paper, and Parchement were first found out. Who first
invented the manner or skille of Printyng, as also what inestimable profit
thence rises, and in fine by what mean a blind man may write. Chap. 2.
SOme what have we after a sort spoken, in the former chapter, of the
invention of letters, it rests now that we also search, on what matter our
elders, or first fathers wrote, and although directly we shall not be able here
of to discourse, ne yet where on they wrote, before ye general inundation in
the first age, for the matter is both doubtful and difficill, to weete,
whether they had letters then, in very deed, ye or not, though we have past
it, as proved by the authority of Josephus, as also aided, to that purpose,
with some other proof, or reasons. Notwithstanding according to the opinion of
al men, the first writers had no kind, or manner of Paper, but wrote
continually on the leaves of the Date tree, whence came that word of leaves of
books used at this day. After this they wrote again on the rindes of trees,
but especially on those that most easily were drawn, or taken from the tree,
as the Elm, the Ash, the palm or Burche tree, from which they took the
innermost rind, that I mean, betwixt the cruste and the tree, of which
subtly and finely polished, they framed, and facioned all their books,
artificially conioigning, and fastnyng them together. And for as much as, in
that time, these rindes were called by the latin men libri, hence have books
held from ye time, to name this word libri, though they this day far differ in
ye matter as is evident. Now after this again an other way was found, to
write in plates of lead, very thin, and perfectly fined, of which some
curious, and private persons, made as well pillars as also books, in which
they regestred all public, and common acts. Besides this, they yet found an
other way to write, to weete, on Liuen cloth, fined and polished, with
certain colors. Here also is, and in this place to be noted, that they then
wrote not, as we now do with pens, but with Reads, which in latin may
be called Calami, which also some use, even yet, in this day. An other kind
of Paper was yet found again, which was made, as it were of certain little
trees, called (as we find) by the name of Papers, which, in deed were none
other, then a sort, or kind of bull rushes, ordinarely growing, in marshes
adionyng to the river of Nile. Of which sort some others are found in Siria,
nigh to the floodde Euphrates, as records Pliny, having the name, as the
others, of papers, little thin leaves, or skins have they, betwixt the
rind and the inner parts, which finely taken or drawn out, with the poincte
of an Neelde, trimde afterward with a certain glue, or paste made with meal,
tempered with boiled water and vineagar, was in the end made a good, and
perfect paper, to write draw, or do anything thereon: and by how much the
nigher, you drew the skins, from the inward part of this Rushe, or Reed,
by so much was it both better, and more fine, and so according to the
goodness or difference of them, they also had diverse and different names. Who
so desires here in more, let him read Pliny. And Pliny in his thirtine
book, the eleventh and twel^te Chapiters.
for as much as, this Reed, Rushe, or little tree, was called paper, the name
is thence derived of that paper, used by us this day, which is made of small
pieces, or shreedes of linen clothe, throwly wasted and worn to nothing.
Varro affirms that the first invention to make paper of these little trees,
or rushes, was in the time of Alexander the great, even then when Alexandria
was Alaxandria was founded by Alex. 320. years before the incarnation of
Christ. Plin. in his. 31. book, and ix. Chapter.
by him first founded. How be it Pliny proves it to be more ancient, by
certain books which Terence did to be digde out of the ground, which before
had been Numa Pompilius his books, king of Rome, found in the same Tomb,
where he was buried, whose leaves were of the said rushe, which we above
remembered. And although Liuie have otherwise written of this Toumbe, affirming
that there were two found by L. Patilius, yet be we of the mind, that Numa
was long before Alexander. With Liuie here in accord, both Lacta^tius, and
Plutarche in the life of Numa, Plinies opinion notwithstanding is of most men
approved. Some write that this word Charta, took his original, or
denomination of a certain Town nigh unto Tire, called Carta, whence Dido
altering the name, called it afterward Carthage. Our elders also wrote in
tables weaxt, thin, and well fined, framyng there letters with sharp, and
small punchions, which them selves then termed, by the name of styles. Whence
it comes that we now usually say, that who so well inditeth, writes a good
style, borrowyng the name, of the instrumente that they then wrote with. Also
before the innention of paper, where on we presently write, the aunciente
custom was, all other fore used means seposed, to write continually on
Parchment only, made of sheep skins, of which remembers us well Herodotus,
whose invention Varro attributes to the inhabitauntes of Pergama, whose king
then was Eumenes, whence in latin it is called at this day pergamenum, in
english parchement. And where as in latin it is also called Membrana, it
takes as may he thought the name of the inuentour. Nevertheless in my
judgment, men wrote on these skines, long before that time, remembered by
Varro, specified in like sort afterward by Pliny, for that Josephus writes,
that the Josephus in his 12. book of antiqnities,
books of the Hebrews, and sundry others, which were many years before
Eumenes, were also written on these skins, as above said. As also when he
recites that Eleasar Prince of the Priests, sent the books, of holy
scripture unto Ptolomie, with the seue^tie interpreters, to the intent, they
for him, should translate them, from the hebrew into greek, affirmyng that
Ptolomie, both straungely was amassed and meruailed at the subtle joining of
these skins, or parchmentes together. Whence it is aperte, that what so ever
was written, in any sort, in parchmente, was of longer, and greater
continuance, then if it had been done, in these rindes or leaves, though in
deed they both were of more antiquity, then the first. By means whereof,
this use of Parchemente, neither has, neither will be, at any time again
leafte, and since that paper again, which we daily now use, is so easy to
make, and in such abundaunce, that it both helps, and profits all kind of
students. But above all other things without comparison we must confess,
that the skill of printyng, (by the only means of which, such heaps of
books come, of all sorts to our hands) is among all other inventions, that
either be, or earste have been, in what sort so ever, to be preferred: which,
as is written, was first of al invented by an Almaine, inhabitant of Magonce,
and hight Ihon Faust (though Polidore When and who first found the skille of
printyng.
otherwise surname him Petra) by whose account the first printyng of books was
there, in the year of our redemption, a thousand, four hundred, fifty and
three. And shortly afterward an other Almaine by name Co^radus practiced this
art first of all in Italy. How be it Volateranus writes that they were
two, and both brothers, which past thence into Italy, beginning to printe in
Rome, in the year of our Lord a thousand, four hundred, sixty, and five.
The first books that were imprinted were saint Augustines de ciuitate dei,
and the divine institutions of Lactantius Firmianus. After this grew there
many, excellent personages, as well in Germany, and France, as also in
Italy, which besides their art, or skill in printyng, were also perfectly,
and passing well learned, as Baldus, Manucius, Badus, Colineus, and Frobenius,
very diligent, and painful in correction of the lettre, with infinite
others, whose names to be short I leave of to remember. By means whereof many
books, in manner lost and hidded, were at last published, to the inspekable
profit, and commodity of man, which was in deed the chife cause of so many
learned men, as this day are every where to be found throughout all
Christendom: which before both seldom, and with great pain attained, to
this absolute knowledge, and perfection in learning. But admit here that it
were not the first, and principal cause, yet am I of that mind, that it
assuredly is the greatest cause, for that with less pain, we peruse now
such as are perfectly corrected, findyng the others every where full of
faults, blottes and errors, committed for the most part, either by the less
skill, or little care of the writer: but if any one were found, perhaps among
the others faultles, neither was he to be had, or to be perused of all men, so
that good letters then flourished not, as they now, and this day, do
universally every where. How be it since license first was granted, by Princes
to Printe, all books, fabulous, wanton, and fruitles, far better had it
been, in this respect doubtless, that the way to printe had never been, to man
yet, or known, or unfolded: For it destroieth and withdraws from virtue the
good mind, principally of youth, which noseled in these follies, less
affects, or desires the study of better lesso^s. Leaving then to speak more
of the commodities of printyng, descend we to the next, the practice of hand
writing, which also in my judgment, is this day more perfect, more curious,
and more absolute, then at any time heretofore, in what age so ever. Concerning
which matter, Quintilian gives some rules, not less worthy to be observed,
as also the learned Erasmus in his book, of good, and perfect pronunciation.
But of this kind of hand writing, will I only speak, by the sole means of
which, as has the said Erasmus, certain blind men have learned orderly to
write. They did to be made a table of Porphire, of bone, or otherwise of
metal, in which was ingraued, every the letters, as a. b. c. etc. then took
they in hand some small, and pretty instrumente, at the poincte very fine,
sharp, and subtle, such, and so well fined, that with ease they might draw
it, through every the above said letters, their hands at first by some other,
well directed, which thing by long practice, they shall in the end conceive,
having the true form of each letter in mind, following it still, with
continual use, and industry, by little, and little, shall in the end grow
so perfect that afterward they shall be able, to frame them on any other
matter, where though they some times fail, yet commonly, and for the most
part, they shall do it well. And thus in fine, they may write in paper, by
just order, and proportion, what so ever, either offers it self to the
mind, or fantasy.

Of the first Libraries that ever were in the world, and how the men, of that
time used, to have the Images, or purtraites of the learned in them. Chap. 3.
IT is to be thought, that the first books, and libraries, that ever were in
the world, were in the beginning among the Hebrews: for as it is evident, that
letters were there first known, and the perfect use of them, so is it to be
supposed, that they also had some care, to keep, and preserve, that which they
at any time had committed to writing. That which is as well verified by the
authority of Josephus here after alleged, as also by that we read in holy
write. Isidorus reports that after the Chaldians had burned the library of
the Hebrews, with all and every their books of the law, the Hebrews being
returned back again into Jerusalem, the prophet Esdras illumined by the
holy ghost, remedied this harm, writing again these books, and reducing
them into the number of twenty two, which was the precise number of the
letters of their Alphabet. Whence it is manifest that after Moses had written,
the Hebrews incontinently framed to them selves a library, for the better
conservation of the said books of their law, as well these I mean, that we
presently have of the old Testament, as also the others, of which we before
remembered, among which was the book of Enoch, alleged, or sited by saint
Jude the Apostle, in his Epistle above specified, the book of the wars of our
savior, whereof mention is in the twenty and one chapter of the book of
Numbers, the book also of the true servants of God, vouchte in the second
book, and first Chapter of the kings, the book of Samuel the prophet,
remembered in the last Chapter, of Paralipomenon, the book of Nathan the
Prophet, with many others, which all seemed to have bien brunt, or other wise
consumed. So that it appears evidently, that the Jews had their libraries,
and that those of the Gentiles, were after the^ and later. The Greeks report,
that the first that ever ordained any public library was Pisistratus tyranne
of Athens, which after was augmented and inricht by the Athenians: whither
when as Xerxes after ward came, he removed the library thence into Persia,
where it was diligently, and carefully preserved, until long time after, that
Seleucus, named Nicanor gatte them thence, and brough them back again to
Athens. These things are reported of Aulus Gellius, and Isidorus, which both
affirm that this library, grew daily after this, to A. Gel. in his sixte
book. Isidorus in his sixte book.
be very rich of all books of what sort so ever. How be it the library of
Alexandria in Egypt, which king Ptolomi^ by his only means framed, was
assuredly the most excellenst of all others in the world, for that there in
was found all the old Testament, the other scriptures also of the seventy
two interpreters with infinite others, famous, and learned works. P^inie not
withstandyng again reports, that the king Eumenes in contempt of Ptolomie,
did an other to be erected in the City of Pergama. A. Gellius, and Am.
Mercellinus writ that in the library at Alexandria in Egypt, were at one
time seven hundren thousand books. Seneca in like sort on the number accords
with them, which although it might seem almost incredible, yet who so has
read of the sumptuous larges, and excessive profutio^ of the kings of Egypt,
as well about sepulchers, Piramides, temples, as also other common buildyngs,
and ships, with infinite such others, of inestimable price, some part, of
the which Budeus, in his annotations on the pandectes very well remembereth
us, and Lazarus of Baif, in his book entitled, ars naualis, reports that
this library seemed nothing to him impossible. From every part, and corner of
the world, books were daily brought, to the better furnishyng of this
library, written also in all tongues what so ever then known, of which none
had any charge, but such as were best learned. Some for the poets, some for
histories, others some also for the others, of other faculties and sciences,
which all were wasted and consumed with fire by the impacable fury of the
Soldiers of Caesar, which even thither followed, and pursued the great and
mighty Pomp, ouerrunning also at that same time the force of Ptolomie, brother
to Cleopatra. Concerning that other, so rich of books, and so famous, by the
pain and labor of Eumenes in Pargama, Plutarche in the life of Marcus
Antonius, says, that he thither had gathered two hundred thousand volumes
every one from other of sundry, and diverse matters. As touching the library in
Greece, Strabo affirms, that Aristotle was the first that ever gathered or
brought together any books in Athens: where in he less accords with other
historiogriphers, which attribute the commendation of that so honest a
dimerite only to Pisistratus which was as is evident many years before
Aristotle, wherefore we must in this place understand, that Strabo mente his
words of a mean, and private personage, and not of king, or prince, as was in
effect Pisistratus. Howbeit, very likely it is, that Aristotle herein was
aided, by the busy pain of Alexander. After all these an other was erected in
Rome, both public, and common by Asinius Pelion. But the first that ever
brought great store of boakes thither was Paulus Emilius, after the conqueste
of Perseus. And after him again L. Lucullus, which he brought among other
things as a pray out of Pontus. Julius Caesar again, with like care inrichte
this library, committyng it to the charge, or keepyuge of M. Varro, which
afterward with some others in Rome was brunte and destroyed, by means of the
often sackyng and subversion of that city. Which never the less was restored
again by the Emperor Domitian, who every where and in all countries made
diligent search for books, causing with the same, that famous library in
Greece, to be trasported and brought from thence unto Rome, whence it is
evident, that al Ptolomies library was not there consumed as we before said
it to be with fire, for that some part of it was now co^ueighed to Rome.
Farther Paulus Orosius gives us to think, that it throwly in deed was not
brunt, and consumed, when he says that there were burned only four hundred
thousand, for that the number of books there, as we read in others, was no
less then seven hundred thousand, so that we may conclude three hundred
thousand to be saved, how be it, diverse histories pass this in such sort, as
if none had been reserved from the rage of the fire. But to return to the
library of Rome, the said Paulus Orosius says, that in the days of the
Emperor Commodus, this said library was once again burned, and that Gordian
(as the others) to repair it, gathered again fifty two thousand volumes,
which all as some report were given him by the testament of Seranus
Samoniquus, whose they first were as has Julius Capitolinus. Besides these
were many others both noble, and rich libraries, gathered by our elders, as
well private, and mean men, as great Lords and Princes. The first library
that ever was known among the Christians, was that, as records Esidorus of
Panphilius the Martyr, whose life is at large written by Eusebius, in whose
study after his death, were found thirty thousand diverse volumes. One
common usage or custom, was ordinary in the old age, to weete, that they had
in their secret Cabinetes, or Studies, the perfect Image and purtraite, of all
such as had in any sort, excelled in learning. Pliny writes, that Marcus
Varro being yet then living, merited for his rare virtue, and knowledge in good
letters, that his Image should have place, in the library of Asinius Polion.
Cicero wrote to Fabian, that he should provide him, of some purtraites, the
better to adorn and beautify his study. Pliny the younger writing to Julius
Seuerus, says, that Ere. Seuerus, a man very well lettered, would order in
his study among other his purtraites, the Images of Cornelius, and Titus
Arius. Of these things find we every where sufficient, and good proof:
whose libraries as also those of other learned men, and great Princes, which
after in success, and process of time followed, were destroyed, and defaced
by the Gothee, and Vandales, until now, that in our time by the great bounty
of God, infinite are found both studious and learned, that have gathered
together houge heaps of books, though not in deed the tenth part, of these
above remembered, by our ancestors. And assuredly a great number of those,
which from their time until now have been carefully preserved found never
the less ill written, less perfect, and incorrected, in such sort that had
it not been, for the grerte pains, of certain worthy personages, hardly had
they ever been brought to any kind of perfection.

Of the amity and enmity of sundry things, issuyng by privy, hidden, and
secret proprieties. Chap. 4.
THe aunciente philosopher Heraclitus, as also others some after him, held and
maintained, in their disputations this opinion, that each thing had his first
cause or beginning, by concord, and discord, by peace, and enmity, which is
in all things of what kind soever, whence also issued the generation, and
corruption of them: on which poinct of Philosophy I less mind here to
dwell, of part for that it is both intricate, and difficill of part also,
for that the reader in my fantasy, shall thence reap as little fruicte, as
he shall conceive pleasure. Notwithstanding, we shall some what say, of the
secret love, and hatered, which naturally is in many things, which, whence,
or how it comes no man directly knows: and is therefore assuredly, no
less strange, then marvelous. As first of all, the enmity betwixt the
Dog, and the Catte, betwixt Oil, and Pitche, the Heart, and the Serpente,
with many such others, which in such sort malice, and envy each the other,
this secret rancor, of no part proceading from th'elementes: for the
difference, or contrariety in things mixte, or compounde, is to all men
aperte, and evident, as we see. The water first disaccordeth, as of nature
contrary with the fire, for that the fire is hot and dry, but the water
contrary, these elementeseche to other opposite, and repugnaunte. The water and
the earth, accord well together, but in this respect only, that they both
be cold: in the other, that one being moiste, that other dry, each here
leaves the other, as his ancient enemy. Betwixt the fire, and the earth
there is a conformity, to weete, in that they both be dry a contrariety
again, even between them both dwells, the fire hoate, that other cold. So
that as these elements of part, agree together, so also disagree they, of,
part as is euidente. All things then what so ever are, caused of these
elements, must be subject of necessitieto these contrary qualities, which
be in these elements, whence they mixte are, and compounded. Wherefore that
thing, in which rules most, some elementarie quality, boroweth his name of
the said quality: and so we say it to be, either hoate, cold, moiste, or
dry, some in more high degree then others, according to the predominant force,
in any these elements. And this these bodies, contrary either to other, are
the only, and sole causes of contrary effects, so that whence this
discrepante, or different nature in things is, is now manifest, and needs no
farther explication. But this other enmity, that proceadeth not from any the
elements, but rather from some hidden propriety, or secret influence, to
find the true cause, and occasion thereof, would ask more earneste study, and
longer contremplation. The Dog and Catte (as is above said) each hates
other, neither know we the cause why. Other creatures also see we, that
mutually are affectioned either to other, neither issues this their love, from
any the elements, whereof they are composed. The Ass eats Fenell gyante, or
otherwise Sagapene, which in Latin may also be called ferula, and finds it
both good, and toothsome, which to all other beasts, of Horse kind, is a
very starcke, and plain poison. The Fox ioieth, and likes of the Serpent
which never the less, enuieth all other beasts what so ever. Neither is this
less to be meruailed among men, then also among any other creatures, for that
man neither knowing why, ne yet for what cause, eftsoon at the first sight,
when he shall meet an other, never having before, or seen, or known him, will
notwithstanding disdain, and hate him, and immediately findyng again the
second, no less strange to him, then the first, will well conceive of him,
love, and like him, and that which more is, sometime will both honor, and
reverence him, yea, though he be in deed, for causes just his inferior,
little accoumptyng of the others, were they though in truth great Lords, and
Rulers. Again, we sometimes see, two men so straungely affectioned, that the
one voweth him self to the will, and advice of the other, which oftsones has
happened, betwixt the servant, and master, so that by nature it seems
(the order of reason inuerted) that the vassaule was the better; no reason to
be given, of so great a disorder. In case semblable such subjection,
poudered sometimes, with malicious enmity, both is, and chances among
birds also, as betwixt the Eagle, and the Swanne, the Crow, and the Kite,
which at times hardneth her self, to take a preie from the Crow, even out of
her folded foot, or pinchyng paws sliyng. Like enmity is also betwixt the
Chough, and the Kite; the Egle also, and the Goose, in such sort, that if you
lay but one feather of an Egle, among many, or in a heap of these of a Goose,
that one wastes, and consumes all the others to nothing. The Heart is mortal
enemy unto the Snake, for with his vehemente respiration, about her hole, he
draws the Snake out, by force of his breath only: and without more
incontinently deuoureth him: for proof whereof, who so pleases to burn,
only some small part, or portion of his horn, shall find that no Serpent,
will abide the smell thereof. The Crow, the Ass, and Bulle, in like sort
disagree, whose iyes the Crow still beaketh, and labors to pluck out. The
bird called Flore, skilfully counterfaiteth the braiyng of a Horse, by means
whereof, he as commonly fears the horse, as the horse by the same means
fears also him. Great enemies to the Woulfe, is the Fox, the Ass, and the
Bulle, betwixt the Vultur also, and the Ele, nature has proclaimed continual
war, and hostility. The mighty Lion dreadeth, and fears the Cock, he
also flies the sight of fire, and the noice of a carte, the Panther in like
sort, the presence of the Hind: the Scorpion pursues with fatal enmity,
the Tarentula, which in Latin we may call Falanga, whose venime, when he has
bitten any man is no way (as some write) cured, but by pleasant harmony, and
Music, and the malice of these two beasts is such, and so impacable, that
who also is stonge, or bitten of the Scorpion, finds present remedy in that
oil, where the Tarentula, or Falanga has tofore been drouned. The monsterous,
and houge Elephante, both fears, and flies the simple Serpent, he trembles
at the presence, and sight, of a sheep, he by no means indureth the grunnyng
of a Hog. The Horse, Ass, or Moile, with great pain abides to see the We
sell, the Snite, or wood Cock, hardly dwells in the sight of the house
Cock. There is a kind of Faucons, which Aristotle calls Tico, that lives
in continual war, and enmity with the Fox, never missing to fight with him,
where he so at any time finds him. Elian minds us or incessante malice,
betwixt an other sort of Faucons, called Pelagra, and the Crow, betwixt the
Crow again also, and the harmeles Turtle. Betwixt the Oule and the Curlue,
and in fine, betwixt the partridge and the Tortuis The Pelican above all other
birds, hates the Quail, and the Horse, without comparison, with most pain
indureth the shamois. Like enmity is also naturallye among fishes, the Crabbe
may not abide in company with the Oister, the Dolphin, and the Whale sly
each the other, the Cunger naturally hates the Lampraie, and Oister. The
Oister on the Ele, has such a predomina^t, and malicious force, and the Ele
in such sort abhors and fears him, that if by hap she ones see him,
she incontinently dies thereof. The Pike fatally prosecuteth, the fish of
some, called Mongilla, or Mugra: the Snake beholding a man appareiled, wishes
him harm and hardens her self, as she may, to bite, and annoye him, but
seeing the same naked, fears again, and flies him. The Ratte, or Mouse
rather, is to the Snake an ancient enemy, as well when she is busied in
couching her Eggs, as also in the Winter, when she lies deep hidden, in the
intrailes of the earth: by means whereof, the Snake to live in more
security, heapeth together in her hole, good store of provision, meats fit,
and well pleasyng her adversary the Mouse, to the intent that the Mouse being
well fed therewith, she at that time might forget, her farther rage, and
malice. The Woulfes malice toward the Sheep is such, and so natural, that
if you make a drum of the skin of a Woulfe, the Sheep with no less fear,
flies the sound thereof, then if the Woulfe were living, and present then
before him. Farther also some others affirm, that if you make any stringes for
the Vial, or Lute, of the guts as well of the Sheep, as of the Woulfe also,
you never shall accord them, or frame thence any harmony. If ye hang the
skin of a Woulfe, either in your stable, or Shepehouse, or where your flock
is fodthered, the sight, and fear thereof, forces them to forget their
feedyng. The Mouse by a secret propriety, so much enuieth the Scorpion, that
whom so ever he impoisoneth, is by clappyng of a Mouse, on the part affected,
cured. The Viper and Snake, dread meruailously the Crabbe, which naturally
has over these worms, such assured maisterie, that if a hog by hap,
should be bitten of the Viper, he immediately expels the poison, having
eaten of the Crabbe. Besides, which most strange is, as soon as the Sun
enters into the sign of Cancer, all Serpents then languishe, as sick of
some malady. The fish called Scorpio, and the Crocodile, wage continual
battle, each killyng still the other. The Panther in such sort fears the
Ounce: that as some write, he suffers himself to be slain of him, without
any kind of resistance: and also if you hang the Panthers skin, in that
place where you keep the Ounce; the Panthers skin will then pill, waste, and
consume. Such is the enmity also of the Chough, and the Dawe, that as
Aristotle reports, each robs, and destroieth the others Eggs. The Waspe
lives in continual war with the Spider: as does the Ducke also; with the
Mouse or Ratte, each seeking to devour, and eat the others young ones. The
Kite continually malliceth, and hates the Fox. There is a small kind of
Hawks, which Pliny calls Esalon, which with fatal enmity, pursues
still the Crow, he searches out her neste, and destroieth her eggs. The
hog hardly indureth the presence of the wesell. The Woulfe, and Lion are
enemies so contrary, that the blood of the one, will not be mixte with the
other. The Mole or Want, so disliketh of the Ante, that he abides not in the
place, where the others be. The Spider wageth privy war, against the
Serpent, and as Pliny reports, does him shamefully to dye. Besides all
these, among things also void, and lackyng life, like repugnancie, or
contrariety of nature is to be found for as we first said, oil is enemy
to Pitche, for trial whereof, who so puts oil into a pitchie vessel,
shall see that the Pitche will sone consume the Oil. Oil again disagreeth
with water: as does also in like sort Lime, but Oil and Lime live in
perpetual league, and amity. The Olife has a secret, and hidden force,
against the unchaste lecherer, such in deed, and so strange, that as it is
written, if a woman less chaste, attempt to pla^t him, she shall languishe,
and die of it, the tree also withers. The Colewort hardly grows, being
sown nigh to Maioram. Salt water waxes sweet, mixte with Wheaton flower, in
such sort, that within two hours afterward, a man may easily drink
thereof. We might in this place load the reader, with infinite such
examples, of fatal, and mortal enmity, as well among things having life, as
also others insensible, which al to tarry, were long and tedious: as on the
other side also we might speak of many things, that secretly occord well by
the privy instincte of nature, as of the Pecocke, and the Pigion, the Turtle,
and the Popingaie, the Thrushe, and the Crane. Aristotle reports a strange
example of amity, betwixt a certain kind of Sparowes, and the Crocodile, he
says, that this houge beast opens his mouth, to the intent, this little
bird should come in there at, to beak, trim, and make clean his teethe, to
purge his gummes, and ease him every where, and in fine adds that this
Sparrowe, feeds, and pleases, in that loathsome filthe, he there gathers.
It is also said, that the Fore loves well the Crow, the Dawe also the Hen
of India, and in fine the Lark, an other bird called the Ioncke. The Fox is
never indomaged by any kind of Snake, the Pigion ioieth in the presence of the
Turtle, the Partridge also with her beloved the Wooddoue. The fish, in Latin
called Talpa marina, is above all others favored, and beloved of the Whale,
which as witnesses Pliny, rolleth carefully before her, aduisyng her where
to shoune the whirlyng gulfes, and deep holes. Behold now the marvelous
works, and secret force of nature, through the providence of GOD, moved, by
the influence of the Stars, and Planettes, which all we find sufficiently,
and well aucthorised, by Pliny, Aristoile, Albertus Magnus, Elian, Marbodeus
the Poet, in his books of the nature, and propriety of stones, with many
others, both ancient, and late writers as well of the nature of beasts, as
of other things.

By what means both amity and enmity proceed from the heavenly, and
celestial influence: and why a man hates or loves another. Chap. 5.
AS we have above said concerning the secrette, and privy force of nature, so
are there certain Stars and Planettes, which have more particular dominion
on some things, then on some others, forcyng by their private influence some
assured proprieties, which neither are caused, be of any elimentarie
qualities: how be it, we neither yet may properly say, that there is any
hostility, or discord betwixt the stars or fignes in heaven.
Notwithstanding the ancient philosophers and Astrologians, considering the
sundry and contrary effects of the influe^ces, caused by the Stars and
Planettes in these our yearthly corruptible and inferior bodies, by their
only motions and irradiations, have attributed unto them for just cause,
diverse qualities, as well of ametie, as enmity together, whereof we find most
aperte, and plain demonstration as well in Guido Bonatus, as Schonerus, and
infinite others, Mars and Venus are enemies to Saturn, Jupiter also and
Mercury malice each the other: the Su^ne and the Moon with all other Planettes
live in leage perpetual, and amity with Jupiter, Mars only excepted,
general ennimie to them all, Venus alone exemted. Jupiter and Venus with like
love embrace the Sun, whose co^traries are Mars Mercury, and the Moon.
Venus favors all the others, and is sole ennimie to Sarurne. So is there then
betwixt these (which to be short I pass over) both amity, and enmity, as
is above said. The case then thus standing those things that are subject, as
governed by any one Planette, must, by inclination natural, either lone, or
disdain, what so else is subject to any other, be it either Planet, sign, or
constellation, according to the conformity or diversity of nature, which
shall be betwixt these stars which rule, and reign over the^, and then is
this enmity, of greatest force, and efficacy. When that betwixt the natures,
and qualities of these Planets, unto which they be in any respect subject,
be of most repugnant, and contrary nature: as on the other side, that mutual
amity, shall so much be the stronger, as the conformity of these celestial
bodies, shall be either nigher, or greater. And this supernall force, or
co^stellation, no less extends it self to man, then it also does to every
other creature. How be it man, being of more free, and advised determination,
although he of part feel this repugnancie, or inclination, yet by grace is he
able to withstand, and resist it, where as other creatures void of reason,
not vsyng this privilege, are ordered, and carried every where, according to
their natural inclination, executyng to their vttereste, what so seems to
them agreeable: the same also is incident to herbs, and to plants. Concerning
the mutual love, or affection betwixt men, Astronomers affirm, and among
the^ their Prince Ptolomie, that those, that in their nativity, shall have
one, and the same sign, for their ascendente, shall like, and love very
friendly together, as also semblably those, that have both the Sun, and the
Moon, in any one sign together. And again, they add that to thesaid
purpose, it suffices to have one also, and the same Planette dominatour, in
their birthe, or nativity, for it naturally provoke love, and conformity of
nature, or if one Planet, to both be not perhaps lord, it yet suffices,
that the two, be friends themselves together, or that, the one behold the
other, with good, and favorable asspecte: which easily is seen, the figures
of both natiuities erected. Great help also grows to this conformity, if
their have some part of Fortune, in the same sign, or house together, and
that the house, or sign, in which the Moon shall be, in the nativity of the
one, shall have a favorable asspecte, in the birthe of the other: for as they
more, or less shall accord in these conditions, so shall the affections of the
parties increase, or else diminish. Whence it is, that two men having to do,
one, and the same thing, the third without his deserts, or cause what soever,
is affectionate, and leaves, as sworn friend to that one, and on the other
side wishes harm, and sinister Fortune to that other, without any annoye, or
offense on that side committed: which might happen to two such, whose
ascendentes were of repugnante qualities, and of a contrary triplicitie, the
lords also of their natiuities, of nature opposite, and enemies, as the Sun,
and Moon in opposition, in signs of diverse natures, and that these Planettes,
in the birthe of the first, be in unfortunate asspectes, to these of that
other. For these things, and such others, as here might be alleged, are the
causes why one beholding an other, conceiueth straight against him, some
inward disdain, or pleasure (as is evident when we see two men plaiyng
together, fight, or dispute for what matter so ever) for that neither standing
bound, to the one, or the other, neither ever having known them, who, or
whence they are, wishes notwithstanding, the desired victory sooner, to the
one, then to the other. Concerning that, whereof we have spoken that one manne
without any occasion, should so much dread, or fear an other, that he
submits himself, and boweth, feign, and glad to be ruled by him, though
indeed he be his better, more worthy, or more honorable, the case is
euidente, and by experience common. Of which al, Ptolomie gives this reason,
saying: that who so in his nativity, shall have his lord, or ruler, or for
better demonstration, to exe^plifie of two, of which the one having the lord
of his nativity, in some sign ascende^t, in the first, or East angle, the
other in the Southe, or tenth angle, the house of honor, he naturally rules,
orders, and governs the other. The semblable again also chances to
those, in whose natiuities, the one has that Planette for his lord, which to
the other is most unfortunate, void of every kind of dignity. If two also
have one, and the same sign, for their ascende^t or otherwise for their lord,
and ruler one Planet, he to whom this Planet shall be of most force, and
authority (as was above said in beasts void of reason) shall naturally rule,
and have dominion over the other. When then this advantage, happens to such
a one, as is of the other, both loved and favored, he by mean thereof,
immediately both orders, and governs him: but if it chance, or betide,
percase to a poor servant, or vassaule, he then assuredly is faithful,
obedient, and loiall, if to two friends of equal birthe and ability (as
is, and has many times been seen) each then lives with other, in most
perfect integrity, the one for the most part orderyng, every the affairs,
or business of the other.

That the memory may be hurt, and that it also by art, and by policy may
be fortified. Chapt. 6.
EVen as the memory in manne, is a thing most excellent, so also is it very
dainty, an delicate, obnoxious, and subject, to sundry misfortunes, as to
sickness, hurtes, and wounds on the head, age, sudden fear, faules from
high places, with many such others. All which offend, and hurt the memory,
indomaging her usual place, or seat, as also the organes, or instruments
thereof. Whence it comes in this place to be considered, that some by the
weakness, and debilitie of memory, have utterly forgotten all things, what
soever they ones knew, or otherwise had learned. Some again in one thing have
been only maihemed, as Pliny Pliny lib. 7. cap. 8.
well notes, of Messala Coruinus, who after a disease (of which he well
recovered) lived ever afterward in such case, that he never could remember,
his own proper name. Valerius also discoursyng of miracles, reports that a
learned man, by the knock of a stone, which he received on the head, forgatte
what soever he before had profited, in any the Sciences, or other good studies,
and yet not withstandyng in all other affairs, was of memory as fresh, and as
perfect as at any other time. An other by a faule, from a place on high,
forgot also to know his own natural parents. I have both red, and heard it
reported, that Franciscus Barbarus, a man of our time, not meanly learned, but
especially in the Greek, wherein he most pleasured, by the mean of a malady,
wherewith he was troubled, forgate all what soever he before had gained, in the
ripe, and exact knowledge of the said tongue: remainyng in all other things,
no less learned then at the first, a thing in truth very strange, and
merueilous. It is also recorded, that Georgius Trapes. a man famous for his
learning, forgatte in his age, what so in good letters, he tofore had profited.
And as we find here, that memory in manne, by sundry occasions, may well be
weakened, so also find we some, that naturally have had fainte, and slippyng
memories. The Emperor Claudius here in so holted, as Suetonius writing his
life, reports, that some times having in bed by him his wife, incontinently
after he had talkte any thing with her, he so became unmindful of him self,
and all other things, that he would ask where she was, why she came not to
bed, and why she so long tarried. And having done to death on a time, a noble
man, the day following made inquiry for him again, to determine with the
others of his counsel on controversies. Herodotus Sophista had a soonne, of
so simple a memory, that by no: labor possible, he could learn, or attain
to the knoweledge of the letters by order, by means whereof, the father (who
so much desired, his enteraunce in learning) the better to bring him to some
kind of feelyng, did to be fostered in his house, twenty four young boys,
all of his own age, to every of which for name, he gave the name of a letter,
to the intent that he acquainted with them, and calling them by the ir
names, might also remember the noumber, and order of the letters. And as it is
said above, that sudden fear eftfones troubles the memory, so assuredly
true is it, that although in deed it utterly destroy not the memory, yet at
times it forces manne, to forgette these things, that he before carefully
with paiue, had committed unto her, as it ones happened to Demosthenes, a most
excellent Orator, which passing imbassadour, to Philippe king of Macedonie,
felt in him self so strange an alteration, being present to utter his charge,
before so puissante a prince, that having past in some little part, of his
premeditated oration, arrested of the sudden, forgettyng that which remained,
as if he never had before thought thereon or in any sort digested it. The very
semblable read we of Theophratus, which being mounted in his chair, would
have uttered some words, before the Areopagites of Athens, of Herodes the
Athenia^, who received in charge, to have spoken before the Emperor Marcus
Antonius: of Eraclides in the presence of the Emperor Seuerus, at least, as is
left us, by record, of Philostratus. And almost in this our age Bartholomeus
Socinus, borne at Sienna, a man absolutely grounded, and learned in the laws,
assigned imbassadour for his country, unto Pope Alexandre in whose presence
(as the manner is) when he a little while had spoken, abashed some thing by the
sight, and present being there of these princes, which were there assembled,
beyond the wonted number, forgot himself, suddenly so amassed, that he farther
in order, could not pronounce one word. To me also such an alteration ones
happened, as was that other above remembered of Demosthenes (not that I would
here enter into comparion) in the presence of a worshipful, and learned
audience, and that by the great affection, which I had, to the consideration
of my cause, which in such sort altered me, before all the senators, that I
less able was to end my matter there began, though before I had well thought
Pet. Crinitus lib. 5. cap. 3.
there on and well disposed it in order. Now that the memory may be aided,
and preserved by art, can of no man, what soever, for any cause be doubted,
of which, and whose remedy, many a learned hand has curiously written. As
Solinus, and Quintilian both at large, and in many. Seneca also in the place
above alleged, where he reports this art memoratiue, to be so facill, and
easy, that in few days all men, may be well skilled therein. It is also
written, that Cineas, the ambassador of the renoumed Pirrhus, practiced this
art to help, and aid his memory. Pliny, and Quintilian write, that
Simonides first found this mean, to preserve the memory, although the said
Pliny affirm, that Metrodorus reduced it afterward to perfection, who also
by that art meruailously fortified, and confirmed his own memory. Cicero in
his book de oratore, Quintilian also, and Valerius in his miracles, reports,
that Simonides on a time invited, with sundry others, to a great bankette,
the house where they feasted, suddenly fell down, by means whereof no one
escaped that death, Simonides excepted, who even in that instante rose, and
went forth, called by some one, he never yet knew who, by which hap at
that time, he there saved his life. And the histories record, that when the
dead bodies were drawn out, which were many, all invited geastes, to that so
unfortunate a dinner, Simonides declared where, and in what order every of
them were plaste, and satte at the table, even then, and in that instante,
when the house so fell on them. The examples that might be alleged, in this
place, to this purpose, are many, but it suffices us, to arreste on that,
which is said. One other thing also, rises here to be noted, which is that
the Philosophers, and principally Aristotle, find a scruple, or difference,
betwixt the memory, and recordation, for that memory say they may be, as
well in beasts, as in man, although not in so perfect, and in so absolute a
sort, and manner, but recordation to man only, and to him alone is proper,
which is to record with discourse, studiyng on things, as in cases of
contemplation, descendyng from the general, to the parts, and perticulers,
not omittyng, the circumstances both of time, and persons, and that all with
due consideration, and advise: for beasts void of reason, remember also the
place, where they at any time have hardly been entreated, the Horse shunneth to
dwell, where he has been harmed, and in like sort all others, more or less
in their degrees. But as we have said, recordation then in man, is much more
absolute, and perfect, assisted with sound advise, and intelligence, orderly
passing from matter to matter. So that according to the opinion of Aristotle,
that manne, that has a most sharp, and fined wit, is also of better
recordatio^ then an other, though some other perhaps exceade him, in the
perfection of memory: for that to record well, is a certain manner of
inuestigation, which forces the memory as it were slepyng to awake, to call
to mind, and to remember, any thing, what soever, wherefore the most quick,
and best fined wits, soneste conceive things, and commit them to memory,
and memory by recordation, makes of them again, at all times faithful
restitution. The Greeks among others many, the vanities of their Gods,
adored, or reverenced a Goddess of memory, in such sort that this force, or
power, of the mind, has evermore been had, in great reverence, and
estimation. Wherefore to conclude, man stands highly bound unto God, for
this so heavenly, and excellent a benefit, and ought studiously to endeavor,
to maintain, and preserve it. Marcilius Ficinus in his book, de triplici vita
gives sundry instructions, and precepts to this purpose.

In what honor, and reputation, Philosophers, Poets, and all others, in what
art, or science, soever they were learned, lived with Emperors, Kings, and
Princes, in times past. Chap. 7.
Truly and for just cause may we not complain, of the want of learned men,
in every art and science: but on the other side I see good letters to mourn,
that they now be not so well estimed, and thought of, ne yet so well
recompensed of princes in this age, as the well lettered in times paste were,
by Emproures, Kings, and other noble personages in those days. And to speak
the truth, whither in deed they have so good reason to plain them I will
pass it now in few, and in place of disputation, will only remi^ber here some
few histories, or examples of ancient princes, and sundry Monarkes, which so
fostored and favored the studious, and learned, that entering into comparison
of their virtuous demerites, with these others that live now in these our
unhappy days, it may be evident to all men, what cause they have in truth to
sorrow, and to complain. First to begin with that most excellent, and most
victorious Pomp, of whom we read, that when he subdued, and vanquished
Mithridates, with others many victories, and adventures of arms, being entered
Athens, with all his spoils triumphantly, the Ensigns and Standers of his
ennimies borne before him, as was tha^ the manner of the Consulles, and Roman
Capitaines, was advertised that the Philosopher Possidonius lay presently then
sick, and diseased in his bed, who desirous to visit him, would not only
honor him with his personal presence, but approchyng nigh unto his house,
commanded that his foresaid imperial Ensigns, should also be carried into
the philosophers Chamber with him: for that in his advice, all Kings, and
Emperors, ought true duty, and reverence to learning, and virtue. This then,
and in this manner bowed he to this poor manne, that would have refused to
have stoopt to any Prince then living. Denis the tyrante King of Siracusa,
having wound by entreaty, the divine Plato to come, and visit him, and
understanding that he was on the way coming, issued in marvelous pomp of
purpose to meet him, whom he received into his own coache, drawn with white
horses, with most great and solemn triumph, that was to be devised possible,
for the marvelous reputation, in those days, due to the learned. Alexander
determinyng to sack, and destroy the town of Thebes, commanded first that
no man should touch in any wise, the house of the Poet Pindarus. In what
honor Virgil lived, and reputation with Octauian, is evident to all men
through out the whole world, whom the people of Rome healde in such
admiration, that as Pliny in his seventh book amply records, when he
entered into the Theater to pronounce some his verses, all the multitude roase
to him, doing him no less reverence, then they did to the Emperor: and that
which more is Silius Italicus a famous Poet a Spaniarde borne, had his day
of nativity of all men so solemnized, that they more carefully did, with
more reverence, and devotion prepare to adorn to bliss, and sanctify that
day, then they did any others, that had any care to solemnize, or beutifie
his own birth. The gifts also that were presented unto Virgil, as well by
Octauian, Mecaenas, and others, were such, and so rich as reports Seruius,
that he in short time was found to be worth no less then six thousand
Sesterces in ready money, which with us mount to two hundred, and fifty
thousand french Crounes: he had in Rome a sumptuous, and an honorable
palais, by means whereof ^uuinal in his seventh Satyr, accounted him for one
of the richeste in that time. On a day this Poet in the presence of Octauia^,
and Liuia his wife, mother to Marcellus, vtteryng certain verses of his
AEneidos, and drawyng to the end, where he with such an excellent grace, and
comely majesty, had also some thing said of the above remembered Marcellus,
which lately before had then yielded to nature, in such sort, that the
poor passionate, and sorrowful mother, began to faint, falling into an
ecstasy, not hearing the end or last of his verses. But after ward revived,
coming again to her self, commanded that for every verse that she then had
loast, that ten Sesterces should be numbered forthwith unto Virgil, who after
that she fainted pronounced, by account, just one and twenty, for which all
he received as was her commandment a reward mountyng to the value of five
thousand Duckettes. It is written that the people of Siracusa, had certain
Athenians prisoners, which by heart had learned some verses, out of the Greek
poet Euripides, which at times they applied in talk, as occasion best served
them, by means whereof only, in th'onour of that Poet, they infranchiste
them, delivered them, and sent them home into their country, Scipio
Africanus, carried evermore in war with him, during his life, the Image or
purtraite of the learned Ennius, and diyng ordained, that it should be fastened
on his tomb, or sepulcher. Silius Italicus a worthy poet, was by means of
Domician three times Consul in Rome, which Mercial records in an Epigramme
thus beginning Augusto pia thura: but what? what honor the princes of our time
have dooen either to Polician, Pontanus, to Sannazar and such others, I never
yet any where heard any thing at all. And again to speak of others, that
live yet presently, as Ronsarde in France Belay and others, Poets lauriate,
and learned men of worthy memory. But some will say, they yet live, and
therefore may be advanced, of little time and few years, though of great
wisdom, and readyng, which all might be compared to these, which long
since were, of rare wisdom, and gravity. Mithridates also, to speak again
of our elders had Plato, for his learning, in such admiration, that desirous
to have his purtraite or Image, caused each where to be sought one Silan to do
it, for that, for his excellency he surpassed all others, for in those days
it was accounted a singular honor, to have in places public, the true
purtraites of the learned, neither was it lawful to have any of these tables,
or paintynges, but of such as had dooen some virtuous exploytes, by their
wisdom and learning commended to the posterity. For which cause the
Athenians had the Image of Demosthenes, with a subscription of such, and so
much honor, as never to fore had been granted to any: it was thus of him
written, that if the puisance of Demosthenes, had been such as was his
wisdom, the King of Macedonie had then never entered into Greece. Josephus the
Jew being brought to Rome, prisoner and captive, among the others of
Jerusalem, had notwithstanding, for that he had written of the antiquity of
the Jews, his Image erected among the others of Rome. The Athenians straungely
again ravished with the singular excellency of Phalericus auditour, and
disciple of Theophrastus, did his Image to be placed in thirty parts of their
City. Now then if these men were in this sort honored, it can not be
gainsaide but that they also received salaries equivalent, to these their
honors. For as Athenes writes in his ninth book de Sinosophistis, Aristotle
for his book de animalibus received of Alexander eight hundred talentes,
which might value of our money, four hundred, and four score thousand
french Crounes or there about, which also is verified by Pliny in his eight
book, who reports that Alexander so much desired to have this work
finished, and ended, that he sent many thousands through out al Greece, and
Asia, with his express letters and commandments, that they should as well
be obaied as instructed, in what so ever they sought, concerning the use
nature, manner, and custom, of beasts, fowls, fishes, and such others, to
the intent they might be skilled in every their natural proprieties and
qualities, to the intent they thereof might advertise Aristotle. If Homere the
only Phaenix of all the Greek Poets, had happily lived in the days of
Alexander, it is to be presumed that he would have done him no less honor,
then to Aristotle, for that on a time a certain little Cheaste being presented
to him, in which Darius had ever kept his rich, and sweet ointementes,
said (very glad that his hap was then to have it) that he would keep, and
preserve there in a far more precious Oil, and with the same coucheth
Homeres books with in it, with which he daily busied himself, continually
readyng them. The Emperor Traian, for his learning only, so much honored
the philosopher Dion, that when he to recreate hymsef, would pass in to the
fields, he did him to be plaste by him, in his own proper Coache, and so
would enter, with him in to Rome, in most triumphant manner. In these wars
which the'mperour Octauian had in Egypt against M. Antonius, heesaied that he
had leafte to sack and spoil Alexandria, for the only honor and renoume of
Alexander that builte it, and of part also of the Philosopher Arrias. The
said Emperor also, ordained Cornelius Gallus Tribune of the people, only for
that he was so excellent a Poet. Snetonius in the life of Vespasian shows,
what rewards in the old time were lotted to the learned. For though (says
he) that this Emperor were noted of avarice, yet favored he notwithstanding
learned exercises, and the lettered, and gave to every the masters, or readers
of the sciences, such annual stipendes, and gross sums of money, that
reducyng them in to our money, according to the computation of Beroaldus and
Budeus, each received yearly two thousand, and five hundred Ducketes. By the
testimony of Pliny in his seventh book, writing of Isocrates a Greek
Orator, is evident in what sort learning was reverenced: for (says he) this
Isocrates, having spoken opeuly for a certain man, in recompense forth with,
received twenty talentes, mountyng to the sum of twelve thousand french
Crounes. It is also read that the Emperor Antonius, soonne to Seuerus, gave
to Appian, so many Duckettes of Gold, as there were verses in a great book,
which he then had digested, of the nature, and propriety, of all kind of
fishes. The Emperor Gratia^ oduertised, that Ausonius the poet, wrote a verse
with no less good grace, then assured facility, called him to the honor of a
consul immediately, then which, none was greater, saving that of The'mperour.
Domicia^ also, though he were otherwise, accursed, and impius, inricht with
great rewards the Poet Eustachius, whom in the day of his nativity (even
in his most pompous and curious solemnity) he did to sit at his own proper
table, cro^yng him with baie, or laurel, where with poets in those days were
principally honored. Seleyus Vasa a Poet lirique, was imbrased of the
Emperor Vespasian, with curtuous, and friendly words every where entertained,
and in fine received of him, no less rewards then the other aforesaid Arrian
for his history compiled by him in Greek of the famous oxploites, of the
renoumed Alexander, as also that he was otherwise well lettered, was ordained
Consul of Rome by Adrian and Antoninus. Nether were these men only this
honored living, but in like sort also after their death, by the posterity,
as is manifest, in that Ptolome king of Egypt, did to be erected both an Image,
and Temple, nolesse sumptuous to Homer, tha^ to any other his gods, what so
ever. In Mantua also, long after his death, was erected an other, to the poet
Virgil. That excellent Horace, though we less assure our serves, of his great
substance, and wealth, yet was he advanced to great officies, by Octauian
the Emperor. Here cold I remember you many other examples seruyng to this
purpose, but I leave to be tedious. Now if any will obiecte here that the fage
Seneca, was cruelly done to death by the wretched Nero, I answer he was a
tyranne, and did it therefore besides reason, and that he living was in Rome of
great worship and substance. It is a true, and ancient proverb, honors
make the learned, and nourishe the sciences. So find we that in the days, of
these Kings, and Emperors, when they so favored the studious, and lettered,
great store was each where found of men wise, and learned, as when Octauian
lived, Claudius, and Adrian, Vespasian, Antoninus, Alexander and others. And to
speak of others that lived in these our days, as of the Emperonr Sigismonde,
Robert King of Sicilia, Nicholas the fifte Bishop of Rome, Alphonsus, and
Mathias kings of Naples, and Hungary, these also of the house of Medecis in
Florence: the slower of which house lives this day crouned in France,
followyng the steps, and virtues of his elders, but especially of that good
king Frauncis, in whose time France so flourished in learning, that it justly
might have been said an other Greece, or Athens.

That lernyng is necessary as well unto Princes as also to all Capitaines,
that live at any times in arms. Chap. 8.
I Might here remember many ancient histories, besides the true, and assured
proofs, that Princes in times paste were for the most part learned, as that
they also knew, that nothing, for fit, or good gouernemente was more
necessary, then to taste, or savor in any sort of good letters. But for as
much as these things are evident, plain, and well known, I will not dwell
long, or stay here much on them. We read not withstandyng that Philippe King
of Madonie, seeing Alexander to be borne to him, Aristotle then in Athens, he
sent him a letter to this purpose notable, recited by Plutarche, and A.
Gellius, in which he A. Gel libr. 15. cap. 3.
yeldeth his humble thanks unto the gods, not so much for that he had a
son then borne, as for that he was borne in the days of Aristotle: whence it
is, even in these few evident, how much this good prince affected and
desired that his son should be fostered in all kind of litrature, to
the intent he might be such a prince and captain, as was his fathers desire
he should, and as he after proved, whom as soon as he was of age fit for
study, he gave him (as is said) Aristotle for master, whom presently he
inrichte with great and large salaries, reedifiing also for the love of this
his son, a houge and waist city, which he to fore had raced, where he did to
be builte for him also a schole more sumptuous, and gaie, then erst had else
been sien. Antigonus also king some times of Macedonie, well knowing how
necessary learning was for gouernmente, tickled with the renoume of the famous
Zeno, a Philosopher most excellent, and prince of the Stoikes, desired beyond
measure, to have him at home with him, which thing he straighte attempted by
letters, and ambassadors: which letters Diogenes Laercius in this sort
remembers: Antigonus king to Zeno Philosopher gretyng: I know well that in
riches, in the gifts of Fortune, and in such others, like things of
reputation, I far excel, and pass thee every way: how be it, I gladly also
confess, that thou again exceadest me, in the true felicltie, in the studies
of the arts, the sciences, and Philosophy. Wherefore my desire is, that thou
should suggeourne here with me: which thing I beseech thee grant, and
accord me, to the end, that I may use this thy desired company: which
doing, be thou assured, that thou shalt not only rule, and master me, but
also shall order, all others the Macedonians, for who so well instructs, and
orders well the Prince, schooleth with bounty, and virtue, all his
subjects: and that this is true, we commonly do see, that such as is the
king, such also are his vassaules, and such as is the captain, such
continually are found, and seen to be his soldiers. These letters received,
by this venerable Philosopher, he sorrowed that he could not, by means of his
great age, answer the expectation of this virtuous, and good prince, but
sent him of part, to content him with all, two of his wiseste, and best
learned scholars, by whose industry, he profited both in virtue, and
learning. Aristotle in like sort, whose auditour Alexander was, for the space
of five full years, profited him, his scholar in such sort, that he afterward
proved a most excellent, and wise prince, such in deed, and so perfect, as
none was found to him comparable, throughout the whole world. Being in the
middle of his army, he never would leave, or abandon his study, but with his
sword did to be said, under his beds head, Homers Iliades, and other
books, which he usually carried. So yt as appears, he made equal acco^pte,
as well I mean of the study of Philosophy, and good letters, as also of the
conqueste of great kingdoms, and countries. And farther says Plutarche, A.
Gellius, and Themistocles, that he being busied, about the conqueste of Asia,
was advertised, that Aristotle had published, certain books of natural
Philosophy, the same in deed, which he had painfully tofore read to him: by
means whereof, he wrote to him in effect, as follows. In very truth
Aristotle, thou haste not dooen well, in making common these books, of
Philosophy, by thee composed, sor how in thine own judgment, may I now
surpass others, if this now, which thou some times didste teach me, by thy
means become common, and well known unto all men? Know assuredly, that I
more affecte to ercell others in learning, then in any the riches, or
kingdoms, of the world. Which thing as soon as it was, ones understood of
Aristotle, he answered that his books, which he then had printed, were so
intricate, obscure, and difficill, that it was impossible, for any man to
profit by them, if himself did not first of all expound, and interpret
them. Pirrhus an excellent captain, and king of the Epirotes, which long
lived in arms, at de^^aunce with the Romans, who also at times discomfited,
and vanquishte them, not only busied himself, in the often readyng of the
Sciences, but also published certain books, of which some were written, of
the policies, or precepts of war. That which alsoin our time, has done
that worthy personage, Gulielmus de Bellai, seigniour of Langei. What shall we
also write of Julius Caesar, the first Emperor, and best captain that ever
led soldier, he no less profited in the study of letters, then of arms:
who first was a studente, before he would be a soldier, and after as
occasion, or time, might serve him, would visit the schools, or
Universities, of Poets, and marchyng still, or trauaillyng, would write, or
read some thing. On a time being at Alexandria in Egipte, the better to save
him self, being in mernailous danger, skilled in swimmyng, committed him self
to the water, through which he carried in one hand, the books, which he had
written, giuyng others to understand, that he no less held them dear to
him, them his life, having no less care to save the one, then the other: and
what he had profited, in the study of good learning, his commentaries, which
he has left us sufficiently witness. And not only Caesar, but all the other
Emperors, verify the same, which we here have reported, which also were for
the most part, good capitaines, and governors: who also when so ever they
were inricht with children, acquainted them straight, and out of hand with
their books, prouidyng them excellent masters, and learned men out of Greece.
Very few know, what men the two Catoes were, how valiant in Martial
exploites, what grave, and wise Philosophers. Censorinus the great, so vowed
himself to study, that what he was and how he profited, his writings yet do
witness: he was an worthy Orator, and well skilled in histories, universally
learned, in all studies, and sciences, the Greek tongue he began in his old,
and stoopyng age. The other surnamed Vticensis, though he were in deed less
subtle, and sharp witted, yet sought he to have with him, such as he could
find any where, the best learned, among whom he retained the Philosopher
Antipater, and so gave him self totally unto his study, that as Cicero
reports in his books de finibus, he hardely might be drawn at any time,
from his papers, in such sort, that he never entered into the Senate, without
some book to busy him self, if he happily might have there so much leisure.
Scipio Africanus that triumphed over Hanniball, was so inamored with the study
of good learning, that he never left to have, the Poet Ennius with him: and
after all his wars, and triumphant victories, gave himself most earnestly,
to continuance of reading. Hannibal his co^petitor, though he were in deed of
Africa, had not withstandyng his books, in his tents continually with him,
neither would he in time of war intermit, or leave any time fit for study,
but in what place so ever he came, yea, though some dangers were imminent, yet
would he retain with him still, Silan and Sasilas, all both Lacedomoniens, by
means whereof, he became right learned in the Greek. We have also tofore
said, that Denis the tyranne, retained with him the divine Plato for master,
and that he also held with him, many others well learned. Who after he was
banished, and chaste out of his country, one in derision, boldly bourdyng with
him, demanded in what steed, his Philosophy, sometime learned of Plato, now
stood him. To whom he answered, that it very well then served him, patie^tly
to supporte, and endure that his adversity. Themistocles also that excellent
captain, had in arms, and in study, like, and equal pleasure, he
continually conferred with Anaxagoras the Milesian. Epaminondas with these
others, capitaines of Greece, were all very studious and eloquente Orators.
Mithridates in all his wars, which by the space of forty years, he had
continually with the Romans, never left or forsook, by means of any the
force, or fury of his enemies, his wonted pain or labor in study. He also as
the others, had sunderie Philosophers with him. Octauian Augustus assigned to
himself, certain hours in the day, for his study, neither left he that his
wont, in the time of war, leadyng with him to that purpose, sundry
excellent personages, as Apollodorus of Pergama, the Philosopher Asperarius,
Asimius Polion, Valerius, Messala, Virgil, Ouide, and many such others. Before
this Emperor was Lucius Lucullus, a most excellent, and famous capitain,
which never left, or abandoned in time of war his study, and in time of
peace, gave intertainment, to greet troops of the learned. Paulus Emilius,
that subdued the king Persius, besides that him self, was in good letters most
excellent, did his pain to the vttereste, that his children should be like
him, so that at his incessant, and most earnest suit, he obtained in the end
Metrodorus of the Athenians, a master to instruct, and bring up his children.
But to what end name I so many here by order? Pompeius, Q. Fabianus the
great, M. Brutus, Traianus, Adrianus, M. Antonius, were all very studious,
whose books, letters, and orations yet ertante, witness what the men were, of
what judgment, and learning. In fine therefore, if I nothing be deceived, few
good capitaines ever were there, that were not addicted to the study of good
letters. How be it, two there were of whose learning, we nothing can
find, or read any where, to weete, Caius Marius, and Marcus Marcellus:
Marcellus never the less, as some record, loved, favored, and defended each
where the learned, so that we may presume, that he also was lettered, though
in deed (as is said) we no such thing, have yet found written and yet of
part it well appears, that he thoroughly was not unlearned, by his wise
defense of Archimedes, at the sackyng of Siracusa: although in deed, he yet
suffered not without the great grief, and sorrow of Marcellus. Let then the
capitaines of this our age say, what them best likes, and that, to be well
lettered, is a thing less necessary, but I to them will say, and to such,
as that maintain, that they obstinatly seek to cover, their foul defaulte,
and ignorance. We read again that our elders, in no respect less
esteemed, the books of the learned, then the force, or puissuance of infinite
their capitaines, affectioned also to study, and to learning, as well
remembers Robartus Valturinus, in his hook, of the stratagemmes of war.

Of a strange medicine, where with Faustine the wife of M. Aurelius was cured,
languishing, and consumyng with infinite, and extreme passions, of unchaste,
and disloiall love, as also of some things remediyng the said passions.
Chapt. 9.
THat, that affection, or prison of the mind, which ordinarily we term by
the name of love, is a passion so vehement, and of so great force, we need
only to consulte, but with those that have felt it, with those I mean, whose
examples are notorious, honorable, great, and stately personages, which so
far herein, suffered theimselues to be carried away, that some of them have
languished, and died of that folly. Julius Capitolinus, among many other
examples, remembers, that which chanced to Faustine, daughter to Antonius,
wife to the Emperor M. Aurelius, which became inamored of a certain sword
plaier, or fensor, in such sort that for the only desire, that she had to use
his company, wasted, and consumed, death even at hand with herre. Which
thing understood, as also the cause thereof, by Aurelius, he assembled great
numbers inco^tinently, as well of Phisicians, as also of Astronomers, with
them to consulte, if it were possible for some remedy. Among whom in fine,
this was the conclusion, that the Fensor secretly should be done to die, of
whose bloodde a good draught was presented unto Faustine (so covertly that she
nether knew whence it was, or what) with this determination, that immediately
after she had received it, the Emperor should acquaint himself in wonted
manner with her. This remedy as it seems very strange, and marvelous, so
clean did it alter, her fond and foolish fantasy, in such manner, that
she never after, at any time remembered him, and as it is, in the said history
recorded, at that time he begat on her Antonius Comodus, which after proved
so cruel, and bluddy, that he more resembled the above said sword plaier,
whose blooodde the mother drancke, at the time of her conception, then the
Emperor whose soonne he was, by means whereof also the fore said Comodus
would ever more be conuersante, and in company with Fensors, which also
witneseth Eutropius in the life of this Commodus. The Phisicians of Greece, as
also of Arabia, account this disease, or torment of love, among the others the
most dangerous infirmities of man's body, prouidyng sundry salues, and
remedies therefore, for it. Cadmus the Milesian, as recites Suydas has
written one whole book of the only remedies to chase and remove love. Ouide
also has well said in his books de remedio amoris. And among other healpes,
which the Phisicians have prescribed against this frantic malady, one is,
that unto those, troubled with these passions, great weaghty matters, and
affairs of importance be offered, such as equally concern both their
profit, and their honor, to the intent that the mind busied about these
matters, may alienate and strange it self, from the imagination that
offends: they also give in rule, that such should abstain from all wanton
toies, of either dainty, or dalliyng damsels. Pliny says that against this
passion it shall Pliny lib. 13.
be good to take that duste, or powdre, whereon a Mule has in any place
waltered or soiled her self, sprinckling or casting the same on the amorous:
or as Cardanus will in his book of subtilties, to rub him, with the sweat of
a Mule heat, and well chafete. The Phisicians also learn us, how we shall
know the party, on whom the amorous, is at any time inamored, and the same
rule is it, by which Erasistratus Phisician to the king Seleucus, understood
of the disordinate love of Antiochus toward his mother in law, the Queen
Stratonica. For being extreme sick, and in marvelous danger, having chosen
rather to die, then in any wise to utter the cause of his torments, proceadyng
of love only, which he bare to his fathers wife, who then enteryng in to the
chamber, when the Phisician felt the pulse of his unhappy patient, which so
vehemently, on the soden moved, a^ the coming of the Queen, that Erasistratus
forthwith perceived, that he on her was inamored, and she the only and sole
cause of his grief. By mean where of he did his busy pain, in good order to
advertise the king here of, which matter how he handled would be long here to
write, and the history besides is well known, and common, which thing as
soon as it was once known to the father, seeing the danger be presently was
in, if no remedy were then provided, contented him self (though it far was
beside the intention of the son, which rather, did wish, or choose any
shameful death, then by the detriment of his father, to purchase him health) to
forgo, and leave the Queen, geuyng her for wife to his tormented soonne. And
here also, to speak the truth, both the age, and beauty of this dame, as
also the marriage which after followed, was much more comformabie in the
son, the in the father. By means whereof Antiochus lived many years
afterward, in great joy, and wealth with his dearelibeloued Stratonica. The
history is very pretty, written by Plutarche in the life of Demetrius, whence
it is, that in such cases, Phisicians give in commandment to feel the pulce
of the passionate party, rehearsing, and remembryng the names of many, and
among them the party also beloved, whose name when so ever, it shall in any
sort be uttered, the pulce of the amorous will then more busily skippe, or
dance, then at any other time, and this easily may you find still the party
so beloved. By many other signs, it also is evident, either when one loves,
as also where, or whom, which I leave to speak of, as sufficiently known to
all men.

Who first did set or plant the Vine, who also did first to drike water in
wine, to whom also, and how the Romans first af all forbadde the use of
wine, with some other things concerning this purpose. Chap. 10.
OF all kind of fruictes, which the earth produces (these I understand
where of we make lycors) none is so profitable in mine advice as is the Vine,
so that he be moderatlie, and with discretion used. For which cause only
Anacrases said, that the Vine gives or presents unto us three grapes: the
first of pleasure: the second of drunkenness: the third of tears, mournyng
and sorrow, in such sort, that who so passes the first grape, to wete a
little wine, moderatly, and seldom, in taking it receaueth great shame and
damage. Our profane authors, that never were acquainted with, or ever heard
of the scriptures, devise, and imagen sundry inuentors of wine. Diodorus
Siculus, in his fourth book attributes as well the invention of wine, as also
that he first found to plant or set the Vine, to Denis the soonne of
Jupiter, called otherwise Bacchus, and pater liber, so termed for the liberty
and force of wine. For which cause they dedicated to him a Temple under the
Capitol in Rome, where were celebrated these feasts, which they commonly
called Dionisians, or Bacchanalia, very lassiuious, and full of impudicitie.
And that this invention was truly attributed to this Denis, Virgil well
assures it us, in his first entree, into his second book of Georgikes:
although Marcianus Capellus affirm that he only skilled the Greeks to make
wine. Others write that it was Icarus father of Erigonus which first found the
mean to make wine in Athens, where after ward being drounke* was slain of
the people. In Italy they say that Saturn there first had wine, which he
brought from out the Isle of Candia. Plutarche writes that Ar^us an Etruscian,
enrichte France with the first Vine that ever was there. But the truth is
that the first inuentor of wine, was Noe, as also the first that ever was
droncke, which witness (besides that which is read in the ninth of Genesis)
Lactantius Firmianus and Josephus Lac. li. 2. insti, diuinarum. Iosep. li. 1.
an^.
which Noe immediately after he issued out of the Arc, planted the Vine with
his own proper hands, and drinking after, of the fructe thereof, was also
first drunk: in which that his disease sleapyng, he so discovered him self,
that, that there betided him, which is written of him in Genesis. After this
men leeking of this kind of licour, drancke it at first pure, and with out
water: for as records Pliny one named Stasius, was the first that did water
Pliny lib. 7. cap. 5* 6.
into wine to qualify it. By mean whereof great good has followed, with the
preservation of health through out the whole world, for that wine so tempered
has his most excellent effects. Plato by Macrobius, in his second book
records, that wine taken moderatly fortifieth the understanding, it
augmenteth the puissance, force, and strength, it yeldeth the heart ioious, it
takes from man all sorroufull, and pensive imaginations. Pliny says that
the honest, and reasonable use of Pliny leb. 2^* cap. 1.
wine delaied, increases the force, blo^dde, and color in man's face, the
veins says he, are stre^ghtned by wine, the sight sharpened, the stomach
comforted, the appetite thence grows, Urine also provoked, it hastneth
sleep, and disturneth Vomites, it purges melancholy, and reioiseth the heart,
and in fine profits in many other uses. Asclepiades the Phisician has
written a whole book, of the only virtue of wine. Saint Paul writing to
Timothy counseleth him to drink a little wine, the better to strengthen, and
comfort his stomach. The Phisicions use wine in many their medicines, for that
wine will restores health, increases bloodde, it offends not any melancoly
humors, it dissipateth and dries ^eame, it moisteneth and fitteth choler to
be purged. Plato introducing Socrates, commends wine saying, even as rain
moderate gives increase of all hearbaege, tempe steous inundations utterly
destroiyng it: so wine with (...) ration reioiseth man, and coumforteth his
spirits, but coutrariwise, in abundaunce, scorcheth, and consumes him. Among
all other sweet, and pleasing odours, the smell also of wine is of the
Philosophers commended, for that it adds force (as is said) to the vital
spirits, it is very subtle, and soon penetrateth: but what so ever is spoken
or said any where of wine, that still is mente of wine moderatly taken, and
delaied. The ancient Romans forbad the use of wine, to women as well, as
also to children, as has Valerius, writing the customs, ^al. lib. 2. Pliny.
lib. 14.
and laws of the Romans. So that as Plime says, that in those days, when
Romulus reigned in Rome, a certain Citisen slew his wife, for that she had
drunk wine and although the murderer were immediately apprehended and taken,
yet the Prince with out suit would pardon that offense. They esteemed it a fault
so great and ignominious, to see a woman bouse, or drink wine, that as Fabian
reports, a certain maid having stolen, the kaies of a wine Seller, preuely
to have drunk or tasted there, of wine, was by famine done to die, even by her
own parents, for that fault. For this cause men used to kiss women on the
mouth, to feel, or perceive, if they had drink of wine. It is recorded, that
N. Domician, being ordained, some times, a judge in Rome, deprived a woman
there of her Dourie, for that she had drunk more wine, then was for her
health either necessary, or conuenable. Solomon in his Proverbs prohibeteth
wine, to kings as well, as also to there counsel, for that in drunkenness
says he nothing is kept socrette, or concealed: the pore man's cause also is
then not considered of, or hard iudgmente at the least proceadeth then
against him. We read not with standing, that it was permitted to the kings of
Egypt, to drink wine, but that moderatly, and by appointed measures. A^
R^mulus invited to a feast, would hardly see, or taste an^ wine, for (...)eth
he must^ I determen of a great, and weighty matter. Auicenna says, that who
so gives wine to a child to drink, heapeth one flaming fire on an other.
Aristotle inhibiteth Arist. li. 7. pol.
wine to be given Infantes, as also to all Nurses, that give suck of their
bodies. Plato, by his laws, in his books de republica, though he seem in the
first to aucthorise the drinkyng of wine, yet in the second says, manne
must drink little wine, well drouned in water, and that also in no wise before
he be eightine years old, in the presence continually of old men until he
be forty, to the intent that if he exceed, he receive punishment for his
excess of them. But after that age he permits, that the quantity be of
some part augmented, to mittigate, or assuage the coldness, and melancoly, of
those years. How be it, his mind is, that a certain measure be prescribed
them: farther he excludes all servants of what age so ever, judges also,
and magistrates, and such as have offices, or charge in the weal public. To
students also he gives in counsel, that they sauer not of wine, and as
concerning bondmen, the same order was also, observed of them in Rome.
Auicenna accoumpteth Plato his laws, as good rules in Physic, with whom also
accords Galene, in this matter. Alexander Aphrodiseus in his problemes
affirms, that those, that never drink, other licour then water, have as well
their sight, as all other their senses, more sharp, and fine, then they that
drink continually wine. But how to water, and order our wine, there are
sundry rules, and opinions: Hesiodus commands, that to one cup of wine, ye
add three of water: Atheneus says, that the ancient Greeks, did five
parts of water, to be mixed commonly with two of wine, and some times) which
more was) three parts of water with one of wine, which accords with the rule
of Hesiodus. And this may here be noted, that the Greeks never did to be
poured water into their wine but wine continually, in small quantity, in to
their water, by mean where of Theophrastus assures us, that these two
licours are more perfectly meddled. And this did our elders, not only well
droune, and water their wine, but drank there of also in very small quantity.
Eubolus the Greek Poet, brings in Bacchus, speaking to the Elders or Sages
of that age, I will give you to drink of wine, but three times at your
refection, the first for health, the second for the good smell there of, the
third to enforce sleep, how often so ever you more drink, it al sauoureth of
disorder, and dronkennes. Apuleus Paniasis, the same that wrote of the
diversity of meats, is with the other, of one, and the same judgment,
saiynge that ye may once drink incontinently after grace, the second cup
moves, or quickens in us Venus, the third is cause of shame, and dishonor.
Julius Caesar very sildome, would taste, or drink of wine, which thing
Suetonius reports, by the testimony of Cato, the same I mean that was
ennimie unto Caesar. The excellent Demosthenes also, or few times, or never
drank of any wine. Apollo Tianeus of whom so many things are so famously
written, as he never did eat any kind of fleashe, so also did he never
drink any drop of wine. And among all Christians in these days temperancie
in drinkyng is highly commended. Saint James the less, never drank in his
life either wine or Ale, nether would he eat of any kind of fleashe, imitating
there in Saint Ihon the Baptiste. The semblable find we of Fulgentius the
Bishop, of Emerys also the soonne of Steven, king of Polonia. Josephus in
his antiquities highly extolleth Josephus lib. 8. ant.
that virtuous modesty of the Esseiens (which were one of the three sects,
that were among the Jews, the Pharasies, and Saduces the other two) which as
he says never drank wine. In a certain Epistle Saint Hierome sharply
reproves Priests, bousinge, or pleasinge any thing at all in wine, addyng
that Saint Paul, advises them to the contrary, and farther says, that in
the old law, these that had charge, or office in the Church, never drank
either wine, or other kind of licour, that could, or might force them any
way to lightness. Good pot men in these days, and gallant tasters, approve
their wines by these four qualities, he must be delectable in mouth, to please
the taste, he must smell well and far of, to content their rich Noses, he
must be well colored, pure, and neat to please the eye, and in fine it must
have his commendation of the soil, to weete, that it came from a hoate, and
high country: and of this good wine they quickly can make vinegar, but of the
commodities or disco^modities hereof, I presently leave to speak more in this
place.

Of infinite discommodities, which take their spring of wine immoderatly
used, as also what Phisicians they were, that thought it good, and medicinable,
some times to be drunk. Chap. 11.
THough Wine in some diseases both healpe and comfort nature, yet thence rise
so many mischiues, if it immoderatlie be taken, that the discommodities
thereof pass, and surmou^t the commodeties, in such sort that it might seem
better, we never had seen, or known it, contentyng our selves with water,
which in the beginning was only given us: of part for that we can imagen
nothing to be better: of part also, that all other creatures content them
selves with the same. Consider we All creatures save man content them selves
with water.
also, that by wine, sundry have lost the use of their senses, some their
lives, some also all hope of salvation, and their souls. And although men well
know the great inconveniences that betide them by wine, yet so far of be
they from any intention to eschwe it, that they nothing so much seek, as
continual occasions, to bouse, and drink incessantly, in such sort that
few hours in the day may pass them, in which they kiss not the cup, at
least five or six times, not slightly, and for facions sake, but with staryng
eyes gladly, and with right good devotion. Pliny writes, that where as many
eftsoon drink, nether for any need, or thirst thereto provoking them, that
wine among al other licours has this nature, or propriety, that with ease it
will be drunk, ye though you nothing need it. But afterward it handles those,
according to their demerites, paiyng them the pain, of that sin, and
excess, the vapors thereof mountyng alofte in to the brain, depriuyng them
incontinently of the use of each their senses, resemblyng for the time, some
dull and brutishe beast, and after they at times, by use, have learned well to
abuse them selves, this infirmity then takes hold and full possession of
them, and orders them as does the hungry Catte the Mouse, I mean it
either kills them, or at least it charge them with infinite
discommodities, and inevitable infirmities, torments much worse then present
death in deed, as the Gout, the Palsy, both in hands and feet, the
dropsy, the eyes stand staring full of blooddy humors, the Liver inflamed, the
face full of fire, and very richely coulered, the Nose full of rubies, with
many other honest and pretty commodities, of very good grace, and much to be
desired. Cato said, that dronkennes was a voluntary All creatures save man,
content the^ selves with water.
folly: Pliny says, that it dulleth, and weakeneth the memory: provoking
dreams, very terrible, and fearful. Seneca writing to Lucullus affirms, that
it meameth and feebleth both the arms, and legs, prouokyng men to lascivious
thoughts, and venerie. Deonisins Areopagita, alleges out of Plato,
drounkennes to resemble, some lusty young daunser, whose thighs in the
beginning are sore, hardly able to bear him, needyng some staff, or croache
to rest, or stay on, she also is well skilled, to alure, and draw unto her,
with fre^dly face rejoicing, her dronken Souldiars daily. Saint Paul writing
to the Ephesians, aduertiseth them to fly, and to forsake wine, the spring,
and beginning of all unchaste living. Solomon also, who so drinks wine in
abundance, and excess, never keeps counsel or secrette, what so ever.
Whence grew for just cause, this old, and ancient Proverb, wine runs
without shows, to weete secretly, privily, pleasantly, hardly seen, or
perceived, shamefully discoueryng man's foul, and vicious apetites. To this
purpose; the Poet Eschilus also said, that as in a glass is sien, the true
fewture of the body, so also is sien in wine, the affections of the mind.
Plato says that wine makes plain, and euidente demonstration of the
manners, and conditions of all men. Hence have we good examples, in Noe both
and in Loath: for the one being drunk, discovered his secret parts, whence he
became infamous to al men: and Sodom against Loath had at all no power, whom
wine notwithstanding, not hardly after conquired, blindyng him, to abuse his
own natural daughter. Behold here the fructes then and forces of wine. Among
the laws of Solon, one of the seven wise men, or sages of Greece, it was
ordained, that what prince so ever, was found or known drunk, should
therefore immediately be executed to death. Pitacus also decreed, an other of
the said sages, that who so being drunk, committed any offense, should
assuredly receive double punishment there fore, once for the trespass, and
fault by him committed, and the second time for his dronkennes, the cause of
the wrong done. Aristotle in his problemes gives a reason, why such as are
given to wine, are less able in the act of generation: as also an other, why
among such as are drunk, some be pleasant, some sorry, some joyous, some
terrible. Some Phisicians also are there, among whom I only remember Auicenna,
and Rasis, which affirm it to be a thing very medicinable, and wholesome, at
times to be drunk, though not ordinarily, and commonly: but their reasons,
wherefore, nothing at all content me, by means whereof, I utterly refuce to be
of their opinion. And where as diverse honorable personages have been subject
to wine, had they assuredly forsaken, that there wonted use in bousing, their
glory, and renoume had so much been the greater. Alexander ye great was taxed
of this vice, so that as some good writers, have least us plainly of him, he
did in these his cups, sundry his friends to death, and afterward repenting
him, of that his rage, and malice, would for revenge have slain also him
self, and surely it may be thought, that by means of these his tyrannies, he
in the end also was traitrously impoisoned. Marcus Antonius, one of the three
pillars of the Roman empire, having espoused the sister of Octauian, pleasing
to much, as the other also in wine, consequently acquainted himself with
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, by means where of in fine, he both lost his life,
and also the empire, first vanquished by wine, and after by Octauian. The
Emperor Tiberius, as in him were many, and sundry great defaultes, yet none
so much annoied him, as that he to much loved excess of wine, and drinking,
whence in place of his name Tiberius, was eftsoon in derision, of many called
Biberius, endyng at the last an unfortunate and wretched miser. Denis the
younger, tyranne of Sicilia, so much was given to excessive drinking, that he
became blind, in both eyes unprofitable. Cleomedes King of the Spartiens,
practicing to immitate the Scithians in bousing, and did so valiantly by his
lusty quaffing, that he proved in the end, a senlis, and lothsum monster. It
is reported that the Philosopher Archesilas died of dronkennes, and no other
malady. The Poet Anacreon was also a great drinker, and in drinkyng was
chockte with the Pepin of a grape, which entered by the wrong way or passage
through his throat. The Bishop Flauius, renoumed for his learning, reports
that Bonosus so pleased in wine, that Aurelius would say of him, that he was
not borne to live but to drink: and herein he far exceaded all others, for
when so ever he drank, or else in what quantie, he never thence was seen, or
drounke, or less advised. But it may be supposed, that he paste it again in
urine, as fast as he received it, how be it in the end, he escaped not the
pain of his excess, and malice, for that being vanquished of Probus, was in
most shameful, and loathsome manner hanged. Some also write, that the king
Antiochus, which was, maugre his bearde, subdued by the Romans, so much
given, to strong wines, and feasting, that he spent the greater part of his
time in sleapyng: by means whereof, he committed almost the whole government
of the Empire, to two his chosen, and very trusty dear^yn^ges, himself
banquettyng, and disportyng still, with a certain young damsel, so that when
after he should mete in field with the Romans, his army was straight
disordered, and he an effeminate captive. Eschilus the poet also did please in
drink, by means whereof Sophocles left not to say unto him, Eschilus these
things, that thou have said, and done, have only paste thee by hap, and by
fortune, and by no knowledge that thou haste, or ought that thou understand.

Of certain great personages, which died, called hence by those, which
before them selves, unjustly had caused to be executed, even in the instante,
and time to them assigned, as also some what of the Archebishoppe of Magonce or
Ments. Chap. 12.
WHen the aid of man fails those, to whom by man some wrong, and grief is
done, God assuredly notwithstanding, never leaves to assiste them: and
although it chance not at such times, so sone, and so apertly, as percase
some would, or could in heart desire, yet God that knows when, and how, he
should avenge him, on those that have unjustly oppressed, or wronged the
innocente, so woorketh that at times such trecheries come to light, and eke
man's falce judgments, to his heavy condemnation. Whereof we could
remember many true, and strange examples, among which we read of a certain
knight, of the house of the Templiers, executed as is supposed, very unjustly:
this knight an Italian, borne in Naples, beholding as he paste to the place of
execution, Pope Clement the fifte of that name, advanced in a window, as
pleasyng in this spectacle, which only did this sentence, to pass against
him wrongfully, and nigh to him Philippe, surnamed Bellus, king then of
France, said to him with a high, and loud voice incontinently: O thou
cruel, and merciles Clement, for as much as in the world, none other judge
is, to whom, from thy unjust sentence, I might appeal, I appeal yet from
thee, and from thy great injustice, unto him that all sees, that true, and
upright judge Jesus Christ the rightuous, before whom I thee assomen, as also
the king there (at whose suit, thou have sentensed me to death) to appear in
person both, before his tribunal seat, there to receive, as ye by me have
deserved, without favor, or perciallitie, without respect of persons, and
that also within the space, of one year followyng. And so it came to pass,
that as he there had cited them, the Pope died, just at the time appoincted,
as also the king to hold theother company. Which thing assuredly, only
proceeded, from the inscrutable judgments, and justice of God. The semblable
also happened, to Ferdinande the fowerth king of Castile, which also did to
death, two other worthy knights, of pretensed malice, not having any
shadow, or pretexte at all of justice whom no sorrowful tears, or often
supplications could, or might deliver, from the blouddie miser. In fine
therefore arrestyng, without more, on this extremity, cited the king in like
manner, as before, within thirty days folowng, to appear before that judge,
the last of which in deed, he made change of life for death, and so
departed hence. Such was the hap also, of a capitain, of certain galleys, of
the town of Genua, of which Baptista Fulgosius, in this sort reports, that
he took a little Boat, or Bark of Catelongna, in which also was an other,
or captain, or gentleman, which never had dooen to the inhabita^tes of Genua
any wrong, or injury, nevertheless, for that private malice, yt this
Captain of Genua, bare to the Catelanes, commanded that he should
inco^tinently be hanged, who mournfully besought him, not to do him that, or
any so great vilanie, for that he never had offended, nor him, ne yet his
country, but findyng in the end no kind of grace, or favor, his last
recourse was unto the divine Justice, saying to this cruel, and to this
merciles capitain. that since he needs would take his life, for no cause from
him, that he then presently appealed, for justice unto God, assummonyng also
him, with him that day to appear, before the Judicial seat, or throne of the
most highest, to yield to him account, of that his great injustice, in which
same day as the others, this capitain also died and past to plaide his cause,
in the true court in deed of justice, where as well may be presumed, such
was his reward, as his tretcherie had deserved. I could here longer dwell, in
others like to these, but for a final example, I will one, only, more,
remember you, no less perchance strange, then very true, and certain,
which happened at Magonce in Almaignie, troublyng, and disorderyng the whole
state of that city, as briefly remembers Gontier the Poet, in his
description of the life, and geastes of Frederick the Emperor, the first of
that name, as he records. The bishop Contadus in his history also
records it, as also Henry the sixte, soonne to the said Frederick. In this
fore said town then, of Ments, or Magonce, in the year of our Lord a
thousand, a hundred, fifty, or some thing more, there dwelte an Archbishop,
who had to name Henry, a man for his virtues, of all men each where renoumed:
this Archebishoppe then as became a good pastor, punished sin, and vice
severely, with a special regard to his flock, and charge, true servant unto
GOD, and friend unto his neighbor: by occasion whereof, some libertines, and
enemies of Gods honor, began to malice, and to envy his estate and
condition, so that he was accused of evil demanure before the Pope, and said
to be less worthy, of such an office, or honor, chargyng him with many
open, and slanderous infamies, which understood by the Pope, although in
truth, he thought him to be both just, and virtuous, yet would he not deny
audience, to those that craved it, and having heard their plaint, advertised
thereof incontinently the Archbishop. By means whereof, the better, to
discharge, and pourge him, he chose out among his friends, such a one as he
loved most, for whom also he had done, more then for any other, this was a
Priest, or Prelate, and had to name Arnoulde, highly advanced, to sundry
dignities, by the bishop. This Arnoulde now was rich, eloquent, and learned,
and being entered into Rome, suborned by the devil, determined on a sudden,
to deprive his lord, and master, inrichyng him self with that honor, if it
were possible: which thing the better to accomplish, with great sums of
money, he corrupted two impious, and two accursed Cardinals, before whom
(to the hearing of this cause deputed) in place to have spoken the truth, as
both faith, and loialtie willed, he uttered against him, what so he fasly
could imagine, saying, that he more stood bound to god, and to the truth,
then in any wise he was, or could be unto man, and therefore must needs
confess, that the bishop in deed was such, as he to be was accused: by
means whereof, the Pope, as abused by this Arnoulde, sent unto Magonce, these
two honest Cardinals, there to deprive, and remove the Archebishope, which
being arrived, caused by prorses this good manne to appear before them, whose
matter was there in such order handeled, that sentence was there in fine
pronounced against him, deprived of that honor, and of that postorall
dignity, in whose rome this Arnoulde, was presently then substituted, which
so had sold his master, as Judas did our savior: at which sentence uttered,
the Archbishop said, God knows that I am unjustly here condemned, how be
it, I mind not to appeal from this your sentence, for that I surely know,
that you sooner shall be credited though liers, then I in truth, wherefore I
receive this sentence, a punishmente for my sins, appealyng never the less
from you, unto the eternal Judge, before whom, I assomon you all three to
appear, at which words, these Prelates burste out into a laughter, saying:
that when so he went before, they incontinently would follow him. This
chaunsed in the year of man's redemption, a thousand, a hundred, fifty and
six, which wrong this good priest took very patiently, withdrawyng himself
into a certain monastery, where he observed the strait rules of that order,
without any coule, or habit religious. But to conclude, God never long
permits such tretcherie, and injustice any where unpunished, to the intent
especially, that the innocence of the just, might the better always be
known. One year and a half after this, this Henry died very virtuously in his
Abbey, mountyng straight into heaven, as may well be presumed. News hereof
was brought, and of his death to Rome, whereat these two Cardinals,
forthwith began to ieaste, either chargyng other, to seek and search out the
Archbishop according as they had promised. And behold immediately, or within
very few days afterward, the one of them was so bruised, by mishappe of his
own servant, that his bowelles, and intrailes burste out at his foundment.
The other fell mad incontinently in such extremity, that he brake his bones,
eating, and deuouryng his own wretched carrion, and as concerning Arnoulde, in
recompense of his disloialtie, and sedicious tumultes, which he most
carefully fostered each where among the people, he became so odious, and
loathsome to the multitude, that about that time, they also environed him,
shut up into a monastery, where in fine they took him, and mangled him most
miserably, castyng his carrio^ into the diche of the city, where it lay full
three days followyng, all the people, as well women, as men, doing to it,
though dedde, the most villainy that was possible,

Of a pretty guile practiced by a virtuous, and good Queen, toward her
housebande, by means where of, I ames King of Aragon was begotten, and of his
birthe, and death. Chapt. 13.
IN the old Chronicles, or annals of Aragon, it is recorded, that the Lord
Peter Count of Barcelon, afterward by succession, the seventh king of Aragon,
received in marriage the lady Marie, daughter to the Earl of Mont Pesulin,
nephue to the Emperor of Constantinople, a lady no less fair, then
virtuous, and honest. The king notwithstanding, who pleased much in variety
of concubines, and therefore less forste of this fair, and virtuous lady,
not vsyng her company, as reason would he should have dooen, ministered to her
occasion, of great annoye, and sorrow, and especially for that, the king had
then no issue to inherit, and succeed, in that kingdom after him. Wherefore by
the means, of one, of the kings own Chamberlaines, which also perhaps, had
served him in other such like affairs, she was conueighed unto him, though
under the pretexte, and name of an other, where having used his company, to
her full contentation, and the king perceiuyng, that it drew toward day,
commanded her to withdraw her self, for the saving of his honor: but she
said, my housebande, and my lord, I am none such as you suppose me to be,
but am your wife, your obediente, and your lawful bedfellowe, do me what
pain, or sorrow, shall best like you, for assuredly I will not depart out
from your company, before you do to be called, some one of sufficient
credit, that may if need be, witness, that I alone this night, was with you,
and with none other, to the intent, that if it please God, to grant me, to be
with child by you, which is my sole, and only desire, that the world then
may know, that it also is yours. The king considering of her honest guile,
was (though in deed he thought, that he had been served otherwise) contented
to fatisfie that her expectation, and did to be there of witnesses, two
honest, and sober gentlemen. Now so it came to pass, that this virtuous dame,
within short time after, knew well she had conceived, and at the term by
account, well aunsweryng to this purpose, was delivered of a soonne, the
first day of February, in the year of our Lord, a thousand, a hundred
ninety, and six, which as soon as he was borne, the Queen commanded
immediately, that he should be carried to the Church, and incontinently as they
(which is to be considered) to whom this charge, was carefully committed, were
on the point of entry into the Church, or Temple, the priests assuredly
less wetyng of any such matter, began to sing Te deum laudamus, in most
solemn manner. And thence departing afterward with the said child, unto an
other Church, they also not knoweyng of any such gehaste coming, even as he
entered began that Psalm of Benedictus dominus deus Israel, which was a
marvelous sign, and assured presage, of the great virtue, and bounty, that
should be in the young prince. And the King and Queen, not knowing now what
name they best might give him, did to be lighted twelve Torches of equal
length, and bigness, lottyng to every of them, the name of an Apostle, with
this determination, that the name of that Torche, that first should be
consumed, should be given to this Prince, for name at his Baptism: and the
first that failed, was that of saint James. So afterward then baptized, they
gave him James to name, he was an excellent Prince, in peace no less wise
then valiaunte, and fortunate in all affairs of war. His invasions, and
incursions were terrible against the Mores, he was large, and liberal at all
times to his souldiars: and among others his notable attemptes, he leuiyng on a
time a great, and gross army, past into the Isle of Maiorque, which then
was only inhabited of the Mores, where he fought many, both bloody, and
dangerous battles, but after he there long had besieged their principal
city, in the end won it, as all the other Isles adioignyng nigh unto it, and
in fine subdued all the other Mores, as also the city of Carthage it self. He
had many children, as well soonnes, as daughters, which all while he lived, he
aduaunsed to great and mearueilous honors. The Prince Peter was after him
king also of Aragon, James king of the Isles Maiorque, and Minorque, his third
soonne was Archbishop of Toledo, the lady Yollant, was espoused to the king
of Castile, the lady Isabeau, to the king of France, the lady Vrroque, to
the lord Emanuel prince also of Castile, and the prince Peter in his fathers
days espoused the daughter of the king of Nauar. This king lived seventy and
two years, and died then virtuously, and in his death bed chose to him, the
habit of a religious man, renounsyng his kingdom, and his royal scepter,
with assured determination, if he ever had recovered of that malady, to have
employed the residue of his days in the sole service, and veneration of God:
but his pains growyng, and doubling continually, he gave over unto nature, in
the town of Valence, in the year of our lord God, a thousand, two hundred,
sixty and six, in the beginning of the month of August.

Of an aunciente and strange custom, observed by the inhabitauntes, of the
Province of Carinthia, at the coronation of their prince: as also how they
sharply punished thieues. Chapt. 14.
POpe Pius, the second of that name, a man no less learned, then painful,
and still busied in aunciente histories, when he lived, reports in his
Cosmographie, or description of the world that the province of Carinthia is
enclosed, within the territory, and seignorie of Austria, and says that the
inhabitauntes there, at the coronation of their prince, used a very strange,
and pretty custom, which also is remembered by A. Sabellicus in his tenth
Decade, as also by Sebastianus Munsterus, in his new Cosmographie. In this
Province of Carinthia, there is a great plain, of very old, and ruinous
bulidynges, as if the were the steps, or monume^tes of some ancient city,
in which also stands a certain great stone, whereupon (at the coronation
of their new duke, the day and time appointed) a housebande man, or labourer
incontinently ascends, unto whom that office by inheritance belongs. On his
right hand stands, nigh to him a black Cow: and on his left, a lame, a
weak, and an ill favored Mare. Round about the stone, stands a great heap
of clounes, or country carels. Then comes the Duke on, with a great noumber
on horseback, all in very good, and in decent order, having twelve ensigns
borne there before them, of which one is more large, and more apparent then the
others, which is borne by a certain Earl there, by especial privilege: so
now approaches this Archduke, cladde like a shepherd, unto ye stone, where as
is plaste this carell, who incontinently cries out with a loud and haute
voice, demanding what he might be, that comes in such pompous, and in such
proud arraie? to whom the others answer, that stand there about him, he is
the Prince, and governor of this country. Then thundereth out this vilaine,
as hard as he may possibly: is he a judge rightuous? will he do justice to
all men? will he seek the advancement, and commodity of the country? will he
defend it, and save it from the enemy? Is he a free man, and of a free house
borne? Is he valiante, and worthy of honor? Is he a true christian man, and
will he defend the faith? They all answer yea, he is, and ever shall be.
Then begins he again a freashe to demand: by what right may he
dispossess me of this place? Then answers the Earl, that bare that best
enseigne, thou shall receive for this thy place, sixty Duckettes of gold,
this Cow also, and Mare, in like sort shall be thine, also the Princes roabe,
which he last of al did of, finally thy family, and kin shall all be
free, from all kind of taxes, or paimentes, what soever. This carell then
gives the Prince, a small buffette on the cheke, admonishing him to be an
upright, and a virtuous Judge, and so leauyng the stone, gives place unto the
duke, carriyng thence with him his cow, and his Mare. Then alighteth the Duke
from his horse, and goes up on the stone, where having a sword naked in his
hand, brandishyng it, tourneth to every part of the stone, promisyng to
minister true, and indifferent justice to all men. This dooen, one brings him
water to drink, out of a poor laborers, or housebandmannes cappe, whereof
having tasted, he descends incontinently, thereby making show, that he
utterly condemns the use of wine. Then takes he his horse again, and with him
all his company, passing thence to some Church, where they hear Mass, after
which he dispoileth him self, of his ragde, and ill favored robes, puttyng on
him apparel of Princely estate, and honor, then dineth he, and his nobility,
in most sumptuous manner, after which he retourneth to the said stone again,
hearing the complaints, and greifes of all men, doing them justice, without
percialitie. And these are the Ceremonies observed, in the creation of this
Duke. An other custom have they, in the punishyng of theft, which is no
less cruel, then in truth unjust, especially to be used among christian
men: for having any small suspicion, or surmise in this case, against any man,
they do him immediately to death, without any farther trial, and the third
day after, they examine the witnesses, and al such as can in that case give
evidence, as diligently, and as straitely as they can possibly: so as if that
in the end, he in deed be thereof found culpable, then hangs he on the
gibbotte, until he rotte of by pieces: but contrary wise, if they find him
innocente, then take they him thence, honoring him with glorious, and with
solemn obsequies, with many prayers also, and almose, for his souls health.
And as those of Carinthia, dealte this straightly with their Thieues, so also
some other Countries, have dooen their pain to foster them, as the Egiptians,
of whom A. Gel. concerning Lib. 11. nocti. Atticarum.
this matter writes. Also the Lacedemoniens, which permitted their children
to rob, and steal every where, to the intent they might be the more hardy,
and apt there to in war. How be it Draco, that gave laws to the Atheniens,
ordained that all kind of theft what so ever, should be punished with none
other pain, then death: by means whereof, Solon after said, that he had
written that his law with blood, which he mitigated, doing it to be more
easy, and favorable. That manner, which now is ordinarily each where used,
to hang, or to strangle thieues on the gibbotte, was first ordained ^y the
Emperor Frederike the third, as writes that famous, and excellent L. Viues,
in the seventh book of his disciplines.

In what part of the Zodiac the Sun, and the Moon, as also the other
Planettes, were in the creation of the world, and when the first were made, of
the beginning also of years, and times. Chapt. 15.
AS says the Philosopher, man naturally is curious to search, and to know
things, and there to bends he his full force, and endeavor, less contentyng
him self with these things, which only concern him, but farther he toileth
with marvelous presumption, to have some feelyng, of things impossible, or at
least very difficill. Neither has this his labor, been all together in
vain, though it some times have also failed, of the desired end, for that by
incessante contemplation, and continual study, sunderie things have been
found out, which seemed both supernatural, and impossible, as the motions of
the heavens, the true course both of stars, and Planetes, their influences,
and forces, with others the like, and semblable: among which is also
comprised, that which I now must speak of, to wete, in what time of the
year, and in what day, the world first began, or to speak it better,
when, or at what season, God first created the world: where time ^^irste
began, and the year to be accounted, in what place the Sun was, when he first
began his course, the Moon also with the other Planettes, Aristotle as with
him, many other Philosophers, paste these scruples, accoumptyng never on them,
not tasting at all, or sauouring of our faith, demyng that the world had been
in deed eternal, never to have begun, or, never to have endyng: but these
others, that were not ignorant of these things, knowing by just account,
when the world first did begin, are divided into two sundry, and co^tray
opinions. Some among them said, that in that very instante, when the world
first was created, the Sun was precisely in the first degree of Aries,
which was aequinoctium Vernale which happened at that time, in the eleventh
of March. But others again contrary, that the world had his beginning, the
Sun being found directly, in the first of Libra, which time we call
aequinoctium Autumnale, and commonly chaunseth in the thirtenth, or fowertenth
of September. And of this opinion, were certain Egiptie^s, Arabies, and
Greeks, as records Linconiensis, in a certain treatise of his, dedicated to
Pope Clement, and Vincentius in his mirror historiall. Those that rested on
this opinion, for their proof used this reason, which how weak it is, and
what small show of trothe it has, shall be here after, in place conueniente
said: For say they, all fruits on the earth were ripe now, and in their
perfection, the earth of very necessity, was then also most perfect,
alledgyng for their proof, these words Deute. 32.
out of Deuteronomie, God in the beginning made al things absolute, and
perfect. Others some again affirm, that then was the first beginning, both
of times, and years, when the day was of most hours, and at his longeste,
which is at the entry of the Sun into Cancer, about the eleventh, or
twelueth of June. Julius Firmicus, an aucthour aunciente. and of great
authority in Astronomy, says in the beginning of his third book, that in
the first creation of the world, the Son was in the fiftenth degree of Leo,
in which sign he has his greateste dignity, or honor, especially for that
it is termed, the house of the Sun, and in this sort discourses he of the
other Planetes. But the most reasonable opinion of all others, and most
agrean^e assuredly unto the truth, is that, when both the world, and the
heavens, were first made, the Sun was then found in the first point of
Aries, which might be in the Monethe of March, the Somer then beginning to
come, and grow on. Which assertion (besides other likelihoodes, that we also
shall remember) is also confirmed by the most part of ancient writers, as
well Christians, as also Heathe^s, among which, we find Saint Hierome,
Ambrose, and Basil, with others, which all together accord, that the first
beginning was, as is above said, in aequinoctio veris. And although it might
appear, that there was yet some little difference betwixt them, for that some
will, that this work was wrought in March, but some a little after, in the
Monethe of April. Yet here on they well agree, that it was in the Spring, as
also in the Equinoxe which presently is in March, for, as is said, the
Equinoxe is not ever firm. For Christ himself died the.xxv. day of March,
and at that time, was the day, even with the night, and now this equation, is
but about the eleue^th of March, whence it well may be presumed, that in the
beginning, it was in April. For which cause some, accounted April for the
first monethe, other some March, and yet they all will say, that then this
frame was wrought when that the Sun first entered into the sign of Aries,
and that then is this Equinoxe, which well is proved by the scriptures, where
it is said, that in the Monethe Nisan, which with us is March, the year
began to have his first day of account. Vincent also in the beginning Exodus.
12.
of his mirror historiall says, that the ancient Hebrews, began their
year in the Monethe of March, for that then was the Equinoxe, says he,
whence, and from which time, the world took his beginning. Certain Gentiles
also, defend, and maintain, with like care this opinion, as Elpaco in his
treatise, written of Astrology, where he says that the Chaldeans, excellent
Astronomers, supposed that the first day, in which the world was created,
the Sun entered into the first degree of Aries, which opinion is maintained
of most part of Astronomers, as well aunciente, as new, and late writers. When
then the Sun was found in that poincte, then also was the beginning of the
year: then also the first day, for before that was none other, neither can it
be denied, but that the first day that was made, was also the first day in
the accoumpt of years, for that before it was neither time, or years. For
which cause only, this sign of Aries, is of all the others reckened the
first, and foremoste. And who so will judge, and divine of things to come, he
erecteth his figures, calculatyng continually, from that fore said poincte, or
beginning of the world. And farther it is plain, by an evident conjecture,
that God when he first created the wide, and wast world, that he then also
plaste the Sun (as is said) in Aries, as may well be gathered of that,
which is fore said, in the chapter, of the day and time, in which our
savior suffered, to wete, that this Planete was in that place, in the
creation, that he also was in at the regeneration, when Christ himself suffered
his death, and his passion, which happened, as is there said, in this
Equinoxe, so often to fore remembered. It also seems credible, that it therefore
was so, for that those that have any felyng in the sphere, or otherwise in
Astronomy, shall well perceive, that the Sun being entered into this sign
of Aries, making Or in the contrary poincte the first of Libra.
there his revolution, by the space of one whole day, no corner is on the
earth, which he in that day ones, leaves, or to comfort, or solace, with
his presence, which at no time chaunseth in any other poinctes of the Zodiake,
for that where soever he else be, some place is on the yeareh, where the Sun
is not in that day seen: but being in this degree (as is said) or in his
opposite, no part of the world is there, which in that day, ones sees him
not. And it seems reasonable, that the Su^ne when he first of all began his
circuit, that he there, and in such place should begin, where he might
visit every the parts of the whole world, and that, that, rather should be,
in the first of Aries, then of Libra, it of part is euidente by that, which
we have said, that in the day of the death, or Passion of our savior, this
Planet was in that very same place, in which he also has a certain
particular dignity. Restyng then on this poinct as on a truth assured, they
doubtless are deceived, that imagined the world first began, in the Equinoxe
of September, though it pleased them to say, that then all fruits were ripe,
and in season, which if we well consider, is nothing so in deed: for when
they are ripe in the North part of the world, they nothing at all, then are
so in the Southe, but in very truth, and assuredly the contrary. For which
cause, I neither would lean to the opinion of those, which said, that in
this Equinoxe of March (which is in the same beginning, which we in deed
approve) was, or ought to be, the entry therefore of the world, for that
then, and at that time is the spring, for that flowers also, and grass each
where then begin to come that then also all beasts, acquainte them with their
match, for if it be to us, as it can not be gainsaied, the coming and
beginning of all grain, and grass, it then is Winter, or at the least
Autumn, to these that inhabit the Southe parts of the world. These then
may suffice, with the aucthorities above remembered, to satisfy and content,
the reasonable in this matter although the year Roman, which only now is
used, take his beginning of the first day of January: which thing happened
by the fond devotion, and superstition only, which the Gentiles used
toward their God Ianus, doing their year to begin by his name, as the
christians did theirs, from the nativity of Christ, although then in deed,
the year had not his beginning. The Romans also began their year in March,
as writes M. Varro, and Macrobius in his first book, Ouide also in Fastis,
with many others. Farther GOD showed to us his great favor, and goodness, in
that it pleased him, to place our first parents, Eve and Adam, in these
Septentrionall parts of the world, after their exile, and detrution out of
Paradise terrestrial, which both entered into this world, at the first
coming of the Spryng, findyng the earth then green, and flowred, the air
very sweet; temperate; and pleasant, the better to solas, and comfort them
in their misery; and nakedness, which at none other time of the year, could
so well have chaunsed them. But pass we this matter now, as sufficiently
proved; and speak we of the other Planetes, especially of the Moon, as one
among the others of most force, and virtue, which as some suppose in the
first day, or instaunte of her creation, was placed by divine providence, in
conjunction with the Sun: others say that she was then at full, and in
direct opposition Saint Augustine co^menting on the fifte of Genesis,
remembers both, these remembered opinions, saying: that they that maintain,
that she then was in opposition, argue that it was not reason, in that her
first creation, that she either should lack, or be defectuous in any thing.
The others say that it is more credible, that she in conjunction began there
her first day, so increasyng, according to our account in her age: but to
abridge this controversy, in mine opinion, she at her first being was in
plain, and perfect oppositio^ with the Sun, which opinion is most
received of the learned. Augustine in the place above alleged, and Rabanus
also on the twelueth of Exodus, arrest them both on this opinion, according
with that which is read in the scriptures, where as it is said, that God
made two excellent lights, the one to lend comfort, and brightness to the
day, the other and the less, to shine in the night. But in that instant it
self, when the Sun first appeared, he gave light on the sudden, to the one
half of the world, so that in that half, it presently was day, the other
being darck, and covered with the shadow of the earth. How be it, it seems
reasonable, that on that other moitie of the earth, cladde as is said with the
night, and darkness, the Moon there should do her charge, and office, in
illightnyng it, so as they both were created at one, and the same instant, so
they both also might execute their office at one instante, the one giuyng
light, and solace to the day, the other not obscuryng, or darkenyng the night,
euenso, and in such sort, as has in deed the text, for then was verified
that part of scripture, the whole world through lightened, both on the one
side, and the other. And contrariwise, if the Moon then had been found in
coniuction, then this common light could not have chaunsed, until fiftene days
after, and farther three, or four days must also first have paste, before
her light could have been seen, or perceived any where, and the same should
have been a very small light also, as that which we see, when she four, or
five days is of age. Wherefore these two in conclusion assuredly, gave light
to the whole world, at one instante in the heginnyng. And again I say, the
Moon then being in opposition with the Sun, of necessity had her being then
in the contrary sign, in Libra, which thing thus sta^dyng, she executed that
day, the effects of the Sun, visityng every part of the world, in that
one days course, which to have done had been then impossible, had she been
plaste in any other part of the Zodiake, by means whereof this opinion has
more plain, and more evident show of truth, though Julius Firmicus gladly
would infer, that this Planette in her first creation, found her first
place, in the fiftenth of Cancer, where in deed, she has her greatest
dignities, of which opinion is also Macrobius in his first book de somnio
Scipionis. As concerning the other Planettes, it should be more difficill for
me to utter herein a truth, then in any respect profitable, to him that would
feign know it, for which cause I leave to dwell here on, in many. How be it
Julius Firmicus, in his second book alleged, hardens him self to assign
them their places, in which at the first, every of them was, as Saturnus in
Capricorno, Jupiter in Sagitario. Marsin Scorpione, Venus in Libra, Mercurius
in Virgin, which are the signs, in which they have greateste force, and
dignity, signs appoincted to these Planettes, sor their houses. Of which
mind herein, is also Elpacus, as well remembers Ioannes Agricanus, in his
summarie entitled Agricane. Macrobius also in his book above alleged De
somnio Scipionis, accords plainly with Julius Firmicus, who lotteth to them,
the same signs above remembered: although others some have supposed the
contrary, and that they all in that instante, were in conjunction with the
Sun, which opinion the Mouncke walterus, in his treatise of the ages of the
world, affirms that the aunciente Indiens held for most assured. But in
truth I suppose, that GOD. so plaste, and ordered these stars, each one in
his place distaunte, and severed from other, not meetyng in any conjunction
with the Sun, to the intent that every of them in that first day, might
with his glitteryng beams, give light unto the earth, which had been
impossible for them to have dooen, if they had been in coniunctio^ with the
Su^ne, for that being nigh unto him, within the space, I mean, of certain
degrees, he so covers, and drouneth their little light, that they or hardly,
or not at all might have been seen from the earth But how, or in what sort,
so ever it were being created, and framed, according to the will, and pleasure
of GOD it suffices, says Saint Augustine, that they were by him in any
sort perfected, and framed.

That men may take example of Birds, Worms, and other creatures, to live a
just, and a virtuous life. Chap. 16.
AS we have, above by occasion, some thing spoken of these creatures, though to
some other intent, and purpose, so now shall we breflie, and in few speak,
how their example may be profitable, to man's body no less, then to his
understanding and mind. For assuredly who so diligently and attentively, will
consider as well the nature, as the properties also of beasts, he thence shall
not only take good instructions of life, for the better preservation, and
maintenau^ce of the body, but lessons also to frame, and perfect his manners.
Whence is it that manne lives not in peace with his neighbor, seeing the
ametie, and concord, of beasts together, how they accompany, and ioigne in
one, in every kind, defending them selves to their vtterest, from the force
of any other? How is it, that man shameth not, to live a trifelyng, and an idle
loyterer, considering how painfully and busely the poor Ante toileth, in the
somer gathering her provision and store for the winter? What subjects are they
that do not true service and honor to their Prince, considering the true
love, and obedience, of the little Be toward her sovereign? Why take not
these public weals, which have no Prince, but live in common, example to
live quietly, with out grudge, or mutiny, of the foresaid little antes, which
dwell together in great multitudes, with good order, doing justice, each one,
to the other? And Princes on the other side, why also advise they them not,
with what lenity, and courtesy, they ought still to use their subjects
especially when they behold the King of the Bees, for no cause to grieve or
offend any of the others? Great Personages, and noble men, may learn an
example of humility by the Camel, which then stoopeth, and kneleth when he
shall be charged. The good and loyal husband, may learn to schole himself,
in the rules of chastity, by birds, by the Turtell I mean and by the Dove,
which both, the male, as well as also the female, for none other cause then
death, what so ever, sever or disioigne, having once acquainted them selves
together. Farther it is also written of the Turtle, that having once loast by
any occasion her mate, that she never after chooses, or lotteth to her any
other. Saint Ambrose counseleth all virtuous widows to imitate this example
of continency in the Turtle. And here in most beasts exceed us in
perfection: among whom, as soon as the femal has once conceived, she never
seeks or desires again, the male in long time after. They also serve us for
examples in temperancie, for commonly they will eat no more then nature asks,
ne sleep they more, then necessity requires. To defend maintain, and well
to order our houses, to be merry, and liberal toward our famely, and charge,
the Cock well instructs us in this place with his example: for he gives out
again of his own mouth meat to his hens, and farther to cherishe, and keep
them, leaves not to expose himself to every kind of danger. The great
obligation of all children to wards their parents, and in what sort they
ought, both to serve, and succor them, the Storke most plainly, and most
evidently she weth us, which lodge in their neastes, foster, and provide for,
their old, their weak, and their foible parents, as they by them were
fostered and fed in their youth. Why shameth not man to fainte through fear
or timiditie, considering the Lions prowis, and invincible courage? Faith,
amity, with the perpetual recordation or memory of a good turn, reast, or
dwell continually in the dog, which never forgetteh his master, whom he
has served, loves, and falloweth him, never leauyng to be thanckful, for ye
bread, that he has received. Man that would profit himself, by the use of
an other man's goods, without his hurt, or damage, must so there in learn
to order and bear him self, as does the little Be which draws Honey out of
the flowers without offense, or annoy, in any wise done to them. The order and
mean that man should use, for the preservation of his health, is not only
given us of one beast, but sufficiently of many, which know what food may
annoie, or grieve them, chaungyng from place to place, as occasion, and time of
the year requires, inhabityng places agreyng to their complexion, and nature,
passing man here in, as also in all other things. Why refuses manne to
learn, and to be instructed in these things, of which he is ignorant, having
understanding, and every his senses? Why leaves he any thing less assaide,
or vnatempted? the Elephante practices that which is taught him, the Dog by
pain becomes skillful in many things, and the bird in fine by long watch,
is taught to prate, or to speak. Who so hireth the Nighttingale with her
diversity of notes, eake also many other birds like pleasant and sweet,
how is it that he less pleases in the skille of music? Why practices not
manne to be exquisite in all kind of buildings, considering how artificially
the little Swallowe frames to her a lodgyng, with what diversity of matter she
fortifieth, and strenghneth it? What better proportion is used in Geometry,
then that which uses the little poor Spider? what Astrologian diuineth better
of the change of weather then does the Ante, or the fish which is called
Vranoscopos (as has Galen) whose eye so stands, Vranoscopos a fish having
but one eye.
that the evermore looks vpwardes. Why prognosticate not men, and why judge
they not of these matters? How many other excellencies, and perfections are in
beasts, of which men have some learned, and daily yet do learn? The first
invention to make holes, or passages through the yerth, as also the first
knowledge of that place to be habitable, manne received at the beginning from
the Badger and the Fox The manner, and facion, to twist and make silk, man
has learned, and received of the little worm, which in latin is called
commonly Seres, by means whereof we now twist woll and other things. After
this of the Spider, manne also learned to spinne threede, and of him to make
Nets, to deceive, and take birds. Of beasts also has manne learned to
swim in the water: for no one is there of them, that swimmeth not, but man
naturally unapt thereto, by long pain some thing profits there in. How we
by them are skilled: in some experime^tes in physic, is else where said, as
also some what, of the alteration, and change of the weather: and yet on them
feed we only, in our necessity, and hunger, in such sort that I know not
how we possibly might leave them. Of their skin, hear, and wolle we frame
to us apparel, from strange countries they bring to us, what so we have need
of, and being so necessary, force man there to seek them. They labor, and
turn the earth, whence we reap our bread and most part of other fruictes,
so that they be the chief stay, and sustentation of man's life, and although
they be ouerlaboured by us, beaten, and hardly used, yet never leave they to
be obedient, to know, and to follow us. In battle oftentimes, they not
only fight, but die for us, and in time of peace, they serve in every our
uses. But speak we now how they profit, the mind, or the soul, a matter,
then the other of greater weight, and importance. Now whence then shall man,
take better, or more examples, for virtuous life, or perfection in manners, the^
he may from many, and sundry kinds of beasts? All these virtues, which
philosophers have so carefully leaft us, are founded on similitudes, and
parables of beasts: Orators to persuade draw from them comparisons, as also
all others that have well, and eligantly written. GOD himself, and his
saints, most usually in holy wreete, and most commonly instruct us, by the
manners and conditions, of rude, and brute beasts, leadyng us to perfection,
and integrity of life, willing manne to be prudent, as is the Serpent, simple
also as is the Dove, meke and gentle as is the Lamb, strong again and
constante as is the Lion. This then by the examples, of mute, and dull beasts,
we are taught to be men reasonable, and spiritual. We also find many offices,
and estates of the Church, applied, and compared to beasts, according to
their property. By the Ox (as has Saint Augustine, on the second of Ihon)
are signified these that publishe, and preach, the sacred scriptures. And
according to this interpretation says he, the Prophets, and the Apostles,
were reputed as Oxen, but such as did labor, and husebande our souls,
sowyng, and plantyng in them, the true word of God. Saint Paul, and also
Solomon in his proverbs says: thou shall not mousell the mouth of the Ox
that trauaileth. The holy doctors and preachers of the word, which with
their laws, and doctrine, govern, and defend the Church are eftesones
termed by the name of Dogs, which Saint Gregory affirms, writing on
these words of Job: Quorum no^ dignabar patres ponere cu^ canibus gregis mei.
The same Saint Gregory, also moves us to a contemplative life, if not for
other cause, yet by yt sole example, and imitation of the goat, which
continually climeth up, in to high and haute places, passing as it were there
his time in contemplation, vtteryng to that purpose these words of Leuiticus:
out of the troop let the Goat be offered. And again he says that the
true preachers should imitate the Cock, groundyng on these words of Job,
where he says: who has given intelligence to the Cock? adding, that as the
Cock, so preach they, in the darkness, and in the shaddowe of this life, the
light and comfort, of the life to come, wakyng us with their admonitions, and
removing us from sleep, criyng and saying continually with Saint Paul, the
night is paste, and the day at hand. And an other says, it is time that we
arise, and forgeate again to sleep, look abroad ye just, and sin not. The
true, the holy, and the immaculate Church, is semblably campared also to a
Dove, for as has Salamon in Canticis, O how fair, and beautiful art thou, O
thy eyes, the eyes of a very Dove. Farther we see, that of four Evangelists,
three of them were figured by three beasts. If I would dwell longer in this
matter, I should have much to do, and should parcase weary also the reader.
But above all other examples, that of our savior, and redemour, Jesus Christ
is notable, which also would be figured by a beast, as is evident by Saint
Ihon, in his Apocalypse saying: the Lion of the race of ^uda is victorious. And
David in his Psalms says, he is raised as a Lio^: with many such others long
to remember: as S. Matthewe where he says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often times would I have gathered thy children together, even as the Hen
clocketh her Chickens under her wings but thou wouleest not. Even so then as
Christ compares his works, to the properties of beasts, so shall man do
well to receive instructions by them, the better thence to frame, and more
virtuously his life. And on the other side what shame and infamy is it to man,
to see how beasts perfectly follow every one their nature, and man the sole
and only creature, that sauereth of reason, so much abuses that
superexcellent gift lent him: for he who only should honor God most,
offendenth still his majesty far above all the others, neglectyng, and abusing
his graces continually: in such sort that some beasts there are, of whom man
should rather take example, then of some men that live presently among us: for
more feling have they of justice, and less offend they in every respect,
then man which knows, or should do, what is his duty. And therefore says
god by the mouth of Esaie, the Ox knows his lord and master, the Ass also
her Cribbe or Maunger: but Israel knows him not, nether will his people
understand him.

Why triumphs were first used in Rome, as again how many they were, that
there also triumphed, what a Triumph is, and that there is two sorts of
them. Chap. 17.
MOrally to speak, and after the manner of man, two things principally move us
to attempt great and dangerous affairs, in peace as well, as also in war.
The first is renoume, and honor, the second none other, then utility, and
gain. The noble heart, and valiant courage chiefly desires, and affects
the first, the mind abiecte, base, and ungentle, greedily hunteth for gain,
and saliry. Cicero in an oration of his pro Archia poeta, says, that we all
are drawn with desire of commendation, and who so in deed is most famous, and
honorable, is most, and above others stirred there with, demanding none other
payment, or guerdon, of his virtue, then only glory, and praise of the people.
The same Cicero again in an other pro Milone, says, that the true, wise, and
valiant gentleman, so much toileth not at all for wage, and gain, as he
does for honor, which follows his pains. Which thing well considered by
the ancient Romans, they assuredly more sought then all other nations,
besides their salary, to honor, and extolle, with all kind of reverence,
such as had done any notable, and virtuous exploites. In such sort, that in
short time was found in Rome, more store of excellent Capitaines, and prudent
governors, then in any other place, through the world whatsoever, by means
whereof they after got the universal empire. For which cause, as well for
example of this time present, as also to content the curious in antiquities, I
thought it good in this place, to discourse of the true order, and manner, which
the Romans used, in giuyng fame, and renoume, to their capitaines victorious.
And for that among al other honors, the triumph was the greatest, we will
there begin, letting the reader to understand, that a triu^phe was a form of
entry, or welcome into Rome, done to ye capitain general, with most po^pe,
and sole^nitie, that was possible to be done in any wise to man: and although
these triu^phes were much used in Rome, yet were they not the first inuentors of
the^ For Diodorus Siculus, and Pliny say, that Denis, of the antiquity,
Diod. Sic. li. 6. Pliny lib. 2.
called Dionis, or other wise pater liber, was the first that ever triu^phed in
the world. It seems also that the people of Carthage, used some times in like
sort to triumph: for as Iustine records, among other things that were
written of Hasdrubal, he four times in his life triumphed magnifically. We in
manner semblable read, of the triumphs of the kings of Egypt, but principally
of the king Sosestris. How be it to speak here in truly, these triumphs
were never else where so solemnized, as they were at times in Rome, for on that
day, that any Captain there triumphed, the whole multitude ceste from every
kind of labor, as not lawful for them at that time to do any thing what so
ever. The inhabitants then of every the towns adjacent, came runnyng to Rome,
to behold this spectacle: then was all the city over, the Temples, the gates,
and the streates, yea and the windows hangde each where with clothe of Gold
and of Silver, with silks, with boughs, with flowers odoriferus, and with all
other costly, and sumptuous sightes possible, which might give any token, or
note of joy. The Senate, the Priests, and Nobility of Rome, with all the
other citisens that were of any countinance, went out into the fields
honorably appareled, to receive him that triumphed then entryng into Rome, all
clad in purple, and crouned with Laurel, mounted in a coache of gold, drawn
with iiij. white stedes. All the captives marchyng before him, attired as bond
men, with their heads shaven: and the general, or king him self, that was at
that time taken, went nighest before the coache of any one other. His own
Souldiars entered the City in good order, every of them having in his hand a
Laurel. Before him also paste other Chariotes, or Wagons all charged with
armor taken from the ennimie, and with them also past all the treasure, and
plate that he had gotten, as well of Silver, as of Gold, all the money, and
Iuels of what sort so ever, and with the same also, but a part, al gifts and
presents, that he had received of any princes or cities, friends, or
assista^tes to the people of Rome. Before him also paste, great Castles,
Fortresses, and Engines of war, most skilfully framed, or facioned in woodde,
representyng the tounes, and holds that he had rased: and in marching made
shows, and countenances of battle, but especially of such, as had chaunsed
them in that voyage, done in such sort, and so representyng the thing in
deed, that it made them to tremble that attentively beheld it. And these
shows were ordinarily so many, and so diverse, that the triumph commonly
continued full three days, to the intent that all these things might orderly
be done. In every triumph were many strange inventions (as shows, and
pageantes) with others the semblable long here to remember. Nether was it
lawful unto all capitaines, ne yet for all victories, what so ever, to
triumph, but certain notable laws, and customs were established, for which
only, and for none other, the triumph was granted. The captain that
demanded that honor, entered not at the first in to Rome, but the Senate
would send him an answer thereof unto Vatican, to weete, whether they
would license him to triumph or not. First no general, or other captain,
of what condition so ever he were might at any time triumph, were he not a
Consul, Proconsul, or Dictator, for the triumph was never granted to man of
meaner condition, by means whereof it was denied to M. Mercellus, that most
victoriously conquired, and subdued Siracusa, as also to Scipio that ouerranne
all Spain. Again to the obtainyng of this fore said honor, it was also
requisite, that the battle fought with the ennimy should be great, and
dangerous, and that there should be slain therein, a boue five thousand. Of
these things writes Valerius Maximus. It is also written, that Cato, and L.
Marius tribunes, ordained a law, to do sharp, and seueare, animaduertion on
all Capitaines that should make false report of the number slain. Neither was
it sufficient to wind the battle, were it never so blooddy and dangerous:
but he also must make tributory, and subject the whole province, leauyng it
quiet, and in peace to his successor, bringing also home with him his army
victorious. For which cause as Liuie records, the triumph was denied to
Titus Manlius, though in truth he had obtained great victories in Spain,
for that after him they were forced to ouerrunne the country again, to wage
new battle, to keep by force, and defend that which before was gotten. For
this cause also Quintus Fabius the great, triumphed not, though in deed he
once had subdued all Ca^pagna, as also records Valerius Maximus. It also was
the manner that he that triumphed, should inuit to him that might, the Consuls
to supper, which they utterly (such was the manner) refused, for that, at that
feast, was at no time any, to whom greater honor was done then to the
triumpher. These triumphs were ever ended in the temple of Jupiter, with in
the Capitol, where he offered up the whole spoil which he had taken from the
ennimie, where also (for greater solemnization) public assemble was then
made. And to the intent that this Captain should not glory to much of this
honor done to him, it is reported that a bond man should that day be placed
by him, to whom it was permitted to skoffe, and deride him, in such sort, and
manner, as it best should like him, where of sundry examples are found in old
histories. But to make more plain this kind of triumph if it be possible, we
will remember some, but first of all that, of Paulus Aemilius, a captain
Roman, most famous, and valiaunte, to whom, for that he had subdued, and
taken Persius king of Macedonie, utterly spoilyng, and wastyng his country,
the triumph was granted, by common suffrage of all men, who as Plutarche
recites, triumphed in this manner. First of all, the inhabitants of Rome, as
well as of other places nigh adiacente, were that day seen in their most
sumptuous, and rich attire, every of them indeuouring to place himself, in
some tootyng hole, or window, the better, and with more ease, to behold this
spectacle. All the temples in Rome, were on every side open, hangde, and
apparelied, with most costly furniture, with grene boughs, and perfumes, of
no small value, the streates also were like gaie, and glorious. And for that the
multitude of people in the city, was then infinite, as well of strangers, as
also of others, a number of sticklers was appoincted, to make through the
streates, easy way, and passage, and for that the diversity of shows, were
such, and so many, necessity constrained them, to part them into three
days: the first hardly sufficed, in good order to bring in the banners,
standards, and ensigns of the conquered, the Colossi, Images, and tables of
price, which all were brought in on carts, very curiously depainted, and
trimmed. On the second day came in the armor of the king conquered, as also
of all the other Macedomens, which as they were rich, bright, and glitteryng,
so were they with most cunnyng to the she we ordered, and couched on carts.
After these carts entered three thousand men in order, bearyng nothing but
money open, and to be seen, and that in houge chargers, and vessels of
silver, waighyng every one three talentes at the least, of which were three
hundred and fifty in noumber, four men lotted to every vessel. The others,
the residue I mean of this three thousand) brought in cundites streming, most
artificially wrought with other plate all silver, no less fair, then massy,
and in passing of these companies, in just and semely order, they ended the
second day in most pompous solemnity. The third day, even in the break, or
spryng thereof, with the first band entered (a joyous sign of conquest)
infinite flutes, drommes, trumpettes, with others such like Martial, and
warlike instruments, soundyng all together, not delicately, or swetely, but in
most terrible and cruel manner that was possible, in such sort, as they
presently should ioigne in battle: and after them came an hundredth and
twenty Kine, all white, having their horns curiously gilted, their bodies
covered with certain rich vailes, which they accounted as sacred or holy,
bearyng also garlandes of flowers on their heddes, driven by certain young
boys, no less well favored, then curiously attired, to the place where they
should be to their gods Sacrificed, after whom also, came other children
again, charged with great platers of gold, and silver for the Sacrifice.
After these came others again, seventy and seven, which in vessels of
gold, carried all the gold that they had gathered in coigne: after whom came
then they, that carried the great gobblet, poisyng fully ten talentes of
gold, which Paulus Aemilius had dooen to be made, set also, and inrichte
with stones of rare price: and they that bare these vessels of gold, were
such as were nighest, and best beloved of these kings, to wete, of
Antigonus. Seleucus, and other kings of Macedonie, and especially of Persius
the honourableste of them. After this followed the couche of the king
conquered, with his own proper armor laid a part to be seen, his diadem,
or croune, with his scepter royal, laid in semely order, to the vewe, upon
his armor. After his coache came prisoners on foot, the little infauntes, his
own natural children, and followyng them, a great troop of his servants,
and officers, as masters of the household secretaries, vshers, comptrollers,
chamberlaines, with others such of his court, or family, all weepyng and
wailyng, in manner so dolorous, seeing them selves brought now into such
servitude, and extremity, that they moved to compassion, all such as beheld
them. Of the kings children there were two boys, and one maid, of age yet
then so young, and tender, that they were less capable of their infortune, and
misery, by means whereof the people were more moved to pity, sorroweyng in
strange manner, to see them in that misery. In this triumph, then followed
the father, his own children after the usage of his country, cladde all in
black, who marchte by his countenance all amassed, and fearful, as in deed
he had good cause, his present estate considered. Then followed the king,
sundry of his approved friends, which beholding in that plight, their
unhappy prince brake out into tears, and sighs, so bitterly, that the
Romans themselves, be wept that their infortunacie. After these followed one,
carriyng certain diademes, which some ancient cities in Greece, had presented
unto Aemilius, who immediately followed in person triumphantly, mounted in a
chariotte, appareiled with purple Tissue, having a bough of Laurel in his
hand, with a croune also of the same on his hedde, whom followed his own
soldiers, both foot men, and horse men, all armed in most decente
order, holdyng also each of them a Laurel bough in his hand, their ensiegnes,
and banners soldiour like displaied, syngyng delicate songs, in the honor of
their captain triumphyng, with many other like matters most royal, and
magnificent. This then was the order of Aemilius his triumph in Rome.
The Others for the most part followed also this order, addyng or diminishyng
some few things as best liked them, and last of all offered up the spoil
or booty, in the temple of Jupiter with in the Capitol, where in such form
and manner, as their vain religion required, they gave thanks to their Gods,
for their victory obtained. And although in this sort they commonly observed
their triumphs, yet were there certain laws, that of part limited the manner
of these triumphs, and that according to the demerites of the triumphant,
making distinction, and difference both of the streets and gates whereat they
should enter, the times also, by the Senate were appointed them, but as
touching all other thnyges, as shows, plays, bankettes, and such others, it
was lawful for every man accordong to his apetite, to inriche, and beautify
his triu^phe, as best pleased him: and as for his Coache he also used that, as
was to him best semyng, for it is evident that some drew them with four white
horses, others some with bulls. The great Pomp when he triumphed for his
victories in Africa, he entered Rome, his Chariote trained with Elephantes.
Suetonius records that when Caesar triu^phed, he entered Rome, drawn with
forty Elephantes: in mauer semblable came in the Emperor Gordian also. And as
Flauius writes the Emperor Aurelius which in like manner was also king of the
Goths, had his Coache triumphant drawn with wild Hearts: M. Antonius also
with Lions. The Roman capitaines farther usually accustomed, to have evermore
in their triumphant Coache with them, one child very young; or some times
more: which Cicero well remembereth in his oration pro Murena. Some also
brought with them, from the place where they conquired infinite numbers of
strange and savage beasts, as Lions, Ounces, Bears, Tigers, Rinocerons,
Panthers, Dromadaries, Elephantes, with many such others, as did Titus and
Vespasian, as records Josephus. Other some also entered, with most diversity
of music that was possible, using as well their instruments, as their
voices, with inspekable others, such harmonious delectotions: among all which
triumphs, some were more exquisite, and more absolute the^ the others, as
those of Pomp, and Caesar, these also of the two Scipioes, brothers, and in
fine these of the Emperors, whereof Blondus remembereth in his book, de Roma
triumphante: and as writes Paulus Orosius, there triumphed in Rome at sundry
times, three hundred, and twenty famous Capitaines, the last of which all was
the Emperor Probus, in whose time the Empire first began to decline. There
was also used in Rome an other kind of welcome, or solemn receauyng, which
was some thing less costly, and less honorable then the triumph, which
they termed, or called an ouation, which as A. Gellius records, was granted
unto Capitaines for their victories, then I say, when some one thing or other
failed in them, so that they might not by their co^stitutions demand the
triumph: as for example, if the Captain were nether Consul, or Proconsul, or
had conquired at his pleasure without any dangerous resistance, or for that
the battle was less cruel and blooddy, or for that he had subdued a people
barbarous, and of small reputation, or that the war was enterprised, without
express commandment from the Senate, or for other such like, and semblable
causes. So that in place then of the triumph, this Ouation was granted them,
which was in such sort as follows. The Captain entered Rome on horse
back, in stead of a Coach, and some also at the first came in on foot, A.
Gellius lib. 6 cap. 6. noct. At.
crouned with herbs, which were offered unto Venus for that these victories
were rather esteemed venerius, then Martial. Neither entered the souldiars of
these capitaines armed, ne yet sounded they any Trompette, or Dromme which
might give or force some Martial noise, but used only flutes, vials, and
others, sweet, and musical instruments. How be it, they brought with them in
open she we their pray, or booty, the Senate meting the^ without the city in
the fields, feastyng, praising, and co^mendyng them merueilously, which
honor (though in deed far inferior to the other) sundry honorable
personages has both yet sought, and accepted it. The first that in this sort
was received in to Rome, was Posthumous Libertus, for his victory obtained
against the Sabines, and next Marcus Marcellus, for his victory in Siracusa.
Suetonius writes, that Octauianus Caesar, entered Rome also with this petie
triumph post bella Philippica, and his other wars in Sicilie. Pliny writes
that there were sundry Capitaines, to whom the triumph being denied, contented
theimselues notwithstanding with this kind of Ouation. The cause why this
little triumph was termed by this name, was for that the sacrifice which the
Captain did, or offered that day, was of a sheep, which may in latin be
called Ouis, but they that triumphed offered a Bull, so that from this word
Ouis, came that other of Ouation, their welcome, or ioious receauyng in to Rome
again. Others say that it took his beginning of that voice of ye people Oe,
or other wise Oue, but for that Or it might be said to rise of the latin word
Ouo, which is to rejoice. Whence also is derived Ouatio and from thence this
Ouation.
to rest here on is a matter of less importance, let it suffice that they
called it an Ouation, whether it took his denomination, either of that first
latin word Ouis, or else of that other Oe, or Oue. It farther was permitted to
all Capitaines triumphant, that they should set up their Images, in all
Temples, and common places, that they should erect at their pleasure any
Columns, or pillours, geuyng them the name of Pillours triumphant, builte of
Marble, workyng in them, in most curious manner possible, every their
battles, and victories, to their perpetual renoume, and honor, a show of
which, is yet this day to be seen in Rome. Which things they first did,
followyng, the Trophies of the Greeks, which also were done in such sort as
follows. In the very same place, where any Captain, obtained the victory
against his ennimy, he did to be set up there a great, and houge tree, cuttyng
from the same, all his arms, or boughs, fastnyng to the stock, the armure of
the vanquished, to his perpetual honor, and renoume, and this called they a
Trophe, of that Greek word Tropi, which may signify conuertion, flight, or
retraite, for that in that place, the ennimy was put to flight: and this with
these Trophes, the Romans first acquainted theimselues, for as Salust
writes, Pomp on a time having vanquished the Spaniardes, plaste his trophes,
on the tops, of the mountains Pirenei, which usage by tracte of time, grew
after into such estimation, that they made them of stone, wronght
artificially. How be it, this thing seems to be of more antiquity, and that
other nations also before the Greeks used it, for it is read in the fiftenth
Chapter of the first book of the Kings, that Saul having vanquished Agag
King of the Amalachites, came after to mount Carmell, where he erected an
arche triumphall, in the only remembrance, and memory of his victories. To
conclude the honor of a triumph was such, and so estimed, that no one other
was so much desired in Rome, so that their Capitaines refused no pain, no
peril, or danger, how great, or what soever, so that in fine they might
attain to that inestimable honor. Besides, these Capitaines that thus
triumphed, became merueilous rich, by the spoils of the conquered, to them
also were given, great presents by their fre^des: which I only to this
purpose, in this place would remember, that princes might hence learn, how to
recompense, and reward their capitaines, and other soldiars what so ever,
according to their deserts: for commonly in these days, the dainty coward,
and nise Carpette man, is more largely considered of, then those that imploie,
both their gooddes, and their lives, in the service of the Prince, and defense
of their country.

What names the Roman capitaines gained by their victories. Chapt. 18.
THe capitaines of Rome, were yet besides their triumphs, in an other lort
honored, to wete, by names, and surnames given them, of the people, and
provinces, which they had conquered, and subdued, which assuredly was no
small recompense, for their worthy demerits. Sometimes they also gat additio^s
to their names for their only prowes, or courage in arms, whence sundry
families in Rome grew, most famous, and honorable. First we may speak of
the three Metelli, of which the one (as has Saluste, and besides him others)
for having vanquished the king Iugurthe, and conquered his country, and all
the territories of Numidia, was called Numidicus. The other Quintus Metellus,
for his victory obtained against the king of Macedonie, was surnamed
Macedonicus, and the last Creticus, for that he subdued the Isle of Crete.
Before these were Marcius Coriolanus and Sergius Fidenatus, of which the first
gatte that name, for that he subdued to the Romans, the city Corialis, the
second, for that he brought Tributorie Fidena in Italy. And finally an other
Metellus was there named Balearicus, for that he subdued to the Roman Empire,
the Isles Baleares, which other wise have this day to name Maiorque, and
Minorque, with the others adioynyng to them. Lucius Numius, was surnamed
Acaicus, for that he conquered Acaia, and Corinthe. Brutus also for that he
subdued the Gauls, received in recompense, the name of Gaulois. The two
Scipioes brothers, were also honored with the names, of two sundry nations,
by them vanquished, and subdued: the one Africanus, the other Asiaticus, for
that he both conquered Antioche, and Asia, and was the first that ever
brought, any Roman ensiegne into Asia. After this the other Scipio, son to
Paulus Aemelius (of whose triumph above some thing is said) and nephewe by
adoption, unto the great Scipio, was also as the other, surnamed Africanus, for
that he both assailed, and wo^ne, the rich, and famous city of Carthage. He
also received for like guerdon, the name of Numantinus, or Numa^ticus, which
was to him no less honor, then the other, for having sackte Numantia in
Spain. It is also readde, that Emperors themselves ioied, in the names of
tounes, and places by them conquered, vysyng the same ever more, in their
letters Patentes, and other instruments, as did Seuerus, and after him his
successors: as for the conqueste of Arabia, Parthia, Armenia, Germania, and
others, the one named himself Arabicus, an other Parthicus, an other again
Armenicus, Germanicus, and Asiaticus, each honoring himself, with his
victories obtained. For other causes also, yt Romans, at times gained like
names of honor, as Marcus Manlius, who for that he defended the Capitol from
the violente force of the French men, gained the name of Capitolinus. The
family of the Toroquates, received first that name, for that o^^ of them took
by force from the neck of his enemy, a chain, or collar, in Latin torques.
Q. Fabius the great, who for his delays, and daliaunce used with Hannibal,
deliueryng by the same means also his country, was surnamed afterward
Cunctator: For this cause he also was called the Targette of Rome, which
turned him to great advantage, and honor. Marcus Marcellus, which lived also at
the same time, for his valiaunte prowes, and courage, and continuance in stel^e,
still against his enemy, was in fine called the knife, or sword of
Hanniball. That excellent captain Silas, though he were cruel, was not
withsta^dyng for his happy victories, surnamed Fortunate. Pomp for his so
many, so honorable, and so re^ed victories, was through the world called
Pomp the great, then which name, I know not what might be more royal, or
magnificent. And thus were those names given, to those virtuous capitaines, in
such sort, that their generalles, and conductours of armies, were also termed
by the names of Emperors, which this day of all others, is the supreme, and
higheste dignity, so that they were, either Pretors, Consuls, or Proconsuls,
and that also had subdued his enemy in some famous battaille, had also
destroyed, and wasted his whole country, slain, and murdered great heaps
of his subjects, and finally by the loss of two thousand of his own, to
have slain ten thousand of the contrary, at the least, for other wise he
gained not the name of an emperor. This happy name gate Julius Caesar, the
father of Julius Caesar, for his victory; which he obtained against the
Samnites, and Lucans, in the days, and time of Silas. Pomp was also called
Emperor, for his fortunate victory in Africa, against Domician. Cicero
assigned Proconsul in that war, against the Parthians, was by his soldiers,
for his happy success, continually called Emperor. Julius Caesar also before
he was elected Emperor, was, for that he was fortunatein war, every where
called Emperor. But what captain so ever found not his adversary strong,
and puissaunte, such as durst, and would, both meet, and encounter with
him, neither merited, or obtained that name of an Emperor, yea, he sharply
was reproved, that ambiciously desired it. Hence Marcus Antonius seemed to
grudge, and m^rmure, for that having sackte a great city, on the farther side
of the river of Euphrates, that the name of Emperor, was notwithstanding,
denied him. After this Julius Caesar, and his successors, affectyng the
seigniorie of Rome; and knowing how odious the name of a king was, unto all the
people, did them selves to be called, by the name of Emperors, which from
that time has continued, even until this day, a name of all others most
reuerente, and honorable. And as the Romans, this honored their own
capitaines, with these titles, so in manner semblable, neither left, or forgate
they to gratify any stranger, that for friendship served, or lived in wage
with them, in manner as ample, as if he had been borne in Rome: and as they
found them hardy, and valiaunte, so were they gracious, and large, in
recompensyng their service: so gave they unto Atalus a part of Asia, with the
title (for more ample satisfaction) of a king of which benefit, he never
became obliuious, or ungrateful, for diyng, he returned the profits thereof,
to Rome again. A. Eumenes brother to this Atlaus, for that he ha^ both
painfully, and faithfully served the Romans, against Antiochus, the Senate
gave him in recompense, all the tounes, that they had gotten of Antiochus in
Asia. Unto Iotar king of Galicia, for having aided Pomp against Mithridates,
they gave the whole province of little Armenia. In like sort they rewarded
Massinisla king of Numidia, received by Scipio for companion, and friend to the
people of Rome, to whom they franckly gave what so ever, he had gotten from
Siphax, which had aided the Citezeins of Carthage, against the others of Rome.
Neither thus rewarded they princes, and great personages only, but unto men
of base condition, they presented iules, offices, and honors. The Consul
Marius, considering the notable courage, of two small bands, which
meruailously withstoode the furious, and violent incursions of the Cimbrians,
which then were entered upon the Cimbria is that which we now call Denmark.
frontires, or confines of Italy, infranchest them immediately, reputing them
for citezeins of Rome, whereof being reproved, as having done it against their
laws, said, that in the middle of that fight, when blows were dealt
thickeste, he heard no law speak in what sort so ever.

The end of the third part.
The fowerth part of the Forest or collection of histories.
Of the seven meruailes, or wonders of the world. Chapt. 1.
SVche as have employed any part of their time, in the readyng of histories,
orators, and old Poets, have found that often mention is made, of the seven
wonders of the world, at sundry times erected, and in places far distaunte.
All such as have hereof written any thing, agree, and accord together on
six, but as touching the seventh, we find diverse opinions, and therefore less
determine, on which, or where, with best warrant to arreste us. How be it, in
the first place we will speak, of the walls of Babylon, one of the seven, and
that for good cause, as well for the marvelous circuit of them, as for the
seat also thereof, which both to most men, might seem a thing impossible:
and although it might suffice, in this place now to advertise the reader, of
that, which is above said in the chapter, of the diversity, and confusion of
tongues, and that it was there builte, where Nembrothe erected the Tower of
Babel, of which the town (as is euidente) took his denomination, yet will we
not so, and in such sort pass it. These waules then according to the
approved opinion, of most men, and of Trogus Pompeius, as has Iustine, were
first of all founded, by the famous Queen Semyramis, mother unto Ninus. Which
opinion D. Siculus, A. Marcelinus, and P. Orosius, with the greatest part of
all the Gentiles, have uniformly agreed on: although Saint Augustine, and
Josephus in his antiquities, attribute it unto Nembrothe Aug. lib. 16. de
ciuitate dei. Josephus li. 9. de antiquitatibus.
aided by his people: but were it, that Semyramis, either laid the foundation,
or repaired it, it suffices that it was perfected, and inrichte meruailously
by her. This City was seated on a plain on the one side, on the other side
paste the great river of Euphrates. It was proportioned in a square, or
quadrante, the walls very high, and curiously wrought, the matter was stone,
laid with hoate lime, and an other kind of cimente, which usually is found
in the mines of that country, but chiefly in that great river of Judea, where
some times stood Sodom and Gomorra, called Asfaltida, giuyng a slime, which
holds more fast, then any kind of Pitche, or Glewe. Some writers disagree,
as well about the height of this wall, as also about the circuit thereof,
which might peradventure happen by diversity of measures, Pliny says that
this wall had in compass sixty thousand pases, so that every quarter, or
fowerth part of the quadrante, had by computation just fiftene thousand: he
farther adds, that it was two hundred foot high, which foot exceded by
three inches, the measure of the foot Romain and xv. foot thick, which was
assuredly very strange and marvelous. Diodorus Siculus affirms, that it
contained in all, three hundred, and sixty stadia, and was also, so thick
that six Carts there on, without annoye, might pass, on a front together.
The bridges, fortifications, towers, and gardines, that Semyramis did on, and
through this wall to be made. is a thing more miraculous, then easy to be
credited. It farther is written, that she retained in this work, three
hundred thousand woorkemen, gathered throughout all the territories, and
countries subject to her. To the former length, Quintus Cursius adds yet
eight stadia more, and in height he says it had just an hundred cubits: but
Paulus Orosius Paulus orosius lib. 2.
says, that it contained in length, four hundred and eighty stadia, which
mount (giuyng an hundred, twenty, and five paces, to every stadium) to the
sixty thousand pases, that Pliny remembered. Strabo writes, Strabo lib. 16.
that this wall was in compass, but three hundred eighty, and five stadia,
but in breadthe was such, that many Carts might pass on it, not touching, or
hurting any one tho'ther. Farther strange things are written, of the
pleasant, and fine gardens, that were on certain turrettes, and towers, in
this wall, in which also grew trees of great height. Julius Solinus here in
accords with Pliny. Besides this, some of these writers also affirm, that
without, it was environed, with certaiue motes, or diches, full to the banks
continually with water no less broad, or deep, then some reasonable good
river. In this city were an hundred gates, all of mettalles, no less strong,
then beautiful, and curious: and in fine, what soever is written of the
excellency of these walls it need not to any manne seem less true, or
incredible, for that this city was then the most proud, and most stately of
all others in the world, the seat, and chair long time, of the universal,
and general Monarche, which is an argument, or note sufficient, of the
great pomp, and roialtie ofit, of part described by Aristotle in his
Politiques, who there says, that it being on a time, taken by the enemy,
these that inhabited the farther part of the same, neither felt, or knew any
thing of their misery, before full three days afterward. In the second place
of these wounders, we shall remember a Colossus, which was made at Rhodes,
offered by the Gentiles, and dedicated to the Sun, although some others
Colossi, were Images of excedyng greatness, having the shape, or proportion of
man. Plineus li. 34. cap. 7.
say unto Jupiter: this Colossus was of metal, of a houge, and incredible
greatness, and height, much like to some great, and strong tower, in such
sort, that it well might be meruailed, how, or in what manner it might be
set up, or raised. Pliny who hardly passes any thing, writes that it had
seventy cubits in height, and although to make it, there were a great number
of good work men continually busied, yet wrought their twelve years, before
they could finishe it, and the charges thereof drew to iij. C. talentes. It
was made by the commandment of Cares, scholar to Lysippus. This Image was of
such horrible greatness, that it seemed the earth was unable to sustain him:
he stood as both Pliny, and Orosius record, but only fifty and six years,
at the end of which time he fell, overthrown by a marvelous yearthquake, and
being fallen, infinite multitudes came to behold him, as a most strange, and
rare spectacle, especially for that few men were found, that could well
fathom his thombe, the little finger being greater, then all other ordinary
Images. Some write of an hundred others, which also were at Rhodes, but all
far inferior to this in greatness, which to remember therefore, is less
incidente to our purpose, unless perchance, we should here mind the reader,
that some therefore have thought, that the Rhodians by this mean gate the name
of Colossenses, having at one time, an hundred small Colossi, besides that
other great Colossus, now above remembered: how be it this opinion less
pleases Erasmus, for that (says he) the Colossiens, to whom saint Paul
wrote, were the inhabitauntes of Colossas, a city in Frigia-Retourne we then
to this Colossus again: which lay rottyng, and rustyng there, many years
after, even until the time of Pope Martin the first, which was in the year of
our Lord God, just six hundred, when the Infidelles, with their captain
the Soudan of Egypt, invaded the Rhodians, and as Platina writes, in the life
of the said Martine, with, whom also accords Antonius Sabellicus, carried
thence all the pieces, or parts, that remained of that Colossus, where with
they loaded nine hundred Camelles. Of all the other Colossi, which were as well
in Rhodes, as in other places, but in quantity, or bigness, far inferior to
this, I may in this place at all, speak nothing, only having here to
entreat of, the seven wounders of the world. The third was, the Pyramides in
Egypt, concerning which, if all things be true, in good histories reported,
they were then no less miraculous, then strange, in deed, and marvelous.
Pyramides were then, certain What a Pyramid is.
edifices, or buildings, which began in a quadrante, and so continued
still, by insensible difference, streatning, and sharpenyng vpwardes, some
thing like unto a Dia^ant, of a marvelous greatenesse, and height with all,
builte, with such, and so houge stones, cut, and framed in such marvelous
perfection, that it were hard to write, the true proportion of it, hard also,
to bring men to receive it for a truth, and credit it: how be it, these
things are sufficiently aucthorised, as well by Christians, as by Gentiles, of
whose report (unless we wrong them) we neither may, or can doubt any thing.
These Pyramides are then Towers of incredible height, endyng evermore at the
top, in a small or sharp point. This word Pyramid, takes his beginning
of this Greek word Pyr, in English fire, for that it ends as a flame,
sharp continually at the point. Among all the Pyramides, any where remembered
of, particular mention is especially made of three, and they al in Egypt,
betwixt the city of Mensis, now called Caira, and the Isle of Delta,
environed on every side, with the river Nilus, of which one, is accounted, one
of the seven wounders: for as is reported there labored continually to raise,
and erecte it, three hundred, and sixty thousand menue, for the full space of
twenty years: which thing Pliny passes not, alleging Pliny lib. 36. cap.
12. Diod. Sic. li. 1. Strabo lib. vltimo. Pomp. M. l^ 1. Herod. lib. 2. Am.
lib. 2.
twelve aucthours, which all together affirm it, as also does Diodorus
Siculus, Strabo, Pomponius Mela, Herodotus, Amianus, with others. Some also
write that the foundation of this Pyramid, contained so much ground as may
be well ploughed, with one plough in eight days, which may mount to
eighty Iugera: others some abate again so much thereof, as may be ploughed
of one plough, in one or two days, so that it contains the full compass of
six, or seven days iournies at the least, and in height it also had, so
much, or some thing more. Pliny writes, that each quarter contained in
length, eight hundred, eighty and three foot. The stones were all of Marble,
brought out of Arabia, and as Pomponius Mela records, the most part of
them were thirty foot long, whence it seems not incredible, that there
were there on busied, so many thousand men, some to carry, turn, and remove
stones, others to square, fine, and frame the^, others again to fasten, iointe,
and lay the^, besides the multitude busied in Iron works, and other things
like needful, and necessary. Farther of other Pyramides, some also write
this, or at the least of two or three, of which one was erected, by the
vain pomp of the princes and kings of Egypt, which were of all others
most rich in that time, of part as well by the fertility of their country,
as also of part, for that in Egypt, no man then held in his own possession
any thing, the king only excepted: and thus there began, in the time of
Joseph, son of Jacob, which counseled Pharao, to reserve, and keep, the
corn of the seven plentiful years, to help himself, and his people, in the
other seven years of famine following, during which time, the king by means of
his grain, became Lord, and seigniour of every man's lands, rentes, and
possessions, throughout all, and every his territories, and countries. Consider
here then of the wealth, of these princes, and how all their subjects served
them, without respect, as they had been bo^dme^. And as it is fartherreported
in good histories, these princes for none other cause, did these Pyramides to
be raised, but only to give meat, and sustenance to their hungry subjects,
to such I mean, as in these works labored, and farther, not to leave their
treasures to their successors: for they more desired in such sort to spend
the^, then to leave occasion to their posterity, by these means to pass, and
surmount their predicessors, in wealth and abundance, inioiyng after them,
that which they before carefully had gathered. It also is written, that these
Pyramides served, as Sepulchers for great Princes: and who so well co^sidereth
the great multitude of Hebrews, which served in Egipte, whose aid the
Princes used there, to erecte Cities, Castles, and Holds, will nothing at all
marvel at that which is above said: for it is most certain, that there were
delivered from this bondage six hundred thousand men, besides an infinite
multitude of women, and children, which all were employed in these, and the
like works, so that by these means it was no strange thing to advance
these famous edifices: and as some also report, the Radishe roots, and
saletes, besides other provision of like meats in these works spent, mounted
to the sum of eighty talentes, which might value, of our money, one million,
and four score thousand Crounes. Diodorus writes, that round about this
Pyramid, both nigh, and far of, there was not to be found, so much as one
small stone, nether any show, or sign, that any man had earste been there,
and in fine, no foundation thereof, to be seen, or perceived, only there was
fine sand as salt, and that in great abundaunce or quantity: in such sort
that it seemed, it only had been, by some secrette miracle, or by the mighty
hand of God, or that it had out of that place grown up, whose height almost
seemed, to have streachte unto the heavens. If we would leave to remember old
histories, yet could we not in this matter lack, good witnesses of our time.
Petre Matyr borne in Milan, a man of no less experience, then learning, sent
as Ambassador unto the Soudan of Egypt, from the Emperor Ferdinande, in the
year, of our redemption, a thousand five hundred and one, composed a book of
these things, which he saw, and did, in that ambassade, where he utters in
writynge, that, which by mouth he has often times spoken, touching, and
concerning, these fore remembered Pyramides, agreyng in every point with that
which these ancient authors have leafte us: and perticularly he discourses,
in many of two, which both he saw, of height incredible, and farther says
that he measured the quarters of one of them, which were all equal, each
having.iij. hundred, and fiftene pases, in leanght, and in circuit all to
gether almost thirtene hundred: and again he adds, that on every side, there
were certain houge, and great stones, imbost, and swellyng outward for the
more better conueance of certain roumes with in. And more he says, that some
of his company, in long time, and with merueilous pain ascended to the top of
one of them, where they found one stone, such and so great, that with ease
thirty men might at once have stood on him, and being descended again, would
not otherwise think, but that they had been in some cloud, and farther so
high they were, that their sight began to fail them, their brains rollyng
and turnyng, as people amassed. So that as he says, it nothing may be doubted,
neither of the number of workmen, nether of the great expenses. The fourth was
the sepulcher, or tomb, which Artemisia did to be built for her husebande
Mausolus king of Caria, a province in Asia the greater, nigh unto the Sea
Icarium. This woman as writes A. Gellius, and others, in such sort loved A.
G^li. 10. noctium At.
Mausolus her husebande, that all men remember her, for an example most
notable: who after the king died, did in such sort lament, and bewail him,
as nether can I write, or find experience thereof in others, erectynge to him
a sepulcher, aunsweryng of part, the great love that she bare him, which for
the cost bestowed thereon, the excellent frame, and workmanshippe with all, was,
and is reputed, for one of the seven wonders. This tomb was built on an
excellent kind of Marble, in compass just four hundred, and a leven foot,
and in height, twenty and five cubits. It also had thirty, and six pillars,
all of stone of rare prise, most skilfully ingraued: it lay open to the veu,
on every side to be seen, with Arches containyng seventy and three foot, in
breadthe, bulte by the most excellent workmen that were in the world to be
found. The part openyng to the East, was ingraued, and wrought by Scopas:
that toward the north by Briax, the South part by Timothee, and that of the
West, by Leocares: the perfection of this work was such, and the frame thereof
so excellent, that it thereby gained the name of Mausoleum, and that for the
dead Kings sake, for whom it was builded, whence also all other sepulchers,
that even until this day have any where been made, if there be any beauty, or
excellency in them, for that Sepulcher only, hold the name of Mausolea. And
of those things make mention Pliny, Pomponius Mela, Herodotus, Pliny li. 35.
cap. 5. P. Mela. li. 1, Stra. lib. 7.
Strabo, Aulus Gellius, and others. It also is evident, that Artemisia after
the death, and departure of her husebande, lived in continual tears, and
weepyng, and that her self also paid the tribute of nature, before this work
was fully finished, and ended, having drouncke notwithstanding her husebandes
bones first in powder, lodging them in the Sepulcher of her own proper body.
The fifte was the Temple of Diana, whom fondly, the Gentiles adored for a
goddess, it stood in the city of Ephesus in Asia, in the province of Ionium.
Pliny says that it was builte by the Amazones, whose fame, and renoume, was
such, and so strange, that no part of the world was there, that resounded
not of it, so that Democritus there of only has written, one whole volume.
Pliny discoursing of this temple, says that it contained four hundred,
twenty and five foot in length, and in breadthe two hundred, and twenty.
This work was of such merueilous excellency, that all Asia about it was
busied ij. C. and twenty years, it was seated in a Fenne, or marishe ground,
only to avoid the danger of yearthquakes: the foundation thereof was laid
with Cole dust, hard trodden, and beaten down, and on that again great store
of Wool, to assure the place, other wise moiste, and watrie. In it were an
hundred fowertie, and seven pillours, every of them of Marble, and seventy
foot high, all erected by Kings of Asia. Of these thirty seven were most
exquisitlie ingraued, the others also of Marble (as is said) polished. The
master of this work, as records Pliny was Cresiphon, but Strabo otherwise
Strabo. lib. 14.
says that it was Archifron. How be it, this diversity of opinions is
excusable, considering how long time this work continued, and therefore of
necessity it required more then one, or two masters, besides, many things
were added at sundry times to perfect it. Solinus, and Pomponius Mela, write
that this Temple was first erected by the Amazones, and Solinus farther
adds, that when the mighty, and puissant Xerxes, was busied about the
conquest of Greece, he brunte, and consumed every other Temple, only reseruyng,
and saving this. All writers accord, that on these pillours, was framed a
roufe of Ceder, in most curious sort wrought, that was possible to be devised,
the doors through out, being all of Cypres. After this a leude person
considering of this so rich, and so renoumed a work, desired still in heart
(which he after did) to burn it, and being apprehended immediately upon the
fact, confessed that he had for none other cause done it, but that his fame
might line, him self each where remembered, for ever, of the posterity, whence
as Valerius Maximus, records, in his title of renoume, and honor, and also
with him in like manner Aulus Gellius, it was immediately enacted, that no A.
Gel. lib. 2.
manne under pain, of great, and grievous punishment, should at any time be
so hardy to speak, or write, his name, to the intent he yet might fail, of
that his desired purpose. But this less served, for both Strabo, and Solinus,
witness of his name, and call him Herostratus, of whom proceeded afterward this
proverb, Hero^^rati gloria, applied unto these that seek either fame, or
honor, by any their like wretched and villainous tretcheries. Farther we may
remember here, as not altogether impertine^t, that the very same day, that
this temple was thus burned, Alexandre was borne, that Prince of worthy memory,
which conquired, and subdued each Province throughout all Asia. Which thing
well notes Plutarch, in the life of Alexandre, as also Cicero twice in his
second book de natura deorum, also again in his book de diuinatione, where
as he says, that then, when this Temple was in burning, the Sages there
prognosticated, of the general destruction, and conquest of all Asia, as in
deed it after was, subdued by this Alexandre. Some report that this temple,
was again reedefied, enlarged also, and beautified, much more then at the
first, as also that the master of this work had to name Democrates. The sixth
marvel was none other, then the Image of Jupiter Olympicus, which was erected
in the Temple of Jupiter in Acaya, betwixt the two Cities of Elida, and Pisa,
which place, as also the Temple, after the denomination of Jupiter Olympicus,
were both called by one name Olympia, which Image as both Strabo, and
Pomponius Mela Stra. lib. 8. P. Mela. li. 2.
report, was no less renoumed for the art, perfection, and finenes of the
work, then it also was, for his exceedyng houge greatness. Some say that it
was, all of Porphire, other some of Yuorie, wrought, or done by Phidias, to
grave, or carue, the most excellenst that ever was. Of this Image writes
Pliny, as besides him sundry Pliny. li. 34. and 36.
others. Strabo adds that the excellency of this Image, consisted in his
greatness to which also came that, whence in deed it was more strange, and
merueilous, that it al was wrought of Porphire, cut, and divided into most
small, and fine parts. It is reported that Phidias, in one only point,
failed in this work, to weete, that the compass of this Image was less
conformable, and agreant, with the true proportion of the Church, for that
being made sittyng, was yet never the less so high, and so great, that if you
would have considered him at any time to have stood, the church then by no
means could any ways have healde him. Notwithstanding this Image much
beautified this Temple, doing it to be spoken of much more then before, though
it also were before very famous, especially by the means of three solemn
plays, and games, kept in the honor of Jupiter, called Olympia. Thence came
it, that the Greeks counted their years, by Olympiads, which usually were from
five years, to five, which plays were first instituted, and ordained by
Hercules. But this usage some times leafte, was after again practiced, and put
in ure by Emonis, or as others some will, by Sfiton, four or five years after
the destruction of Troie, at least as Eusebius accompteth, at which time
began again the first Olympias. Concerning the seventh marvel, some
suppose it to be the Tower that was in the Isle Pharos, nigh to that renoumed
Alexandria in Egypt. This Pharos was a small Isle, long, and streate, liynge
on the one side of Egypt, straight against the mouth of Nilus, which in old
time, or long sith, as gaithereth Pomponius Mela, and also Pliny, was of one
side only environed with the Sea, or P. Mela li. 2. Pline lib. 5.
water, but after ward in their time was so foolded in with fluddes, that
only at one place, and by one Bridge, passage was, and by none other. In this
Isle Pharos (so called after the name of a certain discrite Pilote, which
sometimes was at Meneleas, and there also was buried) the kings of Egipte
builte a certain tower of Marble, in height, and curious work, surpassyng
all others, on the top of a hill environed with water, whose frame, and
facion was such, and so statly, that it cost them eight hundred talentes,
which mount to four hundred, and four skore thousand crounes, according as
Budeus accompteth; and was erected for none other cause, but to be a Lantern
for certain Torches or lights in the night, only for the comfort, and
surety of all those that either were then in voyage by Sea, or by Land, the
better to conduct them to good and sure harbor. Which tower nevertheless as
most men hold, was builte at the proper charges of Ptolome only, whose
master of that work had to name Sistratus, as Pliny also has Pliny lib.
35.
plainly leafte us. Caesar in his commentaries no less commends the height,
then he does the beauty, and excellency of this tower, and says that it
had the name, of the Isle Pharos. The very same reports Amianus Marcelinus,
writing the history of this worthy work: A. Marc. lib. 2.
to which Solinus adds, that what towers so ever were any where to this
purpose built, were, to the imitation of this also called Pharoos, as that (for
example) of Messina and others. And farther I suppose that these lights, or
Lanternes, which ordinarily are carried, in ships by the night, each one the
better to draw, and direct the other, by this means in like manner were also
cauled Pharoos. So this is now the last of these seven maruailes, although in
deed, of many it be accounted none, in whose place some number the hangyng
gardeines of Babylon, where of also is to fore some thing said. Lactantius
Firmianus reports, that these Gardeines were plotted on high, on the very
tops of Arches, and Towers, in such sort that under them were fair, and
pleasante lodginges, and above grew trees of great, and rare hougenes, with
abundance of springes, at all times to bid we them. The form of these
buildinges, is amply described by Diodorus Siculus. Celius Rhodiensis,
discoursing of these mearuailes remembereth no thing of this Tower Pharos, ne
yet of these strange Gardeines of Babylon: but in the seventh place adds an
Obeliscus, framed, and perfected by the commandment of Semiramis, which in
shape nothing differed, or facion from a Pyramid, beginning in a square, and
endyng in a point, in this notwithstanding disagreyng with the other, that the
Obeliscus ever was of one only stone, nether peeste, or patchte, in any part,
or place, and yet therefore little yeldyng in height to any Pyramid, of which
we read that some, were great, as any Towers, of a fair, and good stone
curiously graven. Of which sort is one yet this day in Rome, known by the
name only of a neelde which by inspeakable pain and policy, was brought,
out of Egypt, of height no less merueilous, then it was to bring so houge a
weaght thither. This Obeliscus now of Semiramis, which Celius, as is said,
reckneth for the last marvel, had in height an hundred, and fifty foot, and
in circuit nintie six, each side in length, by equal proportion conteainyng
twenty four foot, which as it was one whole, and perfect stone, so was he
also, by express to^maundement of Semiramis, cut out of a certain hill or
mountain in Armenia, and afterward thence brought to the above remembered
Babylon. But who so will consider how hard it was to draw it thence, how
hard also afterward to erecte it, might think, in truth it was, a thing
almost impossible, were ti not, that the antiquity had things like strange,
and difficill, which every where are leafte us, of authors worthy credit,
which assure us also of others, in like sort perfected, by other Princes of
Egypt. Pliny shows the manner, how with out any hurt, bruise, or annoie,
they first were Pliny lib. 6. cap. 8. and 9.
removed from the place where they were made. Of these Pyramides Obelisci,
Colossi, and such others, at full discourses the learned Polysias, in the
beginning of his book of love and fire.

What manner of women the Sibylles were, how many in number and of their
prophecies, but especially of those that concerned Christ, and his coming.
Chapt. 2.
THe history of the Sibylles is generally aucthorised of all men, there
learning, and prophecies very well known, but perticulerly to entreat when
and what they were, whereof they Prophesied, and at what time, that only
knows he, that has spente some time in old, and ancient histories.
Wherefore my desire was, some thing of them to gather, especially considering
the marvelous gift of Prophecy, which God in sunderie wise bestowed at
times on them, and principally to fore say, of the cummyng of his son, of
his life, and passion, with other many mysteries of our belefe, and faith, of
which we shall some thing, in this place remember, to the intent the
Ethnicke, and Panime, that will aucthorise nothing, but their own proper
writings, might no better have to excuse himself, then the perfect Jew
which affiyng in his own, neither likes, or accepts, the true faith, or
religion. And this say I, for that by common admission, and consent, such
books were of all the Gentiles received, and these Sibylles also credited, but
especially of the Romans, which in every their affairs, or necessities
whatsoever, had their due recourse to the Prophecies of these Sibylles,
conferring, and consultyng of all things, by them written. But for that so
many, as well Greeks, as Latins, have in such sort, so fully discourste, and
written of them, we shall here follow, and imitate the best, not greuyng,
or weriyng the reader, with any others. Diodorus Siculus, Plinius, Solinus,
Seruius, Marcianus Capellus, Lactantius Firmianus, Elianus, Suidas, Strabo,
Marcus Vario, and Virgill also, with the better part of Poets, Saint
Augustine, Eusebius, Orosius, with the most part of all good historians, have
some thing written, and discourste of these Sibylles. Diodorus says, that this
word Sibylla, signifies nothing else, but a woman Prophetess, and one full of
God. Seruius, as also Lactantius, in his fowerth book of divine institutio^s,
names them none otherwise, then the counsel of God: Suidas, women Prophets.
The others disagree, as well about the number of them, as also when they were.
Some nombryng more, some less but as thereof uncertain. Marcianus Capella,
minds us of two only, others some of four, as chiefly Elianus in his
variable histories. Marcus Varro remembers no less then ten, with whom
Lactantius Firmianus occordeth in his first book, whom I have determined in
this place to follow. The first was of Persia, called Samberta, The first
Samberta.
of whom Nicanor makes mention, the same that wrote the renoumed gestes of
Alexander, others write, that she was of Chaldea, others a Jewe, borne in the
town of Noe, nigh the red sea, whose father hight Berosus, and her mother
Erimanta: this woman wrote twenty four books in vearses, in which she
disclosed strange and wounderfull matters, concerning the coming of Christ,
his miracles, and his life, though secretly, and as shadowed, not to be
understood of all men. With whom all the other Sibylles uniformly accord, in
such sort that Lactantius Firmianus, as well in his fowerth book, as in
sunderie other places, leaves us their particular Prophesies of Christ. And
Saint Augustine also has left us, a brief, or short summarie, of some
certain, and principal matters, which as well this, as the others also have
Prophesied, especially of the death, and passion of our Savior, and among
others these words by order. After this he shall be apprehended, by the
hands of Infidels, they also shall beat, and buffette him about the face,
with their impure, and sacrilegious hands, with their mouths accursed, and
blasphemous shall they spitte on him, he shall give them his body, as
contented to be whipte thereon, he shall love silence, and utter few words, so
that whence he speaks few men at all shall know, semblably he shall be
crouned with shearpe, and pearsing thorns, Gaul shall they give him to eat,
and sower Vineager to drink. See here the banquet that these men shall make
him: so that thou O Nation both ignorant, and blind, shalt not know thy
GOD, here present and with thee, but tyrannously shall croune him (as is fore
said) with thorns, meddling Gaul, and vinegar together (a potion) for him.
After this the Veale of the Temple shall sundre, and the middle of that day
shall be darckned as the night, by the whole space of three full hours, so
then shall the just die, who shall lie dead, or sleep only three days, and
having paste through Hell shall rise, or revive, never to die again. These
words are such, so plain, and so euidente, that they in nothing differ,
from these of the Evangelists, concerning Christ, our master, and Messiah: or
otherwise, from these, of the holy prophets, but among the others principally
of Esaie, which the Church also this day does hold, and shall do ever.
And these Prophesies are recorded, some by Lactantius Firmianus, some by saint
Augustine, and others some by others, as by Cicero, Marcus Varro, and others,
Gentiles all dead before the birthe, and natiuitee of our Savior, as is both
plain, and manifest by the said Lactantius, who farther of these Sibylles,
adds also Lact. li. 4. ca. 15.
this much: he shall raise the dedde, the impotente, and the weak by him
again shall go, the deaf shall hear, the blind see, the dombe shall speak,
and laud his name freely, and again somewhat before, with five loaves, and
two fishes, he shall feed five thousand men in the deserte, and that which
shall remain, shall also refreashe the hungerie need of others. The second by
report, was The second libyca.
borne in Libya, of whom mention is made by Euripides, in his Prologue of
Lamia. The third hight Themis, and was surnamed Delphica, for that she was
borne in the The third Delphica.
City Delphos, of whom remembers Chrysippus, in his book of Divination. Unto
this woman, the Romans erected an Image, which was, as records Pliny,
before the destruction of Troie, so that Homere in his works, has sundry,
and diverse of her vearses, as is evident. Diodorus Siculus says, that this was
Daphne, the daughter of Tiresias, who^, when the Greeks had subdued Thebes,
they sent her forth immediately, and without stay to Delphos, where she
after became a prophetess, in the Oracle of Apollo, so that she thence (as he
supposes) and not otherwise, gatte the name of Delphica. The fowerth The
fowerth Cumea.
had to name Cumea, or Italienna, and not Cumana Amaltea, she was borne in
Cimeria, a town of Campania, adioinyng unto Cumae, whose prophesies are
written, as well by Neuyus in his books Punici, as also by Pison in his
annalies, and briefly remembered by Lactantius, by Virgil also in his Eglogue
this beginning, Scicilides musae. The first was that famous Erythrea, which by
the especial The first Erythrea.
grace of God, so plainly prophesied of the greateste mysteries of our
religion, wherefore as has Lactantius, the Gentiles in the ages paste,
supposyng it impossible, that a virgin, should hear a child, as also other
things supernatural, which they in like sort wrote, remembered as well, by
old Poets, as also in aunciente histories, accounted of these vearses, none
otherwise, the^ of light, vain, and fond matters, Apolodorus writes of this
Sibyll, that she fore said to the Greeks, that they assuredly should sack,
and over run Troie, whence most suppose, she was before the destruction
thereof. How be it Eusebius contrariwise thinks, that she lived in the time
of Romulus. Strabo again in the days of Alexander. Of this Erythrea were
these words, recited by Eusebius, which in order translated, sound in
English this much, Jesus Christ the soonne of God, and Savior. Which was
in deed no less strange, then marvelous. Others also wrote she, which
Saint Augustine gathers in his eightenth De ciuitate dei, which dooen by him
into Latin, may in our tongue say this much: The earth shall sweat, an
assured sign of judgment, from heaven shall come a king, which shall be king
continually, but cladde in man's flesh, to the intent he may judge the
world, so shall the incredulous see, as well, as shall the faithful, and with
their iyes shall boholde, God himself advanced in the middle of his angels:
and in the end of this world, the souls of men shall appear, with their
own proper bodies, which all him self shall judge present then in person,
at which time the earth shall be bruised, and disordered. Men shall then
destroy both Images, and Idolles, their iuels eke, and treasures shall they
not account of, he shall go down into hell, and break up the infernal
gates, then to the just shall joy, and peace be lotted, and fire shall
tormente still the reprobate, and impious. All secrets shall in this day be
discovered, every man shall know the thoughts of an other, God then shall
lay open the hearts, and consciences of all flesh: there shall be weepyng,
and gnashyng of teethe, the Sun; and the Stars, in that day shall be
darkened, the heavens them selves shall break, and the Moon shall lose her
light, the mountains shall fall down, and the valies shall lie even with the
swellyng hills, nothing in the whole world shall higher be then other, both
mountains, and valaies shall be reduced, into plains, each thing having in
that day his endyng: the earth shall be skorchte up, and brought then to
powder, both rivers, and sprynges shall in that day burn, and with that fire
also the earth it self, the sea, and the air shall be consumed, a trumpette
then from heaven, most terriblie shall sound, at which voice the earth
incontinentely shall open, discoueryng the obscure, and disordered face of
hell, the pains eke, and the smartes of the damned souls therein. By this
Sibyll these, and many others were written at large in vearse, plainly
declaryng Christ him self incarnate, with the resurrection of the dedde, and
the final judgment. But these things, before they came to pass in deed of
few might, or could in any wise be understood, reputed for meare folly of
the Panimes, and the Gentiles. Notwithstanding Erithrea, well knowing what was
to come, left not this much to say, in like sort of her self: vain shall
they accoumpte me, a light, and liyng dame. But when these things shall be
accomplished, then shall they remember me again, not as a detyng, or as a
senslis wight, but as a true southsaier, or prophetisse of the higheste. From
this Sibyl Erithrea, the Romans at times received many vearses, which
Fenestella with silence passes not in his fiftene Forces, saying, that by
ordinance of the Senate, they sent Ambassadors unto her, only to have (if
it so might please her) of her prophesies, which from her brought back papers
in great number, which were both carefully, and curiously reserved in the
Capitol, emongste others some, which they also had received before. This
woman was of Erithrea, a town of Ionyum, in the Province of the less Asia,
adioinyng unto Caria, which I would the reader should certainly understand,
for that many other tounes are also of this name, as one in Libia, an other in
Boecia, the third in Locris, the fowerth in Cyprus, but to assure us that she
was of this Erithrea in Ionyu^, Strabo may only in this place Strabo lib. 4.
The sixth Samia
suffice. The sixth Sibyll was of Phyto^, a town in the Isle of Samos,
environed with the sea Egeum, borderyng on Thrace, or as others some suppose,
in that other Isle of Samos compassed with the said sea, right against
Ephesus, for which cause she had to name Silia Samia, of which remembers
E^atosthenes. The seventh was Cumana, otherwise Amaltea, how be it, some
others gave her to The seventh Cumana.
name Demophila. Suidas terms her Hierophila: never the less Cumana was she
called, for that she both dwelt and prophesied in the town of Cumas in
Italy, not far of from Baias. Of this woman writes Dyonisius,
Halicarnasleus, Solinus, Aulus Gellius, and Seruius, she brought to be sold to
Tarquine the proud, king of the Romans nine books (though Suidas otherwise
suppose, that it was to Tarquimus Priscus) for which she demanded three
hundred Crounes, or other pieces of gold, such as might be, or was, in Rome
at that time most currante, but for that the king thought her therein
unreasonable, he refused utterly these her offered marchaundises, by means
whereof incontinently, she did three of them in his presence to be burned, not
leauyng therefore, to ask again the whole price, for the other six, which
thing the king disdainyng more then, then at the first, began to deride her,
chargyng her with folly, whence she again takes others three, and as the
first, so burned them immediately, demanding for the remnante, the whole price
of the nine, where at, and at whose constancy, the king then much amassed,
imagining that they contained some strange, and hidden mysteries, bought these
three, at the price of all the others, which afterward were laid up, and
reserved in the Capitol, in marvelous honor, and reverence of all the
people. Pliny writes that she had but three in all, of which she burned, as
he reports two receiving notwithstanding for the third, the value of the^
all, but how so ever it were, it suffices that these books were had in such
great reverence, so kept, and reserved, with these of the other Sibylles. For
as M. Varro alleges out of Lactantius, the Romans with incessant pain,
sought throughout all Greece, and Italy, through Asia also, and every part
thereof, for all books, vearses, or prophesies whatsoever, that might, or
could be found any where of these Sibylles, and especially among the others of
that excellent Erithrea, for accomplisheme^t whereof, and more expedite
gatheryng of these foresaied papers, fiftene men of honor, were charged with
this business, none medlyng, or dealyng besides them in these matters.
Fenistella records, that when the Capitol was burned, the Senate sent back
again to Erithrea, humbly requestyng her, to inriche them ones again, with
her books, if it so ^ight please her. Whence it may be presumed, that they
had not Cumanaes verses only, but every the prophesies of each, and all the
others: and that, that Sibyll, of which Virgil makes mention in the
beginning, or entry, of his sixth of Aeneydos, which then dwelt or continued in
Cumas, where he affirms that Aeneas imbarkte him self, should be some other
Cumana, not this of which we now have spoken, by common account, and reckning,
the seventh of that order: for it hardly may be thought, that Virgil knew of
any Sibyll, at that time, when Aeneas first entered into Italy, ne yet that
she lived in the days, of the fifte king of Rome. And Seruius interpretyng
the same place, says: of necessity it needs must be, that she, that sold
these books, should also be called Cumana, though in trothe her name were
nothing so at all, this woman also died in the said town of Cumas. The eight
was borne within the territory of Troie, in the town of Marmisa, such, and
so ancient, that as Heraclides The eight Hell Iespontia.
Ponticus writes, she lived in the time of Solon the Philosopher, and of that
great, and mighty Cyrus. The ninthe was borne in Phrigia, and Prophesied
dwelling The ninth Phrigia. The tenth Albunea or Tyburtina.
in the town of Ancira. The tenthe hight Albunea, borne at Tibur sixtene mile
from Rome, whens also she is called some times Tiburtina. So these Sibylles,
left many books and verses, in which they Prophesied, of sundry things to
come, but principally of the prosperous, or adverse state of Rome: so that the
Romans, in every their affairs, diligently perused, and with reverence all
their books, or papers, orderyng, and directing them selves, continually by
the^. And as when we would be credited, and be thought to speak a truth, we
usually will say, it is written in the Gospel, so also said they in like
sort of the Sibylles, such was their affiaunce, or great trust in these
women. For proof whereof Iuuenal passes such a vearse, Credit me vobis
folium recitare Sibyllae, which he so said, for that these women, gave
forth their Prophesies, written in leaves of trees, as Virgil well witnesses
in his sixth of his Aeneydos. Cicero with great reverence speaks also of them,
especially in his book De diuinatione, where he thus much says, as we tofore
have said, that out of their first, and great letters of every vearse,
sentee^ces of weight, and great matters still were drawn. Among other things
many, each one of them have spoken, of our faith, and of the Christian
religion, of the birth, the life, and of the death of Christ, as we eftesones
tofore have also specified: as among the others, the Sibyll Delphica also
said. A Prophet shall be borne of a woman not knowing man: and an other this,
he that yet is to come, shall here after come, he shall reign in poverty, his
great and mighty force shall he to few discover, out of a virgins woumbe
shall he also be borne. Josephus again (a Jew though he were by race, and
eake by his profession) speaking of the tower of Babylon this much reports,
that a certain Sibyl rememberyng when first men spoke but one language,
says, that they builte to them a proud, and haute Tower, as if by the same
they should have entered in to heaven, but God sent fourth great winds to
raze, and to subuerte it, as also diverse tongues, the spring of division, and
discord among the people, whence this Tower gained the fit name of Babylon.
These things and others, the semblable, written by these Sibylles, have well
been recorded by Christians, Jews, and Gentiles, which the Gentiles repleate
with sin cold never yet understand: but the Christians as soon, as these
Prophesies came to their hands, as well record Lactantius Firmianus,
Eusebius, and Saint Augustine, with others, gathered thence great fruict,
and comfort immediately, the Panym, and the Gentile neglectyng them to their
confusion. Besides these were yet some others, that also were called Sibylles,
reputed as fore shewers, or fore saiers of things to come, as Cassandra the
daughter of Priamus, Campusia Celofonia the daughter of Calcas, Manta
Thessalica the daughter of ^iresias the Thebane, but all histories, only
accord on the above said ten.

Wherefore sleep by nature was given unto man, and that to sleep to much is
both noisome, and domageable. Chap. 3.
Sleep was given man for his preservation, for that nothing having life is
there that sleapeth not. Aristotle says Ar. lib. 4. de animalibus.
that al creatures having bloodde, take their repose, and sleep, in which
place he proves by reason, and by experience, that fishes also at times as
other things do sleep. Sleep is a surcessing of all the senses from
travail, which is, or is caused, by certain euaporations, and fumes, rising
of our meat, and sustenaunce received, mountyng from the stomach immediately
unto the brain, by whose great coldness these vapors warm are tempered,
castyng into a slumber every the forces, or senses exterior, at which time
the vital spirits retiryng to the heart, leave all the members of the body
in a sleep, until such time again, as these said vital spirits (which
are the only instruments, by which the Soul both governs, and orders
the whole body) recover new force, and streangth to them again, and so
these vapors, or ceassyng, or diminishynge man again awaketh, or retourneth to
himself, more apt then to his business, then at any time tofore. Of these
occasions of sleep, Aristotle is long in his book De somno, and vigilia: and
Plutarche recites the opinions of sundry philosophers, with many natural
reasons concerning the said matter. But although it be good, and necessary for
the body, yet must it not be with excess and immoderatly taken, for that to
much fleepe (as well records Aristotle) weakneth the spirits, of the body
as well, as also of the Soul, even as moderate, and competent reaste,
bettereth them, increasing, their vigor and their force. For as many things
are necessary, and nedeful in man's life, so taken in excess, annoie, and grieve
us much, as to eat who feleth not how hunger us compels? and yet, who to
much eats, repents it, we see: in semblable sort exercise with moderation
also pleases, but in excess thereof no man has any liking. So sleep then
must be taken, for necessity only, to revive, refreashe, and comfort the
weary senses, the spirits also vital, and other weary members. For to much
sleep (besides that it makes heavy the above said spirits, and senses, the
party also becomes slothful, weak, and effeminate with over much idleness)
ingendereth much humiditie, and raw humors in the body which commonly
assault it with sundry infirmities, messenges of death, and of final ruin:
for when we to much fleape all the moistures, and humors of the body, with
the natural heat retire to the extreme parts thereof, no where purging, or
euacuatyng, that what so is redundant. So then unmeasured sleep, is not only
forbidden by philosophers, and phisiciens, but also, is a thing odious to the
wise, and virtuous. Aristotle says that while we sleep, and slumber, no
difference is known betwixt the wise man, and the fool, and surely were
there none other cause, to break, and call the wise man, from long, and weary
sleep, but only to eschew, and vterly refuse, in any point to be like, or
resemble him that is not, yet therefore should he fly it (though moderate
sleep give life, and be therefore right necessary) considering that he that
sleapeth, is not then as one living. And as Plutarche adds in his book, of
the contention of water and fire, who so sleapeth has none other force, or
understanding sleapyng, then if him self were dead, a cold, or senslis
carrion. Pliny also is of this mind saying, that sleep still bereueth us, of
the one half of our life, for that when we sleep, we neither know, nor feel
whether we live or not. Ouide with other Poets, and men of like learning,
term sleep an Image, or purtraite of death, and in the Scriptures sleep, is
compared unto death, as where Saint Paul says, brethren, we will not, that
ye be ignorant of these that are a sleep: by which words he means these
that now are dedde, and a little after, God shall draw out after him, those
that have slepte in Christ. Sleep also is the figure of negligencie, and of
sloth, which the same S. Paul again, in plain words utters, my brethren,
it now is time ye arise, and wake out of your sleep. Sleep also signifies
sin, as has Saint Gregory, who says that to sleep, is to continue, and
persevere in sin. And again, if that to sleep much, had not been accoumpted
sin, Saint Paul then never had remembered these Paul. cap. 4. primae epist.
ad These.
words so often, awake ye just, and leave any more to sin. Let us
begin to shame then, that spend the greater part of our time, in sleep, and
in our bed, for surely who so does, his offense is nothing less, then his
that all day does sit, in fat dishes surfettyng, like a gross, and
swolen Epicure, considering these creatures, should only be taken, to the sole
sustentation, and maintenance of life, and not to fill, or pamper
voluptuouslie the belly: in which sort sleep must also be taken, only for
necessity, nothing at all for pleasure. Since then sleep none otherwise must
be used, let us now speak in what sort is best to sleep, which way, and
how to turn, being laid down in bed to rest us, to the intent that our
sleep may not annoie, but profit us. Such then as are of body not impotente,
or less hardy, should pass as some suppose, their first sleep on the right
side, but after that, the greater part of the night, upon the left, thence
chaungyng toward the morning, unto the right again. The reason is, for that
man's stomach is so ordered, that the mouth thereof, somewhat more bends
toward the right side, then it does to the left, but the bottom contrary
wise to the leafte, declining from the right. So slepyng one hour, or two,
on the right side, the stomach stretches forth it self at large upon the
Liver, whence two singular commodities ensue, the first, that the stomach
orders, and inlargeth her self in wisshed manner, by means whereof, it
passes with more ease, and contentment, the late meats received, or nutriment
what so ever: the second the moisture, or humiditie of the food in the
stomach, cools, refreshes, and comfort the Liver, by means whereof, the
natural heat waxes strong within the stomach, which mattereth not a little
to hasten the digestion. This dooen it shall not be discommodious, to turue
unto the other side, on which being sometimes laid, the Liver straight
imbraceth, and covers the stomach, whence in this manner aided, it
perfecteth, and causes immediately digestion. How be, it, it also shall be
expedient, some what before you rise, ones again to turn, and cast you on
the right side, to the intent the stomach, disburden, and discharge it self
again of the Liver, expellyng all noisome air, and superfluity of the
digestion passed. This rule may profit such, as have their Liver temperate,
their stomach also not watrishe still, and cold, and to whom in fine, these
two are well affected: but unto him whose Liver percase may be inflamed,
whose stomach also is subject unto cold, which both are common in many to be
seen, to him I think it noisome to sleep on the right side, for that the
stomach then falls, and rests on the Liver, strainyng or chargyng it, on
every side or part, whence in excess it heateth and inflameth immediately, the
higher part of the stomach, remainyng still uncovered, coolyng so, and
weaknyng more then before, besides that the Liver draws also to it, even that
little heat, that before was in the stomach, whence consequently insueth,
late, and il digestion, the body indisposed, less apt to follow any thing.
Wherefore, whose stomach is cold, but Liver contrary wise inflamed, and
hoate, best slepyng is for him continually on the left side, for that the
stomach covered on every side with the Liver, it happily hasteneth, and
perfecteth digestion: and concerning the Liver, liyng so a lought, it both is
discharged, and disburdeined of the stomach, hy means whereof it cools,
clean void of inflammations. Some also sleep grouelyng, their face, and belly
dounewardes, which semblably aideth, and comfort digestion, for that it
both draws, and retains the heat natural in the stomach, which thence
expels, and exileth all superfluities. The contrary happens to them that
sleep on their back, the face open, and directly upward, for that the
natural heat is disperste in parts abroad, less apt, or less able to
perfect, or cause digestion, for neither can the superfluities be purged well
by the mouth, ne yet by any other cundites, or ordinary passages, but arreste
them continually in the stomach, and in the throat, whence some times spring
vehement suffocatio^s, the falling evil also, with others many the semblable,
and like infirmities, The wise also here learn us, that we sleep not to much,
stretched forth throughout our bed, for thence again digestion, of part may
also be weakened: for as has the Philosopher, when the virtues, and forces are
united well together, the operation of nature is then so much the stronger,
and so liyng of part, drawn as it were together, that part of the body,
which covers next the stomach, ioigneth more close unto it, comfortyng,
and warmyng it more then it did before. These rules percase may profit, the
dainty, the delicate, and eke the weaker sort: but concerning those that are
lusty, and well disposed, the best advice I may, or any other give them, is
that they retain the same custom, that they tofore have used.

Of three sundry doubts, which the ancient Philosophers were never able to
resolve, with the causes why. Chapt. 4.
THE aunciente Philosophers, by the marvelous instincte of God, curiously
searchte out the causes, of each the works of nature, assertainyng their
propositions, without contradiction, or repugnauncie, of any others. Yet never
were they able to resolve these three things, of part doubtful, and of some
importance with the causes assured of their spryng, and being. The first is,
that they well knew, there was given unto man by nature, a desire never to
dye, or depart hence, never to feel smarte, or any annoye what soever, but
continually to sugiorne, with felicity perpetual, and pleasure in this
world, never sauoryng of any lack, or defaulte of any thing, but yet could
not attain to that desired end or mark. And on the other side well assured,
that GOD and Nature, never attempted any thing in vain, and farther that this,
man's appetite proceeded only of nature, toilyng, and supposyng herein to
find the cause, especially that this axiom in any other thing never failed,
they folded, and refolded them selves, in infinite perplexities, cessyng in
despair, to lose this knotte or scruple. The second was that they said, that
each manne felt in him self, a certain natural, and perverse inclination of
the flesh, and farther, a sensuallitie plain contrary to the above said
desire, or appetite, which was not to dye, or savor of corruption, as in this
carnal motion, which casts man into sundry dangers, and infirmities,
shortnyng his time, and his days so much desired. The semblable also rises
of excess in surfeting, besides that others some again, desirous suddenly to
mount to great pomp, and honor, hassarde themselves to wind the sporres in
field, where commonly they fall, or else return often times, with a fearce, and
troubled mind, or in fine some mishap or infortune there betides the^, an end
al contrary to that they so much affected. The third is, that in the order of
nature, the bodies inferior, are governed by the superiors, as for example
the elements, by the bodies celestial: the Orbs, or Spheres of the
Planettes (as Philosophers will) by the intelligences, and they again by the
first maker, or mouer of al things, God the only and the sole cause, and
prince eternal. But in man alone this order is now perverted, who being of two
parts, to weete the soul, and body, we see that the fleashe in truth both
vile, and abiecte, rages, and rebelleth against the mind, and reason, and
that which worst is draws it, to his own froward will and pleasure, whence
the Apostle said, that he in his members felt, a law contrary, and
repugnant to the law of reason, mouyng it to sin, and to unjust rebellion.
The philosophers therefore that lived before the coming of our savior knew
nothing at all, the occasion of this disorder, but curiously sekyng some cause
thereof, or reason, fell into sundry erroneous, and fond opinions. Whence
Anaxagoras said, that this monstrositie, or disordered rebellion, began at the
first, in the beginning of the world, when all things were folded without
regard, or respect in that ancient Chaos: for separating this force of reason
by discord and reioynyng it again afterward by concord, it ingendereth
every thing good, and perfect in his kind, man alone excepted, whose body it
unites stoberne, and disloiall, with the soul only absolute, and reasonable.
And therefore as these two, in this Chaos first disagreed, so ever more
continue they in discord, and in enmity, contrary to the rule, and order of
all other things. In this sort this poor, and less advised philosopher,
attributed the fault hereof to the divine providence. Others also said, that
this only happened, by diversity of constellations, under which man was both
borne, and conceived. Aristotle never hardened himself, plainly and appertly to
vnknot this present scruple, but rather he gainsaieth it, himself affirmyng,
that man's will is naturally inclined to evil, so that with great difficulty,
it is, or may be brought subject unto reason. And in an other place he
says, that the felicity which manne by virtue here acquireth, is the
absolute, and perfect gift of God alone. To conclude then, virtue, in the
action, or operation where of, the felicity of man fully consists, must be
the gift of God, and not of nature only. On the other side the Manichies
desirous to yield some reason of this perverse, and unjust order said, that
in manne were two souls to geather, the one good, of the true and perfect
substance, of the prince of light, the other impious, and accursed, taking his
spring of the Prince of darckenes, whence this war, was this in man
continued. Origin says, that before the creation or frame of the world, all
souls sinnyng against the divine majesty, were kept and reserved in heaven
for a time, but afterward for their punishmente, were plaste again in bodies,
of hard, and noughtie nature, whence this rebellion, in man, in this sort
lives. But all these opinions both erroneous, and detestable, are confuted by
Saint Augustine writing against the Manichies, in his book De duab. anim. and
in an other of his, De not. boni. where with long reasons most learnedly he
shows, the cause why they never attained to the knowleage, or felyng, of this
foresaid disorder, which was for that they never had heard, or known any
thing of the scriptures, by which we fully are resolved in every, and all
these scruples, by which also it is evident, that both these propositions are
aunsweryng, and consonant unto the order of nature. To weete that God, and
nature attempt nothing in vain, and that it again is conuenable, that man by
nature should fear, and refuce to taste of death, desirous to live in
continued joy, and pleasure, though he yet never attain thereto in any sort:
ne yet therefore is this desire of his in vain, but rather accords perfectly
with nature, but not to attain to the effect, or end thereof, is to manne an
accident, and therefore less natural. For God created man, first to live
immortal, in such sort that according to the opion of most divines, he
never should have died, or tasted of any misery, had he, or kept, or observed
the commandments given him, but having transgrest them he straight became
subject, to the stormy tempests of this world, and finally to death: and
this by disobedience, man here has purchaste anguishe, the grave, and
corruption. So as the Apostle says, by the sin of disobedience, death first
crepte in, and entered into this world. Hence now it then is evident, that
death was neither natural in our first father Adam, ne after him in us, but
casual and accidental, as nothing at all less mente us by the divine
providence. Now then this doubt, may also this be resolved, that the desire
never to die, or to endure annoie, is lent us from nature, and that not in
vain, for that it some times was in us, if manne then had not sinned) assuredly
to have attained, the effect so much desired: but being (as we are) rebellious
and obstinate this desire still remains, but so to be, is denied us. The
second doubt also, by this means may be resolved, for that through glotteny,
and venerie, we hasten our fall, and ruin. In semblable sort the third also,
by the sin of Adam, by means where of, he fell from that original justice,
or state of grace, which God before to him, had freely given, and granted,
seruyng him to moderate, his life, and each his actions. Whence immediately
began to follow this disordre, for reason that should rule, and order things
aright, lies subject unto the will, and to every the senses: so that it
appears plainly, that this perverse order, is in no respect natural, but
(as is said) of fortune, and altogether casual. By which means we here
conclude, that things of greatest excellency, and of assured perfection
should, and ought to governs others of base condition, and this never
misseth, or fails at any time, as is more then plain, in every the bodies,
immixte, and celestial, but although in manne experience show the contrary,
that issues of fortune (who by his fall has merited not that, but greater
punishment) and not at all from nature.

What ceremonies the Romans used before they denounced war to any prince or
country. Chap. 5.
WHo so has readde of the holy ceremonies, and religious observations,
practiced continually by the aunciente Romans, as well in matters concerning
peace, as in those also of war, may nothing at all mearuaile, of all theirs
so many, and so famous victories, against such migtie Princes, such warlike
and bluddie nations, nor on the other side might think it, or strange, or else
impossible, to see the fatal ruin of this great; and stately empire, which
first of all began, when contemptuously they first disdained these
solemnities. For as we see by examples of infinite histories, by how much the
more devoutly, they observed the ^boue said vsages, so much the more grew
this Roman state, and empire, their capitaines also happy, and renoumed, and
dreadde throughout the world, as is and may be seen in Pomp and in Brennus,
with others, more known, and more then I can remember, which though they
were in deed idolaters, void of al knowledge, or perfect feling of God, yet
of part it appears that God still was propitious to the fautors of religion,
which percase might be to this, and none other end, that as this people was
ialous of this religion, of which they yet had no perfect, nor none other
assured ground, so by more sure reason, they gladly should have been Patrones
and Protectors of the true and Christian faith, if it had been to them, as to
us it is revealed. By the effect it then is evident, that long time he kept,
and preserved them in prosperity, with fortunate success in their affairs
te^porall. The ceremonies then which the Romans used in time of peace, are
many and diverse, which I leave to speak of, for that if I should all pen
them, I should weary, and grieve percase the reader, and to speak thereof to
little, were injurious in my fantasy. Wherefore I shall in this place remember
five only, which they orderly observed before they proclaimed war against
any prince, or country, to the intent that Princes of our time may see, how
much they err, rashly to denou^ce, war and hostility, not craving first
Gods assistaunce, his aid, and his succor: and farther that they also may
know, that hence only, on them befalls, commonly such evil, adverse, and
finister fortune, and finally how far in points of religion, they in truth
be inferior, to these Ethnikes, and Idolaters. Now then when news came to
Rome of any rebellion or that any prince barbarous, had invaded their
territories, or that any other had done injury to their confederates, they
immediately sent forth their ambassadors unto him, by which the Senate, by
fair means advised him, to make restitution of the damage, and wrong
committed, and farther that he ever afterward, refrained from such
incursions: which advise if he esteemed not, then did they war to be
proclaimed immediately. The Senate then having chosen some captain for this
journey, did all their Sacrificatours, incontinently to be called, which
received in commandment, to pray unto their Gods, for the happy success,
and good fortune of their people. For the Romans went never forth, to spill
the blood of their enemies, before their priests had bitterly wept, and
prayed in their Temples. After this the Senate, being assembled all together,
went in good order to the Church of Jupiter, where solemnly they swore al,
or plighted this faith, that when so ever yet, the enemy (against whom war
by them was then denounced) would desire a truse, or peace again with the^,
or otherwise would crave pardon of his defaute, that mercy should not in any
case be denied him. This dooen the new Consul, chosen for this expedition,
hastneth thence again forthwith unto the Capitol, where he voweth to him of
the Gods, in whom he reposeth, or most hope, or confidence, that he will
offer, if he return victorious, the best thing that he has, of what price
so ever. And although the thing offered, were of never so great value, yet
were the people bound to repais it him again. After this an Ensign, having in
it an Egle (which was the true, and ancient arms of the Romans) was
brought out into the filde of Mars, which they only did to this end or
purpose, that the people might know that it was then less lawful, to use any
plays, or other pleasant spectacles, whilste that their friends, and
kinsmenne, were then in filde, and in arms, and in fine the Praetor, being
mounted on high, on one of their gates, sounded a Trumpette, to call together
their Souldiars, deliueryng with the same certain Ensigns unto the Captain.
Hence it appears, that they never would arm themselves before they first
had appeased, and honored their Gods, craving their assistaunce in that
battle, or fight, against their ennimies. For if the Consul or Captain,
assigned by the Senate, happily subdued any Province, or City, not valiauntly,
and honorably, but by prodition and by tretchery, he afterward should be
punished by the said Senate grievously. Where of we find sundry examples, of
which I shall remember but two here presently, the one of their excellent
prowes and virtue, the other how they handled one, that by a dishonorable
policy had conquired his ennimy. Fabritius on a time, with an army of the
Romans liyng before Fidena, a certain scholemaister issued with his scholars
out of the City, who supposing highly to gratify this Captain, hastily did
himself to be brought into his presence, whom incontinently this Consul
(although by the retainyng of them, being as they were, the soonnes of the
most honorable, and richest of the town, he straight should have been received
for their Lord into the city) not only refused to accept, and receive him,
but did him to be stripte in their presence naked, and bindyng his hands, gave
to every of his scholars, rods to skurge him, sendyng this traitor back
so, unto their friends, and Parents, by means whereof he wonde the hearts of
the Citisens, which immediately yielded theimselues subject to the Romans. On
the other side, in the year of the foundation of Rome three hundred, and
eightene, war was proclaimed by the Consuls against the Sarmates, and others
the inhabitauntes of the mountain Caucasus, which as is sien in tables of
Cosmographie, deuideth Asia in the middle, bandyng Scythia on the one side, and
endyng in India, where by means of extreme cold, no Grape at all grows. In
these wars Lucius Pius was appoincted general, where after many a bloody,
and cruel skirmish, he so^e times gainynd the better, some times the worse.
But during a truse betixte them accorded, Lucius royally feasted, and banketed
the Capitaines of the Sarmates, and after this having trained them eftsoon
unto him, and considering how they pleased much in bousing of his wines,
especially for the great skarsnes, and want thereof in those countries, in
the end again invited them, to a solemn and rich supper, where he gave
them of wine, in such abundance, that they al held them selves, well
contented of him, yeldyng by this means their province tributory to the
Romans. This war now so ended, and Lucius retourning home again to Rome,
demanded of the Senate, to triumph, for his conquest, which was not only, in
most disdainefull manner denied him, but also this form of victory was so
odions, that they did him to die for it openly, on whose Toumbe this Epitaphe,
for more contempt was written: here lies Lucius Pius Consul, who not by
virtue of arms in the filde, but by banketyng dishes on his table, not with
the Lance, or Sword in hand, but with good wine that over ran the
Sarmates. The Senate, (...) yet contented with these excedyng cruelties,
farther proclaimed throughout each part of Rome, that what so ever Lucius had
done, in the name of the Romans, should not be taken or reputed for any
thing, and besides it was written also unto the Sarmates, that they again
should be free, in their pristinate, and wounted manner.

That it profits a Prince much to be fair and well fewtered. Chap. 6.
THe greatest matter in my judgment, that any way may commend the majesty
of a Prince (speaking now only of graces exterior) is the comely feauture,
and proportion of his body, accompanied with a decent gravity, an argument
infallible of pregnant sapience. And although we some times see, the rule of
Pithagoras, to fail, and be less certain, to wete that in a body crooked
are crooked manners (for that virtue eftsoon dwells in a frame less fined,
rough hewe^, and ill proportioned) yet assuredly for the most part a man
hardly shall find the contrary. And albeit, that an honorable, aspect or
representatio^, to no other purpose, may profit a prince, yet purchases it
him reverence, and inlargeth his authority, especially if it have alliance
with bounty and honesty, as on the other side, it commonly is deminished by
odious deformity: for as says Cicero the habit of virtue, is of such
great force, and efficacy, that it constrains us to love them, that have
her in possession. Even so in a prince the majesty of his personage has in it
a certain secret veneration, alluryng the hearts of his vassaules to love him,
moved thereto percase by some hidden fantasy, perswadyng theimselues, that he
is both just, merciful, and virtuous, his life and manners conformable, to the
feawture of his body. Hence certain people barbarous supposed, that there was
no man of sufficient advice, and discretion, to accomplish, and absolve
matters, of great charge, and importance, but such only as were by nature
endued, with an ameable countenance, and good proportion of body. Macrobius
recites that in the Isle of Neroe, borderyng on the river Nilus, the
inhabitants, (which live half as long again as do we) choose continually,
their Prince, the most valianste, and most beautifulleste personage (without
regard of his parentage) throughout their whole country. How be it, no man I
suppose, so far exileth from reason, that will not prefer the Prince hard
favored being virtuous, before that other well fewtered, vertulis, and
impious: but both being of condition equal, my self would prefer the other
before the counterfaite. Demetrius soonne of Antigonus was of a representation
so honorable, and excellent, that no Painter, or Caruer, cold in his time be
found, that durst to take on him, in any sort to purtraie him: for in him was
a certain mekenes, and terror together, conioigned with so much good nature,
and grauetie, that it appeared he was borne, in one, and the same instant, to
be dradde together, and also to be loved. It is also written that Marius, who so
many times triumphed, was of such a venerable, and loving countenance, that
being taken prisoner by his ennimie Sylla, a certain frenthemam was sent with
express commandment to kill him, who being entered into the Prison, with his
sword drawn, but beholding there so grave, so perfect, and so fearful a
visnomie was immediately, so strangely amassed, that he turning retired, and
leafte the prison open, by which means he happily then saved his life.
Alexander the great, for that he was but of a small stature, and not of face
most amiable of all others, walkyng with his welbeloue^ Ephestion, the mother
of the King Darius came to salve him, and knowing not which of the two was in
deed Alexander, reverenced for the king most humblely Ephestion, for that
seeing him of so honorable a representation, supposed assuredly that he had been
Alexandre. The old histories report, that Alcibiades, and Scipio, with others
in any, honored, and aucthorised the dignity of their offices, with their so
reverent, and comely graces, with united and connected, to their excellent
virtues, profited not a little their common weal, and country On the other
side we find, that many princes, and Capitaines, as well in the old time, as
in this our age: have by mean of their base stature, lived in disdain and
contempt of many, and that some also, for that they were deformed, were at
times in great hassard to have loast their life, of which for examples sake;
I will remember two, the one long since, the other of late, though we lack not;
to this purpose, infinite others. Philopome^s. Duke of the Achaiens, a man
renounied, and very honorable, was of a small stature, evil faeste, and
deformed, so that when he was cladde in base, and ^ile apparel (as was his
manner eftsoon to be) he rather seemed to be of a vocation most abiecte, then a
Prince orderyng, or gouernyng a count^is. This Duke pleased much in huntyng,
by means whereof, he often times came to Mega^la, where on a time ^y earnest
in followyng the chase, went ^other from home then was perhaps his will to
have done, so that he was feign to harber that night in the house of a
certain poor gentleman, in the country, one of his especial, and assured
friends, who also had then married very lately before, having only at that time
but one seruante in the house, having sent for the his others, about other
his affairs: when then this Duke was come to his gates, with out more he
knockte a loud there at, immediately his wife lokyng out at a window,
demanded whom he sought, whence he was, and what he would? to whom his
servant answered, that it was Philopomines the Duke, that was come thither to
lodge, with his friend that night. The gentlewoman streaght amassed, that on a
soden she should receive such an honorable geaste, and supposing them both
at the gate servants to the Duke, which were fore sent to advertise them of
his coming, and for as much as they were but two only, with out any more ^he
opened to them the gates incontinently, the Duke then with his servant being
entered in to the Haule, she sends forth a Paege with speed, to seek her
husebande, which presently was then at the next village, and turnyng her
about to Philopomines and his servant, willed them to sit down, while she
provided the supper, so busied in ordering things about the house with her
maid, no less in truth trobeled, then almost amassed, began now one thing,
and then on other, not finishing or endyng at all any thing. So seeing her
matters to go but slackly forward, beholding the Duke fast folded in his
Cleake, which also percase was colder then he gladly would have been,
(mouyng him to laugh thereat beyond measure, desired him to put of his Cloak,
and healpe to make the sire before her servant were returned, to the intent the
supper might be ready against his Lords commyug. Than took Philopomines a
wedge in hand, beginning to sunder Logges as fast as he could, having first
secretly charged his servant, in no thing to do him then any reverence or
duty, to the intent the poor gentlewoman might not know him to be the Duke.
Now while he thus labored in cleauyng of Blocks, the master of the house in
great have came in, who very well knowing Philopomines, imbrased him with
great reverence, and demanded of him saying, my Lord what do you with these
tools in hand? To whom he answered with smilyng couutenaunce, my friend
content thee, that I do my business, for herein pay I the price of my
deformity. In our time Ferdinande King of Spain, a Prince no less discrete,
then wise, but of stature rather little then reasonable, who also though he had
a Princely face, or countenance, and with the same of advised, and politic
government, the other parts of his body were yet less corespondent, besides
that continually he went appareled in cloth, such, and so made, that he of
these that knew him not, was rather reputed for a mean citisen, the^ for such
as he was, a great and mighty Prince. The king on a time now passing to
Naples, with his wife the Queen Isabella, where he at that time was earnestly
lookte for, and arriuyng in the morning with one Gally only, the others less
ready, but folloyng after, was received of the inhabitauntes honorably, who
while his breakefaste was then a prouidyng, whilste also the Palace was then a
furnishyng, walkte alone without company in the great haule, whither also at
the same time by hap came a fisher, which even then had taken a goodly
great fish, which he there mente to present unto the king: but this fisher
not knowing him in deed, demanded of him, where the king might be, who
incontine^tly said; that himself was he, whereat the fisher began to laugh,
supposing that he had but borded with him merrily, and besought him again to
learn him where he was, to whom he answered, as before, that he was he, but
the fisher neither seeing in him (as he thought) any the port, or maie^e of a
Prince, withdrewe himself with his fish again, whereat the king had great
sport, and laughed. And immediately certain courtiers entering to who^, (after
their accostomed, and usual reverence done to his majesty) the King says,
laughing merrily: gentlemen if ye give not yonder good fellow to understand,
that I in deed am the king whom he seeks assuredly we shall not taste, of that
great fish for our breakefaste. Which words as he thus spoke, the fisher
again returned, and seeing him in such sort, on every side honored, imagened
that he then, was King in deed, and so falling on his knees presented to him,
his fish. But this happened to him, a harmelis, a pleasant, and a merry jest,
far otherwise, then an other chance, which afterward betided him, by the
very like, or same occasion. For an other time being him self at Barcellona,
and following the sacrament, with all his court, in the day of ye
sole^nization thereof, he suddenly was assailed of a certain Spaniarde, which
with a weighty, and long dagger, reachet him such a blow on the neck, that
had it not been for a great chain that he wore on, which bare of, and
defended the greatest force thereof, it very nigh had sundred his head from the
body. This Spaniarde was incontinently apprehended, and the multitude doubtyng
least he also had some consortes, the sooner to force him to confess
therein a truth, did him to be rackte, in most cruel manner, but for all the
torments that they possibly might device, could not be brought to say, that
he had done it for other cause, but that himself, was moved in conscience,
only for the disdain, and malice that he bare him. And being demanded, why
he either should malice, or disdain him, answered for nothing else, but for
his evil favored visnomie, as also that he was so crooked, and ill fewtered,
and that it so much grieved him, that he had not dispatchte him, as any their
cruel torments might any way annoie him. See now here then, these strange
adventures, for that not being formed to the contentation of men, we either
are refused, or disdained, walking eftesones in danger, and peril of death.

Of the horrible tyranny of Aristotimes, a matter or subject not less
fittyng for a tragedy. Chapt. 8.
ARistotimes by the only favor, and means of Antigonus tyrannously usurped
the seigniorie of Eleusis, where he ruled as Prince so intemperately, that
there was no kind of merciless cruelty, which he there practiced not on the
miserable, and poor citezeins: for of nature was he more bloody, and cruel,
then any one other, that lived in his time. And the better to increase this his
excreable villainy, he used still the counsel, and advise of men barbarous,
to whom he not only committed the administration, and government of all the
whole country, but with the same also the guard of his person. Now among
other his cruelties, which he many committed, it shall not be impertinent,
for example, in this place to remember, that which he practiced, more then
tragical, against Philomides, a citezein very honoble, and of good
countenance. This Philomides had a daughter, of a maruailous good grace, and
excellent beauty, called Micca, on which a certain soldiour, that hight
Lucius, well favored of the tyranne, became inamoured by means whereof, he
sent to the father, that he immediately, and without stay, should send him his
daughter. Philomides all amassed, at this unchaste demand, and with the same
knowing his authority with the tyran, dreadyng least percase worse should
betide him, both he, and his wife earnestly, entreated their daughter to go to
him. But the young maid, which better loved her honor, then her life, as she
that had been chastely, and virtuously brought up, threw herself down on her
knees before her father, imbrasyng him, as hard as she could do possibly,
most humbly besechyng him, in no wise to permit, that she should expose her
self, to such, and so great a dishonor, and that he rather should hasten, to
see her dedde before him, then with such barbarous cruelty, so to be
deflowred. The father then moved with these her many tears, began also to
weep in most bitter manner, so did the mother sobbyng, and blubberyng with
pain, and having now stayed some little time, without resolution, Lucius
inpatient, in his immoderate villainy, not seeing her to come, as was his
commandment, went himself in most furious rage to her fathers house, where
findyng her, on her knees, imbrasyng her father, with thunderyng threats
commanded her, incontine^tly to rise, and follow him. But she beginning a
fre^^e, then her most bitter plaintes, staiyng, and refusyng to rise at his
commandment, this odious monster forraged, trailed her about the house,
rentyng her apparel, not sparing to dispoile her, till she was al naked,
beatyng her more cruelly, then my pen can here speak, but she with such
constaunte courage, supported this villainy, that she neither skrichete there
at, or used any exclamation, showing her self ready, to endure, and tolerate,
what so he would, or could do to her more. At the sight of which so horrible
a spectable, the father and mother, both moved, in strange manner, weepyng,
and criyng, fell on their knees before him, beseehyng him to have pity, and
compassion, both on her, and them, but seeing that they nothing might gain of
this merciless lecherer, began to appeal, both to the gods, and men.
Where at this homicide, more wroth then before, drew out his sword, and slew
the maid, imbrasyng her fathers knees. At which most inhumane, and unheard
vilanie, Aristo^imes, was not only not moved, but of the Citezeins, which
blamed, or mislikte of this tyranny, some he did to death, some others he
banished, so that more then.viij. hundred, by this mean in haste fled thence
to Etolium which afterward wrote their earnest letters to the tyranne,
desiryng him that he would grant license to their wives, and children to
come unto them, which thing they could not in any wise obtain. But certain
days afterward, he tretcherously did proclamation to be made (as was the
manner) under sound of Troumpette that it should be lawful, for all the wives
of the banished, with their gooddes, and children to depart to their
housebandes. Which news to these dames, was so glad, and ioious, that they
forthwith began to make their males, and packettes, some prouidyng horses,
some wagons, and Charriottes, more easily to pass them selves, their
gooddes, and their children, but at the day appointed, being all at the gate,
at which they should pass, with all their wagons charged, as is fore said,
with their gooddes, and children, as they were then setting foreward in their
journey, there came against them, all the guard of the tyranne, which with
horrible threats, criyng a far of said unto them, arreste ye, stay ye,
whither will ye, ye harlottes? and approchyng to them, commanded them in haste
to return, ouerthrowyng their Charriottes, and wagons, on the ground, with
all their gooddes, and children in them. But these women, by means of the
press, less able to return, ne yet to assure themselves in that tumultuous
thruste, and that which was most lamentable of all, they saw their children
slain, and dismembered under horse feet, and wagons, not able to help them
in any sort, whatsoever. So that when these soldiers had chaste into their
company again, certain women, and children that stragled out, hopyng to have
escaped their tyrannous, and bloody force, they drove the^ all together, as a
flock of sheep, beatyng them, and laiyng them on, until they came to the
palace, where when the tyranne had taken from them, all their money, or
treasure, he did them to be imprisoned together, both them selves, and
their children. This cruelty so much now displeased the citezeins, which not
knowing how, they best might move this tyranne to compassion, determined to
send sixtene Vestall Nonnes, consecrated to Denis, being apparelled in their
most holy, and most religious habites, having also with them, all the
sacred things in their Church, and so in good order, proceeded the right way
to the palace, intendyng to crave mercy of the tyranne, for these women, and
children. Whither when they arrived, the guard being moved, with their
reuerente solemnities, made them easy passage, to the presence of
Aristotimes, who arrestyng to understand the cause of their coming, perceived
at the first, both what their suit was, and coming thither, where at al
wroth, turned him to his guard, checkyng them maruailously, for having
permitted these Nonnes to enter. Wherefore the guard, without any respect,
either to their, or sex, or Religion, with great wannes that they commonly
carried in their hands, so miserably outraged these poor, and innocente
women, that they most pitifully were both beaten, and bruised, or they might
pass out from the court again: and farther, for that they presumed to enter
into his presence, each of them was condemned in two Talentes unto him. In
this City was there a noble gentleman that hight Elanicus, two of whose
soonnes, this tyranne had unjustly done to die, but the fathers force (for that
he was very old, and decrepite he never at any time feared, or suspected. This
manne not longer able to supporte this outrage, this inspeakable tyranny, and
oppression of his country, determined by some means to avenge him on the
tyranne. Now while these things thus stood, the citezeins which were fled
(as is fore said) into Etolium, had gathered together, a certain company of
soldiers, entryng with them in arms, into the country of the Eleusions,
where they gate certain holds, which they strongly fortefied, and
determining to arrest there, mouyng war so to Aristotimes, sundry others of
the said country, came daily unto them, so that quickly they were grown to a
reasonable multitude. By means whereof the tyra^ne, was in such a maruailous
perplexity, that immediately he hasteneth to the above said dames imprisoned,
and for that he was of nature fell, and cruel, he rather thought to obtain of
them by minasyng words, then by entreaty, or conrtuous speech, and therefore
commanded them, with rigorous threatenynges, that they should by
Ambassadors, write unto their housebandes, that they immediately left, and
retired, from their purpose, otherwise that he would murder all their
children, and whippe their wives naked about the city. To whom these women
would not answer at all any thing, whence all in choler, with frownyng face
he cries, acquainte me, I charge you, with your determinate resolution. But
this poor company with fear all appalled, durst not to answer him one
word in the world, each of them beholding, and lookyng on the others, as
though they nothing had accounted of, or feared his malice. Now among the
others, was there one Megestena, the wife of Temoleon, which as woll for the
nobility of her housebande, as also for her own rare virtues, and honesty,
was as the principal, honored of all the others. This woman at the coming,
and entry of the tyranne, neither would her self rise, neither would she
permit that any of the rest should, which at last, when she had advised
her, of his discourse thoroughly, without mouyng from her seat, or doing any
other reverence, answered without more as hereafter follows. If in thee
Aristotimes, were any kind of wisdom, or discretion, thou never would
address thy self unto us sely women, willing us to prescribe to our
housebandes by letters, what is most expediente for them, or what they ought
to do, but rather shouldeste send us safely hence unto them, vsyng thy self
in words more discrite, and sober, farther in thy deeds should thou also
be more considerate then thou lately wast, when thou in this sort diddeste,
both imprison, and abuse us. And now again perceiuyng, that there remains
to thee, none other practice, wouldeste use us as instruments, with words to
deceive, and delude our housebandes, as thou lately in like sort haste abused
us, thou losest thy labor, and trauaileste in vain, for we by thee again,
will never so be betrayed. Neither think thou them on the other side, to be
in deed such wanto^s, that only to gain the lives, of these their children,
to keep, and save their wives from momentarie ignominy, they will leave to
pursue, that which so honestly they now have enterprised, that I say, which
they are bound to do, for the liberty of their country: for the loss of us,
and their children, shall not be so grievous unto them, as they shall be well
satisfied, if they may deliver their country, and their neighbors from thy
tyranny. Megestina this about, yet to have said more, the tyranne could no
longer refrain his ire, but in furious rage, commanded her child to be
brought him, whose blood himself threatened presently, to spill before her, but
whilst his ministers sought the child, among the others then there prisoners,
the mother with maruailous constancy, called him by his name, saying: Come
hither to me oh my little soonne, to the intent thou rather dye in my hands,
which tenderly love thee, then with the sword of so barbarous, or monster, or
tyranne. These words more moved Aristotimes then before, which laid his
hands on his faucheon, incontinentely to have slain her: but Cilon then
present, one of his familiers, stayed him, laboring to appeace his hard, and
cruel malice. This Cilon was one of them, which with Elanicus secretly,
sought the ruin of this tyranne, not longer able to supporte, or to endure his
villainy. And in fine by good hap, so much prenailed with him, that he did
again his sword into his scaberde, showing him that it was a deed most
shameful and ignominious, and of all others most unworthy of a prince, to
lay violente hand, or do force on a woman. Shortly after a strange, or
prodigious matter befell, fore showing the assured fall, and ruin of the
tyra^ne, for being in his bed, himself, and his wife, while the Cooks in the
morning were busied, prouidyng his break fast, an Eagle was seen to fly,
with meruailons impetuositie, directly over the palace, lettyng fall a stone
upon the kings chamber, presicely against that place, where he lay in his
bed, and with the same giuyng, a great, and loud scriche, vanished out of
the sight, of all such as beheld her. The tyranne the^ awaking, through the
noice of his people, which well beheld this strange adventure, and
maruailously amassed at the discourse thereof, caused to be called inco^tinently
a soothsaier, in whom he reposed great trust, and confidence, to know (if it
were possible) what this might signify: who badde him to be of good courage,
and merry, and that this none other thing, at all denoted, but that Jupiter had
care of him, and favored his doings. But to the Citezeins, he said the
contrary, to who^ he was assured, that he might utter franckly, and without
offense his mind, especially for the malice they bare to Aristotimes, for he
eftsoon warranted them, that the tyranne was then threatened from heaven, and
then presently lived in greatest danger that was possible. Whence Elanicus
with his company, supposyng it not good, to protracte the time any longer,
determined to assail him the next day followyng. This night then coming
Elanicus dreamed, that one of his soonnes came to him, tofore executed by the
tyranne, which with a loud voice cried earnestly, and said: father, why keep
you your bed? why lie you now slepyng? why slack you your matters? why stay
you so long? doubt you any thing to morrow, to be Prince of this city?
Elanicus affiyng then maruailously in this vision, hastened in the morning
early, to find out his confederates, which he exhorted without stay, to
set forward in their business. Even in this same instant, news came also to
Aristotimes, that Craterus was come with great force, to aid, and assiste
him, and that they presently, incampte nigh unto Olympia: whence he waxt so
glad, and joyous, that he then thought no occasion remained more, of fear, and
on a bravery issued out of the palace incontinently, accompanied only of
Cilon, not lookyng, or caryng for his guard, that scatteryngly a loofe, and
far of followed him. Which thing Elanicus perceiuyng, and thinkyng that
occasion, was then well offered, not giuyng the sign betwixt them appoincted,
lifted up his hands, to the heavens, and with a loud voice said: what, longer
abide you, ye valiaunte, and courageous? Why show you not your prowes, in the
middle here of your City? Then Cilon immediately draws out his sword, and
slew one of them, that in haste, was come to wait on the tyranne out of the
palace. And on the other side Aristotimes, seeing both Trasibolus, and Lampidus
assailyng him, and supposyng to escape them, fled to the Temple of Jupiter,
where he was slain, by the multitude pursuyug him, and his body drawn out
thence, in the sight of all men, liberty being proclaimed throughout the whole
City. The multitude in heaps, incontinently then assembled, but few yet came
to see or behold, that loathsome carrion, before these women were delivered,
which hastenyng to that place, ioiously honored them, that by the death of
the tyra^ne, had delivered their country. In the mean time, the people
running in have to the palace, where the Queen, advertised of the death of her
housebande, dreadyng much that, which in deed insued, lockte her self up in
her closet secretly, where she strangeled herself, without the helpyng hand of
any. Now had this tyranne two very fair daughters, both of ripe years, and
ready to be married, which understanding of the faule of their father,
withdrewe theimselues, in all haste aparte, into their cabinette, whence they
incontinentely were drawn out, by force of the people, and diverse ready,
violently, and without more to have slain them, Megestena, with the rest of
the imprisoned women, skilfully appeased that their ragyng fury, hesechyng
them to abstain, from the young gentle women, considering the tyranne (though
other wise fell, and cruel) had never yet, they all being his prisoners,
imbrued himself in the blood of any one of the^. At the request the^ of these
dames, each weight was sone appeased, which after co^sultation, resolved on
this poinct, that with their own hands, they should do themselves to dye,
chusyng what death so ever, was to them best likyng. Then were they both
shut into a chamber together, the elder neither in gesture, nor in word,
showing any kind of sorrow, took from her waste, her girdle, fastenyng it to
a poaste, and being ready therein to dye, exhorted her sister, with manly
courage to do also the semblable: but the youngest then taking her sister by
the hand, besought her most humbly, that she might dye first, to whom the
other answered: even as since our cradles, having still lived, and continued
together, I never yet denied you any your demand, so am I contented, to
accord you again this your last, and fatal suit, which is, that I live
until you be dedde, although of all others, this assuredly will go nighest
me, to see thee mine own sister, to be strangled here before me. Now took
then the youngest in hand her girdle, which with tre^blyng fingers most
pitifully she knotted, the other aduisyng her well, to fasten it about her
neck, that she more quickly, and more easily, might pay the tribute due unto
nature* which she sone after her fare well given to her sister, dolefullie
accomplished. When she now was this paste and gone, the other stretched forth
her body, in most reverent manner possible, semblably coueryng it, as
appertains to the dedde. After which she tourneth about to Megestena, most
humbly intreatyng her, that after her death, she would not permit her body
to lie naked on the earth, which her request, being easily granted, she
tourning strangleth herself, in the same girdle of her sister.

Why, and for what causes, men rarely aspire, to the assured perfection of
things in this life. Chapt. 9.
Five principal things are there, that distourne manne from the ripe, and
mature cognition of things in this life, which if he well knew, he then
might repute himself for perfect, and wise. The first is the ignorauncie, or
not knowing, of his end, to wette, his not knowing, to what end he is borne.
For assuredly, if he well knew it, he would no thing less pain him self, to
attain there unto, then he presently does, to aspire to pomp, and honor, in
which (appetite rulyng him) his only felicity seems to consiste. But in
this case, I may compare manne, to a kings soonne in his infancy, of whom,
if you will ask, which he loves better, the succession of a kingdom, or else
an aple, or a cherie, which presently you shall offer him, it may not be
doubted, but he will refuse to be king, to play with, or taste of the aple, or
cherie, and that; for that tofore, he percase thereof has tasted: So fares it
with manne, who if he be demanded, which he most affects, or riches, or
learning, he at first will desire, to be master of money, ignorant, and
less wetyng, that the learned only, and he alone is rich, and father, that
it also is necessary, that the sage still order, and govern his country, and
that also without knowledge, honor is not honored, but rather becomes a note
of ignominy, and slander, and that great wealth also without good letters,
is the true pathe to senslis brutalitie, the root of presumption, and
accomplishemente of rusticitie: but the wise suffices to direct himself, and
others, posseste of these threasures, that never may fail him. But this all
happens unto manne, for not knowing, to what end he is borne. The second is,
the immoderate use of pleasures, of the mind, as well as also of the body,
which both annoye, and droune, no less the exterior motions to virtue, then
the interior also, and these of the spirit. So that manne so folded in the
filthe of this world, may well be resembled, to the daughter of a Prince,
fair, and beautiful, to whom also appertained after her father, the kingdom,
but for having committed fornication, with a bond man deformed, and odious, is
deprived thereof, to her eternal infamy. The third issues of the evil
disposition in man's body, whence manne, of learning, and good letters, for
the most part is incapable: and this some times is caused, by the place of
his birthe, whence he takes to be, of an imperfecte, and impure complexion, as
in certain countries in the East, where, as in parts of Africa, men are borne
so senslis, and bestiall, by mean of the extremity of heat in these soiles,
that they live as brute beasts, incapable of reason: and on the other side, in
the countries Septentrionall, or North, in other some places, by extreme
coldness, are men borne, so wild, and savage that some of them refuse not, to
feed on man's flesh, such are the Goths, and Ostrogothes, with others. And
these people may be compared to an Egle, in whose foot there is fastened a
stone, of some weight, which lets her, there to fly, where by nature she
desires, to wete, above the clouds, in the supreme, and higheste, region of
the air. The fowerth is the difficulty, and hardness of the sciences, for
though man see, that in heart, and mind he desire, to search the truth, and
causes, of haute, and profounde matters, yet findyng them so labourous, and
hard to understand, he utterly gives over his first attempt, and
enterprise, and becomes like unto an iye, which to look on the Sun,
fasteneth it self closely, whence issues such a pearsyng, and extreme
brightenes, that it so eclipseth, and troubles the sight, that it in no wise
is able to look thereon, or abide it. The last, and worste of all the others
is, a certain affection, which manne has conceived in his youth, especially
in these things, in which he has been fostered, and bredde up, with long
continuance afterward in the same, for custom easily conuerteth it self into
Nature, by occasion whereof, there grows in manne, a most assured desire and
singular love in these things, where unto he has been usually accustomed,
hatyng, and disdainyng continually the contrary: and in this error the whole
world is this day almost drouned. For see we not the same, in the young
children of the Turks, which before they come to be of judgment, or reason,
abhor, and deteste all christianity, as does also the Jew. Again we see,
that the peasaunte, or country manne, for having been nourished, and
accustomed to the country, dieted, and appareiled grossly, as is their manner,
flies, and refuses the acquaintance, or company of the courtier, as also of
these others, that live in well ordered, and civil citees: whence A proverb
among the Frenchmen.
rises this proverb, unhappy is that bird, that was bredde in an evil
vale, for having been fostered, and still kept in the same, she can not at any
time depart thence, and leave it, though assured to be else where better, and
at more ease. Neither in this case only, have we experience here of, but
farther our selves hate strangers, and these of an other country, yea, though
we never lived in their company, or saw them, only perchance, for that we
have heard evil of them. In women also is this error notorious, to whom so
much please these things, that they have accustomed, which though they be in
deed, less profitable, or honest, yet may they in no wise learn, or receive
the contrary. Finally this love, of use, or custom, with the dislikyng of that
we know not, is almost generally seen, in all things of election. Wherefore
we must banishe from us, every these impedimentes, to the end we may know
(if it be possible) perfectly to judge, in cases of difference: for in these
things consists the absolute perfection in this world, the pathe also is
it, to felicity in the other: followyng the good husband manne, that well
labors his soil, taking from it first, all thistles, and evil weeds, and
after bestows in it, as order asks, good seed. So also the Physician that
would restore to health, his sick, and weak patiente, pourgeth him first,
of all his corrupt, and superfluous humors, for that in a matter evil, and
ill disposed, a new form easily, and at the first, is not induced. We then
must endeavor by all means possible, for man that is reasonable, and yeldeth
not unto reason, but dwells still, as wedded, to his own fond apetite, is
as he that would sail, on the top of high mountains, or build him houses
on the restles, and surgyng waves of the sea, which both are less advised,
and fruitless immaginations.

How unlawful a thing the cumbate is, and that princes ought not in any wise
to permit it. Chapt. 10.
AS by the cold charetie, and malice of men abuse is creapte into all things
in the world, so falls it out in the cumbate, or fight of two, which in
the beginning in ceirteine cases and doubts of great controversy, which
otherwise could not be determined, or decided, was then by great princes,
when hostility, and war first began to grow, upon just consideration
honorably received. But in this our age, it now is, so common, and so abused,
that every private, and mean Soldier, for little cause, or small matter is
ready to attempt the cumbate against his adversary. And that which gives me
greatest cause of marvel, is to see that Christian princes, and none others
admit it, to whom, above all others it expressly is, prohibited and denied,
and yet grows it still, to be such, and so common, that if God for his
great mearcies sake extinguishe not the memory thereof, I fear me, that
prelates, and church men, will not shame at the last as valiant champions to
enter the listes among others. This kind of fight is denied man, first, and
especially by gods word, it also is denied him by the Civil, and Canon law,
it is denied, I say, to the party that demands it, also to him that
permits, or aucthoriseth it, and in fine to all such as would look on, or
behold it By Gods word we prove it, in this sort to be denied. Every act by
which GOD may be tempted, is to a Christian expressly prohibited, for it is
written thou shalt not tempte thy Lord, thy God. That God is tempted by this
means, this make I it evident. To make proof of these things, which by none
other means, might be brought to good end, but by the only providence, and
justice of God, is no thing else, but to prove, and tempte God, as is sin in
cases of purgation, wherit evermore is most plain, and evident, that according
unto the order of nature, the strongest, and most valiant ouertroweth the
weaker: but the contrary (which is that the less able should conquire the
other) never chaunseth but by miracle only. To such then in force and courage
so different, enteryng the listes to fight the cumbate, the victory is lookte
for at his hands, that maintains the just quarrel, to the intent the
truth, might be thence aperte, and manifest: this tempte we then God, willing
that he work herein miraculously, that which in deed, he should do, if the
more valiant were subdued, by the timorus, and impotente, which were clean
contrary, to the order, and law of nature. Again we may in like sort prove
it by this argument: when the law inhibiteth any thing, it also inhiteth in
any wise to do that, by means of which a ma^maie commit the thing
inhibited, since then to us, by God him selselfe, murder is nenied, the cumbate
is also by the same reason denied, for that thereby is committed homicide. Or
other wise again it might be said in this sort: in holy wrete is forbidden
every act that accords not with charity, which is the sole ground, and
foundation of virtue, but the cumbate is an act, that accords not with
charity, charity being none other, but the love of God, and our neighbor,
therefore the cumbate in holy write is forbidden, for who so enters the
listes, thirsts as is evident, the bloodde of his neighbor, traitorously
rebellyng, and disobaiyng the divine majesty. Finally it also is forbiden by
the Canon law, for that it follows the rule of the Scriptures in all
things: by that reason then that it is prohibeted in the one, it also is
prohibited, and forbidden in the other. By the law of reason it also is
prohibited, for whatsoever is contrary, or repugnant to natural equity, is
by the law of reason also prohibited, which reason stands grounded on
natural equity: and natural equity wills, that the same that commits
the crime, should for the same crime also be punished ye innocente not hurt,
or annoied in any thing, but the contrary is ofttymes seen and known in this
case. Again natural reason, on which is grounded (as we have said the stay
of man) labors chifely for the preservation, and augmentation of man kind:
but by this policy, the destruction, and diminution of man kind is
hastened, this policy therefore exileth from natural reason. And surely no
thing, may be farther of from love, or natural reason, then is this unjust
practice of the cumbate, for therein are permitted men to murder each the
other, for whom our savior paid that inestimable price of his death, and
bloodshedde. Also in this sort may we argue against it, no man ought to
purchase to himself honor, or profit, by the detriment of an other: or this,
no man ought to wish to an other, that which he could not be contented, to
wish to himself: but in the cumbate is evident both the one, and the other,
for that who so demands it, searches his own glory, by the ignomious
deprauation, and detrimente of an other, to wete of him against who^ he
fights, his neighbor: and wishes also to him, that which he, in deed,
less would to himself, I mean both to subdue, and kill him. The cumbate is
therefore utterly to be refused. Out of the Civil law, we also in this sort
may argue: the law prohibiteth every act, by which justice either is, or may
bedenied to any, but in this case it eftsoon is denied to the innocent, for he
falls in the listes, and his adversary triumphs, by the said law
therefore it comes to be denied.

Of the great constancy of the Aritafila, with her honest policy, and
delivery of her Country. Chap. 11.
THe constancy of the noble Aritafila, of Cyrena, meriteth to be spoken of in all times, and ages. The daughter was she of Eglator, and wife to Fedim, which
in noblelesse and wealth was reputed for one of the worthiest in that City:
she also in beauty no less excelled, then she did in wit, with a merueilous
facility, and swetnes in talk. It chaunsed now that Nicocrate, Some read
Nicocreon.
cruelly, and tyrannously oppressing the country, had done to death diverse
honest Citisens, and among others his execrable, and intolerable villainies,
he also executed Melnaipus Apollo his preeste, to the intent him self might
usurp the office sacerdotall. Shortly after by dishoneste gyle, he did Fedim
also to die, the huseband of Aretafila, taking her to wife by force, and
against her will, not leauyng from time time, to abuse the poor Citisens,
waxing every day more fell, and more cruel then other, so that on a time in
his rage, and fury, he blooddely flewe a great number in one instant, and for
that the usage was to bury them without the City, was advertised, that
diverse living, were noised to have been of the number slain, to the intent
they might be carted out of the town among ye dead, so to eskape his
impacable malice, by means whereof he sent a great troop of his Souldiars,
immediately and in all haste, to keep the gates, which with long weapons, and
peekes of Iron, read hoate with the fire, punchte, and pearste all that past
them in most vnreuerent manner, by that means to make proof, whether any
there lived or not. These things displeased much Aretafila his wife, which
moved to great compassion, through the love she bare to her country, besides
that she hated him, for his tyranny executed against her best beloved Fedim,
determined, in fine, to hassarde her life, to bereue the tyranne (if it were
possible) of his. And although Nicocrate most ardently loved her, not leaving
any pain to please, and content her, yet could he not for all that alter
her honorable determination: so that when all the other Citisens through the
great force of the tyranne, were all in despair, of freedom, or liberty,
she alone still continued, in assured hope and confidence, by some mean to
dispatche him and to deliver her country. For the more assured performance of
this her determination, she calls to memory the noble valiauncie of Ferea
that renoumed Thebane, whose courage, and virtue she determined in the
accomplisheme^t of this so great, and weaghtie a matter to imitate, and
follow, and for that she had none assistantes, as had the other many, she
resolved to impoison him, in cloase and secrette manner, by means whereof her
self, was, in great danger of death, as shall be here after said, for that
she eftsoon failed, with such convenient opportunity to minister her potions,
as her self still desired, and at last suspected and taken with the manner, was
not able to excuse her self, with manifest proofs, convicted of that folly.
Whence Caluia the mother of the tyranne, which more then fatally hated her,
and as a woman of fell, and mearciles courage, persuaded with her soonne to
execute her in most shearpe, and cruel manner. But the great love that
Nicocrate baere her, with her assured constancy, and valiant courage on the
other side, aunsweryng so wisely to every her accusers, caused that her death
was not hastily pursued: howbeit after long and many examinations, being most
plainly, and apertly convicted, not able to excuse her self, but that she had
provided it, in the presence of the judges, she boldly said this much. I
confess my Lord, and husebande, that this drink by me was, and by none
other provided, of purpose to have given, or bestowed it on you, but not that I
ever thought, or in any wise knew that it was either noisome, or venomous, but
continually I supposed it to be a confection amorous, for seeing that I was
envied of sundry Ladies, and gentlewemen, especially for that it pleased you
so well to think of me, as also for that they see me advanced in honor
above them, and doubtyng least they might allure you, by some means also to
favor them, I provided this potion, to increase, and continue your good
affection toward me. Wherefore if I any thing have herein offended, surely I
ought not in trothe to be punished, for that only love, to attempt it, and
no thing else has moved me, and not as some would, or malice or rancour, and
yet never the less if I must be punished, death have I not deserved as an
impoisoner, but as a woman that through to much love have devised
inchauntmentes, or licours amatory, to force her husebande no less to love
her, then she both has, and does love him. Thus she with a sober
countenance, and like grace, in defense of her self, seemed of part to have
satisfied, and contented the tyranne, wherefore, he would not that she should
in any wise be done to death, but commanded, that she should be laid on
the rack, where through tormente she might answer a truth to each
demand. Caluia now provided with diligence the rank, doing her to be
tormented in most cruel manner, besides that her self also in person leafte
not to play her part therein, until at the last she was as werie, as was
possible for her to be. How be it, Aretafilia confeste no thing at all: by
means whereof she was in the end delivered, and received as inculpable, by
the tyranne Nicocrate, which sorrowed mearueilously, for that he had done her
in such sort to betormented, and being vanquished with love, practiced with
gifts, and iuels, to reconcile her again unto him. But she as a wise, and
prudent dame, fained that she could not but love him continually, but having
laid up in her bosom the memory of these torments, attended ye time only,
and place, to avenge her, and whilste she often times devised with her self how
she best might acco^plishe it, behold this occasion, in happy time offers
it self. She had by Fedim a daughter of rare, and excellent beauty, virtuous
with the same, and very well nurtered, as also Nicocrate a brother that hight
Leander, young, and dissolute, hauntyng in every corner, the company of women,
whom notwithstanding to acquainte, with this her daughter, in secreate, and
cloase mean she labored continually, in such sort that by inchauntmentes,
and other pretty confections, which had been for the more spedie
accomplishment hereof taught her, she easily constrained him to love and like
her, principally for that the maid, was by her mother tofore instructed, to
show him what in her was, al notes of love, and loialtie. After this, she so
wrought here in, tha Leander besought his brother to give him this maid for
wife, and companion in ^ead, which he easily obtained, by the consent of
Aretafila. This marriage now solemnised, Leander that loved beyond measure
this young dame, never had his fill, or was satisffied in disportyng with her:
wherefore on a night by the counsel of her mother, she persuaded with him to
procure the death of his brother, to attempt and take in hand a matter so
honorable, as was that by his death, to deliver his country from tyranny. And
farther she added, that he might be assured, that the Citisens in recompense
thereof, would choose him for their King, besides that, if he did it not, if
happily his brother by some other means were slain (which was impossible for
him long to eskape) that his life also then could not be but in hassarde,
laiyng evidently before him, by manifest examples, the execrable, and barbarus
cruelty of his brother, which only deprived not the Citisens of their
liberty, but also him that was his natural brother, and that this is true,
said she, consider that it was not in thy choice, to take to thee a wife, but
that thou first must become, a long, and humble suitor. Leander the^ at the
persuasion of his wife, at that instante resolved to conspire the tirannes
death, especially understanding, that it well pleased Aretafila. Wherefore
breakyng, and impartyng with Dannides, his most trusty, and assured friend,
did by his help, and advise therein so much, that he shortly after had
slain him, himself crouned king, and Prince of the country, whence he
straight grew, to be of such puissant aucthority, that he by little, and
little contemned Aretafila, and her counsels, so that he rather made it evident
unto all the world, that he was an homicide, and murderer of his brother, and
not a conspirer of the death and fall of the tyranne, for continually he
governed the people with injustice, although he yet again afterward somewhat
began to reverence, and honor his mother in law. Wherefore preuely by
letters, and messengers sent him, she persuaded with Anabe a Lybian borne, a
captain courageous, and very fortunate (seiyng that she had not yet
delivered her country from tyranny, mindyng also to dispatche him as the
other) to enter in arms on the territories of Leander, which he did, and
being entered, with his whole army, she calls Leander, and immediately
tells him, that neither were his capitaines equal either in experience, or
prowes to these of the ennimie, and that it should also less advantage him,
to much to trust, or affie in his people, not yet so surely planted, as he
supposed, in that city, wherefore her advise was, that he should by all
means, labor to pacify, and appeace the wroth of Anabe, promising that her
self would find some way for him, gently, and quietly to confer at full with
him. This counsel of his mother in law pleased well Leander, by means where
of she labored, to bring them both together: howbeit, before the time of
meting appointed, she sent certain assured, and secreate messengers to Anabe,
humbly intreatyng him, that when Leander came to him, that he either would kill
him, or at the least retain him prisoner, promising to requite him therefore,
to his full contentation. Whereunto this Lybian accorded, promising most
faithfully to acco^plishe her demand. But Leander of nature fearful (as
commonly are all, and every these tyrauntes) differred, and prolonged from
day to day this Parle: till at length through the earnest instigatio^ of
Aretafila, who charged him both with inconstancy, and cowardice, especially
for that her self would go to the ennimie with him, went forth all unarmed,
at last to mete with Anabe, whom when he saw coming with a certain company
with him, he arrested him saying that he would go no farther, but all amassed
with fear, would then send for his Guard. Whence she some times encouraging
him, some times also with rough words reprouyng him, did still her busy pain
to pushe, and thruste him forwards, and in fine took him her self by the
arm, as well to harden him, as by force also to draw him, till in the end
she waS come to Anabe with him, into whose hands she delivered him captive,
and prisoner, who curiously then, and safely kept him, until he had
received the whole sum of money promised him. After this she returned into the
City again, where she discloased (as is above said) the whole order of this
matter, uttering every her polices practiced for the delivery of her country.
Which known, this money was immediately gaithered, and sent as was promised,
forth with to Anabe, which also delivered Leander in chains to his mother in
law, whom she again committed to the keepyng of the magistrate, by whose
commandment he was cloasde up, into a great sack of Leather, and cast
into the Sea, such was his endyng: Caluia his mother was also burned. Now all
the country came runnyng to Aretafila, and falling on their knees did her the
greatest honor that was in any wise possible, especially for that, with such
and so great hasarde of her person, she had delivered her country out of the
hands of two tyrants: and farther in recompense of these her demerites, they
chose her gouernesse (to be assisted with certain others) of their country:
which she courtuously (as was her manner) and tha^ckfully accecepted, painyng
her self in the administration of justice until all things were reduced in to
perfect, and quiet state, and afterward geuyng up her office in to the
hands of the Senate, withdrewe her self in to a house of religion, among
Noonnes, where she lived in contemplation, and prayer the residue of her life.

The end of the fowerth and Last Part.
A TABLE OF ALL THE MATTERS CONTAINED IN this book, and first of the first
part.
WHy in the first age men lived longer, then in this our age present. Chap.
1. fol. 1. page 1. That the opinion of those, that supposed the years of the
former ages paste, to have been more short then these of our time, is false. As
also which was the first City of the world, and finally that our
Forefathers had more Children, then these that are remembered to us in the
Scriptures. Chap. 2. fol. 3. page 1. Of the excellency of Secrettes, and in
what sort a secrette ought to be covered, with certain Examples seruyng to
that purpose. Chap. 3. fol. 5. page 2. How commendable a thing it is, to
talk, or speak few. Chap. 4. fol. 10. page 1. Of the strange opinion of the
Egyptians, touching the term, or end of man's life: limiting the same by
the proportion of his heart. Chap. 5. fol. 11. page 2. Of the first beginning,
and spring of War: as who were they, that first invaded strange Countries,
with the inuentours of certain Weapons, and Arms: who also first found out
the use of Artillery. cha. 6. fol. 13. pa. 1. For what cause manne goes
upright: as also why fasting, then when he has eaten, he evermore is found
more weighty, and poisante: and why in conclusion he poyseth more dead then
living, with others, such not impleasant accidents. Chap. 7. fol. 15. page 2.
Of the excellency of the head, above all other members of the body, and that
it is not good to have a little head, or strait breaste, as also whence it
is, that we account it courtesy, to take of the Cappe, or Hatte, in saluting
an other. Chap. 8. fol. 17. page 2. That man's death is to be accounted
fortunate, or less fortunate, according to the estate that himself shall die
in: with certain example serving to that purpose. Chap. 9. fol. 19. page 2.
What speech was used in the beginning of the world, and how first began the
diversity of languages. chap. 10. fol. 21. page 1. Of the division of ages, of
the world, with a brief discourse of diverse Notable matters chanced also in
them, as also in fine, of the beginning of Realms and Kingdoms. Chap. 11.
fol. 23. page 1. Of the strange life of Diogenes, surnamed Cinicus, as also of
his Sentences, Propositions, and Answers. Chap. 12. fol. 28. page 2. Of the
excellency and commendation of travail, as also of the domages that grow of
Idleness. Chap. 13. fol. 32. page 1. How detestable a matter Cruelty is, with
some examples serving to that purpose. Chap. 14. fol. 37. page 2. How for the
most part, cruel kings, and blouddy tyrants are the Ministers of God: and
how notwithstanding they continually end in state most wretched, and extreme
misery. Chap. 15. fol. 42. page 2. Of a strange case, which at two diverse
times chanced, after one and the same sort, unto two Roman Knights of
honorable Family. Chap. 16. fol. 44. page 1. Of the distinction of the age of
man, according to the opinion of most Astrologians. Chap. 17. fol. 45. page 1.
Of certain years in man's life, which the learned in times paste judged above
the others to be merueilous dangerous, as also for what cause they esteemed
it to be so. Chap. 18. fol. 49. page 1.
THE TABLE O^ the second part.
WWhat danger it is to murmer against princes, as also what commendation they
gain by clemency. Chap. 1. fol. 50. page 2. Of what country Pilate was, and
how he died, as also of a river so called, and of the property of the same,
and finally, of a certain cave, or den in Dalmacia. Chap. 2. fol. 52. page 1
In what degrees, and at what age a man and woman should marry. Chap. 3. fol.
54. page 1. Of the cordial and hearty love, that should be in marriage, with
diverse examples seruyng to that purpose. Chap. 4. fol. 59. page 1. Of the
strange customs observed by our elders in marriage. Chap. 5. fol. 61. page 2
Of the excellency of paintyng. Chap. 6. fol. 64. page 2. Of that excellent
Painter Apelles, as also of Protogines another in his time. Chap. 7. fol. 66.
page 2. Of a strange manner of exile used in Athens, by means of which the
most honorable and worthiest personages were oftentimes banished, without any
offense, or fault at all committed. Chap. 8. fol. 69, page 2. Of sundry
excellent personages, which by the ingra. titude of there Country, have
unkindly been banished. Chap. 9. fol. 72. page 2. Of a strauge adventure betide
a certain prisoner, and how after his weary imprisonment, he was in the end
made free and delivered. Chap. 10. fol. 75. page 1. That the bloodde of a Bulle
causes them to die that drink thereof at any time, as also, who first brought
the Bull to the yoke. Chap. 11. fol. 76. page 2. Now necessary water is in all
the uses of man's life, of the excellency of this element, and how to find or
try, the best water from the other. Chap. 12. fol. 78. page 1. By what policy
we may draw fresh water out of the Sea: and why cold water in falling
makes greater noise then it would do, if it were warm: finally why a ship
on the salt water, bears greter weight then on the freashe. Chap. 13. fol.
81. page 2. Of the renoumed and great Tamburlaine, of the kingdoms and
countries that he subdued, and finally of his practice, and manner in war
Chap. 14. fol. 82. page 2. Of many Lakes, and fountains, the waters of which
have many strange properties. Chap. 15. fol. 87. page 2. Of diverse strange
things, which hapened at the birth and death of our Savior Christ, recited
by sundry famous, and learned historians, besides these that are recorded by
the Euaugelistes in the scriptures. Chap. 16. fol. 92. page 1. Of many places
aleaged by sundry good authers, making mention of christ, and of his life.
Cha. 17. fol. 95. p. 1. That men borne of base condition, should not leave, by
all means possible, to attempt to reach, and aspire unto honor, with
certain examples seruyng to that purpose. Chap. 18. fol. 99. page 1. Of the
opinion that the old Romans, and other ancient countries had of fortune,
and how they plast her in the number of their Gods: in what form or figure
they also depainted her: and finally that there is no fortune at all among the
Christians, attributyng the cause of all things unto God. Chap. 19. fol. 102.
page 2. That sundry beasts, by some privy natural instinct, have
foreknowleage of things to come: as also of many countries, by the only force
of little worms, brought to be desolate, and forsaken. Chap. 20. fol. 106. p.
(...).
THE TABLE OF the third part.
HOw profitable a thing the invention of letters was, who first found or
invented them, as also how the Hebrew Characters signify some thing of them
selves, that which is incident to no other kind of letters, of what sort or
kind so ever. cha. 1. fol. 104. p. 2. Where on our elders wrote before the
invention of Paper, and with what kind of instrument, how Paper, and
Parchement were first found out. Who first invented the manner or skille of
Printing, as also what inestimable profit thence rises, and in fine by what
mean a blind man may write. Chap. 2. fol. 111. Page 1. Of the first
Libraries that ever were in the world, and how the men, of that time used, to
have the Images or purtraites of the learned in them. Cha. 3. fol. 113. page
2. Of the amity and enmity of sundry things, issuyng by privy, hidden, and
secret proprieties. C. 4. fol. 116. P. 1. By what means both amity and
enmity proceed from the Heavenly, and Celestial influence: and why a man
hates or loves an other. Cha. 5. fol. 119. Page 2. That the memory may be
hurt, and that it also by art, and by policy may be fortified. Cha. 6.
fol. 121. Pa. 1. In what honor, and reputation, Philosophers, Poets, and all
others, in what Art, or Science, soever they were learned, lived with
Emperous, Kings, and Princes, in times past. Cha. 7. fol. 123. Page 2 That
learning is necessary as well unto Princes as also to all Capitaines, that
live at any time in arms. Cha. 8. fol. 127. Page 1. Of a strange medicine,
where with Faustine the wife of M. Aurelius was cured, languishyng, and
consumyng with infinite, and extreme passions, of unchaste, and disloial love,
as olso of some things remediyng the said passions. Cha. 9. fol. 130. Page 1.
Who first did set or plant the Vine, who also did first to drink water in
wine, to whom also, and how the Romans first of all forbad, the use of wine,
with some other things consernyng this purpose. Cha. 10. fol. 131. Page 2. Of
infinite discommodities, which take their spring of wine immoderatly used, as
also what Phisicians they were, that thought it good, and medicinable, some
times to be drunk. Cha. 11. fol. 134. Page 1. Of certain great Personages,
which died, called hence by those, which before them selves, unjustly had
caused to be executed, even in the instante, and time to them assigned, as
also some what of the Archebishoppe of Magonce or Ments. Cha. 12. fol. 136.
Page 1. Of a certain guile practiced by a virtuous, and good Queen, toward
her housebande, by means whereof, James King of Aragon was begotten, and of
his birthe, and death. Cha. 13. fol. 138. Page 2. Of an ancient and strange
custom, observed by the inhabitants, of the Province of Carinthia, at the
coronation of their Prince: as also how they sharply punished thieues. Cha. 14.
fol. 140. Page 1. In what part of the Zodiac the Sun, and the Moon, as
also the other Planettes were in the creation of the world, and when they
first were made, of the beginning also of years, and times. Cha. 15. fol. 141.
Page 2. That man may take example of Birds, Worms, and other creatures, to
live a just, and a virtuous life. Cha. 16. fol. 145. Page 2. Why triumphs were
first used in Rome, as again how many they were, that there also triumphed,
what a Triumph is, and that there is two sorts of them Cha. 17. fol. 148.
Page 2. What names the Roman Capitaines gained by their victories. Cha. 18.
fol. 154. Page 1.
THE TABLE OF THE fowerth and last part.
OF the seven meruailes, or wonders of the world. Cha. 1. fol. 156. Page 1.
What manner of women the Sibylles were, how many in number and of their
prophecies, but especially of those that concerned Christ, and his coming.
Cha. 2. fol. 163. Page 2. Wherefore sleep by nature was given unto man, and
that to sleep to much is both noisome, and domageable. Cha. 3. fol. 167. Page
2. Of three sundry doubts, which the ancient Philosophers were never able
to resolve, with the causes why Chap. 4. fol. 165. Page 1. What Ceremonies the
Romans used before they denounced war to any prince or country. Cha. 5.
fol. 167. Page 1. That it profits a Prince much to be fair and well
fewtered. Chap 6. fol. 174. Page 1. Of the horrible tyranny of Aristotimes, a
matter or subject not less fittyng for a tragedy. Cha. 8. fol. 177. p. 1.
Why and for what causes, men rarely aspire, to the assured perfection of
things in this life. Chap. 9. fol. 181. Page 2. How unlawful a thing the
cumbate is, and that princes ought not in any wise to permit it. Cha. 10.
fol. 183. Page 1. Of the great constancy of the renoumed Aretafila, with her
honest policy, and delivery of her Country. Cha. 11. fo. 184. Page 2.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Kingston, for William Jones, and are to be soulde
at his new long Shop at the Weste end of Poules.


