THE ADMIRABLE HISTORY OF THE POSSESSION AND CONVERSIon of a Penitent woman.

SEDVCED BY A MAGICIAN THAT MADE her to become a Witch, and the Princess of
Sorcerers in the Country of Province, who was brought to S. Baume to be
exorcised, in the year 1610. in the month of November, by the authority of
the Reverend father, and Friar, Sebastian Michaelis, Priour of the Covent
Royal of S. Magdalene at Saint Maximin, and also of the said place of Saint
Baume.

WHO APPOINTED THE REVEREND FATHER, Friar Francis Domptius, Doctor of Divinity,
in the University of Louaine, by birth a Fleming, and residing in the said
Covent of Saint Maximin, under the regular discipline and reformation of the
order of preaching Friars, for the Exorcismes and recollection of the Acts. All
faithfully set down, and fully verified.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED A PNEVMOLOGY, OR DIScourse of Spirits made by the said
Father Michaelis, and by him renewed, corrected, and enlarged: Together with an
explanatory Apology of the many difficulties touching this History and the
Annotations.

Erubescant impij, and deducantur in infernum, muta fiant labia dolosa.

Psalm. 30.

Translated into English by W. B.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for William Aspley.

AA


TO THE QVEENE REGENT.
MADAME,
The History comprised within this Book, does for sundry reasons appertain
unto you. First, because those things which in themselves are great, rare, or
admirable, do properly belong to great personages, and your Majesty is the
greatest Queen and Princess of our age. Secondly, for that your name seated
in the highest place of the entry of this History, may occasion Princes, Lords,
and Gentlemen, to take the pains to read over the same, which will advantage
and profit them as much, as any book that has been published these many
years. The third reason (which is grounded upon the two former) is, that our
little King your son will prove another Josias, who was crowned and made King
of Israel at eight years of age, yet nevertheless became the most pious King
that ever was in Israel: who did parallel David himself in sanctity, crushed
all manner of Idolatry that for so long space was hatched amongst the people,
broake down their Idols, and put to death all Magicians and worshippers of
Baal. Neither do I slenderly conjecture this, because that since his reign
even at the very first entrance unto his Crown, there has been made an
admirable discovery of Magicians and of the kingdom of Satan, by the
extraordinary providence of God. Henry the Great his deceased father and our so
much desired King, gave the first light and life thereof unto him, who would
rather die then give credence unto Mag^cians: clean opposite to Saul, who did
affect rather to make his address to such men, then to hazard himself any way
to danger. To which may be added that our present King gave the first grace
and pardon unto her, who by seducements became the Princess of Magicians: God
having through his mercy touched her heart, and converted her unto him, as he
will do all those, that of their own accord do make acknowledgement of their
impieties: which is the most proper remedy to bring the said kingdom of Satan
to utter confusion, and to attract and win in his adherents and accomplices to
the true knowledge of God; Neither can he better assure his state and kingdom
then by this means. 1. King. 23. 4. King. 21. and 23.
King Saul was dis-inuested thereof, because he went to a Witch. And God was
stirred up to wrath against King Manasses, in that he countenanced Magicians
and Sorcerers. Upon the like occasion was the great City of Babylon ruined,
Esa. 47. Ezekiel. 28.
as it is written by the Prophets, Esaias and Ezechiel. Contrariwise the good
Josias, although God was much provoked, and as it were challenged by their
former offenses, yet reigned religiously and peaceably one and thirty years in
Jerusalem. The Acts of the 23. of December. page 219.
The fourth and last reason is, because that in this History, our late King
Henry the great is mentioned not without grert Attributes of honor and praise;
God having accepted of his piety and good desires as a sacrifice, and his death
as a kind of Martyrdom. To conclude, I am not ignorant, that some will here
allege, that it is not expedient to believe all that is written in this
History, and that it was not so fitly managed, to put this book in print, by
reason of the inconveniences which may arise thereupon. But to these two points
I will answer in the following Epistle, which I make to the Reader; fearing
(Madame) least I prove burdensome to your Majesty, who am, and always will
remain

Your most humble and obedient subject and servant, F. SEBASTIAN MICHAELIS
Prior of your Covent Royal of S. Magdalene at S. Maximin.
From Paris the 2. of October. 1612.
TO THE READER.
FRiendly Reader, When first I made mention to put this History in Print, I
found two sorts of men, that were of a contrary opinion. The first had the
fair cloak and couerture of Scripture, saying that we must not believe nor
give credence to the Devil, upon which (say they) all this History is founded.
The second as more eagle-sighted then the former, allege, that it is unsitting
to put it forth, to avoid thereby the scandal of many (especially of those
that are strayed from the Catholic faith) which they will take at the
publishing of this book, when they shall understand that these things were
done by a Priest. To these two points I answer, that as touching the former,
Jesus Christ himself does give us the resolution thereof, when speaking of the
Devil he says, that of a certainty there was no truth in him from the
beginning of his fall; but he gives a restriction and limitation to his
Axiom, John 8.
adding immediately these words, Cum ex proprijs loquitur, mendax est, that is
to say, when he speaks from himself, and of his own accord, it is most
certain, he is always a liar, ever endeavoring to work man's prejudice and
destruction; but the case is altered, when being enforced and adjured in the
efficacy of the name of God, he speaks and answers to exorcismes. Marc. 5.
This we see verified in the Gospel, when Jesus Christ would use his
authority over the Devils; as when they cried with a loud voice worshipping
him, Nemo poterat cum domare, catenas disrumpebat, and compedes diminuebat and
videns lesum a long cucurrit and procidens. Matthew. 8. Adorauit eum and clamans
voce magna dixit. Quid mihi and tibi Jesus fili Dei altissimi?
What have we to do with thee Jesus the Son of the high God? I charge thee
by the same God (said one of them) that thou do not torment me; and earnestly
besought him not to cast him out of that region, nor into the bottomless pit
of hell, but to suffer them all to enter into the heard of swine. And Jesus
Christ demanding the Devil that spoke and was the chief of them what his name
was; he answered, my name is Legion, for we are many. In which we may observe
two remarkable points; first that Christ Jesus being adjured by the name of
God, although it was done by a Devil, yet from the respect and reverence which
he did bear to God his father, condescended unto the request of this Devil
and all his companions: as in the like occasion, being semblably charged by
Caiphas to declare whether he were the Son of God or no, he then answered
more clearly and amply then at any time before, although he well knew, that
Caiphas was incapable of that mystery, and would not make his advantage of the
same? What ought we then to conceive of Devils, being adjured in the power of
the name of God? Vid, Acta. 16. December. page Marc. 5. Luc. 8. Matthew. 8.
shall they not deliver the truth, when by the virtue of the same name, they
are compelled to relinquish and abandon the bodies of those, whom formerly they
did possess? The second point to be noted is, that upon the interrogatories of
Jesus Christ, they have spoken and answered truly, and consequently they do
sometimes tell truth, not of their own accord or motion, but upon constraint
and that of him who is powerful to constrain them, to wit, Christ Jesus, and
his Lieue-tenants that are endowed with this power: to whom he says; I have
given you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, Dedivobis potestatem
calcandi supr a serpents, etc. Luc. 10. Et in nomine meo daemonia eijcient.
Marc. 16.
and over all the power of the enemy: And in another place he says to the
successors of the Apostles, that they shall cast out Devils in his name. If
then the answers of Devils are inserted in the Gospel, why may not the like
answers be now written and published to the world? The old Testament does not
stick to say, that the evil Spirit of God having possessed Saul, 1. Sam. 19.
besides tormenting him, did prophecy also, that is to say, he spoke after
the manner of Prophets, of things absent and hidden from the understanding of
men. Saint Chrysostom in the 13. Homily upon Saint Matthew, gives us his
resolution of this point, inueighing against Atheists who deny the pains of
bell. They are taught by the Devils (says he) who being full of pride will not
confess that they endure any torments, and being replenished with malice,
would dissuade us from believing it: yet are they oftentimes compelled (besides
the confessions made by them in the Gospel) to say and confess publicly the
great torments which they suffer; and are constrained thereunto by the
omnipotency of God, and the excessiveness of the torments wherewith they are
punished: as a malefactor that is questioned extraordinarily, does by the force
of the tortures that are presented unto him, confess the truth. If then the
Atheists will not believe the Scriptures, God makes the Devils themselves to
confess it, and those (says he) that will not then believe are worse then
Devils.

For answer unto the second, we will make remonstrance unto them, that by
their reckoning the Scripture should net have laid before us the History of the
young Priests that were the sons of Hely: 1. Reg. 2.
who did snatch the flesh from the pots that belonged to the sacrifice, and did
deflower the devout women, that came into the Temple to watch there at night.
Neither should the narration of the sins of David who was a Prophet and
father of the future Messiah be set down; much less should the Evangelists
mention the treason of Judas: which are so far from ministering occasion of
scandal unto the people, that on the contrary, many wholesome doctrines
tending much to edification may be drawn from thence. This is declared by
Saint Paul, 2. ad Timoth. 2.
when having spoken of Hymeneus and Philetus that did scandalize the Church,
he adds, The foundation of God remains sure, and has his seal on those
that are his. Notwithstanding (says he) is it not true, that in the house of a
great Lord, there be vessels of gold and vessels of silver, vessels of wood
and vessels of earth, destinated unto diverse uses? If therefore any man purge
himself from the ordures which are in the contemptible vessels, the same shall
be a vessel of honor in the house of God. True it is that the vessels of
greatest contempt and dishonor, are the wicked Priests: as for example Judas
in the College of Christ Jesus, and Diacrus Nicolaus in the society of the
Apostles; and the reasons thereof are apparent. First because of their great
ingratitude, Romans 1.
which makes the grace of God to depart far from them, and consequently they
are the more blinded by the working of the Devil, Ingrati, scelesti; says S.
Paul. Another reason is, because they are more ignominious to Christ Jesus, as
appears by Magicians. The third reason is, for that the corruption of those
things that are excellent, is worse then the corruption of things less
excellent, as the putrification of the blood is more pernicious then of any of
the other humors. And this would Jeremy have said in the vision of the two
baskets of figs; the one being full of figs not only good, but excellently
good, and the other full of figs not only naught, but extremely naught, in
porta templi. And this is amply declared by Saint Augustine, Epist. 117.
in an Epistle which he wrote upon a suggestion against a Priest of his, who
was accused of some soul crime. In the house of Adam (says he) there was
Abel and Cain, A thorn in a garden cannot blemish the roses or the garden; but
that a man may still say. Behold a fair garden.
in the Arc of Noah living creatures both clean and unclean, and in his
house one Cham with Sem and Iaphet. In the house of Abraham, Ismael with Isaac:
in the house of Isaac, Esau with Jacob; in the house of Jacob, incestuous Rubin
with chaste Joseph: in the house of David, Absolon with Solomon: And how be it
God himself had twice talked with Solomon, and had bestowed on him so many
indowments of his grace in the house of his father; yea although himself was a
Prophet and the author of some of the sacred and Canonical writtes, yet did
not the Devil cease to gain upon him, and to cause him to present unto him
the sacrifices that were appointed for God. Finally Saint Augustine brings in
the example of Judas, and concludes, I have by long experiences learned, that
as there are not on the earth better Christians then good Priests, so on the
contrary I never knew a Christian so evil as a wicked Priest. Hiero. contra
vigil.
To the same purpose speaks Saint Jerome, no man did ever disesteeme the
College of the Apostles, because Judas played the villain among them: no man
ever misconceiued of the Quires of Angels, by reason of Lucifer and his
confederates: but rather by their unhappy end we should learn to do well, and
be strengthened the more in the Christian faith, when it comes into our
consideration, that the Devil paineth not himself to draw a Minister to make
his supper in a Synagogue, nor a Rabbin of the Jews, nor a Musulman of the
Turks; for from hence can redound no ignominy unto Christ Jesus, neither can
he by this gain in any thing in his pretensions, as he would by the assistance
of a wicked Priest that does consecrate the body of Christ Jesus. Neither does
God suffer such execrable villainies to pass without great and marvelous
wonders (as shall be seen in this History) but discovers all by the
extraordinary means, of his unbounded power, and does enforce the Devils
themselves to make discovery and proclaim the same, to their utter ruin and
confusion. And from hence he ministers matter and occasion unto Heretics to
make acknowledgement of their Heresies: unto Magicians to abjure and abandon
their abominations; unto Catholics to implant and establish themselves with
better assurance in their faith. I have made some Annotations in the margent
upon the points of greatest difficulty, because I would give contentment unto
every one. I must entreat the courteous reader of this History to excuse me,
if in the second part hereof I have bin constrained to make mention o^tentimes
of my self, and those that were with me; there was a necessity for the doing
of it, for the more ample verification of the History. Moreover the courteous
reader shall do well to take heed, that in this History he do not therefore give
credit to the Devil, in that he speaks naught that is contrary to the
Gospel and doctrine of the Church; but to give credit to him then, when he
would set on foot some new and contrary doctrine. Besides he may observe, that
this tends not any way to the overthrow of the company of the Virgins of
Saint Vrsula, for there is many times mention and repetition made in this
History, that God has made special election of them to confound and crush in
pieces all magic, and the abhorred villainies thereof, and that for
compensation of the same, they shall be extolled before God and before men.
Furthermore the freindly reader will hold me excused for the rude and
unpolished phrase of this book, I having a regard in a business of this
nature to write rather truly then elegantly: he may remember that the French
Dialects are different, as it was in Greece when it most flourished; and that
Aristotle with his harsh kind of writing was no less profitable, then
Demosthenes with his Atticke phrase was pleasing: and the style of the Gospel
and of Saint Paul is more powerful with us, then all the oratory of the world.
Besides those that are possessed ordinarily spoke their mother tongue, so that
it was expedient for the more faithful relation of the whole, to follow their
vain of speaking word for word. Hence it comes, that the phrases of the
native French tongue could not be always observed. The scope of this History
is, the fear of God and his judgments, the detestation of vice whereby the
Majesty of God is provoked, and the avoiding of the pains of hell; more
particularly, to cause in us a loathing of that abominable sin of Idolatry,
which is perpetually committed in practicing of Magic, and in the School of
Satan. In the recollection of all, there has been used great faithfulness,
without any additions whatsoever; and the diligence that has been employed
herein may be seen in the page of the acts of the eighth of January, and in
the following page.

I have suppressed this History for the space of a year and more, and made no
account to have had it published; but the zeal of the Catholic faith has
induced me thereunto, after I had once seen a letter missiue of Monsieur du
Vic, wherein he advertised, that the adversaries of our faith did triumph in
Rochel, when the depositions of the Magician, now in question, were put forth
in print, where it is said, that the said Magician did celebrate Mass in the
Synagogue. And thereupon they make an inference, that the Mass is a
diabolical thing, but do not withal consider, that the Devils aim is to
usurp upon the glory of God, and to invade (as much as in him lies) the
honor of his divinity, that in conclusion he may cause himself to be adored
as a God. For he shamed not to demand it of Christ Jesus himself, saying unto
him, I will give unto thee all the kingdoms of the earth, Matthew 4.
if thou will worship me, that is to say, if thou will acknowledge me to be
the only God and Creator of all things, as Saint Chrysostom does interpret
it: as also he dared to abuse the sacred Scripture it self in the presence of
Christ Jesus. To which purpose speaks Saint Augustine: showing that sacrifice
appertains to God alone; August, lib. 20. contra Faustum Manich. c. 21.
as in the old Testament (says he) the sacrifice of the law, in the new
Testament the sacrifice of the true flesh of Christ on the Cross: and after
his ascension, the sacrifice made in the Sacrament, which is in commemoration
of his death and passion; he goes on and says. These are things which those
proud spirits the Devil and his Angels do openly challenge and demand. And in
the 4. book of the Trinity, chapter 13. about the end of the chapter he
says, Non intelligunt ne ipsos quidem superbissimos spiritus honoribus
sacrificiorum gaudere potuisse, nisi vni vero Deo, pro quo coli volunt, verum
sacrificium deberetur. That is, Idolaters do not understand that these haughty
spirits could not be so pleased with the honor of sacrifices, were it not that
truesacrifice were due to the only true God, in whose steed they would be
served and honored. Another inducement wherewith I was much moved, was a
book in Latin lately printed in Paris, entitled Mimyca daemonum, compiled by
Henry de Montaigne a gentleman of Languedoc L. of S. John de la Cost, where in
his precursory epistle he gives to understand, that the occasion that gave
life and birth unto this book (which does intend to show that in all ages the
Devil has bin Gods ape, and usurps upon his glory) is to beat flat that
shallow, yet dangerous conclusion which the Ministers of Languedoc held
touching the depositions of the said Gaufridy; adding these words, Nouatores in
re tam leui insistunt, and libellum confessionis praedicti Gaufridij a suis
curant ^mi, and venundari, vt rudi plebeculae, quam decipiunt, quasi horrorem
sacerdotum ineutiant. But the truth of this History will clearly demonstrate,
that God was grievously offended with such impiety, and that for to bring
confusion on the same, he used a marvelous and unusual means, making the
Devils themselves to be the discouerers of this Magician, who was afterward
burnt. Neither could it be otherwise detected; for the truth of this could not
sink into their apprehensions that knew him, he being after a strange manner
by the aid and conuention of the Devil grown a covert and close hypocrite,
and was after a stranger manner dis-masked and laid open by the omnipotency of
God, whom the Devils themselves are constrained to obey, when it is his good
pleasure. The stream of this History runs mainly on this point, to show,
that al tends to ampliate the glory of God unto us, and to confirm our holy
Catholic faith. Whence the courteous reader may also note, what regard God had
of our Priest hood, when to convert one Priest that had so strangely gone
astray, he did draw it on with such long and admirable solemnities. For matter
of fact in this History, there is nothing to be wondered at, which has not
been observed and published upon other occurrences by three Inquisitours of
Spain in the year 1610. Printed by John de Mongastonat Lon. grond.
which was the very year that this History was acted; and at the heels of
that followed another book of the same nature, made by Monsieur d' Ancre, one
of the Kings Counsel in the Parliament of Bordeaux. The 6. book and 3.
discourse page 459.
But the wonders were done in the person of him, who named himself and indeed
was the Prince of all the rest in France, Spain and Turkey: and Monsieur d'
Ancre does write, that he found by the depositions of the Sorcerers of Biscaye,
that one Jews came and taught them to accuse those that were innocent, to
excuse the nocent, and to inueagle in as many sons and servants to Satan as
they could. So that the providence of God, has been the true means to put to
rout all the army of Satan in this kind, in that his Standard is overthrown,
and the very master of his camp trampled and trodden under foot. Moreover he
that will more narrowly consider the History of Balaam the Magician, Numb. 22.
rehearsed in the book of Numbers, will not think it strange which by
assiduall experiments is verified of the Magicians and Witches of our time. For
it is there said, that King Baelac being conscious to himself of his
weakness to resist the army of Israel, sent to seek out Balaam as the
greatest Magician of that Country, to charm and chain up the arms of the
Israelits, and so to come to his purpose by this means. It is also recited in
that History, that to make his charms and maledictions the more potent and
effectual, he caused seven Altars to be built, and this was to sacrifice and
invoke the seven Princes of the evil Spirits, which bare sway in the
kingdom of Lucifer: Apoc. 1. D. Thom. 1. partic. quest. 113. art 2.
wherein he does by way of limitation endeavor to make himself like to God in
his Majesty, who has seven principal Angels to assist him. Of whom S. Thomas
as also S. Denis do say, that the seven superior orders do command and send
forth, and the two inferior are commanded and sent; and hence it is that these
first are properly styled Princes. Yet are we not to say, that the superiors
do not come unto us when they are sent from God, for S. Michael and S. Gabriel
in the 10. of Daniel, Tob. 12.
and in the 1. of Luke, and Raphael himself who is said to be one of the
seven Assistants before God, were sent by him And in the 10 of Daniel, Michael
who is one of the chiefest is come to aid me. And in our very History, The
second part page 311. act of the 11. of Ian. and the 6. act of the 12. December.
page 39 6. Book 2 discourse page 414. after Cardan and Strozzi. Math 12.
assumpsit 7. spiriritus nequiores se. Marc. 16. De qua eiecerat 7. demonia. See
Dr. Maldonat upon the pastages which he literally makes of the seven Devils.
mention is made of seven principal commanders amongst the other Devils, and
the same is auerred in the late History of Monsieur d' Ancre touching the
country of Biscaye. These Altars were built to sacrifice a Bull and a sheep
upon every of them to these seven Devils (which was the very manner of
sacrificing to God in the Law) and by these means to obtain of them that
which he desired, Dabo sicadens adoraueris me. And because they sought to work
against the honor of God, and the public good of the Church by him that was
the Prince of all the Magicians of the East, it is said, that God to discocouer
and give stoppage unto such impiety against his Majesty, and villainy against
his Church, did show great and unusual wonders; to wit, that a good Angel did
visibly appear highly displeased, and exceedingly dreadful, brandishing a
sword in his hand, that an ass spoke by as great a miracle, that the Sorcerer
himself became a Prophet, God putting that into his mouth which was not in his
heart, and he speaking oppositely unto that which he had determined, whereby
Magic was by the Magician himself defeated and put to confusion: to the end
(says S. Ambrose) that the perfidiousnesse of those that believed not in God,
might by their own South-faier and Sorcerer be reprehended. We are further to
hope, that this History will be no less profitable and useful unto France,
then that of Lion printed in French in the year 1566. Bartholomaeus Fayus
praeses. Parisiensis in Energumenico Hadrian. Hofstadius ser. 52. de
Eucharistia. Joan. Lorinus in acta apost. c. 5. verse. 16.
which greatly confirmed the Catholic faith, and converted many heretics,
that heard the Devil which possessed a Virgin to say diverse times in a high
voice, that these Heretics were his friends and confederates; and that the
reality of Christ's body was in the Sacrament, because in it there was Hoc. To
this purpose speaks S. Augustine in the 1. book of the Concordance of the
Evangelists chap. 15. that in his time the Paynims durst not blaspheme Jesus
Christ, because their Oracles were constrained by the power of God to speak
well of him: and thereupon the Paynims began to blaspheme the Apostles; but
(says he, speaking to the Paynims) question your Oracles touching the
sanctity of life of the Apostles, and you shall clearly see, that they will be
enforced to speak well of them also. If they could not have had a power to
speak a truth, S. Augustine had made these other more obstinate in their
vnbeleese. S. Thomas in his Opusculum 17. cap. 10. answering to the fourth
objection of those that said, it was unlawful to receive children into the
orders of Religion, because that sometimes it proceeds from the temptation of
the Devil, he says, that there is no danger to follow that which perhaps may
be a temptation of the Devil, so that it be to a good end, with this
provision, that if the Devil would afterward wreath and wrest this to an
evil purpose, as to scandalize or corrupt others, they do not consent unto
the evil; otherwise the Devil by this scruple may divert us from all
goodness. Thus did S. Anthony practice who was well versed in this art,
Anthanas. in vit. Anthonii. Joan. Lorin in act. Apost, c. 16. verse. 17.
as Athanasius observes. And for resolution of all scrupulous doubts, a late
Doctor of Province of the society of Jesus, called father John Lorin has
prettily collected, that the Devil may speak truth four several ways:
first to beguile those that are unbelievers and faithless, because they may
say, this is not true, for the Devil says it; as S. Chrysostom and
Oecumenius have noted upon the 16. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where
it is said, that Paul being with his associats in the city of Philippi, a maid
having an evil Spirit upon her, cried after them and said, These men are the
servants of the high God, and do show unto you the way of salvation. Saint
Paul for a while suffered her to say this, thinking that it might be
available unto some; but when she still continued on for many days, he grew
angry, and conceiving that this might be hurtful unto others, he commanded
him to come out of the maiden in the name of Christ Jesus, which he presently
did. Secondly to flatter and collogue with the Exorcist, that he would cease to
torment him, or to cast him out: which reason is also alleged by S.
Chrysostom upon the same passage saying, Marc. 5.
that he behaueth himself herein as a guilty person before his Judge, and a
boy before his Schoolmaster, holding the rod with his hands for fear of
being scourged. The discourse of the history which is faithfully gathered shall
give you to understand that the Devil spoke after this manner.
After this manner did a Devil flatter Christ Jesus, saying, I pray thee
torment me not Jesus, thou Son of God; in which he spoke the pure truth.
Thirdly, (which is the most ordinary fashion) when they are enforced thereunto
in despite of themselves, by the divine and hidden providence of God, or in the
virtue of his name by exorcismes; which reason is alleged by the sweet and
religious Poet Arator, in his Poems upon the Acts of the Apostles, as also by
venerable Bede, and many others. Fourthly, he speaks truth to gain thereby
an opportunity to accuse and give attestation against unbelieving and
impenitent men, before the throne of Gods judgment. Whereupon Saint Anthony
rehearses the history of a Devil, that having taken on him the shape and
habit of a Preacher, made a very good sharp sermon, and in the end declared
before them all, that he was a wicked Spirit permitted by God to accuse
unbelieving and vnrepentent persons before the tribunal of Gods judgments. The
friendly Reader may be pleased to have regard unto two things; first that this
is a History making a bare declaration of a fact, and is no foundation
whereupon to build our faith, though it may serve very fitly to stir us up to
ponder upon the judgments of God. The other is, that he take not in ill part
the frequent repetition of things, for that it was expedient to express and
fashion this History to the truth: although those very repetitions were so
varied and expressed with such vehemence, that they were neither unfruitful
nor superfluous to the standers by, but did raise in them such passions, that
they cast forth many sighs and tears, God for his goodness touch and make
tender all our hearts by those many means and remedies, which he has bestowed
upon us.

THE SVMMARIE OF THE HISTORY OF the Magician burned at Aix, in the year 1611.
the last of April.
IN the City of Marseille there was a Priest called Jews Gaufridi, that came
from the side of the mountains of Province, and for the space of 14. years
remained a Magician. He fell into it, by reading a certain book in written
hand, where there was French verses with diverse characters: and this was found
by him amongst the books of an Uncle of his, that died some years past; so
that in conclusion the Devil did visibly appear unto him in a humane shape,
and said. What will thou with me, for thou have called me? And after some
discourse, the said Jews Gawfridi said unto him, If thou have power to give
me what I desire, I ask of thee two things. First that all the women that I
shall be in love withal, do affect and follow me: Secondly that I may gain
estimation and honor above all other Priests of this Country, and amongst men
of worth and credit. The devil having promised him these two things did
reciprocally demand, to have given him his body, his soul, and his works:
whereunto he answered, that he would freely bestow these three things upon
him, only he desired to make reservation of administering the Sacraments. And
being thus agreed, the said Gaufridi gave him a schedule signed with his blood,
and the devil interchangeably gave unto him another, and promised unto him as
aforesaid.

And being now become such a one, he endeavored to seduce a young girl, of
the age of nine or ten years called Magdalene de Demandoul, alias de la
Pallud, daughter unto Mounsieur de la Pallud, a gentleman of Prouinco, whose
consent at last he gained, and led her whiles she remained at a Grange of the
said Monsieur de la Pallud; to a Cave or den not far from the said Grange:
where she saw a great number of people (who were the Synod of Sorcerers) and
was much abashed at the same. But the magician told her, these are all our
friends, and you must be marked like unto them: and so took the poor
affrighted girl and marked and abused her; yet for all this she would reveal
nothing when she came home, neither to father, nor to mother, nor to any other.
Afterward she was ordinarily carried by the Devil to that Conuenticle, and
was made the Princess of the Synagogue, as the said Jews was the Prince.
Notwithstanding this, whiles she re mained still at her Fathers, by the grace
of God (who had regard of her young and tender years) she had a desire to
become one of the Virgins of Saint Vrsula, that are resident at Aix in
Province, under the conduct and government of Priests called the Priests of the
Christian doctrine.

This her intendment she communicated unto the Magician, who dehorted her from
it with all the inforcements bec old, and persuaded her to marry, promising to
provide for her a rich and proper man to be her husband. For all this she still
persisted in her first resolution, which put the Magician into such passion and
choler, that he menaced her and said, if thou do go thither I will destroy all
the company, as well of the virgins of S. Vrsula, as of the Priests of the
Doctrine. Being gone thither, the Magician by Witchcraft, and power of a
Schedule which she had formerly given the devil signed with her blood, so
wrought that she was possessed by Beelzebub, and many others of his associates.
He also did by a Charm bewitch a companion of hers called Louyse Capeau, by
the force whereof (as also because she had diverse times besought God, that she
might endure all torments even to the pains of hell, as much as she could be
capable of, that she might convert certain of her sisters there, who were in
a desperate estate, and deuoid of the grace of God) the said Louyse was
possessed by a wicked spirit called Verrine, and by two other his companions.
This being so, father John Baptista Romillon Superior of the Priests of the
Doctrine, perceived by their extraordinary gestures, that these two women,
were possessed, and thereupon caused them privately to be exorcised in their
Chapel, as one that feared least this might tend to the defamation of that
Company. And having continued this for the space of a year and certain
months, and to his understanding profited nothing (for the devils could never
all that space be brought to speak) he brought the said Magdalene as more
manifestly possessed then the other to S. Maximin, to crave there the advice of
Father Sebastian Michaelis Priour of the Covent Royal that is at Saint
Maximin, where the body of S. Magdalene lies: who was of opinion, that there
should a general Confession be by her made to S. Magdalene, and so she should
receive absolution from him, as from the Inquisitour of the Faith, least
otherwise she might reserve some particular fact to her self. Afterward they
made her make a vow for 9. days in the Chapel where the blessed S. Magdalene
does lie, and did exorcise her evening and morning, in which time the devils
used strange motions and gestures, and grievously tormented her, but would
never speak.

And now approached the time of Aduent, in which the said Father was to preach
in the city of Aix: he therefore advised Father Romillon to bring Magdalene*
and Louyse likewise to S. Baume, a place where S. Magdalene for thirty years
space did her penance; and as a Vicarige that belongs unto the Covent Royal
of S. Maximin: and told him that some dates past he had sent thithe^ Father
Francis Domptius a Feming by birth and Doctor of Divinity in the University of
Louaine, who beside ^his o^h^r sufficiencies had formerly exorcised in this
kind. And all this was done accordingly.

When the two that were possessed came to S. Baume, Vertine that was in the
body of Louyse began to discourse upon the day of the conception of our Lady,
and spoke a full hour; and continued on these discourses twice a day at the
two Exorcismes till the third of January; saying that he was abiding there by
Gods appointment (although constrained and compelled thereunto) to convert and
make known unto the world two magicians, especially him who was the Prince of
them and commanded all the Magicians of Spain, France, England, and Turkey, and
had Lucifer for his diuill. And further he added that God could no longer
endure the blasphemies and injuries, which they in the depth of night committed
against his majesty, and against the blessed Sacrament, and said, that upon
special causes God had destinated him unto this, and to be an instrument of
their conversion, which never yet took effect, because they had renounced God,
the merits of Christ Jesus, his blessed mother, all the Quires of Angels, and
all the blessed Saints: as also all confessions and the other Sacraments, all
preaching and exhortations of men, all motions and inspirations from God, and
al visible creatures which might any way lead them on to their conversion unto
God: the devil (said he) only excepted. Hence it is that God has made choice
by a great and new miracle of the devils themselves (said he) for the
manifestation and conversion of them.

In these discourses, he principally endeavored the conversion of Magdalene,
and did rudely lay to her charge in the presence of a great multitude of people
that stocked thither every day, that she was not entirely converted, that she
had a heart of stone, and that she did still practice and hold intelligence
with Beelzebub, having the day or the night before consented anew unto him.
Finally he told her before all the standers by whatsoever she did in that
Synagogue of witches: And hereupon she became so ashamed of her self,
especially when she heard him say she was a Magician, that she began to shed
many tears, and remained afterward a perfect Convert.

This once performed, Verrine began to inueigh against the Prince of the
Sorcerers, without naming him: but said, that he knew well enough what was
spoken of him, either by the report of wicked spirits, or himself coming
there in person to hold his synod, or by the speech of the lookers on, who
cried with a loud voice, That if he would not be converted he should be burnt
alive, yet he made slight of his conversion: and therefore one day he named
him aloud in the presence of much people, and wrote him a letter by the hand of
the Father the Exorcist; of which he made little reckoning.

The Aduent being finished, Father Michaelis parted from Aix after Christmas,
and came to Saint Baume, where he remained from the first of January till the
fifth of February, to try whether the two women were really possessed, or no:
because they spoke diversely of it, and himself had a desire to make trial
thereof, in regard they were in a Church of his Jurisdiction. So having
observed all, and being confident that the two girls were indeed possessed, as
also seeing what strange events had befallen, which were caused either by the
devils or the Magicians: when the time of Lent drew near he went again to
Aix, to continue there his preaching, and acquainted Monsieur du Vair chief
President of the Court of Parliament in Province, with every circumstance: and
told him that there were three distinct infallible essences or realities in
Magdalene, which when he found to be true, he together with the parliament of
Aix proceeded against the Magician, but obtained grace and pardon for Magdalene
from his Majesty, who had regard and compassion of her tender years and
considered that the seducements were very full of craft and subtlety.

The Acts that were taken day by day from the beginning of December until the
24 of April in the year 1611. do extend and enlarge more amply all these
strange events and passages, as also any new occurrence that happened until
that time. The said father Michaelis was present at all the acts and Exorcismes
four months together, to wit, January, February, March, and April, besides
that whereof he was an eye witness about the end of December,

A TABLE OF THE DIFFIculties that are propounded touching this History.
1. WHether it be lawful for a woman to discourse and reason in a Church? 2.
Whether it behooues us to believe all the Devil says? 3. He says that
Antichrist is borne. Whereupon it were good to be prepared least we should be
surprised, as those in the time of the Deluge. 4. Whether Solomon be damned,
and Nabuchodonosor saved? 5. The Devil seems to command the Exorcist. 6.
Whether Henry the great, the fourth of that name be saved? See the discourse of
S. Hierome upon the first chapter of the Prophet Nahum. 7. That the blessed
Sacrament has been trodden under foot. 8. Whether it be lawful to write
letters unto Saints in Paradise? 9. Whether the Devil may pray to God for to
save sinners? 10. The Devil says, that God did promise him a diminution of
his torments. 11. Whether there be not here an appearance of ambition.
THE REPORT AND EXPLICATION OF the passage of S. Jerome, upon the 1. chapter of
the Prophet Nahum, where it is said:
WHat do you imagine against God? he will make an utter destruction (that is
to say, he will bring all things to an end) affliction shall not rise up the
second time: or according to the Septuagints, He will not take vengeance twice
upon the same subject in affliction.

Hereupon S. Jerome discourses against the Marcionites, and other ancient
Heretics, who accused God in the old Testament of cruelty, and alleged the
examples of those that perished in the flood, of those that were stricken with
lightning from heaven, in Sodom and the neighboring towns: of the Egyptians
that were drowned in the red sea, and of a great multitude of people that died
in the desert.

To which he answers, that in all this there is more mercy then justice, for
he afflicted them with some temporal punishment, that they might not be
eternally damned. This is clear in the Prophet, who says plainly, that God
will not take vengeance twice on the same subject.

Then (says he) those that have been once punished, shall not be punished
afterward; otherwise it might occasion men to say that the Scripture is not
true, out subject to lies. We are then to say (adds Saint Jerome) that these
receper^nt mala in vita sua, and consequently not in the other world. He
groundeth this upon the saying of S. Peter, that many at the time of the flood
repented them of their sins, and went not immediately into hell fire, but
were put into a prison, from which Christ Jesus delivered them when he
descended into hell. The same also must be understood of the others above
named. After all this Saint Jerome makes a very apposite question, saying:
What shall we then judge of a Christian, whom another finds in adultery and
cutteth off his head? To this he answers in another manner, and says: No
man can prevent or anticipate the sentence of God our righteous Judge, thereby
to give impeachment unto the course of his vengeance, which he inflicteth
according to the measure of those punishments, that are by him decreed for our
great offenses.

He means, that if a man should pretend to delude God, and say, I will hinder
God from condemning of this sinner, and will punish him my self in this world,
he would much deceive himself. For the reason why God does not punish in the
other world, does presuppose that God himself in his providence has punished
it, and that he who receives castigation in this world, does whiles his
affliction is upon him repent him of his sins, and semblable unto the good
these, ask pardon in his punishment. On the other side, if a Christian be
beheaded in the very act of adultery, he has no leisure to make an
acknowledgment, and crave pardon of God; which is another case, and not
comprised in the sentence of the Prophet Nahum. Better it is (says S. Jerome)
that the transgressor be punished in this world; as he who cursed the people
of Israel, or he that gathered wood on the Sabbath day, for they had time to
acknowledge their sins, which yet were much more pardonable then the sin of
adultery.

From this discourse of S. Ieromes, some school divines have drawn this
conc^^sion, that if a malefactor that is condemned to die, receives his death
willingly because he has offended God, and in hope of the remission of his
sins, he is not to endure further pain in the other world: because there
can be no greater love in the world, then freely and willingly to die for God,
for the remission and satisfaction of the offense committed against his Majesty.

AN EXTRACT OF THE Kings Privilege.
BY the permission and privilege of the King, it is granted to Charles
Chastellaine, sworn Printer in the university of Paris, to print or cause to
be printed, to sell and to disperse this present book, entitled, The
admirable History of the possession and conversion of a penitent woman, seduced
by a Magician, compiled and disgested into order by the Reverend Father,
Michaelis, Doctor of Divinity, and Preacher. We do therefore sorbid all
Stationers, Printers, and all others of what estate, quality, or condition
soever they be, to print, or cause to be printed the said book, or to sell
and vent the same during the term of six years, upon pain of confiscation
of the said Copies, and an arbitrary amersement besides: as is more lagely
declared in the Letters Patents.

Given at Paris the third of August, in the year of Grace, 1612. And of our
Reign the third. By the King in his Counsel. DV FOS.

AN APOLOGY UNTO THE DOVBTS that are proposed touching this admirable History
of the possession and conversion of a Penitent woman, etc.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE Reader.
This book is a bare History, that makes true declaration of all the passages
which happened in the discovery of a Magician, and conversion of a seduced
sinner.

THe wicked Spirit that was the instrument of this discovery, called himself
Verrine, and declared that himself was a Devil, damned eternal, without hope
or redemption. This he well showed by his deeds, for from the month of
December until the end of April, he did what in him lay to stop and hinder
Louyse, whom he possessed from making an end of her confession, and from
receiving the blessed Sacrament: the like did Beelzebub by Magdalene.

God (says he) is not my redeemer, but my severe Judge. And adds, that it is
a wonder extraordinarily rare, that he is thus constrained to speak the truth;
yea it is more (says he) then to create the world, in that the Devils in this
constraint, resist as much they are able, and enter into dispute with God. He
also said, I was not sent by God to preach the Gospel, I should lie to say it;
but said that God had permitted him to enter into this body for his glory, and
for the conversion of many souls, especially of these two.

Both the Devils did discover and declare, all the enormous and gross
villainies that these Magicians committed in their cursed Synagogue. Verrine
further said, I speak unto you things tending to your salvation: take and make
use of that which is good (as if a wicked Priest should give you good
exhortations) and if you will not, I tell you, you shall not be constrained
unto it.

These particulars with many others of a semblable nature, will give an easy
check to those apprehensions, that should misconceiue them to be Angels of
light: for they do plainly appear what they are, to wit true Devils. And
consequently, in this regard there is no danger of being abused, by those which
speak in persons possessed, because we know they are very Devils, which in
these cases we must always presuppose as a foundation. The strange torments
and gestures which do appear beyond the strength of man in the bodies of those
that are possessed, do prove also the same unto us.

This being presupposed, it remains now to clear up some difficulties that
were propounded since the impression of this book: which not withstanding
consistunt in facto tantum, and not in any points of our faith. And although I
had for the most part breefly swept away these doubts in my Annotations in the
margent, yet because I will give no disrellish unto any, I will make a longer
explication of the same: always supposing that which I have noted in the 260.
page upon the day of Saint John the Evangelist, that touching the predictions
to come, time will make the truth or false-hood thereof to appear haereafter,
and touching those things that are abstruse and hidden, we must in the mean
time hold us to that, which is decreed and taught by the Church.

THE DOVBTS BY SOME PROPOVNDED Touching the History comprised in this book.
THE I. DOUBT.
Whether it be lawful that a woman should speak and preach in the Church,
since that Saint Paul forbids a woman to speak there?

THE ANSWER.
THat a woman possessed should speak in the Church, or rather the Devil by
her mouth, during the time of Exorcismes, is no new thing in the Church of God;
and the fresh remembrance of the woman of Laon that was possessed in the face
of the whole Court, and of diverse Prelates, does give ample attestation of the
same, Boleze, 1566. Bartholomaeus Fayus praeses Paristensis in energumenico.
Hadrianus Ho^^tadius sermon. 52. de Eucharistia. Johannes Lorinus in Acta Apost.
cap. 5. and 16.
which History was word for word so largely written, that it arises to a just
volume; and many grave personages have alleged the same, so that diverse
Preachers made no scruple to make mention thereof in the Pulpit as of a great
miracle, sent from God, to confirm the Catholic faith, which began then to
fluctuate and waver in many, and also to convert Heretics unto the truth.
This book has bin seen and received in all the quarters of Christendom, as
some have observed: yet neither Bishops, nor the Sorbone, nor any University
did ever show any disgust they took in the publication of the same, nay it
has bin found, that it has wrought good effect in the propagation and
advancement of the faith. Hieron in vita Hilarions.
Saint Jerome thought it no scorn to write the History of a woman possessed
through witchcraft, together with the manner thereof, and the questions of the
Exorcist Saint Hilarion, and the answers made by the Devil. And in our time a
Nun of Millane that was possessed, Joan. Lorin. in Act. Apostol. cap. 16.
did in like manner discourse out of the Scripture, as ours do in this History.

As for the matter of preaching which some may here conceive, the History it
self will thwart all such imaginations; for she never went into the Pulpit,
and the Devil himself did oftentimes protest that he was no Preacher, saying
that if God should command him to go into the Pulpit to declare who this
Magician is, he must have taken upon him the shape and semblance of a man,
because it would not befitt a woman to do it.

THE II. DOUBT.
Whether we are to believe all the Devil says?

THE ANSWER.
IT is a note worthy of observation, that he never said it was necessary to
believe him, but when he spoke out of the Gospe^l and the Scripture, and then
he sharply rebuked all Heretics and unbelievers: but when he speaks
otherwise, he plainly says that he constrains and tyeth none to believe him
as appears in the 249. page, about the end of the Act taken upon Christmas
day.

THE III. DOUBT.
He says that Antichrist is borne.

ANSWER.
THis has bin said many times by the Doctors, as by Saint Gregory and others;
In registro,
and about 200. years after, D. Antonius in Historia.
Saint Vincent Ferrier did say it, and preach it, and does assure us of the
same in the Treatise he made De Antichristo, which was verified in John Husse
burned at the Council of Constance, until which time the said Saint Vincent
lived: And this John Husse was the first original and sourse of heresies both
of the age past and of this now present. Quoniam Antichristi multi sunt, and
Antichristus i^m venit, says Saint John. And who knows what God prepares
and storeth up for the heinous transgressions of our age.

THE IIII. DOUBT.
Whether Solomon be damned, and Nabuchodonosor saved?

ANSWER.
THe Annotation which I have made in the margent, does make known that this is
a Problem in the Church, yet Saint Augustine holds he is damned upon the
126. Psalm, and in many other passages, as Bellarmine notes 1. tom. lib. 1.
Controuers. cap. 5. who is of the same opinion, together with Lyra upon the
second of Kings the 7. Chapter. In Decretis de Poenitentia.
Touching Nabuchodonosor Saint Augustine does oppose him directly against
Pharaoh, and magnifies the justice of God in Pharaohs reprobation, and his
mercy in Nabuchodonosors salvation, although both (says he) were equal in
condition and dignity, and in the greatness of their sins. The repentance of
the latter appears in the Scripture: And Epiphanius reports that
Nabuchodonosor after he recovered his wits, Lib. de interitu Prophetarum, in
Danielem.
in all his life after did never eat flesh nor drink wine; and was advised to
do this by the Prophet Daniel.

THE V. DOUBT.
The Devil seems to command the Exorcist, saying to him, take the stole and
exorcise me.

THE ANSWER.
Here is to be noted, that immediately after it is said, command me; and he
does oftentimes protest, that he neither can, nor will do any thing without his
command. In which he shows, that he speaks not after the manner of one
that commands, but of one that desires and would be commanded. Example
hereof we have in the Gospel, where it is said: Sieijcis nos hinc, mitte nos
in gregem porcorum: and ait Jesus, Ite, Matthew. 8. and Marc. 5.
where it is clear, thaty word Mitte is not imperatiuely spoken, but by way of
deprecation. Athanas^n vita Anthonij.
Saint Athanasius reports, that when the Devil persuaded S. Anthony to pray
to God, he prayed unto him, not because the Devil said it, but because it was
his duty, and that the Devil therein did speak agreeable unto the word of God.

THE VI. DOUBT.
Whether Henry the great, the fourth of that name be saved?

THE ANSWER.
THe Devil does say it, and repeat it three several times in diverse places.
And whereas it may be objected, that this may bring in a bad example, the
answer is clear, that contrariwise it is a marvelous example unto us against
Sorcerers, since that God does so freely and largely pardon those, who are not
hasty to give credit unto their abominations.

Nolite iudicare, etc. Dijs non detrahes, Principi populitui non maledices.
And because it is said, that it was likely that his death was a kind of
Martyrdom; we are to interpret all doubtful and indifferent things to the
best, as we are commanded in the Gospel, especially in behalf of our Kings
and Princes. We must suppose that before his Assassinate, a Germane
Astrologian did ^oretell the day of his death, and he was afterward advertised
thereof by others. We must also suppose, that by the excellency of his
judgment, and through the great faith which he had in God, and by the
instructions of his ghostly fathers, he had this faith and knowledge, as to
think it a grievous sin to believe iudiciarie Astrologers, or Magicians. All
this being by us supposed, as every true Frenchman and indeed every good
Catholic ought, it is easy to resolve this difficulty, that his death was a
kind of Martyrdom; since is a man shall suffer death for any virtue be it
moral or divine, with faith, it is always a Martyrdom. Beati qui
persecutionem patiuntur propter iustiriam, quoniam ipsorum est regnum calorum.
As for example, if some or other had foretold Joseph, that unless he gave
consent unto the lascivious desires of his Mistres, he should as he went out of
the house be murdered. If this had happened, Joseph had bin a true Martyr,
because he rather made election to expose his life to danger, then to offend
God through incontinencie. Much more, when such a mischief as this befalls a
man, because he would not transgress the first commandment of the Law, which
is the waightiest and of most importance amongst them all; Hoc maximum est and
primum mandatum.
the observation of which is most frequently commanded in the law, and the
transgression the most severely threatened and avenged. This doctrine is the
decision of Saint Thomas, 2.2. quaest. 124. art. 5.
who concludes that if a man suffer death for any virtue whatsoever, it is a
true Martyrdom, And he all eageth the example of Saint John Baptist, who was a
true Martyr, in that he did defend continency against the incestuousnesse of
Herod. Apud Theodoretum, in hist. Ecclesi^st.
In like manner was that good Monk declared by a Council to be a Martyr,
because in running betwixt two fencers to part them, he was slain by them.
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in 1. ad Thessal.
Saint Chrysostom does precisely say, that he which may be healed of some
malady by enchantments, and refuses all such help, least he might offend God,
and had rather dye, then have the use of the same, in this case (says he) he
is a Martyr. Furthermore Cardinal Caietane commenting upon the abouecited
article of Saint Thomas, says, that if a man be slain to avoid a venial
sin, that death is a Martyrdom; for it chanced unto him, because he would
not offend God, and because he desired to support virtue. Those that would
play the Philosophers and say; the deceased King called not on the name of God
in the last period of his life, let them know that he might do that so suddenly
and secretly, that none about him might perceive it, much less understand it.
How easily might he lift up his heart and inward parts unto God, and that in a
moment of time, especially for that his precedent desire might minister quick
assistance heereunto; because that day he powered out his prayers unto God,
more particularly and for a longer space, then he accustomed to do. Besides,
that honorable company which were with him in his Caroche, do show that he
went not surcharged with any wicked project or purpose.

THE VII. DOUBT.
It tends little to edification, where it is said, that the blessed Sacrament
was trodden under feet.

ANSWER.
I Have cleared this very largely in the Epistle to the Reader. Besides the
miracle which followed thereupon did much condemn Sorcerers, and tended to the
edification of good Christians. It was further necessary to touch upon this
point, as well for the integrity of this History, as also because the said
profanation was already published, and all the heretic ministers of
Xaintogne and Languedoc made their best advantages from the same, as may be
seen in the said Epistle. The But and aim of this History is, to declare how
much God is offended with such unhallowed and sacrilegious persons, as will
appear through the whole frame and body of this History. I should desire, that
the historians in such cases would imitate the sacred Scripture, which never
sets before us any profanation of those things that are sanctified, but it
presently subioynes a miracle, as may be seen in the History of the sons of
Heli, and of their death; of the Philistines profaning the Arc, and their
plagues: of the Bethsamites who were too curious to behold it, and the fire
that fell from heaven upon them: of the two sons of Aaron, Nabad and Abiud,
and the fire that went out from their Censers and destroyed them: of Choran and
Dathan taking their Censers, and the earth opening under them: of king Ozias
offering incense on the Altar, and of the leprosy where with he was stricken.
In the new Testament, of the prophaners of the Temple, and the whippes
wherewith they were chased away, Hieron, in Matthew.
which Saint Jerome takes to be a great miracle: of Ananias and Saphira, and
of their sudden death: and to come nearer to our purpose, of Judas profaning
the blessed Eucharist, and of his death the morrow after, with his belly
breaking asunder in the middle. Saint Paul was well practiced in this, who when
he had told the Corinthians of this profanation, he presently sets before
their consideration those, that for this cause were dead, sick, and feeble, by
the vengeance of the just judgment of God. And it is a clear truth, that at
sundry other times things sacred have been made profane, which the holy Ghost
passes over in silence, because there insued no miracle ^hereupon: which when
it happens may edify as much or more, then the profanation can give
occasion of scandal. The same is held by S. Cyprian, and S. Gre^ory in his
Dialogues. Cyprian. Sermon. de lapsis.
To this purpose may be alleged ^he example of the Donatists, that gave the
blessed Sa^rament unto dogs, who running presently mad, tur^ed upon them and
tore them in pieces. As also of him ^ho came in to the city of Be^ith, recited
in the works of S. Athanasius: and of him of Paris, whose marks ^re yet in
the Church of Bulliettes, in Latin, Ecclesia Do^ini Bullientis, the blessed
Sacrament being thrown ^^to a boiling cauldron. Another miracle is to be seen
(...) the holy Chapel at Diion. Besides the blessed Eucha^^st is more
profaned, when it enters into a soul ^^at is polluted with the infections
of sin, then it can ^e said to be in this place.

THE VIII. DOUBT.
How and for what reason did Magdalene by the advice of her Confessor, write
one letter to the blessed Virgin, and another to the glorious S. Magdalene?

ANSWER.
IT is a very profitable way which our spiritual fathers ^ do use, to instruct
and inure those that have any know^edge, to holy exercises and meditations; and
by this ^eans they become ready and expert therein. As a schole-^aster
commands his scholar to write letters to his father or mother, to the King or
to the Pope, not that he would have the letters sent, but that his scholar
should ^y this gain some skill and ability: for it is one thing to write, and
another thing to send a letter. So many in our ^ge have with great devotion
dedicated the epistles of their books to the blessed Virgin, not with an intent
to send them, but to give contentment to their devotion. As for example the
Epistle of the Book touching cases of conscience made by Friar Benedictus, and
of the Book of Euangelical demonstrations upon the 3. Mary's, made by another
Friar. The same was also practiced by the Emperor Theodosius, who wrote a
letter to S. Chrysostom, Lib. 14. Eccles hist. cap. 43.
that was dead more then 30. years before: which letter is to be seen in
Nicephorus.

Touching the correction of this letter which was made by the Devil, we are to
conceive, that he was enforced by God, to busy himself in the conversion of
Magdalene, as is by experience verified unto us. There is no difficulty of
this, for it is apparent, that a spirit is more sharpe-sighted and peircing,
and more particularly familiar with men's faults and imperfections then any man
can be either with his own, or with others.

THE IX. DOUBT.
How the Devil could pray to God for the conversion of the Magician,
presenting to God the Father the merits of the death and passion of his Son,
of the blessed Virgin, and of all the Saints of Paradise?

ANSWER.
WHen a good or bad Spirit does put motions into a man, S. Thom. 1.2. quaest.
1. art. 1.
if he yield his consent and does operate with them, then is the action said
to be the man's and not the Spirits; because a voluntary action proceeding from
free will, is an action appertaining to a man. When it is said, that a Spirit
did ask of God to be a Spirit of lies in the mouths of the Prophets of Achab,
although this lying spirit, 3. Reg. 22.
did speak by the mouth of Zedekias and other false Prophets, yet the action
of prophesying falsely, is attributed to Zedechias and his companions. In like
manner, when the wicked Spirit came to Saul, and made him throw his spear at
David, 1. Reg. 18.
^his action is Saul's and not the wicked Spirits, because Saul did consent and
work with him. Inuasit spiritus Dei malus Saul and prophetabat in medio domus
suae, tenebatque lancea and misit eam, etc.
So when the good Angel came upon Sampson, by whose force and ^ower he slew a
thousand Philistines with the iaw-bone of an ass, the Scripture does
appropriate this victori^us action unto Sampson holding the iaw-bone in his
^and. When the same good spirit made Elizabeth to declare the praises of the
Virgin, the Gospel does make the action to be blessed Elizabeth's, exclamauit
and dixit. The same may be said of S. John Baptist, who leapt for ^oy in his
mothers belly, because he did cooperate and ^eeld his consent thereunto, by
his precedent free will, ^s many of the fathers have observed. In the same
sense ^oth Saint Augustine and others interpret that sen^ence of S. Paul,
Spiritus postulat pro vobis gemitibus in^enarrabilibus, postulare nos facit and
gemere. For they are the actions of the man, not of the holy Spirit, but as he
inspireth him. And when it is said that God hardened Pharaohs heart, the
interpretation hereof is two fold. First that it was God himself immediately
that did it, by withdrawing his grace: secondly, that it was by Gods
permission, who suffered Satan to tempt him even to obduratnesse of heart,
without control or hindrance. Howsoever it be, all the evil actions of
Pharaoh that proceeded from this hardness of heart, and even that too, are
attributed to Pharaoh, Indurauit Pharaoh cor suum, says the Scripture; and the
reason hereof is, because he delighted and gave his consent unto this
hardness of heart.

Thus fared it with the Devil that possessed Louyse, when God by his absolute
power (as the Devil himself said, and often repeated that it was a very great
miracle) constrained the Devil to moo^e the tongue of Louyse, and to imprint
in her imagination all which she should say, Louyse giving her consent unto it,
out of a longing she had to convert the Magician and Magdalene. All these
prayers were the actions of Louyse and not of the Devil but as an inftigatour.
Peradventure God would have it so, to demonstrate the more how grievous the
offense of the said Magdalene was; she at that time sending forth hideous
yell's and cries with all the force she had for the space of an hour, till
she had lost her voice; as also to show how much prayer and merit must be
employed in the conversion of a miserable man, so far banished from the
presence of God. And although the wicked Spirit did sometimes speak by
Parenthesis in his own person, to declare that he was the author and moouer of
this discourse, yet this lets not, but that those other actions might be
humane, she working with them, and not these Parentheses. And as we have
noted upon the passage in the 292. page, the act of the second of January and
the 275. page in the act of the 29. of December, she afterward said, that she
did labor and consent unto all those prayers, as if it had proceeded from her
own proper and first motion. Which being so, there is no doubt but she might
present the oblation of Jesus Christ to God his Father, as all Christians that
are present at Mass do or ought to do. Pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui
tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis pro se suisque omnibus, etc. Heereunto I
add, that of S. Thomas cited before in our Epistle, who says, that when a
young man is tempted by the Devil to enter into the orders of religion, who
hopes by this means either to overthrow him, or by him to spoil others, and
that this young man does then pray to God to give him grace to be received,
this action is meritorious and good, as being a humane action, proceeding from
a good intention, although the Devil be the author thereof. And if when the
Devil straineth to put his first design in execution, he do yet resist him,
then gains he a double conquest upon his enemy. The same may be said of all
other good works, as giving of Alms, or hearing the word of God. Actiones
sunt suppositorum.

THE X. DOUBT.
The Devil says, that God promised him a diminution of his pains.

ANSWER.
THe essential torment of the Devils, which is the deprivation of the sight of
God, and is the greatest of all others, together with the punishment allotted
unto them from the beginning, and proportionable unto their first sin, cannot
be subject to augmentation or diminution, as may those accidental pains be,
which are often written and mentioned in Exorcismes, Augeo tibi poenas. The
doctors of Saint Ieromes time were of opinion, Hierom super 5. cap. Matthew.
that evil spirits have new punishments ^nflicted on them, as often as they
offended God, and these punishments are temporal: as parallel heereunto,
there is an accidental joy in the good Angels at the conversion of a sinner,
which is lost again, when he ^eturneth and falls into a relapse, but their
essential joy ^emaineth for ever. Besides God at the last judgment will
augment their pains. Vt, Marc. 5. Matthew. 8.2. Pet. 2.
quid venisti ante tempus ^orquere nos? and tradidit cruciandos in iudicium
reser^ari: although there should be nothing else done unto ^em, then the
shutting and penning of them up in hell, being now at more liberty in the air.
And when a ^ood Angel binds a wicked Spirit (as in Tobias and in ^e
Revelation) then is his pain increased, Tob. 8. Apoc. 20.
and when (...) is loosed, then is it diminished and taken away. So ^all
Lucifer be served at the end of the world, Soluetur athanas iam alligatus.
There is here no doubt then, if ^e attribute this unto the unlimited power of
God, by which he is able to do all things, and of this power does (...) Devil
expressly speak, as we have before observed.

THE XI. DOUBT.
There is a show and semblance of ambition, by reason certain praises are
bestowed in common, and some given more particularly: which might well be
spared.

ANSWER.
Touching this point, there are two fortes of learned men, which have said
their opinions of it. The first being led by the direction of their knowledge,
answer candidely in three words, which for this purpose are as good as a
thousand. It is a History. The others not regarding their knowledge (by which
they might easily understand, that in the composure of a History, the truth
must be purely told and written, and must neither wrappe up in silence,
reprehensions nor praises, vices nor virtues) conclude, that it had been
better to have spared them. Notwithstanding Moses in his books, having regard
unto the rules of a History, did otherwise, even when he spoke of his own
person. The same does David in his Psalms, Job in his History, Saint Paul in
his Epistles. Truth it is, that I would have pared this off from the History,
but those that were there present did withstand it, protesting that they would
then declare openly, that the History was not sincere and full: which yet I
wrote not, neither was I present at all these acts. The History was given me
in Latin and French, and may word for word be justified; yet did I qualify
and moderate this in the margent, and said, that this might seem to sent of
flattery: and for fear least it should be misconceiued, Act. of the 27. of
December. page 260.
that this was supposititiall. I afterward subioyned, Notwithstanding this
has been said. Concerning the Trinity which he speaks of, himself makes
explanation of it in these words. When the creatures do conform their wills
unto the will of God, then have they not but one will with God. And this is
agreeable to Saint Paul, who faith, Qui adhaeret Deo vnus spiritus est cum eo.
And Christ himself witnesses the same when speaking generally of all
Christians he says John 17. Vt ipsi in nobis vnum sint. But neither my self
nor any of ours do arrogate or lay claim to this, especially I who am a poor
and miserable sinner before God. Men may judge whether or no I have beeue
ambitious of mine own glory, when in the Annotation which I have set down on
that point, where the Devil does mention father Lawrent, and father Michaelis
for preachers, without speaking word of others that were very famous in that
kind, I have added these words. He speaks unto the capacity of the simple
people that were there present, because that these two did preach much in the
cities of Province. Many will bear me witness, that I forbad all Odes and
Epigrammes to be inserted in the beginning of the Book, Ribadeneira in her
life and works. Ioachin Abbas in Hieremiam.
and I know not how the Printer was won unto it, vn^esse through the
importunacy of some. As for that which concerns the religious orders in
common, the mother Therrese and the Abbot Ioachim have foretold as much,
saying, that about the end of the world two orders should be reformed in the
Church, before the coming of Antichrist, and all the other orders should
follow, Postea omnes ordines reformabuntur. Touching particular men (one of
them being father Romillon Priest of the Doctrine) they are 66. years of age,
and this other not much short of it, so that it may be hence euinced, that
their best rely is now on God, and that both their age and condition of calling
will free them from any touch of worldly vanity: and God he knows, that this
History was merely pub^ished for his glory, for the supportation of the
Catho^ick Church, and for to stop the mouths of Heretics, who wrested and
abused the depositions of the Magician, that to our great disgust were put
forth in print; which if it should pass unchecked, it might add obstinacy to
the one, and be a means to seduce the others. Therefore it was needful to
understand the course of this History, which is the true antidote against those
cursed depositions. Those that do yet object, that Heretics will take their
advantage thereof, let them read with diligence my Epistle to the Reader, and
they shall perceive that nothing makes for them. To conclude, this History is
true, to which nothing has been added, and in which nothing is contained,
either against says or manners: against the authority of Church or State; no
more then is in the collection of the Exorcismes of the woman of Laon.

The reason why God has permitted this wonder, may be on the one part the
unbelief of men, and on the other part the wrath of God for their unbelief.
Saint Chrysostom infers this conclusion against the Athiests of his time,
Homil. 13. in Matthew.
upon the confessions which the Diuils made, and their rehearsal of the
tortures which they suffered in hell. This proceeded not (says he) from their
own accord, for their pride that always swells and never abateth, is too
repugnant thereunto; but it is God that constrains them to do this, for the
further conviction of Athiests, who believe not the word of God preached, nor
yet the Scriptures. We are likewise taught by the Scripture, that when God is
wroth with us, he makes men to understand his indignation, four several
ways. First when he sends them cruel and tyrannous Princes: as in the 13.
of O see it is said, I will give thee Kings in my displeasure, and Rulers in my
indignation. The second (which is an argument of greater auger) is, when he
suffers evil and corrupt Pastors to instruct the people either in doctrine
(by permitting them to believe lies, because they would not hearken unto the
truth) or in manners, as he does threaten them in the 14. of Ezechiel, and in
other places. So Caiphas by prophesying amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, and
inducing them to crucify Christ Jesus, gave as it were ^ signal of their
ensucing ruin. The third (which is a greater demonstration of wrath then the
former) is, when the people are taught by Magicians and Sorce^ers. Thus did
Balaam prophecy amongst the Moabites, and concluded that they should be
totally ^destroied. Et ^onteret duces Moab. The fourth (which is the greatest
^f them all) is, when the Devil is permitted to give intructions unto men, not
by an immediate operation of is own (for he is an invisible spirit) but by the
bodies of those that he does possess. And in this manner (says S.
Chrysostom) God does convict and threaten the A^heists, who will not believe
hell fire. And thus did the Devils cry against the Pharisees and unbelieving
Jews, that Christ Jesus was the Son of God.

So that from this History we may draw three obser^able points: the conversion
of a sinner, by whom others of like condition may take example: the dete^tion
of a cursed Magician; and the just wrath of God against those, who will not
believe or follow that which is taught them by their Pastors and Preachers.
But he that will make use of the four signs above mentioned, shall thereby
escape the displeasure of God, and shall acquire a full measure of reward
before him. If then we do thus conceive of this History, it can not choose but
minister much edification unto our con^ciences.

We are further to consider, that God as the Creator and sovereign Lord o^
all, does employ both good and ^ad Angels, about any thing that may tend to his
glory and the execution of his good pleasure, be it by means ^rdinary or
extraordinary. Of this second we have an ^xample in the Scripture; It is
certain, that the least ^ngell in Paradise, is more potent then the greatest
Devil in hell; as the Devil himself does precisely con^esse in this History:
yet did God suffer the Devil to re^ist and stand in affront with Michael the
Prince of Angels, about the burying of the body of Moses. And being not able to
stop and vanquish him, he had no other remedy but to fly to God, and to
pray him to lay ^is command on Satan. Imperet tib^ Deus, increpet te Deus,
Satan: especially in matter of justice, whereof the Devils are the
executioners. Thus when God would try Job in his justice, and cause all his
cattle to be taken from him, all his children to be destroyed, his houses to
be thrown to the ground, and fire to descend from heaven and consume all his
substance, then spoke he friendly to Satan, as is written at large in the
book of Job. And when he would declare his justice upon Achab, and had
decreed to let him perish in battle for his transgressions, he spoke unto a
wicked Spirit, and commanded him to go and execute his pleasure. Now because
this History is an act of his justice against one of the most impious and
cursed Magicians that ever was, as appeared in his end, and that it was not a
woman that divulged this, but the Devil himself called Verrine, who published
the same in her: and further, in regard that God would show an act of justice
upon the converted sinner, as the insufferable torments (wherewith for the
space of fix months she was in all men's sight miserably afflicted) do very
well testify; it is not to be wondered at, if herein he employed two
executioners of his justice. Let us then give God leave to do whatsoever
seems best unto him, and not dispute thus against his powerfulness, and
manifest good pleasure.

CONCLUSION.
We ought not to believe the Devil; yet when he is compelled to discourse and
relate a truth, then we should sear and tremble, for it is a token of the
wrath of God.

ERRATA.
Page re. line 13. read, The Dominican father. p. 11. l. 21. read, refractaric.
p. 12. 27. read, contentations. p. 18. 1. 24. them, read, it. p. 38. l. 30.
read, ouuert. p. 82. 2. it not so, r. it is not so. p. 87. l. 16. in margin,
from any, r. from him. p. 96. l. vlt. or them, r. him. p. 97. l. 15. leave out
( and further) p. 103. l. 3. for them, r. him, 105. l. 19. for the, r. thy. p.
116. l. 10. for part, r. heart. p. 137. l. 27. r. to the blessed. 143. l. 6.
for these, r. these. p. ibid. l. 30. r, things. p. ibid. l. 36. r. store. p.
146. l. 5. r. ^0000. p. 152. l. 12. r. in a good way. p. 169. l. 18. as like,
r. like. p. 172. l. 11. r. seared. 174. l. 32. leave, r. live. p. 189. l. 26.
r. equal. p. 198. l. 8. redress, r. address. p. 216. ^4, r. ^auourably. p.
219. l. 18. in margin, for this Saint, r. the same. p. 223. l. 13. or his, r.
this. p. 235. l. 32. forwhom, r. which, p. 245. l. 34. questioned, r. question*
246. l. 1. r. domini. p. 252. l. 31. r. follow. p. 257. l. 17. r. lessoned. p.
285. l. 35. ascent. p. 355. l. 2. r. ^^^nuisibly. p. 361. l. 13. r. Thrones. p.
387. l. 15. the portment, deportment.

Errata in the discourse of Spirits.
Page 12. line r. erant, read, erant. p. 17. l. 5. this, r. his. Ibid. p. 25.
leave out, ^t. p. 50. l. 9. Spiritum, r. Spirituum. p. 78. l. 24. do, r. did.

AA


THE ADMIRABLE HISTORY OF A PENITENT woman converted, who was seduced by a
Magician in the Country of Province in France: and of the end of the said
Magician.
The acts of the 27. of November. 1610.
THE reverend Father and Friar Sebastian Michaelis, Prior of the Covent of S.
Magdalen at S. Maximin, of the order of preaching Friars, having sent Father
Francis Domptius (aboue-named) to Saint Baume, a place of penitence of the ^id
Saints: about the same time also (which was the ^7. of November, 1610.) there
came thither from Saint Maximin, by Father Michaelis his appointment, Fa^er
Romillon, and Father Francis Billet, together with Magdalene de Demandouls, and
Louyse Capeau. And it ^as held expedient, that the said Magdalene should ^ere
soiourne, especially on S. Andrews day, to make ^ustrate the menaces of the
Devils, that threatened to ^rrie her away that day, according to the compact
^ade betwixt them two years before, as the said Mag^lene confessed.

Being come thither, and she having been formerly ^xorcised in diverse places,
as at nostre Dame de Grace, (...) S. Maximin, and at Aix, by the space of many
mo^eths; in which affair the said Father Francis Billet did exercise much
patience in himself, and charity toward the said Magdalene, yet was never
able to draw the Devils, who did possess her, to speak one word; upon the
28.29. and 30. of November, the said Father Francis Billet began again to
undergo the office of an Exorcist at S. Baume; endeavoring to make the Devils
to speak. In the mean time, by reason of some occurrence of business, it
behooved the said Father Francis to be absent for certain days from S. Baume.
Upon whose departure (which was the 3. of December) the said Magdalene was very
carefully watched; for in the mean space, especially upon S Andrews day in
the evening, it chanced that the wicked spirits would sensibly and with great
violence have carried her away, Magdalene carried up by Devils.
even when she was in the holy place of Penitence, whither she was led to
prevent the worst; as also the night before they lifted her up very high from
the ground, and would have carried her out at a window, which is in the highest
place of the Quire at S. Baume. In so much that Father Romillon not being able
to hold her, was forced to call for aid, and to contest with the Devils and
say, She is ours.

The 3. of December Father Romillon and the said Father Francis Billet before
his departure, did entreat Father Francis Domptius the Dominican, that he
would make some Exorcismes for Father Romillon, who by reason of his age was to
undergo that labor; assuring him that Father Michaelis would auow the fact,
because he had taken him as his assistant, in his proceedings of Inquisitour,
to annihilate and break off all contracts between the Devil and Magdalene.
To which Father Domptius then answered very coldly, because he had been
formerly traveled and wearied with the pressure of the like charge.

Notwithstanding upon the 6. of December he began to conjure Louyse, First
speech of Verrine.
and at the first Exorcisme one of the Devils that was in her body, began to
speak. Then the said Dominican Father commanded him to worship God, The act of
adoration of the said Verrine.
and to bow himself in the adoration of him, and to do things of the same
nature, which he readily did to the great astonishment of the Exorcist, who had
upon another occasion labored three weeks, to make a Devil called (...) to
perform an action of that kind.

The 7 and 8. of December, upon the continuance of the same Exorcismes, twice a
day, the Devils were asked and readily answered, that there were three of them
in the body of Louyse, and that they resided there by means of witchcraft:
Possession by witchcraft.
the first of them named himself Verrine, the second Gresil, and the last
Sonneillon: and that all three were of the third order, to wit in the rank of
Thrones.

During this time, Verrine one of the Devils in Louyse gave a sign of his
being in her body, and it was this: As the Dominican (who had been now an
Exorcist for the space of three weeks) had after Euen-song finished his
Rosarie, (as is the manner of the order of S. Dominicke) he did immediately
present three prayers unto three Saints, to the Virgin Mary the mother of God,
to S. Magdalene, and to S. Dominicke; and then did sensibly feel a marvelous
power, devotion, and attention in himself, so that he was amazed from whence
such incitements might come, and endeavored by all means to slake the force of
them, and to know the reason of this strange motion. But he could not find the
reason of it, until he affronted the devil with an Exorcisme, and so
demanded of him, what were the Saints that did ^ost disquiet him? Who answered,
they are those whom thou do with such ardencie of affection pray unto. The
Exorcist asked him, whether it were not Saint Paul (unto whom he ever bore a
particular devotion). The Exorcist tries the devil.
The devil said, no; but it is the Virgin mother of God, Magdalene, and
Dominicke: yet had not the Exorcist ^poken a word of this to any person
whatsoever.

The acts of the 8. of December, which was the 4. feast of the second week of
Aduent, and the day of the conception of our Lady. 1610.
This day in the evening, the said Dominican Father began to exorcise; and upon
the entry unto the same, Verrine began to speak in this manner following, to
the honor and praise of the sacred Mother of God, saying:

We are to take these and the following discourses, as we take the discourses
of Balaam the Inchanter, and of Caiphas that prophesied of Christ Jesus; not of
their own voluntary or proper motion. S. Athanasius faith, that when the
devil persuaded S. Anthony to pray unto God, he prayed unto him, not because
the di uell said it, but because he spoke agreeable unto the word of God
Athanasan vit. Anthonij. Thus we believe the devils saying, in Mat 8. Mark. 5.
Luke 8. that Christ Jesus was the Messiah, and the Son of the living God; not
because they said it, but because they were enforced to speak according to the
Scriptures. They fear and tremble (says S. James) under the puissant arm of
God, who serves his turn with them as he pleases Dragons and Serpents, fire
and hail, do all work the will of God, says David, Psalm. 148.
Exclamation upon the conception of our Lady.
. Mary is the goodliest creature that ever the eternal Father created, to my
great grief do I speak it. She stands incessantly before her son making
intercession for you: she shows him the womb that bare him, the breasts that
gave him suck, and all the services that ever she did for him in the world.
True it is that she is so fair, that the devils themselves would endure all
the tortures of the world only to have a sight of her beauty; but they could
never have the grace to see her in glory, neither have they deserved, or ever
shall deserve the same, by reason of their excessive pride and arrogancy. She
is so amiable, so excellent, and so rich in all perfections, that neither
Angel, nor Archangell, no not the Seraphins themselves, can be equal matches
unto Mary in beauty. She is rich and a Queen together, so that it were an
idleness to demand, whether such a one as she be able to bestow on those that
beg it of her: so is she wise, and does therefore know all your necessities.
Besides, she is merciful, and is ever in the presence of her Son suing and
saying: Son, take compassion upon these miserable sinners, for many times
they understand not what they ask. And in this (said he) they are like the
mother of the sons of Zebedeus, who prayed that one of her sons might sit
at the right hand, and the other at the left, not knowing that she wronged her
self in speaking so, and that those that were on the left hand should be
damned. But your God, who knows better then you what is needful for you,
will answer, You know not what you ask.

You will tell me, that this is no new thing which I utter, it is true, but
this is new, that the devil does speak these things.

I say then, that it is good to love, serve, and honor the most blessed and
most worthy mother of God; for all those that are carried with a full and
perfect zeal unto her, they shall never, it is true, it is true, it is true,
they shall never, never ( O Mary thou sacred mother of God) be put to
confusion. The devil himself by the coaction of thy Son is forced to honor
thee, and to call thee the mother of God, a thing unaccustomed to be done by
devils: for they call thee either plain The contempt of the devils toward our
Lady.
Mary, without any accession of title, as did the Jews in contempt, or they
name thee by some other names of blasphemy in great indignation: but never
before by this so excellent an attribute, as the blessed mother of God. And
using these words, you say all that may be said, of a Lady, in honoring her
with the title of the Mother of God; then which no dignity is more excellent,
none more venerable.

He limiteth this afterward, saying, next to the humanity of thy Son.
She is also all in all; for she is the daughter of the Father, the mother of
the son, the spouse of the holy Ghost, and the peerless temple of the
sacred Trinity. She is besides, sister unto the Angels, yea even their Queen
and Princess. I say further, that next after the blessed humanity of Christ,
she has her Quire alone, as one whose excellence admits no partners or
equals to keep her company. And in that she is the only and most matchless
mother of God, it stands with reason, that he who is clothed with all power,
wisdom, and bounty, should mould and fashion her to admiration: neither are
we to wonder that it is so.

Many there are that have a will to do good, but their impotencie and
disability makes them come short of their intendments: others have knowledge,
to do good, but by reason of some bodily impeachments, or for want of grace
they cannot employ it thereunto: for the devils have knowledge, but it steedeth
them very little. But Exclamation in the praises of God.
thou (speaking of God) it is true, I speak it constrainedly, and not out of
affection, thou art omnipotent, all-knowing, and everlastingly good, who art
able to make out of nothing whatsoever seems good unto thee. Notwithstanding
it is true, there are those that for all this are ungrateful.

During these and the like discourses so full of use and observation, the
sister This was Magdalenes Guardian, a woman admirably virtuous, whom we have
beheld ravished in a tra^ce, as soon as she had with tears received the
blessed Sacrament.
Catherine of France was sent for, and brought with her Magdalene that was
possessed, that she might know the rare and transcendent praises of the blessed
mother of God (for it was held unmeet that There was observed a great hatred
betwixt the two possessed, proceeding from the devils that were contrary.
Magdalene should be present at the exorcising of Louyse.) And being come
thither and seated on the first step of the place of the holy Penitence,
Verrine about the end of his discourse turned toward her, and began to yell
with a hideous outcry. Beelzebub, although thou be my Prince, yet there is one
greater then thy self, that commands me to speak in thy presence: yes, The
Devil that is inferior, dares not speak in the presence of his Superior
without his permission, because he is restrained by one mightier then he: for
the order they have in hell is natural. And we have observed that the two
companions of Verrine would never speak without his permission; nor the
companions of Beelzebub without his permission, or in the absence of the said
Beelzebub.
yes, I am constrained to speak before thee.

Proud Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, who was in the body of Magdalene, hearing
these words, began to bellow like a furious Bull, and wresting aside the head
and eyes of Magdalene, with great wrath and fierceness he took her shoe, and
threw it against Verrine, so that therewith he struck Louyse on the head.

Notwithstanding these brauadoes of Beelzebub, Verrine addressed his speech unto
the said Magdalene, and said. The first reprehension of Magdalene.
O Magdalene, how blessed is S. Baume in thee. It is true Magdalene, blessed for
ever is this S. Baume, because in this place, if thou will, thou shall become a
second Magdalene: but hitherto thou remainest arrogant, unthankful, obdurate.
I tell the Magdalene, that thy Creator is yet ready to die for thee. This is
true, Magdalene: Marie intercedeth for thee, and pleads for thee before her
son, and ever says unto him. My son, Magdalene will be converted unto
thee. But O cursed, polluted, detestable woman as thou art, thou still shuttest
up the door of thy heart. Magdalene take heed unto thy self; take heed, take
heed, take heed Magdalene. I tell thee, never was Judas, never was Herod so
tormented as thou shall be, except thou amend thy life and conversation.
Magdalene, forsake these Devils, Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Balberith, Asmodee,
Astaroth, forsake this infernal society, Magdalene: they all do thirst after
nothing else but after thy damnation. Louyse is but the instrument of this
discourse, she is possessed out of love to thee. God gives the touch unto
this instrument, to make thee listen after his melodious harmony. It is true
Magdalene, this good God will receive thee to grace; if thou do repent, thou will prove another Thais; Humiliate thy self Magdalene, and return and obey
S. Vrsula.

A He here begins to discover this miracle.
miracle, an vn-heard of miracle, and which will never happen again, that the
Devil should convert souls, and be in steed of a Physician, an Apothecarie
and a Surgeon.

After all these discourses, The hardness of Magdacenes heart.
Magdalene still remained obstinate, and in her first desperate estate; at
which all ^he compassionate spectators were much amazed, not only for the
hardness of her heart, but also to hear ^uch high and mysterious discourses,
and pronounced after more then a customarie manner. It was then held sit, to
offer her unto God by the 7. penetentiall Psalms and other prayers.

When this was accomplished, the Dominican father said unto her. Magdalene
where are thy Prayer causes tears.
tears? where are those gnawings and remorses of conscience? where are those
sighs which a penitent woman ought to have? At this Magdalene began to weep,
and bitterly bewailing her self, she fell down at the feet of those that
were present, and asked forgiveness, with this protestation, that she knew her
self to be a cursed and disconsolate sinner: so that every one remained well
edified thereby, and conceived good hope of her conversion.

The Acts of the 9. of December.
ON which day in the morning Louyse and Magdalene were by the said Dominican
father exorcised, and at the entrance of the same Verrine began to speak in
this manner. The 2. reprehension of Magdalene.
Accursed woman, listen and be attentive unto what I shall now say unto thee:
I call thee accursed, because in the world there is none so impure as thou: it
is true, thou art most wicked, and shall be most unfortunate, unless thou be
converted. Never These are as strokes of a hammer, to convert a relentlesse
person, and to bruise and bray his heart.
was Cain, never was Judas, never was Pilat, never was the rich Glutton so
horribly tortured, as thou shall be. Louyse is no Philosopher, Louyse has no
indowments of literature, Louyse never was a student, and thou well know,
that Louyse understands not the secrets of thy heart; but almighty God who
knows thy most reserved cogitations, compels me to say, that The first
accusation of the Sorceresse.
thou have again harkened unto Beelzebub with stronger attention (dissembling
and graceless Witch as thou art) then unto thy Creator: and this thou
covertly do bay by day. Graceless and accursed woman, I do here lay it unto
thy heart, that he is fearfully incensed against thee. And though it be an
uncontrollable truth, that thou art a thanklesse and proud wretch, yet does the
Exclamation that our Lady intercedeth for sinners.
mother of God stand for thee: she is ever, ever, ever speaking for thee; she
is euertelling her son: to morrow Magdalene will be obedient, to morrow
Magdalene will be humbled, to morrow she will turn to goodness, to morrow she
will be converted. O heart of stone, O heart of marble and of Diamond, nothing
can soften or make thee tender but the blood of the Lamb. Look to thy self
Magdalene, and be no more wilful, else art thou everlastingly undone: O thou a
thousand and a million of times accursed, damned shall thou be, and that more
deeply then any other, the Devils shall carry thee body and soul to hell. I
say unto thee, never was there, nor shall be such a wonder, as God has now
wrought for thy sake. It is true, thou ungracious and flint-hearted woman, that
God could do no good upon thee neither by his inspirations, nor by preaching,
nor by reading, nor by Angels, nor by all those that are in heaven, nor by so
many good men as have prayed for thee. What? must thou have a Devil to convert
thee? must thou have a Devil to be thy Physician, Apothecarie, and Surgeon?
This is more strange, then to see a hundred, and a hundred, and a hundred dead
bodies raised and enlifened again. The defect is no where but in thee, to be
if thou will, another Magdalene, another Thais, another Mary of Egypt, and
another Pelagia. Magdelene I advise thee resist no longer, open the door which
thou have locked against thy God, and he will compassion thy youth, and give
pardon to thy ^ransgressions.

Verrine continued on, and said. Magdalene. Thou know well, that Louyse is
very scrupulous and dainty of an oath; and will not swear for any good. I
then do swear by your God and by your Redeemer, that it is most true which I
have formerly spoken. And till this present thou did conceive it was
Louyse: is not this true? The all-powerfull God who sees thy in-most
imaginations, constrains me to speak it.

Then he cried. Ha, woe is me. Beelzebub inuisibly menaceth him, according to
the mutual language, that Spirits have.
Ha, Beelzebub thou do threaten me; but I must not regard thy threats, for a
master more potent then thou, and all hell besides does command me. Then
turning to Magdalene he said; Magdalene renounce Beelzebub, Leuiathan,
Baalberith, Asmodee, Astaroth; say but, I renounce thee cursed Beelzebub, and
thee wretched Leuiathan, and thee Baalberith, and thee Astaroth, and thee
Asmodee. Then he willed the Exorcist that he would force him to make this
Verrine never made oath or abiuration but by the commandment of the Exorcist.
Magdalenes contrition.
abiuration, which he did by the mouth of Louyse. After the end of this
discourse and of so terrible an inuectiue, the Father Dominican turned to
Magdalene, and commanded her to say, Convert me Domine, and conuertar ad te.
Then began she to weep very tenderly, and in external appearance showed
marvelous great contrition for her life past, and oftentimes kissed a Crucifix
which she held in her hand.

The Dominican when he perceived in her so much compunction, after the terrible
batteries of such a hammer, that did so beat at the gate of her heart, asked
her how she found her self. Magdalene answered: Ha! my father, I am at the
brink of desperation. The Exorcists exhortation.
To which the said Father replied: No Magdalene, God does not call thee to
reject thee afterward. Be confident that the gate of his mercy is opened unto
thee, and that his hand is stretched out to receive thee. Magdalene resist not
his motions any longer, but ponder well upon them, for in them God does offer
unto thee the remission of thy sins, and such abundance of grace, that if
thou be willing, thou may prove another Magdalene. What inducement leads
thee to be distrustful of the bounty and mercy of thy Redeemer? To which,
she said, I She was also much ashamed that she was proclaimed a Sorceresse in
the presence of all the people.
am as it were swallowed up in the immense sea of my offenses, and with the
soulnesse of my transgressions.

Then did Verrine lay hold on those words, and said: I have not spoken this
unto thee, to occasion thee to despair: no, no, Magdalene, although any other
sinner should commit a million of impieties more then thy self, Magdalene, it
is true, God would pardon him upon his coming home unto him. God cannot lie,
he has said it: In The mercy of God.
quacunque hora, He has made no sessement of the number, or enormitie of
sins, he desires only unsained repentance: and it is most true, God
receives a sinner as the prodigal child was received. These and the like
words were uttered by Verrine, so that the whole assembly was possessed with
more amazement, then on the day before.

The same day after Euening-song were Louyse and Magdalene exorcised by the
same Dominican Father before the great Altar at S. Baume, where there remains
a pourtrait or picture of the blessed Mother of God, with her son Jesus in
her arms, having on one side of her the blessed S. Magdalene, and on the other
side S. Dominicke. At the beginning of the Exorcismes ^he said Father demanded
of Magdalene: Do you acknowledge your self to be a proud, ungrateful, and
refractorie woman, and to be the most miserable creature that did ever tread on
earth? Do you renounce with your whole heart Beelzebub and his adherents? Are
you ^eadie to set open your heart to God, who has created ^ou? To which she
answered, yes: and in contempt of ^athan she spit She spit at the persuasion of
the Exorcist.
three several times upon the earth. Then presently spoke Verrine, and said:
Magdalene true (...) is, that this is the first time thou spakest from thy
^eart. Magdalene, now does the whole host of heaven ^^ioyce for thee, and all
hell is in great sorrow and con^^sion; the Almighty compels me to speak
it. Magdalene, take now unto thee thy God and thy Crea^or for thy Father and
husband. Love him, and him a^^ne with all thy heart, and let neither men, nor
women, ^or any other creature whatsoever share or have fel^^wship herein, but
for his sake. Magdalene deliver up ^^e key of the three faculties of thy soul
unto him, for he now begins to take affection unto thee.

Verrine his persuasions to Magdalene.
Magdalene, thou do affect beauty, thy spouse is the comeliest amongst men.
Had thou but once seen him, as has that other Magdalene, thou would
nothing but languish after him. It is true (said he, turning to those that were
present) you know not this, but we know it well: yet never saw we him in his
glorious beauty, although we would endure whole millions of torments to gain
the fruition of the same.

I say, Magdalene, thy spouse is most lovely, most gracious, most perfect: He
would yet be ready to die for thee, and for all those that are here: he has
hands of iron for us, and feet of wool for you. He that knew the greatness
of his beauty, would suffer millions of torments, to have only a glance of
him, as he passed by: yea the very devils confess, that he is beauty,
goodness, and perfection it self.

Thou love riches and pleasures, Magdalene; thy Spouse is powerful to bestow
upon thee Paradise and Heaven, which are replenished with all riches and
pleasures that may be. Fie on devils, fie on Beelzebub, fie on all hell. True it
is, Magdalene, that we Devils promise mountains and maruels, but the wages we
give to those that serve and pleasure us, is merely hell. But with thy Spouse
there are a thousand millions of pleasures, which do never decrease, nor will
ever have end. The delights there are so infinite, the contentation so
numberless, the joys so exquisite and immense withal, that though I should
discourse thereof until the day of judgment, yet could I not set forth their
vndescribeable greatness and excellency.

Magdalene, thou love nobleness of blood: Thy Spouse shall ennoble thee, and
place thee in the rank and condition of a Queen and Princess: only love him
with all thy heart, sithence he loves thee so much, and will inuest thee with
so much honor.

Thou art also to take the most blessed Mother of God for thy mother: For thy
The arrival of Magdalenes mother.
natural mother here wishes thee much good, but has not ability of
performance: but the sacred Mother of God has all power to satisfy thy
desires; all knowledge to understand what is meet for thee: all goodness to
grant thy requests unto thee. Magdalene, she is so amiable, that she is not to
be paragond by any: we Devils neither have seen her, nor shall see her; but it
is in thee to behold her, if thou will. Magdalene, the Devils will assault thee
again and again, even until they tempt thee to despair: but be of good
cheer, be of good cheer; God will yield thee his assistance, if thou will but
permit him to discipline and govern thy soul. And take thou no thought for
any thing, for the victory will remain with thee.

True it is, Magdalene, that to enter into Paradise, thou ought to tread in
the paths of simplicity. Thou have read many books, but art little aduantaged
by them. The gate of Paradise is so narrow, that there can enter in but one at
once, neither can you pass so, but you must be forced to creep upon your
belly. Thou art to thank S. Magdalene intercedeth for Magdalene.
Magdalene a thousand million of times, for she has done much in thy behalf,
and will hereafter be thy advocate, yea even thy sister to be assistant unto
thee in all perils and dangers.

Thou ought also to render thanks unto S. Dominicke an intercessor for
Magdalene.
Dominicke, (a great enemy of mine he is) for he has mediated much in thy
behalf.

Thou must do the same unto the Angel that is thy Guardian, who has begged
thee of his Lord, saying: Lord leave Magdalene to me, suffer her to be a day
longer in my custody, and she will be converted, she will ^epent, she will
readily relinquish all the blandishments and inticings of hell. Courage then,
Magdalene, for ^hou have gracious and diligent Advocates for thee unto God.
Then showing her Father Romillon, and the Father the Exorcist, he said unto
her, Magdalene behold thy Gods on earth, thou art yet as a child, suffer thy
self to be governed, humble thy self, be obseruant of them, and follow their
advice and counsel.

Verrine added: Magdalene, tell me, did thou never see She had seen them
often at the Synagogue and elsewhere.
the Devils? Whereunto she answered, that she had. Then said Verrine: And
know thou not, that the inferior Devil dares not to speak in the
presence of his superior. Is it not thus? Speak? To which she answered, that
it was so. After this was spoken, Verrine said to Beelzebub: I regard not at all
thy threats; a greater Master then thou commands me. In Hell I owe thee
homage and observance, as one more powerful then my self, but being in this
body, I have naught to do with thee: for I am here by the appointment of thy
Creator.

Then toward the end, he addressed his speech again to Magdalene, and said:
Thou have been served like a Princess, thou have had the first place at the
table, and the middle, and also the last. Content thy self, and digest this
remonstrance well: all these discourses are intended to thee.

When this was finished, the whole assembly thought it fit to say a Te Deum
laudamus, etc. to give thanks unto the Almighty for his manifold mercies
shewred down from above upon the said Magdalene; which was done to the great
joy and contentment of her own mother, who by accident was there present at S.
Baume.

Te Deum laudamus, etc. being ended, Magdalene cast her self at the feet of
her mother, and humbly craved her pardon; and performed the same to the whole
assembly, who received much comfort and gladness, to see the unbounded and
infinite bounty of God toward his creatures.

At the same time some advised Magdalene to take her Creator for her husband,
the blessed Mother of God for her mother, the holy S. Magdalene for her sister,
and S. Dominicke for her father, and all the Angels for her brothers: and so to
call them by these several appellations, when she prayed. This being done, she
directed a letter by the advice of the Father her Confessor to her blessed and
gracious Mother the Virgin Mary, in this following manner.

My The letter that Magdalene wrote to the mother of God. See the answer unto
the doubts in the 8. objection after the Epistle to the Reader.
most sacred, most glorious, most sweet and amiable Mother, I salute you with
my very heart, and present my self before you, as a poor afflicted daughter
before her mother, to receive some consolation. I do address my self to you
(my dearest and most amiable mother) as a poor desolate girl, that is on all
sides destituted and defeated of comfort, deuoid of all goodness, and
surcharged with whatsoever is naught. I therefore in all humility pray you to
take pity upon me, and do here protest, that I offer and consecrate my self
wholly unto you, and do freely bequeath you the keys of my heart, that you
may in the midst thereof implant the unstained lilies of purity and chastity,
that my dearest spouse Jesus may repose himself and take his delight in the
same. I give also unto you the keys of the three powers of my soul: the key
of my understanding, to plant therein the laurel of perfect hope, that I may
trust wholly upon my spouse: the key of my will, to plant therein the rose of
seruent love, that I may above all things cleave unto him, and for his love
abandon all other by affection: the key of my memory, to plant therein the
violet of deep humility, to put me in mind of my base and mean condition,
that so I may deiect and debase my self to the feet of every one, after the
example of my beloved and dearest spouse. And I heartily beseech you my dearest
and best beloved Mother to accept these my prayers and offers, so shall I
remain now and for ever, your most humble, most obseruant, most unworthy
daughter, servant and slave, Magdalene of Jesus.

This letter Father Romillon did then approve of, but the correction thereof
was on the twelfth of December, as afterward appears by the acts of the said
day.

The acts of the 10. of December. 1610.
THis day in the morning were Louyse and Magdalene exorcised by the Dominican
Father, in the presence of four Pilgrims come Great troops did daily flock
thither.
from Rome, and of many other persons of the country of Province. Then at the
beginning of the Exorcismes, Verrine began to discourse in this sort.

Exclamation touching the last judgment.
Call to remembrance the day of Gods judgment, how dreadful it will be; when
he shall separate the good from the bad, and shall say, Come, give me an
account of your works of mercy.

He will not ask you, whither you have read or prayed much, whether you have
been great or base, noble or ignoble: no, no, he will not mention this, but
will say, Come, give me an account, whether it be not true, that when I was a
hungry, you (directing his speech to those that he reproves) gave me no
meat; when I was thirsty, you gave me no drink; when I was naked, you
clothed me not; when I was a stranger, you received me not; when I was sick,
you visited me not; when I was a prisoner you redeemed me not; when I was dead
you buried me not. Then shall they answer and say: What? were you a hungry?
were you thirsty? could so great a Lord as you stand in need of any thing?
could you be naked? we never saw you thus. Verrine followed on, and speaking in
general as well to those that were absent, as to those that were present, he
said: A worthy reprehension of Christians.
O miserable and unthankful men, how misunderstanding you are of the benefits
of God. You call your selves Christians, but do not the works of Christians:
you have a God so good, that the very Devils do confess his overmuch
goodness. What more great expression and sign can you have thereof, then to
hear him speak these words, Whatsoever you shall do unto the least of mine, I
will take it done unto my self.

Miserable is the state of those Christians, who do not love and serve so good
a God, know ye therefore, that those who remain in their obstinacy and
wilfulness, and yet have heard those dreadful words, which God spoke to the
cursed and reprobate, Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, Ha! how well do they
deserve to incur the most severe castigation.

We are to note, that Verrine spoke these words with such hideous cries, and
fierceness, that he seemed desperately enraged: and often repeated these words
Ite maledicti, about five several times; and gave intimation, that since they
had slighted and set at naught all the wounds of our Savior, together with the
blessed Trinity, and the 10. Commandments of the law; it comported with good
reason, that they should experiment and try that amazefull sentence.

Hereunto Verrine added. Your God is so full of indignation, and so dreadful,
that the beams proceeding from his eyes as from bright-shining flames, cannot
be endured by the wicked: Yea the pains of hell it self are not more
unsupportable, then is the fury of this great Judge, when once he is provoked
by them.

I say further, that the souls The sight of the damned fearful.
in hell are so horridly fearful, that if any of them should be presented
before you, the sight thereof would prove unto you so ghastly and
insufferable, that you would dye in the place, to see all their deformities,
pollutions, loathsomeness, stinkes, and marvelous torments. But your God is so
good, that he will give to every one according to his deseruings (not for their
The vocation and first grace is the pure and mere grace of God.
merits, but from his own bounty, for if he should handle every man according
to his deserts, there would few escape hell:) And this great God, be your good
works never so mean, yet if they flow from charity and the merits of his
passion, he will give them a reward, as he has promised, saying, Come ye
blessed of my father, etc.

Because when I was a hungry you gave me meat; when I was thirsty you gave
me to drink; when I was a stranger, you took me in; when I was dead, you
buried me; when I was sick you visited me; when I was naked you clothed me;
when I was in prison you redeemed me. Then shall he carry them to Paradise, to
have there the fruition of his pleasures, because they contemned all for his
sake. And since they were his companions at the Cross, it stands with
reason, that they be his Associates at his table. These words were no sooner
ended, but he cried, I am mad, I am mad; I The constraint of Verrine, which he
auowe^h in all his discourse.
am compelled to express this not for love, but upon constraint.

It is strange that a soldier should kill himself with his own weapons. It
fares so with me, who take arms against my self, wherewith my own throat
is mangled. But what remedy: God will have it so.

Is it not a thing that was never heard of before, that the Devil is at
variance with the Devil, and that hell combateth against hell?

Here is to be observed, that this discourse and many others semblable unto
them, were spoken with such an emphasis and efficacy, that all the assembly
began to weep, and to ask God forgiveness: as also to confess themselves,
and to receive the Sacrament instantly upon it. Of which the four aboue-named
Pilgrims would needs give attestation in form as follows.

The 10. of December 1610. there came to S. Baume The Pilgrims arrival, and
testimony of the precedent Acts, besides ordinary witnesses.
Monsieur Arnoulde Borffartigues, Canon and Sexton of the Cathedral Church of
Cominge, Doctor of Divinity, James Audry Merchant, of Troy in Champaigne, John
Gallois Goldsmiths, and Claud Gaudet a Merchant Draper of Troy in Champaigne,
which were present at the Exorcismes, of the two women that were possessed,
about three several times, and heard very admirable accidents touching this
particular. In witness whereof we of our own proper motion have subscribed
our names, for the public good, and for the reducement and bringing home of
many millions of souls by the miraculousnesse of the same, where the Devil is
enforced to utter the truth of the Gospel by the mouth of a woman called
Louyse, being thereunto commanded by almighty God. And having no further
occasion to remain or soiourne here any longer, as men harried with the
travel and toil of our journey from Rome, we have left our testimony in the
hands of the venerable father the Exorcist, in the presence of the fathers that
were present, and of many others. In truth whereof we have subsigned our names.
Borffartigues, John Gallois, Gaudet, Audry.

The same day in the evening were Louyse and Magdalene exorcised by the
Dominican father, and at the beginning of the Exorcismes, Verrine discoursed of
the pains of hell, and other matters in this manner.

The Exclamation of the pains of hell.
pains of hell are so great and fearful, that one alone Devil with his
hideous shape, were able to strike a man dead upon the place, although he had a
thousand lives. The devils themselves might not endure the souls of the
damned, were it not that hell were the place that is destinated for everlasting
torments. When the accursed souls of the damned come unto us, we make very
much of them, we cause them to sit on a great chair of flaming fire; we
present unto them balls of fire for their repast that are all very well
sulphured: we give them to drink a certain liquor, bitter as gall or wormwood,
and enforce also upon them courtesies more bitter and more stinking then these.
Their eyes are fed with continual visions of Diuel^; they have for their songs
and music, wherein they took their pleasure in their life time; vucessant
blasphemies against God, cursing the time that they were borne, their fathers
and their mothers, together wirh all other creatures great and small. We fling
and tumble them sometimes in the fire, sometimes upon the ice, sometimes in
sulphur, sometimes in snow; and in exprobration of their transgressions we say
unto them. Ha! accursed wretches, behold, The reproaches and sorrows of the
damned.
behold the recompense for your pleasures and delicacies. You that would not
obey your God, you that made slight to trespass against his commandments, you
that have whored after Baal, and abandoned your Creator, you do deserve, you
do deserve to be thus tormented; you deserve to be thus handled. Never shall
you see God, but shall be eternally deprived of those celestial joys, and in
brief, you shall here be tortured for ever.

Besides (said Verrine) we are cruel remembrancers unto them of the favors
and blessings which they have received from their Creator, not hereby to give
them any comfort or refreshment, but to torment them the more abundantly. We
say unto them. Miserable caitifes as you are, you might have gone to Paradise,
you might have been filled with heavenly bliss, you might have been
companions to the Saints of heaven; but the tide is turned another way. Behold,
you are the bondmen of Satan, the Gally-slaues of hell, and the food and
nourishment of that unquenchable fire. How wretched are you, who might have had
the liberty of the children of God, and do now remain in the thrall and
servitude of Devils. If you suffer tortures, you do well deserve them; yet are
you not punished according to your misdeedes and demerits. Then making a great
outcry, he said.

O wonderful miracle, O great misery! The Devils speak against The sorrow of
Verrine, because he was constrained.
themselves, yea and against all hell; they disgrace their own Country, and
dehort men from traveling thither, and from cohabiting with them; This is very
strange. Let two men speak together of their Country, and it is not to be
wondered at, if both of them be lavish in the praises thereof: but it is a
great miracle that the Devil an enemy to God and heaven, recommendeth unto
men that celestial Country, and vilifieth the kingdom of hell. I further
auerre, that men ride to hell easily in a Coach, and the horses and all the
furniture thereof may pass in with facility: But to Paradise, you must go
a-foote, and enter in, stouping; the gates thereof are narrow, so that much
labor and toil is requisite for the attainement of the same, and hardly may
you enter in without doing penance. I also say, that the fire of hell is so
deuouringly hot, that put all the fire in the world together, and it is but a
painting in regard of it. Yet are there souls so desperate, and unnatural,
that they run at full speed into these gulphes of brimstone. Accursed
Magicians, abominable Witches, and relentlesse sinners, can all of them relate
unto you such news as this.

Then he Exclamation of the wicked Spirit.
cried with great and ghastly exclamations, and with a rage and fierceness
beyond ordinary, and spoke these words five several times. For ever, for
ever, for ever, for ever, for ever; alas shall the damned souls be deprived of
the vision of God. You will tell me perchance, that as yet I have told you no
great news, it may be so: notwithstanding it is strange news (as I have said
formerly) to hear a Devil speak for God, and for the salvation of your
souls.

All the assembly were so affrighted with these and the like words, and at the
dreadful passages which Verrine had, touching the pains of hell, that there
gushed from their eyes abundance of tears, when they called to remembrance
their offenses which they had committed.

After this discourse, Beelzebub who was in the body of Magdalene, cried out
very The marvelous pains of hell.
hideously. Hola! I will acquaint you with the repose and contentation which
the souls of the damned have in hell. And then taking Magdalene, he Beelzebub
throws Magdal^ne from one side of the Church to the other.
rudely and without intermission tossed her from one side of the Church of S.
Baume to the other, and presently from that side back again, and so continued
in tormenting of her without any, cessation, so that if it had not ended as it
did, she would surely have died. Thus (said he) do we torture the souls of
the damned, without allotting unto them the least moment of relaxation.

Besides this that has been said, Verrine added, that The will as a faculty
of nature, desiretn ever that which is good.
God was so beautiful, that the Devils would be content to undergo all the
torments of the world, and all the pains of hell, so they might but once have
a sight of his beauty.

The same day after dinner, Magdalene wrote a letter to the blessed S.
Magdalene, the tenor whereof ensues.

Most The letter to S. Magdalene.
holy, glorious, and beloved sister. I heartily beseech you to compassionate
the deplored estate of your poor and worthless sister. See the answer to the
doubts, after the Epistle to the reader. Object. 8.
Take me by the hand, and lead me to my dearest and lovely spouse. And with
all my soul I do entreat you, to indow me with those five goodly qualities,
where with you were able to prostrate your self at his blessed feet, and
which induced him to receive you with such speed for his best-be loved friend.

The first is humility, that I may undervalue and set at naught all things
with you. The second is perfect contrition, that I may bewail and ever
abominate all my sins. The third is, perfect faith, that I may believe, that
the almighty can pardon me. The fourth is perfect hope, that I may assuredly
expect his mercy. The fifth is fervent charity and love, that I may affect and
cleave to him as to my dearest spouse, and disingage my self from those
incongruous desires, which may thwart or give impeachment unto the same. I
instantly pray you (dearest sister) to beg for me these five lovely virtues,
that I may be confident through them, to present my self to my most glorious
Spouse, and so to receive from him the blessings and grace of heaven: that
together with you I may praise and bless him for ever. My most blessed and
glorious sister.

Your most humble, obedient, unworthy, and meanest sister and servant, the
wretched slave, and forlorn creature, Magdalene of Jesus.

The Acts of the 11. of December.
Upon that day the Dominican father began to consider with himself, whither it
were not expedient to force The trial of the wicked Spirit.
the Devil to dictate the words and discourses, which he affirmed did come
from God, and so to submit them to the censure of the Church, to the end that
the wiliness and subtilties of Satan might be detected, and to make known,
whither he spoke from his own motion and scope, or no: that so both those
that saw it not, and those that were present at it, and also those that are to
come after us, might be partakers of this history, to the increasing of the
glory of God, of his blessed mother, of S. Mary Magdalene, and of all other
Saints, to the extirpation of all heresies, and to the conversion of misled
and wandering souls. Conceiving for a certainty, that whither the pitcher fall
upon the stone, or the stone upon the pitcher, it is still the pitcher that is
broken, and all shall turn to the confusion of the Devil, be it this or that
way. Since that in strange and new occurrences, it is lawful to use and search
forth new remedies; provided that nothing be done against God and his Church.

This was for certain days put in execution, when as he Exorcist not being
able to write down all for have, Verrine did dictate unto him word after word,
that which he had formerly discoursed: and that for eight days after: And
this was done by the virtue of the Exorcismes. Afterward he had liberty to
speak as he would, which he also did.

The same day came the reverend father Francis Billet, Priest of the Christian
Doctrine. And in the morning Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by the
Dominican father who saying Mass to the honor of the blessed mother of God,
Beelzebub The first exclamation of Beelzebub.
upon these words ( ecce Ancilla Domini) began to cry. O accursed words for
us. O would they had never been spoken!

And a little before the beginning of the said mass, Beelzebub lifted himself
up with great arrogance, and unusual fury, howling and crying with a loud
voice: Should I adore thee Christ? Should I adore thee! No, no; I am as mighty
as thy self. The Devils pride.
See how vn-stoupingly and upright I stand. In all this he made the body of
the girl serve his turn as his instrument.

Then Verrine (who was in the body of Louyse) said unto him. Ha! Beelzebub,
wretched spirit as thou art, thou They are beaten to augment their torments: as
we have proved to be true by their howling and crying. I burn. I can endure
it no longer: and foame and boil with the pains of it. Among the devils the
superiou^ beats the inferior, as being more powerful then he. The good
Angels also beat them, and torture them when God is pleased to have it so.
Besides they are tormented by virtue of Exorcismes, as experience shows it,
and themselves confess it, Mark 5. Venisti torquore nos. And Christ Jesus
himself has given this power to his Apostles, to tread on Serpents, and
ouerall the power of the enemy.
wilt be lasht and punished for this. Beelzebub answered. I regard not, I had
rather be punished, then adore him.

After Mass, the Priest holding the blessed Host that Louyse and Magdalene
might communicate, and saying (Ecce Agnus Dei) Beelzebub began to cry, yes, yes,
yes, he is a Lamb for others, but unto us a roaring Lion. Then the Dominican
father said unto him. Adora Deum tuum. To which Beelzebub replied: Why should I
worship this God? I will not do it, I will not do it. Ha God! in despite of
thee, in despite of Mary, in despite of Magdalene, this Magdalene is mine.

Then said Verrine: Ha thou cursed and as abominable as my self, thou have
naught to do with Magdalene, thou shall come short of thy reckoning. Magdalene
this is but to fright thee, fear not, be confident, and take God for thy
husband.

Then answered Beelzebub. No, no; she is married to me, I will make
demonstration unto you she is mine, I have the Bonds, I have the Seals.

Upon these words the Exorcist said to Magdalene, believe not this deceiuer and
father of lies. Your God calls himself your spouse, the Virgin Mary styles
her self your mother, and Saint Magdalene your dear sister.

Then said Beelzebub. No, I will make it appear that in all equity she is mine.
Verrine answered. No more then I am: thou did not create her, neither
did thou redeem her, and if thou have lost thy pray, she is now become a
sheep of Christ Jesus. Go to He would here say, that because he had lost
her, and suffered her to escape his Clutches, Lucifer would be enraged against
him, and would beat him, as one more mighty then he.
thou wretched and detestable spirit, thou shall be well beaten by Lucifer. To
this Beelzebub replied: I will once again bring back this pray unto him, for I
have a power to tempt her, and will practice a thousand and a thousand wiles to
gain her, I will now use all my slights, subtilties, ambushes, and cautelous
circumuentions, I will assiege and assault her so often, that at length I will
carry her.

Verrine said unto him. Her spouse will strengthen and illuminate her, and will
also give assistance unto those who have charge over her, to confound thy
cunning and deceites.

Beelzebub replied. They do me wrong, and are injurious in this particular unto
me, because in all right she is mine, and I will make proof thereof by many
special allegations; and if she be the wise of Christ, where are her virtues.

Verrine said unto him: She has made confession of all, and has kept in
nothing; Beelzebub replied. That is true, but confession without contrition and
satisfaction is nothing. Where is her penance? Verrine said, She shall do it.
Beelzebub answered, Cursed be that, She shall do it. When sinners offend, they
talk presently of that which shall be, and never of what is past: this maddeth
me. God for one pranke of pride could punish us. Cursed, This is the Devils
language in hell. Non mortui laudabunt t^ Domine, etc.
cursed, cursed may he be for the same. After this Dialogue, the Dominican
father holding still the said Host in his hands, said to him. Adora Deum,
Beelzebub answered him: Should I worship him. No, no; I will not.

Then replied Verrine. Ha miserable wretch, I do perceive thou art overcome,
and have no more force to yield resistance. These are only thy brauadoes and
shows to gain time.

The Dominican father having again commanded him to worship God in the blessed
Host, upon the sudden The adoration of the blessed Eucharist.
he prostrated himself flat on the ground, and all the assembly troad on him,
as one that was conquered and put to the worst, and were required by the father
Exorcist so to do; there being also five or six Priests present at that time.

As soon as Louyse and Magdalene had received the Sacrament, Verrine began to
cry, Harken and consider me well. God constrains me, (it is a truth) and
enforces me to speak.

The Exclamation upon the wickedness of the world.
day of judgment is not far off, the world was never so repleate with all
pollutions and wickednesses, as now it is. Sermons have lost their operation
and efficacy: learned Preachers are listened unto merely for curiosity, and
ignorant Preachers, that men may carpe at them and deride them. There is now no
esteem made of holy motions; and reading with other ordinary means is held
in mis-prision. Churches are as Stables, and are now become the places where
greatest villainy is contrived, and where men do most transgress. Behold the
last remedy is, that God would convert souls unto him by the Devil. Be ye
therefore penitent.

The same day toward evening Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by the
Dominican father. At the beginning whereof Verrine began to cry out after this
manner.

The Exclamation upon the ingratitude of men.
Christians are cursed and obdurate caytifes, for although God has done so
much for them, yet do they not return unto him any acknowledgement for the
same. The love which God bears them, and always has borne them, even to
desire to die for them, and to put this desire in execution, is slighted and
not accounted of. O wretched and unhappy as you are, your God dyed for you on
the Cross, and has endured g^eeuous torments for your sakes, and would you go
to heaven in your Litter, or Caroche! no, no, no; you get not thither so
easily. The gates are there very narrow and low, and you must be humbled before
you can enter. I say further, you must travel thither with an extraordinary
lowliness, and as it were creeping with the belly on the ground. I ascertaine
you this, that the hauty and curious shall never touch on Paradise, if they
persist in their pride and curiosity: you will tell me, that I speak no new
thing unto you, and that you know this already; that is true and I am contented
to deliver unto you the truth, as being here by the appointment of God.

Know that the day of doom is at hand, and that it is now high time to repent,
as did the people of Niniuie. The^ Verrine addressing his speech to God, said:
Exclamation of Verrine, that God constrained him.
What, Lord? are there not Preachers enough? There are many learned personages,
many Doctors, many wise Philosophers, many good books. They have also the
holy Scripture, they have the lives of all those that have ^ed virtuous and
exemplary lives. Verrine expresses the answer of God; or else the good Angel
on Gods behalf, did make an internal impressi^n thereof unto him As in Job, 1
chap where God by a mutual colloquie spoke to Satan. Now Verrine, because he
speaks by coaction, desired that God would exhort sinners by some other
instrument.
No, no, says the Lord: I regard not that, I will declare that I am the
Almighty, and that I can serve my turn by the Devils ^hemselues when I
please, and when it makes for the ^xecution of my pleasure. What? is Lucifer
greater ^hen I?

Verrine answered: Many there are that will not be^eeue this, but will object
and say, that we are the fa^hers of lies. I tell thee Lord, there are many
that for ^his cause will not believe. I am not astonished at it, yet when
others shall have information thereof, because ^hey cannot sound the bottom of
this business, they will conceive very strange of it. I say this is a miracle
altogether unheard of: I further say, that when thou thy self (meaning Christ
Jesus) did preach, were not thou truth it self? Undoubtedly thou wast. Yet
were there some found ready to gainsay thee, witness the Pharisie, and those
that demanded signs and miracles. So that it is not to be admired, if I shall
not easily be believed, because these things are plenteous in admiration, and
he who knows or sees them not, can never without much scrupulousnes believe
and understand them, as he ought. But I have said, that to believe it, you must
humble your selves, and must not in a thing of this nature use any curiosity,
but say, that God is omnipotent, and can at his pleasure out of baseness work
great effects. Then did Verrine reply to God. What, Lord? If thou will work an
unusual wonder, take some great Doctor, Philosopher, or Preacher, and then
will men believe. To which God after an internal and intellectual manner
replied. What? have I need of the counsel of men, much less the advice of
Devils? Verrine answered him: I say unto thee (O great God) that thou art most
powerful, and yet there will Exclamation against the proud and curious.
be found some so wretched, that will conceit, that all thy power, all thy
wisdom, yea and the whole Trinity with all perfections thereof, may be
comprehended and shut up in their understandings, as if they were of an able
capacity to conceive all this. But in thy behalf I tell them they cannot, and
that they are so swollen with pride, that except they humble themselves, they
are not worthy to receive that true illumination, which streameth and
proceeds from faith: for, say I, the haughty and curious person is in the
end deuoid of faith.

Hereupon I affirm, that if they be humble, they will acknowledge that thou
art omnipotent, and that being so, thou art able to wring truth from the very
Devils, not from their free disposition and will, for we are all of us
accursed, but compulsorily and as constrained thereunto by thy power. We are
more loyal unto God then many Christians, yet for all this we are still Devils.

And here Reasons why the devils may speak the truth.
must they deny the authority of the Church. Why is it, that those that are
possessed be exorcised, if it be not available, and if the Devil cannot
speak truth? I say it is all lost labor; you may take your books (speaking
to the Exorcist) and throw them all into the fire. Then he spoke in a great
rage to her that was possessed, and said: What think thou Louyse? why do
thou suffer thy self to be exorcised, if neither by God, nor the tenants of
the Church we are able to tell the truth? Ha miserable wretches! how many oaths
have been taken in the virtue of the name of God by Exorcismes: all which must
proceed from Louyse, if they must not be accepted of our part.

But miserable and abhorred wretches as you are, you deceive your selves, you
are exceedingly replenished and surcharged with unthankfulness, and
mis-apprehension. You have so good a God, that if it were needful that he
should suffer death for you again, he would willingly undergo it; more
especially for two souls, which now I cannot name.

Magdalene it is true, that Louyse is for thy sake possessed, and will if it be
requisite, lay down her body for thy soul.

It is true, all sinners are accursed, and obstinate. You will peradventure
say, that God does love much. And why Lord? Have thou need of Christians? No,
no, thou could not be God, and have need of the aid of any creature
whatsoever. I say, the creature has need of thee. And it is a fixed truth,
that the more miserable the creature shall be, the more clearly shall thy
bounty shine and appear in relieuing it. It is not so great a wonder that
children should go to heaven, but this is the miracle, that sinners who have a
long time snored in their obstinacy, should repent and turn to God. I do
assure you who hear this, that if you do not treasure up these things for
your profit and health, we will be your accusers at the day of judgment.

We must here note, that some days past, The fright of Magdalene.
Magdalene told the Dominican father, that upon the eighth exhortation, which
Verrine made unto her, she felt her self so affrighted, as if she had already
one foot in the pit of hell.

The acts of the 12. of December 1610. which was the third Aduent Sunday.
ON The resolution to write that which was spoken by the devil.
this day it was thought behoofull, that the Father of the Doctrine, and the
Dominican Father, should so interchangeably aid one another, that whiles the
Dominican Father was busied in exorcising one of the possessed, Father Francis
should supply the place of a Scribe, to note summarily the sentences that
proceeded from the Devil by the mouth of Louyse. On the other side, when the
Father of the Doctrine did exorcise, the Dominican Father should transcribe,
that so in conclusion all might be subjected to the Censure of the Church, for
the further glory of God.

The same day in the morning were Louyse and Magdalene exorcised by the
Dominican Father. In the beginning whereof (many persons of the neighboring
Towns and Villages, which were by this time advertised of this accident that
happened at S. Baume, being assembled thither in great troops) Verrine began
thus to speak.

Cursed be this God changes the witchcrafts and charms of the M^gician into
good.
witchcraft for from hence will God work out a thousand benefits, and a
thou^and acts of his mercy. It was not our intendment, nor the purpose of the
Magician that such accidents should happen. Our project was to get her consent,
that so we might have carried her to hell.

Cursed, cursed, cursed be S The devils were not enforced to discover
themselves and to speak, till he poss^ssed were brought to Saint Baume, a
place sanctified and apt for that purpose through the conversion of a famous
sinner.
Baume, a thousand, thousand, thousand times accursed. It is a wonderful thing
that the slaves of hell should be the instruments to convert the children of
light. Do but observe what I shall say unto you. Some hunt after riches, and
all their affection is enuassailed and taken up therewith, who by giving a
little alms imagine to go to heaven in a featherbed, without any more ado,
or observation of the law and Commandments of God. Some others are poor, and
have a conceit, that for their poverty they shall enter into glory. Indeed
happy are the poor, but they must be poor in spirit.

You that On that day the whole assembly consisted of the poor of the
adjoining villages.
are poor, endure your poverty with patience, and you shall merit much. Have
you in your cogitations the God of glory; how he was borne in poverty for
your sakes, and laid in the manger of a stable. God from all eternity foresaw
this day, and that in S. Baume the Devils should discover themselves, to the
conversion of souls. Do not repine at your coming nither, you (I say) who
oftentimes have prostituted ^our selves to the hazard of losing your goods,
bodies and souls, to offend and trespass against him. What a ^hame will it
be, that any should not be converted, when ^he Devil himself exhorts them
thereunto? God is ^ost powerful, and is able to bestow rewards and ri^nes upon
you: but he is not able to do two things, he ^ not Deus mentiri non potest,
seipsum negare non potest. But this disabilitie (as we term it) is a supreme
power: as it is a great excellence in Spirits and souls, that they have no
power to dye.
able to sin, and he cannot fail of his pro^aise.

Shake off your sins you who have mortally sinned, and depart not from hence
until you be co^sessed; To ^y extreme grief and vexation do I speak this.
^orsake your covetous desire of worldly goods, which ^oth so much possess you.

You poor people, rejoice in your poverty. This day ^m I compelled by Mary
and Magdalene to tell it unto you: by Mary from her son, by Magdalene ^om her
Master.

Humble your selves after the example of him who ^ecame poor for your sakes.
He died for you, and not for us. Mary knows well, that he died on a Cross,
being naked, and not able to get a glass of water. The same knows Magdalene,
and John the Evangelist, and that for you he suffered death on the Cross.

It is strange, that hell should exhort you to go to Paradise. And speaking to
Louyse, he said: Cursed be thy desires, thou have longed above a thousand
times to suffer even the pains of hell for thy neighbor. Humble thy self
Louyse and that speedily, Louyse at some intermissions did contemn and detest
Magdalene, as having been by her charms possessed, as she conceived.
otherwise believe it, thou art the most unhappy, the most abhorred, the most
detestable, and accursed of all creatures. Louyse believe me. Enter into the
abisme of thy less then nothing. God would have thee humbled. Desist from
believing all that men will thrust upon thee.

The sins from which God has preserved thee, are as great benefits, as those
for which he has pardoned thee. Thou had been in hell if God had not
preserved thee: thou had Louyse was baptized by a Minister, and for a time
remained a Huguenot.
remained a Huguenot, and should not have had the understanding, to beg
for that, which was convenient for thee.

Preachers do travel themselves much to think upon what they have to say,
we also think upon many things, but it is for wicked purposes.

Be ye devout and obseruant unto Mary, and unto Magdalene, unto Dominicke, and
unto all the Saints in Paradise, and the Devil shall have no power to hu^^ you.

The word of the Devil is in this respect as good, a^ the word of a great
Philosopher, Doctor, or Preacher.

The Devil is always in extremes, be it in despair or be it in presumption,
but here I am forced to keep the middle, when God commands me.

It is a Having respect to the consecration, not to him that consecrates.
great matter, that the Mass of a wicked Priest should be as available, as
the Mass of a hol^ man.

If you should see a malefactor punished, and yet hi^ Judge to yield obedience
unto him, you would be much abashed at it, for it were a strange case. It may
be spoken well, if it be understood in a good sense, by way of exaggeration. As
in the tenth chapter of Iosuah it is written. Obediente Deo voci hominis. God
obeying the voice of man. And to speak properly, God does no more herein, then
he has ordained and promised, the Priest doing his office.
Thus does God obey a wicked Priest, in descending on the Altar at his command:
the Creator obeys the creature, the Father his child, the Redeemer his
slave, and the Judge his malefactor.

Hereupon the Priest held forth the blessed Host, that Louyse and Magdalene
might communicate; and said, Ecce Agnus Dei. Which Verrine straight takes hold
of, and says. True, he is a Lamb for you, but a Lion for us: it is the
innocent Lamb, the true God and your father, but our Judge; a Lamb sacrificed
for you, and not for us.

Then the Priest presented the blessed Host unto Magdalene, and said: Receive
thy spouse Magdalene, the son of thy good mother. Upon which Beelzebub began
to torture Magdalene cruelly handled by Beelzebub.
and toss all her body, making her to knock her head against the ground, yet
without wounding her, and made her to wreath and bend her body in diverse
manners; sometimes backward, and sometimes with her head doubled down to the
earth; Saying to those that were present, Thus do we practice in hell, learn
how we torment souls. If we now torment them thus, when the edge of our power
is blunted and abated, think how we plague them in hell, when we are enabled
to employ all our fury thereunto.

Aye me! God does enforce me to torment her thus, to present unto your view the
punishments of hell.

Then the Priest said unto him; Beelzebub, worship thou God with thy face on the
earth. At this Beelzebub began to yell and cry as if he were enraged, and said:
Ha miserable and accursed Magdalene had manfully resisted the Iucubi, which
ordinarily Beelzebub sent unto her.
caitise (speaking to Magdalene) I am enforced to worship Christ, for the
contempt which at midnight I received from thee.

In the mean space Verrine spoke to these that were present, saying: Believe
that your Redeemer is here with his flesh and bones, and with all his divine
essence, really and truly. We The Devils worship him by constraint, as they
also believe by force and trembling. Marc. 5. Videns Iesum a long cucurrit and
adorauit eum, clamans voce magna: Quid mihi and tibi Jesus fili Dei altissimi,
etc.
worship him although he be our Judge, you worship him as your Savior and
Redeemer; and yet do you serve him but badly. We put his commandments in
execution by compulsion, and you have no respect unto them at all. Preachers
make Sermons either for love or for reward, and God will plenteously reward
them, but we preach by force. It is no wonder that a man preaches unto another
man, that so they may attain unto a place, whither all men desire to come. But
the wonder is, that Devils should preach to men, that they may have access
unto that place, where they themselves have no means to be.

It is no small matter, that the Devils should occasion the Angels to rejoice,
who in times past were their brethren, but are When God permits them, they
are unloosed, and do all they can against men.
now their mortal enemies.

Then speaking to Magdalene he said: Cursed be thy desire, which wrought in
thee a liking to enter into the Order of S. Vrsula.

Vrsula, Vrsula: thou have cost me dear. But no man is exalted, unless he be
first humbled. We were They intended to have hindered this new erection of
religion, which was to profit ye church of God; who made profession to teach
girls their Catechism, devotion, and good manners. Thus would the Devils have
hindered the first Monks of the deserts.
all set loose, to ruin this company, we have tempted them all to go into
Monasteries, would God they had all gone thither, then should we not have been
put to this pain.

O you of that company! you have been mis-prised, and set at naught, yet were
you abashed at nothing. Therefore shall you hereafter be exalted, and that by
the means of Devils, to our infinite sorrow and confusion.

Lucifer thou have no power left thee, nor thou Beelzebub. O great confusion!
that Devils to our exceeding grief should preach against Devils.

Then said Beelzebub to Magdalene: God confound thee, and all hell swallow thee.
For thou art the occasion of my downe-fall. At which words Beelzebub and Verrine
began to cry, as though they were outragiously mad, Confundetur infernus,
Confundetur, by our selves. Louyse cursed be thy force, and him that gave it
unto thee. And Verrine speaking to God, said: Thou could not be God if thou
were not stronger then us and all hell besides. Lucifer it must be so, thou
art to be obedient.

Both the Devils did much resist, that the two women should receive the blessed
Sacrament. And it was needful to be very patient, for by that means at length
they were overcome. They would say. It is too hot for us, we will taste none;
and this happened every day, which we tried often from the month of November,
till the month of May.
Then the Priest commanded Verrine, that in testimony of the truth of that
which he had said, he should suffer Louyse to communicate: to which Verrine
answered, In confirmation of all which I have said, I obey the blessed Host,
let her communicate. Then The oath of Beelzebub and Verrine.
did Beelzebub and Verrine agree both together to take an oath. And Beelzebub
beginning said to the Priest: I swear unto thee, my Sovereign makes me to
swear, that I do show you the truth how we cruciate and torment souls from
time to time without any intermission.

After Beelzebub, Verrine spoke. I swear, that God has enforced me to say all
these things in the usual tongue and language of Province, for the instruction
of the ignorant: in which the full bounty of your God toward his creatures,
does make clear manifestation of it self.

The same day toward evening Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by father
Francis Billet, and presently Verrine began to make relation of the eternal
glory of the Angels, and discoursed of many other matters in this sort. Cursed,
cursed, cursed be the Charm and he that gave it. But should it not have been
given to her, it had been given to some body else. We are bound up from doing
mischief, but let loose to do good. We desired to be They were bound there to
discover the Prince and Princess of Magicians, and to exhort others. And
beyond this bound they could not pass.
loosed to tell you your sins in another fashion, but we cannot resist the
Almighty.

Lucifer and all hell are but flies, hand-wormes, Pismires, Gnats; and we have
no more power then what God pleases to give us; he bestows upon us so much
as will try who are his that are to be placed in Paradise. Witness Job who is
the Patron of patience, as is Magdalene of repentance, and Francis of
humility. You are Ingratitude of men to their good Angels.
all unthankful to your good Angels, whom your Redeemer has given unto you;
they attend always upon you, they do ever preserve you from a thousand
dangers, from fire, from water, and other like perils, and without them you
would many times be choked in your sleep.

Speaking this, This is a new torment unto them, when they think thereupon:
because they do envy and malice the elect of God, who are i^ucsted with their
places in heaven.
he added withal in a great fury, and said, It is to our exceeding grief, and
to our confusion and deep damnation, that I say this.

Great goodness of God! He gives unto you creatures of that transcendencie in
perfection, to wait upon you; and those who are his Pages of honor, and part
of his Court, are servants unto you. Yet are there many that make more
reckoning of their Gromes and Lackies, then you do of your good Angels, who
always behold their God and their King in the face, and by only looking upon
him, do know the will of their Master, and do evermore render their
obedience unto him. They are so wondrous fair, that if you should but see one
of them, you would worship him, and think that you beheld a Deity. If the
servant be so lovely, how amiable ought the Master then to be. You have the
witness of John the Evangelist heereunto, who would have worshipped an Angel
which he saw, but he raised him up, and would not permit that he should
worship him. An Angel is more powerful then all hell; and one of them is
sufficient utterly to ruin and overthrow it.

Mary the mother of God is the most pure of all creatures, and most lovely in
her The humility of the Mother of God.
humility. Cursed be those words when Mary said, that she was the hand-maide of
her God; and that she held her self unworthy to be the hand-maide of those
that are hand-maides unto him, for by this means she deserved to be the mother
of God.

S. Magdalene the chiefest amongst sinners.
Magdalene because she loved so much, is there where she now remains, and is
the chiefest (amongst those that have sinned) that are about the son of God;
because she and John the Evangelist loved him more then others.

Dominicke is the Saint that is adversary unto Verrine; whom therefore he
ranketh first as if he were superior to his two co^*panions. He does then
first place his Saint that is adversary unto him.
Dominicke, John the Evangelist, and John Baptist, be all our enemies, yet must
we found forth their praises. All those that are in heaven, have such a longing
that the day of judgment should come, as cannot be expressed: to the end that
you may have the fruition of what they enjoy, and that you may taste of those
delicacies, wherewithal they are plenteously fed.

They have a good Master, that The charity of the Saints is greater then the
devils malice toward men.
prepares their viandes for them, and the holy Ghost is the Master of the
banquet of souls. They that are in Paradise would willingly transport you unto
that mountain of bliss, and they do so burn with the feruencie of this
desire, that they would be more pregnant and ready to descend and accompany
you thither, then we that are Devils can be to carry you to hell.

Paradise is so exceedingly fair, that if you could but behold one of the
souls there (I speak not now of Angels) you would worship the same, and
think it to be a Deity, so lovely is it, being clothed and covered with the
clear brightness of God.

The souls of John the Evangelist, of John Baptist, of Peter, of Paul, of
Stephen (our greatest enemy) have had some participation of this glory before
they died, but nothing comparable to that, wherewith they are now adorned.

It is a great wonder, that so grievous sinners as they have been in the
world, should have their souls so beautified in heaven. This is it that
plungeth us into despair, and makes us run outrageously mad. For let them
commit ten thousand millions of sins, yea let them leave no transgression
unpracticed, yet shall they find mercy, and out of the evil which they do,
there shall be drawn much goodness. Witness Paul, when he heard the voice,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? he heard a voice, he felt no stroke. Your
God loves you so much, that be it good, or be it hurt which is done to one of
his, he will take it as done to himself.

The beauty of Paradise.
Paradise is so beautiful, that the walls thereof are framed of precious
stones; as Carbuncles, Emraudes, Diamonds, Saphyrs* Iacinths, which do all
signify some manner of virtue. He that will come thither, must build him a
Tabernacle here, and that by good works. There is a mansion prepared for you in
Paradise, but you must bring with you the stones that betoken virtues; and
before your journey thither, it is needful that you join and set these stones
together.

Every body shall have there a country more spacious then the whole earth:
and notwithstanding all this beauty and riches of your God, how few are there
that do love and serve him?

Contrariwise, The deformitte of the devils and souls of the damned.
we are so deformed, so horridly foul, that if you should see one of us, you
will be strucke^ dead with fear upon the place. And if a soul of the damned
should but present it self unto your view, you could not endure to behold so
ghastly a spectacle, but would fall down dead presently. Yea so horrible is
their semblance, that hell it self could not suffer them, but that it is the
place destinated by God for their punishments. The good Jesus has many friends
at his table, but very few on Mont Caluary.

Many lose their part in Paradise for their delights, others for gluttony, and
some for their curiosity: we always assault them where they are weakest and
most We must say with David: Et obseruab^ me ab iniquitate mea.
ouvert unto danger, and on that side, which we know most inclinable to vices.

We shall never see God but in judgment, when he shall rouse himself up as a
roaring lion against us, and when flames of fire shall flash from his eyes,
which we shall never endure to behold.

After this discourse, whilst the assembly said their Credo, at the Article,
Sedet ad dexteram Patris, Verrine spoke of Jesus, and said:

Before he sat at the right hand of his Father, he did endure so much, and did
suffer such an ignominious death, as no Martyr did ever undergo the like. I
say further, that not only no one Martyr, but all of them together, did never
endure so much as he, although all glory were already his own.

There is no ransom be it of King or of Emperor, that can equal the price
wherewithal God has redeemed you to be heirs of Paradise: yet do you reckon
no more of it, then if it had cost him nothing. I speak generally as well for
those that are here, as for those that are absent. You regard it no more then
if it had stood him but two Liards, or a Sons. No, no, it is not so cheap, he
has bought it with the price of his blood.

And when they came to Sanctam Ecclesiam, etc. Verrine said: Every one believes
not this Church, witness the Caluinists: and many stray from her, and so
depart from the light to be shadowed with darkness. I am forced to speak this
with more compulsion, then any Gally-slaue, or one that is a captive amongst
the Turks.

There were seven there in ordinary as they declared afterward, but many
times they went forth and returned very sensibly, neighing as it were, and
saying to Beelzebub: See I am here. Beelzebub possessed her forepart, Leuiathan
the middle of her head, and Astaroth the hinder part. The part of the head
where they were did beat and move perpetually contrary to nature: but when
they depa^ted forth, that part stirred not. And when at any time we commanded
B^lzebub to leave her for the space of a Miserere, he went out of her very
sensibly, and ma^e a noise in the mouth of her that was possessed. And the
prefixed time being past, he presently returned, that i^ might be well
perceived, as we have said. And being departed, the Physicians and others tha^
felt her head, found it in moveable but upon his return they felt and saw the
motions. And this was also proved by Leuiathan, and Astaroth. This has been
tried at S. Baume and at Aix many weeks together, to the great astonishment of
the beholders, especially of those who wou^d not believe it.
There were then five Princes of the Devils in the body of Magdalene, to wit,
Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Baalberith, Asmodee, and Astaroth, with many others of
inferior rank and condition. Yet did Verrine brave them all, and Lucifer
himself also, saying, that God commanded it, and that they al in regard and
comparison of him were but flies; and were to yield their service and obedience
unto him, when he should command it, as servants do unto their Prince.

That same day did Magdalene read the letter which she had before addressed to
blessed Magdalene, and the assembly there heard it, without any hindrance or
contradiction from Verrine.

Afterward she read the letter, which she had formerly, the day before her
conversion, directed to the blessed Mother of God by the order and advice of
the Father Romillon; in reading of which, Verrine rebuked her and taxed her of
pride, saying, that Pelagia being converted by a sermon, This Nonnus was Bishop
of Edesso: of whom mention is made in the Roman Martyrologe, the 2. of
December.
Nonnus refused to baptize her; but she threw her self down at his feet, and
said, that she would demand satisfaction of him at the day of judgment,
whereupon he did baptize her.

Then he said: Take courage Magdalene, for God will give assistance unto thee;
but beware thou neglectest not the five counsels and instructions, which were
given to Louyse this morning; to wit, a good intention, purity of affection,
purity of conscience, faith, and humility. Francis for his simplicity and
humbleness is in Paradise; he suffered himself to be accounted a fool, yet
was he garnished with all sorts of excellent virtues, for God gives grace to
the humble, and resists the proud. He was also endowed with the gift of
obedience, for without obedience there is no going to Paradise; yea the Son
of God himself said to his Father in the garden of Oliuet: Fiat voluntas tua;
and finally, resignation is to be made of all worldly desires.

After this, he caused the tenor of the letter to be changed, saying, that
it sented of nothing but of pride and niceness; and he made it to be mended in
manner as follows:

Magdalenes first letter corrected. See the answer to the doubts, the 8.
objection, after the Epistle to the Reader.
My most dear, glorious, worthy and unspotted Mother of God, and the most
lovely Mother of my Spouse, I salute you in the heartiest manner, and present
my self before you, as a wretched malefactor before his Judge, to the end that
you would be pleased to intercede for me to your best beloved Son, and to
offer unto him your holy and chaste womb that bare him, and your blessed
breasts that gave him suck; As also to pray your dearest Son to present his
five wounds unto his Father, that so I may have remission of all the sins,
which I have committed in my five senses. I am a poor miserable creature,
unworthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven, or once to name of my Creator. But I
will say like another Thais, he who has created me and framed me of nothing,
take pity upon me, who am not worthy to tread on the earth, or to lift up my
spirit and voice to pray, no not to S. Magdalene, S. Dominicke, my good Angel,
and all the Saints of heaven, or other reasonable creatures, as well absent as
present. I Magdalene of Demandouls, have written this letter to the most sacred
and worthy Mother of God, who do not merit as much as to name her, delivered
by a Devil called Verrine, that spoke by the mouth of Louyse, because I have
not made those instructions useful unto me, which by so many learned
personages (whom I little esteemed of) were recommended to my practice. I have
rather hearkened unto Lucifer then to them, and do now make my protestation
before God, that I shall never hereafter give ear to Beelzebub nor to his
adherents, by the assistance of his grace, and through the prayers of the
Virgin Mary the sinners Advocate, and specially of S. Mary Magdalene, of all
Angels, and of all Saints. Protesting in despite of Beelzebub, the chief of the
Devils, which are in my body, and of al hell, I will heedfully observe those
five points, which were recommended unto me: to wit, a good intention, a pure
affection, purity of conscience, simplicity, humility, as also obedience,
and resignation of the world. All this I do here promise by the aid and grace
of my God. The subscriptio^ of the said letter was dated in manner as
follows, Verrine saying, that the subscription of letters that were to be
sent to great personages, ought to be no less polite and elegant, then the
body of the letters themselves. Your most humble, and prostrate handmaid,
replenished with all presumption, in that she has been so hardy as to write
unto so great a Queen, although my great and compelling necessities have
pressed me unto it; and I saw that you were the Sanctuary and refuge of those
that were forlorn; as also I was transported thereunto, by reason of the great
and violent assaults of temptations, which Beelzebub and all his accomplices did
force upon me. And having understood such wonders spoken of your greatness, I
was embold^^d to take you for my Mother and Advocate; and will remain all my
life long, until the last hour of my death by the help of my God, your most
forlorn, and worthless slave Magdalene of Demandouls.

The superscription was thus: To the most sacred, worthy, precious, and
glorious Mother of my God, and Advocate for sinners.

The acts of the 13. of December 1610. being the feast of S. Luke.
THat day in the morning, the Dominican Father came to confer of the
discourse of the day past, that he might orderly couch and set down in
writing, what he had observed. And seeing that he could not conceive where to
begin, he remained a little sad, that it should be thus in hazard to be
forgotten. At the length he was resolved, to take the Stole, and to adjure the
Devil Verrine, that if it were the good pleasure of God, that this should be
written to the end that the Church might take knowledge of the same, it was
then his part and duty to repeat and dictate what he had spoken, to the
confusion of the Devil, and to the glory of God. Presently did the Devil
begin to dictate in the presence of the fathers of the congregation, as is
aforesaid. The Devil protesting that he was now enforced to ^he repetition
thereof, but would hereafter dictate all unto the Church so leasureably, that a
man might have ^he opportunity to write after him.

The same day in the morning, Louyse and Magda^ene were exorcised by the
Dominican father, and at the ^eginning of the exorcismes Verrine began to
dictate that which here follows, in the hearing of many; ta^ing the subject
of his discourse from the Gospel In ^rincipio, which the Priest read after
Mass. He cried ^ut: Cursed be In principio, If I were able to smother ^t, how
willingly would I do it? These last words ^lunge us into despair, Verbum caro
factum est, and ha^itauit. The beginning speaks of your redemption, ^he
conclusion of your glory, there is no habitauit ^or us; it is for others. And
this habitauit is it, that ^addeth us. The miracle does not consist in this,
that John the Evangelist wrote it, but The wondrous miracle of the compulsion
of Devils to speak the truth.
the wonder is, that ^ Devil does auow it, and is constrained to his in^nite
sorrow, to annunciate this truth unto you. The ^iuels are compelled to speak
the truth, when God al^ighty does express and wring it from them, and are ^s
Gally-slaues forced unto it. This is that God whom ^e Christians worship.

After Mass was finished, he began to speak after ^is sort, touching the
great Counsel of the most sa^ed Trinity, about the reparation of mankind.

When Adam had transgressed, God was highly ^^spleased against him, yet would
he not by and by in^ct his vengeance and indignation upon the soul, which was
so goodly a creature, although it had recei^ed a taint and blemish by the
pollution of sin, and ^as grown refractarie and mutinous against him, who ^d
showred down so many blessings upon the same; ^at had shaped and created the
whole world for man, ^d did assubiect all creatures unto him, to use them as ^e
thought good, even down to the very beasts. This ^ould man have excused, when
he said, Eve did cause me to do this; but in this he did bewray the impotencie
of his judgment, that would so facilely believe the counsel of a woman. Yet
if he had humbled himself without excusing his He had not been subject to so
much misery as he was: for the excuse did aggrauate the fault.
faults, he should not have felt so much displeasure, as he did.

God loves not, that men should endeavor to euade by excuses. If that Adam had
craved pardon, God would presently have forgiven him: yea the very Angels that
fell, if they had humbled themselves, should have tasted of his mercy. Now the
blessed Trinity held The counsel of God is eternal, but the Scripture styles
the execution of his eternal counsel, after this manner. It is also a phrase
of Scripture to say, that God holds his Counsel, when he would execute his
will. As in the 1. of Genesis in the creation of man The metaphore is borrowed
from the custom of me^, when they would execute any thing.
their counsel upon this point concerning man. The eternal Father according
to true justice would have him punished; but presently did the divine word give
himself up to be your pledge, saying that he would be incarnated, and take
your flesh upon him, and would be ever ready to endure whatsoever the father
would think fit to be inflicted. Then presented themselves the two daughters
of the eternal Father, to wit, Justice and Mercy, and made them ready for
the encounter.

Mercy and Justice are equally twins with God, a^^ all other perfections are.
Yet in the putting of them in execution, one sometimes gains upon another
according to the good sentence and pleasure of God. And upon this is the
metaphore drawn from two Advocates, each pleading their righ^^ one against
another. Now although the determination and sentence abides in the Judge yet
does not this hinder, but that either the one or the other might allege just
and ponderous reasons in diverse sorts. Divines maintain the Idea of things in
God.
Justice as the younger daughter said, that they were to be punished for their
disobedience, and that they did very well deserve it. Mercy as the elder said.
My Father, I am thy eldest daughter, and my sister here is much younger then my
self, it therefore stands with reason that I be believed, and that for many
causes. As first, to what end have you created a creature thus beautiful? to
cast him headlong into hell? There is a remedy to save him. For there will
come a woman called Mary, that will be more humble, then Eve has been proud
after her transgression; and will be more replenished with simplicity, then
ever Eve was with curiosity. Mary will be more obedient then ever Eve was
rebellious; and more prompt to say, I am the handmaid of the Lord, then ever
Eve was to take and taste the apple. From thence shall proceed that great
paymaister of debts, that shall give satisfaction more then a hundredth fold.

On the contrary part, Justice pleaded that they did well deserve sharpest
castigation, who do yet stand upon their justification, although they are
guilty of the highest treason, in rebelling against their Prince, yea such a
Prince as their God is. That they knew the Edict of their King, yet would not
observe the same, and sinned not through ignorance, but through their too much
knowledge, that brought them to their destruction. To this the The mercy of
Christ Jesus.
divine Word made replication. Father, Father, you are to pardon them, you are
to pardon them, repeating the same often (not in words but by the power of
understanding) and ever saying, that he would take upon him your flesh for
your sakes. The eternal Father, according to the rigor of Justice, and as
being justly provoked against them would not have ^t so: but always the divine
Word did oppose himself unto it, and said, Father I will endure for their
sakes a more ignominious death, then ever any creature shall be able to suffer.
The eternal Father having regard unto the person which was to suffer, and give
plenarie satisfaction, and that by no other means then this could a thing of
that nature be accomplished, as also knowing how much he was to suffer (for in
God all things are present, and there is nothing past or to come) did yield
unto this ouerture: yet what Father would have consented to give up his Son
as he did. For he foresaw ^he ingratitude and disesteeme which you would bear
unto him, yet was he contented to agree unto this, because his son always
said Father, some or other will be converted.

The Holy Ghost gave assistance unto the Word, These are the attributes of the
divine persons.
for he is the God of love; the Father is the God of power and of vengeance;
the Son, the God of wisdom, and the Holy Ghost the God of bounty. But the
Devils themselves do confess that there is but one God in three persons, and
have made confession of the same at Baume, the place of S. Magdalens penitence,
in the presence of the whole assembly. Then spoke Mercy and said, Father, it
is expedient that the void seats of the cursed Angels that fell should be
filled up, and why was this goodly fabric and frame of the world created, and
the heaven so varied with diversities of beauties? Was it for your self alone?
let them live, let them live, they will be repentant, and have virtuous
children, and just Abel will proceed from them. Hereunto The knowledge of God
foreseeth all things.
Justice replied, that there should be a Cain as wicked as the other was just.
But Mercy did always ingeminate, that many of them would prove good, as Mary,
who should make reparation of the fault committed by Eve. And in truth, Mary
has been more virtuous, then ever Eve was wicked, and gave more reputation
unto good, then ever Eve gave advantage unto sin. The Serpent held diverse
discourses with Eve to cause her to fall, but Gabriel spoke but a few words and
Mary presently obeyed, saying, Ecce ancilla.

Then the Word said to his Father, that as the person offended was divine, so a
divine person should give satisfaction, since no other could make reparation of
the same; the person offended being infinite, might justly expect satisfaction
from a person infinite. That there was no creature, neither men nor Angels,
that could make up this offense, which was committed by a man that at the time
of his tentation was altogether innocent. And as this sin was committed in a
garden, so reparation thereof should be made in a garden, at what time he
should say fiat voluntas tua, and this should be the act of his giving himself
up unto death. To conclude, this transgression came by eating of an apple, and
should be remitted by the fruit of life issuing from the ^arden of Mary. Upon
this mention of the Virgin, ^errine took occasion to say: This was a The
Virgin Mary likened unto a beautiful garden.
garden hed^ed in, where that goodly fruit of her purity remai^ed,
excellently qualified with beauty, sent, and taste: which make representation
of the properties of the ^lessed Trinity. In this garden there were all sorts
of goodly trees, whose roots were humility, whose leaves were virtuous
desires, and whose fruits were good works, that might deservedly be placed
upon the ta^le of the King of glory. And upon this table are ever ^trowed all
kinds of flowers, which signify her virtues, and these she has kept fresh by
her humility, acknow^edging that all the good which ever she had received did
stream from her son, and proceeded not from her self. By these means of
humbling her self she conserved them, and lent also of her store unto others.
The Word was content to repair the fault of Adam, and in ^egard thereof to
subject himself to all the torments which Adam had deserved, and said, that by
his obedience there would redound more benefit unto man^ind, then ever did
prejudice by Adams transgression: and by how much the greater the offense was,
so much ^he greater would his mercy appear: that his bounty would then shine
cleerest, when these his creatures appeared most miserable, as has been
verified in Peter, Paul, David, the Publican, Matthaeus, and James the Hermit:
as also in Magdalene, Pelagia, Mary of Egypt, Thais, and the woman of Samaria.
That his boun^ie would dart forth the rays thereof so effectually upon his
creatures, that many souls by their examples should be converted. Besides, the
Son made offer unto his Father to endure all the torments that should be put
upon him, and that he would debase himself even ^o the cratch to give
satisfaction for the pride of A^am^ that he would be obedient, for his
rebellion, even to the death of the Cross: that for the wantonness of Adam,
he would undergo all vexations, and would fast for his gluttony: that the
offense was committed by a tree, and should be remitted by the tree of the
Cross: and that at the same hour or instant that the first man offended, the
breach in mankind should be built up in the second.

Do but consider, that at that time when in his humanity he suffered, the
love which he did bear to you, did cause him to cry out that he was
thirsty, that is to say, after the salvation of your souls. This is evident
by the thief, who speaking unto him but these words, Memento met, was by him
refreshed, as also was Longinus, and all those which at that time were
converted. Observe further, that he died with a great longing to have his very
tormentors to be converted; and his sorrow, to leave his enemies plunged in
their obstinacy, (as Pilate, Caiphas, Annas; and Herod) was more apparent and
sensible, then to leave his Mother whom he so much loved, Magdalene, John the
Evangelist, or Martha. Witness those words which he spoke, Pater ignosce
illis, Father pardon them, for they know not what they do. His second grief
was to leave his children the Jews, hardened in their wickedness, sorrowing
that they would make such bad compensation unto him for all his benefits. For
never was there natural father that has powered down so many blessings upon
his children, as your God has done upon the people of the Jews. It was no
novel thing with them to disobe^ his commandments, and mutiny against him.
The^ made a Calfe of gold and worshipped him, and without sense or
consideration of his manifold blessing they did long for the garlike, onyons,
and leekes of Egypt: so gluttonous and ravenous were they. Notwithstanding all
this, he cried upon the Cross, Pater ignosce illis.

Then did Verrine cause this which ensues to be adjoined unto that letter that
the day before he did dictate unto the blessed Virgin: I protest by the
assistance of God to observe the good instructions which were given unto me
upon the Vigile of S. Luke, and will read them five times a day. Observe here,
that Verrine said that they would prove five exorcismes more terrible unto
Beelzebub, then all those that were comprehended in books: and added, Cursed be
your exorcismes.

After this, he said that Magdalene was to say at least an hundred times a day,
if she could, He who has created and fashioned me, have mercy upon me: as one
that well knew how unworthy she was to name the name of God, and to suffer for
his love; or that Beelzebub himself should remain in her body, since that her
God did patiently bear the appellations of fool, drunkard, and possessed by
Beelzebub, and that he wrought wonders in the name of Beelzebub. But the good
woman in the Gospel confessed that all which they objected were lies, and that
he wrought those wonders by a peculiar puissance of his own, without borrowing
the assistance of any creatures.

Afterward as they should have communicated, Magdalene was upon the sudden
strangely tempted by Beelzebub. But Verrine taking upon him as her counselor
and admonisher, did lay before her the imbecilitie of the Devil, and dismasked
all his slights and subtilties. And it happened, that after Magdalene had
received the holy Host in her mouth, Beelzebub made show, as if he would force
her to spit it out upon the earth. In which fact, he discovered that there was
some She had not confessed this sin either from oblivion or out of shame.
enormous sin in Magdalene, which was familiar only unto those that knew the
inward guilt of her conscience.

The same day in the evening Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by Father
Francis Billet: and Verrine began to speak in this manner: It is requisite
first to pass the Altar of thorns and knives, before you come to the Altar of
Crowns. I tell you that The martyrdom of S. Lucia and the Virgins.
Lucia was a poor woman, and of such base condition, to outward semblance,
that a man would not have bestowed a farthing upon her: yet being betrothed,
she abandoned all for the love of him who had redeemed her, and in regard of
him undervalued all worldly things whatsoever. So must all they whom he takes
to wife, they must forsake father, mother, brothers and all, and only set
their affection on him who does so wholly deserve it. He will place them there
where no person is able to sing the hymns which they shall sing, and they
shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, to the great vexation of the
Devil and of all hell. Magdalene does not sing at all, yet is she next unto
Mary: for in love she does surmount Martha. Martha is the next that sings
after the Mother of God: she was hosts unto him, and lodged him in her house,
and next unto the Mother of God was the principal Virgin. Catherine of Sienna
thou bear a part in that song, and thou Barbara, and thou Lucia, and thou
Clara. Vrsula is a Queen, and Catherine is another, and thou That Victoria is
registered in the Roman Martyrologe 27. December, who was put to death because
she would not take Eugenius the Paynim for her husband.
Victoria have also thy share in that melody.

It is true, I rage against those that live chastely in their Monasteries, but
the Company of The praises of the Company of S. Vrsula.
Vrsula makes me stark mad, both by their Christian doctrine, and by their
wholesome instructions: and the exceeding great labor which they take for the
good of their neighbors, makes hell it self to be swallowed up in despair.
I do not speak this to puff them up, let them be as humble as they will: but
the truth is, that all the devils do strain their uttermost subtilties to
work their final extermination. God is desirous to have them proved, cursed
be my words, they will cost me full dear. Mary, why should thou so
affectionatly love them? wherein have they been serviceable unto thee? We have
sisted them all by temptation, to breed in them a longing to leave their
vocation. We suggested that their order of Religion was mere brocage, and
their vocation vnapproueable. This we said to discourage them from that
course, and distilled diverse other temptations into them against their
Superior, but principally against Cassandra their Superior at Aix. We have
filled them with grudging and murmuring against their Superiors, persuading
them not to obey or believe them, and have baited both men and women with our
temptations: the men gave best heed unto us as those that were the prouder. We
also hatched a conspiracy against Romillon, and the Order of the Doctrine,
that they might be forsaken of every one.

Whilst the Devil was thus discoursing, there came to S. Baume Sister
Catherine of Isle, with another of the same Company. Whereupon Experience does
teach that in matters of curiosity they do laugh and make a lest of men.
one that was present said unto the Dominican Father, whether he thought the
Devil could presage of their arrival: who being asked thereof, without seeing
or hearing of her, answered it was she. Then being demanded, whether there came
but one or no, he answered, there is none but Catherine of France: which was
not true: and when one of the Assembly did reproach his ignorance, Verrine
said, Do you wonder at that, this is not the first lie that I have told.

Then the Dominican Father softly rounded Father Romillon in the ear* and
said, It is no wonder though he intermingle something of his own, when men out
of mere curiosity do ask him questions. Scarce had the Father finished
these words when We have often made trial, that when Verrine spoke according
to his commission that tended to the conversion of the two Witches, he always
told the troth and never failed: but being put from that he declared himself
to be a true Devil, oftentimes interrupting Confession, and a long space
endeavoring to hinder the receiving of the Communion. The reason whereof is set
down in the acts of the 15 of Ian. in the mar^e^r.
Verrine said, It is true, I am not bound in that case to speak the truth, for
I never do it but by constraint, or for some sinister and malicious purpose.

About the same time, the Devil Verrine was observed against his customarie
manner to be very still and silent, and being demanded why he thus held his
peace, he answered, Because some think that the things which I do utter are
not worthy to be written. And indeed some were of opinion, that they ought
not to give heed to these discourses, but only to the deliverance of these
poor creatures: at the least, that it was not necessary to booke-downe what
he spoke. Yea, some conceived tha^ it was no Devil that spoke in Louyse, but
as soon a^ they revoked that their opinion, Verrine then began to discourse as
he was accustomed.

The acts of the 14. day of December.
Upon that day Father Francis Billet Priest of the Christian Doctrine saying
Mass, at the elevation of the blessed Sacrament, Verrine began hideously to
yell, as if he had been mad and desperate, saying, tha^ he adored the God of
the Christians, and confessed him to be his Creator and Judge. He further
said, that he was in the Chalice blood and bones, clothed with hi^ Humanity
and Divinity, as when he was crucified o^ the tree of the Cross: and was
there as great and as ful^ of dimensions as when he was upon the same tree:
ye^ was his body covered under a morsel of bread, and hi^ blood under a
little wine really and substantially. He^ made also repetition of the same at
the Mass, which was said by Friar Francis Domptius of the reformed Order of S.
Dominicke. Verrine also added, I said in m^ rage, that thou were of the
reformed Order: Cursed b^ the inspiration of Michaelis who began this
Reformation, which will be an occasion to correct the disorder of many
Monasteries as well of men at of women. Thi^ is it that makes us to despair.
I say besides, that some will give out, that Romillon has taught Louyse, etc.
Al^ this he repeated again at the elevation of the blessed Sacrament, Father
James de Rets Priest of the Doctrine saying Mass.

The same day in the morning was Sister Louyse an^ Sister Magdalene exorcised
by the Dominican Father^ And there happened a long dispute between God of the
one part, and the Devil of the other, whether God ^ught to make the Companies
of S. Vrsula and of the ^octrine, as also the Sister Louyse his instruments to
^ut that in execution, which he intended to accomplish. ^ow because I had no
leisure to write it down, Ver^ine did afterward will me to write that which
then ^ad bin disputed, but first would have me to command ^im to do this by
virtue and power of the Exorcismes, ^s they always use to do. As soon as I
had comman^ed him, he began to speak in this manner: I have spo^en formerly
(meaning in his discourse the day past) in ^he honor of Martha and of the
Angels. This I did upon good reason, The prosecution of the praise of Virgins.
for Virgins are the sisters of An^els, and shall be exalted, because Mary
would have it ^o: yet always without any prejudice to Magdalene, ^or in
Paradise there is no ambition.

I also said, that the Son did much esteem of Mag^alene, by reason of her
affection; and the Mother of God did exceedingly love Martha in that she vowed
^irginitie (which she did in imitation of the Mother of God) she also loved
Martha, because she was the Ho^esse of her Son.

I said, that yesterday I had spoken of Lucia and of ^irginitie, and that
Virgins were sisters unto the An^els, and that they did sing a new hymn, which
none ^ould sing but themselves.

I also said, that married women might be happy enough, and go to heaven, but
that Virgins did attain unto it with more facility then they.

The conference of Verrine with God, or with the good Angel sent from God.
Besides, I entered into disputation with God, say^ng: Why have thou instituted
the Sacrament of Mari^ge, if thy intendment were not that all should be
mar^ied? His reply was, that they who were unmarried were all espoused unto
him. To which I reioyned, that ^uch Pismires as they, could not deserve so
great a King ^or their husband.

God answered me, that they had forsaken all for his ^oue, and that for a lump
of earth (thereby meaning man) they did bequeath and betroth themselves to him.
And in liew of those momentarie blessings and riches, which for his sake they
had abandoned, he would open unto them the treasures of Paradise: and for a
little pleasure which passes away as the wind, he would glut them with the
delights of Paradise which endure for ever. Furthermore, I did object that he
did prepare Crowns for them as if they were Queens, and had well deserved it:
but, said I, they have merited nothing. He answered me that they were true
Queens. I replied, that they were Chamber-maides, and that I should not have
wondered at Vrsula which was a Queen, at Margaret the Queen of Hungary, at
Catherine of Alexandria, at Gertrude, at Margaret the Martyr, who have
performed many memorable exploites, for the love of him and of many others. He
answered me, that his custom was that from baseness and from things of the
meanest condition, he used to work matters of great moment for his glory,
and for the conversion of souls. To this I replied, that I should not have
wondered if in a matter of this nature he had made election of some great
Philosopher or Doctor, or of some great Queen, or of some magnificent Empress
and Princess: but I was confounded with wonder when I perceived he would make
choice of personages of so high a quality, from such Pismires as was Louyse.
He answered me, that he did not this for her, as if she had deserved it, but
had done it for his glory, and for the conversion of souls.

The desire of Louyse to suffer patiently.
Then (said I) cursed be that desire which swaied in her (speaking of Louyse)
and made her ready to endur^ hell it self (if it had been expedient) for the
glory of God and salvation of souls. And here I began tohowle as one
surcharged with despair and madness, and more fearfully indeed then I can
express it, saying, that she was a Huguenot, and that her father and mother
died Huguenots, and that she was baptized in the Louyse baptized in a kitche^
by a Minister.
kitchen of Monsieur de Mailhians at S. Rhemy, and that Joseph Dessade of
Beaucamp, brother of Michael Dessade of Lagoy was godfather to Louyse, and
Louyse of Pourcelet daughter of Monsieur de Mailhians was her godmother, in
whose house she was baptized by a Minister. Then God told me that many souls
had been converted to him by Catherine of Sienna, and that humiliation is to
go before, that exaltation may follow after: and that the calling of this
wretch (meaning her that had the devils in her body, to wit, Louyse de
Cappeau) had been debased and exposed to derision, as also dishonored and
disrespected by the devils, who would have waded further into these advantages,
if they might be suffered. Many incongruities are committed in the judgments,
which men and women make upon the event of things; but this calling should by
the same means purchase much glory and reputation, through which formerly it
was depressed: and that God should be magnified even by those who did offend
herein, when they should once comprehend all the circumstan^es of this
business. And this is it where withal the Devils are so enraged. Then cried
Lucifer, Come and ^elpe us, Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Balberith, Asmodeus, Astaroth,
Carreau, and let all Hell come, for we are at our wits ends, and can make no
longer resistance. I also added, that we were now all desperate, that Hell it
self ^ad entertained a dreadful combination and conspira^ie, and that we
were all unloosed to ruin and fling ^eadlong into perdition the whole Order of
the Do^trine, and the whole Touching. the Company of S. Vrsula.
Company of Vrsula: and that we had environed them with all sorts of
temptations as well men as women of both Companies, from the least and youngest
unto the greatest of them: and that we ^ad given impeachment unto others to be
of that Com^anie, and suggested unto them, that they might do well to
encloyster themselves in Monasteries, where ^hey might abide in the house of
God their Father, and might do much good, as frequenting Hospitals and
Churches.

Moreover, that by bringing of the company of the doctrine unto ruin, we
should easily root out the other company, to wit of S. Vrsula, because these
are guided by them. For the Priests of the doctrine are founded and established
expressly to guide and govern them, and were particularly reformed for that
purpose. As also because the two companies had a reference the one to the
other, and were to be fellow laborers for Gods glory, and the salvation of
their neighbors, and were to march hand in hand, that is, where there was a
house appointed for the sisters, there was also to be a house for these
Fathers. Then Verrin began to cry as if he had been mad, that there
Godpermitted this for his glory, and the exaltation of that company.
were six sisters (...) S. Vrsula bewitched or possessed, to wit, Magdalen^
Catherine of Isle, Margaret Burles, Martha of Gazier and that unhappy Louyse:
for Anne of Bonieux said, he is full of sorrow. The Devil (said he) is not in
the bodi^ when he ^will, but when it conduces with the glori^ of God. There be
that demand the same with much instance and solicitation, but that which
others do so vrgently demand, and for the most part are denied has been
granted unto this unlucky woman.

I further say, that I would rather choose to be in the body of a dog or of a
hog, then to be where I am and I have petitioned Lucifer, that he would take
m^ off from this body, because there is nothing here to b^ gotten; and I
cursed Beelzebub that he would not com^ and take me from hence, and that I would
rather sa^ upon a supper in Hell, then taste that dinner which I ha^ at S.
Baume. He further said that a certain disputation betwixt God and him was
acted in S. Baume at the fee^ of S. Magdalen as here ensues.

I said to God he might do well to discover by vision to this unhappy woman
what he intended, he answered me that visions were too dangerous, and that he
would cause her to understand his pleasure when and how he ^leased, and that
she should do well to humble her self! I said unto him that it was the
devil that made ^er speak, but God replied upon me that it was not ^rue, and
that all came from him, and to understand this said he) there needs no In
confession and out of confession she still said, that she regarded not to be
possessed, since it was Gods pleasure for the manifestation of his glory.
other argument the^ this, that ^er soul is in repose, and that she is full of
gladness, and ^he devil does not possesse-those souls that are peaceable and
chierefull. Also God the more to try her, told ^er that she was to humble her
self even to the pro^oundest gulf hell, and that she should reckon of her
self no more, then if she were a handful of dust, or of dirt, or as the leaf
of a tree that falls to the ground: and further that she should conceive her
self to be unworthy to tread on the face of the earth. Then said the Devil,
this will swell her with pride; but God made ^nswere, that his grace should
suffice to preserve her vn^ainted by vainglory, and that she should make
recognition that all was derived from him; and that of her self she was
nothing, but was confident that he would give her his grace, to acknowledge
this nothing. Then I added, that the date of miracles was now ^xpired. And his
reply was, that he was still ^he same God, who wrought them in times past, and
that he was both as powerful and willing, as he was in those ^aies.

The Devil answered; that she was not endowed with those virtues, as were
those in whose time such miracles were done. What? she is no Saint, she is a
Pis^mire. Then God commanded me to be gone, and hold my ^eace, and so I was
enforced to withdraw my self, and ^o suffer Louyse to finish her devotions.
All this was ^one in the presence of her Creator, and of the blessed ^acrament,
that was there, and of her superior, John Bap^ista Romillon, and of Catherine
of Isle. To conclude, ^he Devil was so impatient of this discourse, that he
^egan to roar, as unable to endure such talk any longer: and cried thrice,
that he had lost all hope both o^ God, and that unhappy woman.

This dispute internally and externally endured little less then an hour and
a quarter, in Saint Baume: an^ much of this disputation was repeated at the
time o^ Mass the same day in the mornings discourse.

Then was Louyse commanded to tell her Superiou^ and all those that had charge
of her soul, as also to him that did exorcise her, and to all those to whose
benefi^ it might any way appertain, all her temptations and internal
conferences, for fear least she should be deceived by the Devil. In
conclusion, they recalled to her remembrance those five points which that last
Sunday they recommended unto her: to wit, a good intention, a pure affection,
purity of conscience (which i^ one of those points) humility which is
another, obedience, and resignation of the world which is another This done,
Verrine spoke and said, I have formerly said that some Priests go to the
Church as if they were to go to a stable without any preparation, or
premeditation of that which they have to do. I have also said that the Son
of God did yield more In the Scripture phrase as we have formerly cited out of
the book of Joshua the 10. chapter.
obedience to you then you to God, and that as soon as a Priest does speak,
God presently descends upon the Altar. ^ have also said, that the Priest was
equal in honor unto the Mother of God, yet did not his mother dare to touch
him but with fear and reverence, no not she^ which had carried him in her
womb nine months.

I said, that if they were to behold him they would draw back and be dazeled
with his exceeding brightness, or at least would prepare themselves better the^
they do. Then Louyse said, that it was revealed to si^ster Louyse in Saint
Baume in that disputation, how the Magician should be converted by the prayers
of ou^ Lady, if he hardened not himself against them, and how God had
inwardly commanded sister Louyse to pray for him.

After this, there was a letter directed to be sent to ^e Sisters that were
the Co-adiutors in the house of Vrsula at Aix as here ensues. Most dear, best
loved and ever honored Sisters, I unworthy to call ^u my Sisters do beseech
you to pray unto your Re^emer to take mercy upon me desolate and distressed
^etch, unworthy to call upon the name of God. I do ^aue pardon of you as often
as I have grieved, provoked, ^d debased you, and that many times upon no ground.

Your most humble obedient and indeed vnwor^y to name you, the servant and
slave of Catherine, ^pirite, Magdalene Honorate, and of all those whom ^od has
created and formed (God be merciful unto ^em all) Louyse Cappeau. While the
said letter was di^ated, the Devil began to say, Ha God, thou go a^ut to
humble one, and I will cause four other to fall ^ infusing into them vain
glory. Then he said, God ^swereth me that he would humble them by those five
^ints above mentioned to Louyse, which she should ^ake familiar unto them, and
should not fail to per^rme it.

The same day in the evening the two that were pos^sed were exorcised by Father
Francis Billet: when ^rrine began to speak of Hell and of sundry other ^iects
saying, Catherine humble thy self, and remember what I said unto thee in the
morning, that the ser^nts of God were to humble themselves and to endure
^tiently, to be scorned and trodden under foot. Men ^e so ungrateful, that
they serve God with less re^ect and veneration then they bear unto their
grooms ^lackies. Also, men do so little regard his commanments as if a groom
had made them: yet notwith^nding he who gave them unto Moses has recom^nded
them unto you.

There be ten Commandments, and yet they are but ^o.

When men preach unto men of Hell and Paradise, there is no more heed given
unto it, then if they preached of some rock of stone. S. Francis When it
pleases God all things accomplish his will. He commanded the Raven of Helias,
and the Worm that withered Jonas his gourd
preached to stones, and Anthony of Padua to fishes. It is strange, the very,
beasts did bow down their heads, thereby making recognition after their
mariner of the benefits they had received, and therefore shall rise up against
men at the day of Judgment.

In Hell we make wondrous much of men in requital of their obedience which
they carried toward us. We say unto them, Discourse of Hell.
Damned and ungrateful as you are, you would not serve and acknowledge your
God, and then we lay on load as it, were with bars of iron, and do
intollerably torment them.

There are no gates for men to get out of Hell, but the gates to enter in are
very large and spacious.

The repast and fare which they have in Hell are Serpents, Toads, Scorpions,
and whatsoever else is filthy and abhorred: the drink is brimstone,
wormwood, rhew, and all bitter and distasteful liquours. We put them in a
seat of flames and fire which does grievously scorch them, and do often
remember them of Paradise, thereby to augment their torments. Upon the earth
they ear white bread, but here they must gnaw upon crusts, and that without
their teeth.

In stead of perfumes we stuff their nostrels with stinkes and loathsome
favors, and in stead of delightsome songs we fill their ears with derisions,
blasphemies, and cursings, saying, Cursed be the God that has created thee,
cursed be the father and mother that have begotten thee, cursed be the air
that thou did breathe, cursed be the four elements, cursed be the
creatures that have any way obeyed thee.

And to add unto their torments, we set before them Heaven, together with the
glory and those pleasures which they have lost, because they have transgressed
through malice, not through ignorance, and remained obstinate in the same.

He that would dine at ease in this world must sup in Hell.

We also provide milk for them, in comparison of which the hail of Laurent is
a heap of roses. All misery is contained in Hell, as in Paradise all
happiness does abound.

The damned souls are more horredly deformed then the Devils themselves, and
eternally, eternally, eternally, eternally, eternally shall they blaspheme the
name of God. And we have permission to inflict upon them most sharp and
exquisite torments, for their unclean and bestiall speeches.

And as the hangman does his office when he tortureth a malefactor that is
condemned by the Judge, so the Devils are not nice to perform their charge
they have to torment souls.

The torments of Hell are torments indeed, and the greatest tortures of the
world which are inflicted upon malefactors, compared with these, are but as
flowers and roses.

They shall be damned everlastingly, everlastingly, everlastingly, without
hope of intermission or end, everlastingly, everlastingly.

The Devils shall bind you hand and foot, and, being thus manicled, they
shall throw you into a boiling chauldron: and after you have been burned in
these flames, you shall be engulfed in a sea of ice. None can resist the
Almighty when he has a purpose to do a thing. God has given you a soul,
and appointed her to be the Mistress: it stands with good reason that the
Mistrisse should bear sway, and not the chambermaide.

God has given your three faculties or powers: give him the keys thereof, and
suffer him to have the government of them.

Lock fast your gate, that is to say, your will, against all manner of vice:
shut up your windows, to wit, the five external senses, that thieves steal
not in and make a cheat upon your souls. Then Verrine said, I had rather an
hundred thousand times sup in Hell, then have given you such a supper, as by
this discourse I have done, and withal swore, that he had uttered all, which
is above mentioned, for the glory of God, that all proceeded from God, and
that the Devil was forced thereunto as a slave or a captive in the galleys.

Then he said to those that were there present: This Baume, this Rock, these
leaves will rise up against you at the day of Judgment, if you make not your
advantage of these things. Your God loves you so well, that if it were
behoofull for you, he would at this very instant return to Mount Caluary.

The same day, this dialogue chanced to be between Verrine and Beelzebub.
Verrine said, You that hear Mass do say, I believe that my God is there in
blood and bones, and that in the Chalice, both his flesh and bones, his
Humanity and Divinity are present. But you must conceive, that you are there
as poor malefactors before your Judge: pray therefore unto your Judge and he
will hear you, for he gives grace unto the humble, and casts down the
proud of heart. Oh how narrow is the gate of Paradise, and how low you are to
stoop to enter into it.

Then The discourse of Beelzebub co^plaining to God of his over great mercy to
sinners, even to the Magician himself, in whose custody remained the scheduls
of Magdalene.
Beelzebub said: Ha God, thou art too plenteous in thy pity to sinners: the
Devil is enforced to acknowledge it. I am not at this time possessed with the
scheduls, Lewis has them in his custody: to the confusion of Devils is this
great mercy showed toward sinners.

Christ Jesus is ever showing his wounds to his Father he does always renew
and make them fresh, and does still represent them unto him. All Hell is
confounded: Misericordia Dei plena est terra. O Mercy, thou art too too
exceedingly great! You have no more to do but only to cry peccaui, and
presently all is pardoned: a mercy indeed too spacious. Let a man renounce
God, his Passion, and all the merits of the same, and let him only say
Miserere mei, and presently all is pardoned: confusion unto us, Confundatur
superbia Diabolorum. Lord, thou did cast forth the Angels which would have
bandied themselves against thee, and did crush in pieces all their forces:
yet let a sinner cast himself headlong into Hell, and renounce thy precious
blood and wounds, yet will thou ever mediate for them to thy Father, and wilt
receive them into grace if they bring with them a pure desire to return back
to God for thy sake: a mercy too large for sinners, and damnation too great for
the Devil.

Cursed be the wound that cost me so dear, because in it all sins are
swallowed up: Cursed be Long in us that made that wound. O God most bountiful
unto sinners: O virtuous and most merciful Mary. The Devil is their God, and
yet O Mary thou art always falling at the feet of thy son; thou art ever
interceding for them: thou art always saying, To day and to morrow, and do
ever prolong and drive things off. In saying this he desired against his
ordinary manner to have an oath ministered unto him: and for further
confirmation of the truth, he said that one of Magdalens The Glove of the Girl
was too little for her, and could not be pulled on but by violence.
Gloves should fall to the ground, and that he would stretch himself flat
upon the earth. Then said Verrine to him, humble thy self Beelzebub. What is
now become of thy strength? Beelzebub said, Confundatur su^erbia Diaboli: I am
now constrained to humble my self. Then Verrine said: All you that are here,
come and tread upon him, speaking this to the Assembly.

Then Beelzebub began to cry: what, under the feet of men? Do men resist God,
and am not I able to do the same? Verrine said, God is so merciful, that he
will fill up the empty seats in heaven, and will pardon men their offenses.
Then did Beelzebub infer, O what a judgment is here against those which will
not turn and be converted. Next after Lucifer, I am the proudest, yet learn
from hence to humble your selves. For one offense am I damned for ever, for
ever, for ever.

And that justly said Verrine; we are damned because we had more illumination
then was given unto men. O, O, O, Mercy (said Beelzebub) how great art thou for
the sinner, O Justice, how severe art thou against us? Occasions of doing good
are never wanting unto the sinner: he has the benefit of Preachers, of
Confessors, and of Miracles, and yet remains obstinate in his sin, and
still God is so favorable in his behalf, that he will at the last cast make
use of Devils for his conversion, Verrine replied, superbos humiliat, he is
more powerful to attract sinners unto goodness, then are the Devils in their
malice to allure them unto ill.

Further he said, I fear not Beelzebub, nor Lucifer, nor all Hell besides. I
am not to be punished for this. God has commanded me, and yet there be some
found that will not believe this. Never busy your selves further about
repentance, for the day of Exclamation against sinners.
judgment does approach, and (...) very stones shall rise up, and the leaves
shall bandy themselves against those that shall dwell still in their
obstinacy: I warn you all of this both young and old, for Death is a thief
that spares none, but sweepeth all away rich and poor, great and small and as
the hook moweth down the hay, so Death with his sith cutteth down all.

Beelzebub constrained to swear and to tell the truth.
Then said Beelzebub, it is no longing of ours to deliver the truth. Whereupon
Verrine took occasion to say; Magdalene, this he utters in confirmation of
the letter directed to the blessed Mother of God, and pronounced by Verrine in
the mouth of Louyse; read i^ often, and keep it as thou would do
relickes. Then said Beelzebub: I swear that I have reasoned of the mercy of
God, to confound all Devils, Magicians, and Witches, that are in the world, and
all them that do^ practice or trade with Magic. At this Verrine said, Through
maine compulsion art thou drawn to swear, and although thou be my Prince,
yet at this present thou art but as a Fly. Where are thy braues and forces now?
thou that but a while since did outface heaven and earth, do now humble
thy self under the feet of Frauncis.

Then Verrine setting his foot upon Beelzebub, said, I am thy vassal. Thou
would have plucked God from his Throne. Consider you that are here, whither
Monsieur de Guyse your Governor would ever have endured, that a Lackey should
brave him thus, as I do now my Prince. And turning to Magdalene he said:
Endure patiently Magdalene, for the remission of thy sins, and think thy
self even unworthy to humble thy self; Resist thou Beelzebub, for thou see
how I brave him, and yet there are here five Princes in this body.

The Devils would have laid diverse foul aspersions and disgraces upon the
Companies of the Doctrine and of Saint Vrsula, but God is pleased to exalt them
as it were by Pismires and leaves of trees. Labor therefore for the glory of
God.

Then he swore that whatsoever had been by him delivered, of hell, and of the
mercy of God, and of those that were obstinate, was all true: by the
obstinate, he tacitly meant those that were negligent in their devotions to
Saint These are the Patrones of the Country of Province together with Saint
Magdalene, where their bodies lie interred.
Martha, and Lazarus.

Afterward the Priest saying Fecit potentiam, Verrine thus discoursed. All
things are the works of the hands of the Almighty. It is strange, that they
say every where, there is nothing that withstandeth God or the Church. I say
that many Christians are Gods friends at his Table, but few followed him to
Mount Caluary; your Redeemer was forced to be there almost alone. Some will be
contented to be present at a Mass, and then desire that within half a quarter
of an hour it should all be ended. Try your selves, and be regardfull of your
souls, for you have but one, and let that be surrendered up to him that gave it.

We could be contented, that there were none but rocks and trees to hear us.
This is it that pusheth us on to despair, that never any Preacher did deliver
so much, and that this fact of ours will be diuulged all abroad.

Then he spoke to the sister Catherine, and said: Catherine thou art entangled
with many encumbrances, thou must suffer thy self to be instructed, and to
say, Gods will be done. Cursed be that word that has cost me so dear, whereby
the Devil does lesson others against the Devil. Catherine suffer it to be
done, for thou art yet unexperienced. Then Verrine spoke to the Devils that
were in the body of sister Catherine, saying, Speak accursed Spirits, come
into the field.

Beelzebub also said: There is no means to hide thy self, thy Prince is
humbled, therefore take not thou in scorn to humble thy self. Let us go and
disclose our selves. Obedi Deo, and Mariae Virgini, Mariae Magdalenae: Obedi
maledicte, maledictio Dei omnipotentis sit super te superbe. Obedi Deo,
confundatur superbia. I command thee by almighty God, tell me thy name, The
Devils are ever very dainty and squeamish to discover them selves, or to tell
their names for fear of being exorcised, commanded, and by punishments imposed
on them, tormented.
I command thee by the Virgin Mary, by Saint Vrsula cum socijs, confundatur
superbia. Will thou yet make head against thy Captain? I will make thee speak,
and fall under my feet, for since that I have humbled my self, I will have
thee humbled also. Surge, augeo tibi poenas, thou art but a proud Spirit. I
regard not whither thou speak or no, for I will tell, that thou art a Spirit
called Sabathon.

And speaking to the Exorcist, he said, Increase his pains, seeing he will not
tell his name. Verrine said, We are of the rank of Thrones, and do yet yield
our obedience, but here the men would be better then their Masters. That time
is not yet come.

Physicians are contented to give Physic, and we must give both Physic and
restoratiues.

You that are here present will testify and say, that you have seen three
women possessed for the glory of God, and for the estimation of the two
Companies of Saint Vrsula and of the Doctrine, and that the Devil never met
with such an affront and encounter: for all hell is amazed at it.

Cursed be the Charm, cursed be he that advised to give it. O what a great
reparation will this make in the breach that was caused by sin.

Louyse, thou art but a poor wench and of base condition: yet could we wish
thou had been a Queen, a Saint, or skilled in Philosophy. Thou do but
lend thy tongue in the utterance of these things, and have now delivered twelve
several discourses, by the which thou art much confirmed; Be content with
this: You have seen the beginning, the progress and issue of this matter.
This was in that hour wherein the Sermon of the Aduent was ended at Aix, where
he preached about eleven a clock in the forenoone.
O Michaelis, thou art now preaching, and have said many things and that truly,
but have gained very little by the same. Louyse never studied, and yet has in
a summarie comprehended all manner of perfection.

Then he said, that upon a Tuesday was the birthday of Louyse being the feast
of Anthony of Padua, and upon that day he entered into the Order of Saint
Vrsula: upon a Tuesday was the day of Saint Maximin, where we were discovered;
and upon that day we departed from Aix to come hither. Upon a Tuesday Louyse
made her general confession, and was borne about midnight on a Tuesday, the
same hour that your Lord was born, being the thirteen of June; and it is
about thirty years ago since she was borne.

The same day Beelzebub and Verrine began to curse in the chamber where they
were saying, Cursed be him who first began to write these events: Cursed be
the Printer that shall put them forth: Cursed be the Doctors that shall
examine them: and cursed be those that shall compile the contents hereof in a
volume: Cursed be the Pope that shall give his approbation thereunto: Cursed be
the Cardinals Archbishops and Bishops that shall give any passage or
assistance unto the same. For since the beginning of the world until the day of
judgment there never happened, nor ever shall happen an accident of a semblable
nature.

The Acts of the 15. of December.
Upon which day in the morning Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by the
Dominican Father. And at the beginning of the Exorcismes Verrine took occasion
to speak of Saints in this manner.

Gods pleasure is that I speak of the Saints which are in Paradise, my mortal
enemies. I would have here resisted God and the blessed Trinity, but they do
constrain me to speak. Beelzebub, thou art but as a Pismire in comparison of
God. How strange a thing it is that devils must be feign to discourse of the
glory of Saints whose mortal enemies they are, and would, if it lay in their
power, pluck them from thence, and carry them headlong to hell.

Frauncis is in heaven: and Lucifer lost his splendour by his excessive pride,
to the attainement of which Frauncis has aspired by his humility.

If a He speaks according to the capacity of the simple people that were
there present, because these two did use to preach in the Towns of Province.
Michaelis, a father Lawrence, or some great learned personage should preach
this, I would not be abashed at it, but that a devil should speak it by the
mouth of a Pismire, there lies the wonder. But the God of the Christians will
have it so, and he which lies in the blessed Sacrament at S. Baume commands
it.

Mortifications are by them that are unacquainted with their virtues accounted
yrksome. John Baptist with all his repentance was contemned, but is now high in
glory in Paradise, he is sanctified, and is one of the great familiars and
friends of God: who to show to sinners the way unto repentance, took upon him
repentance when he had not sinned. That mortifications are ^equ^s^te toward the
attainement of Paradise.
We are therefore to pass through mortification if we would attain unto the
place of bliss and glory. Is it not strange that the devils should teach men
mortification and advise them thereunto? Ioannes Euangelista was the great
friend of God, and Maryes guardian for her chastity. Stephanus, cursed may
thou be, I must trumpet forth thy charity in praying for those that stoned
thee. O Pernardus, thou art Mary's darling, and thou Dominicke, and thou
Stanislaus also, though few take notice of thee. P^ulus, thou were a sinner and
persecutor of the Christians, but afterward did become a great Preacher of
virtues. Anthonius of Padua, through thy humility, and for thy other virtues
thou art now in Paradise.

By thy obedience, O Abraham, thou art the Father of believers: David is the
glass of repentance wherein sinners may behold themselves, and how they are to
return unto their God. Tu Petrus, thou have denied thy Master. Accursed
Peter, thou have cost me dear: O Peter, by thy example those that have denied
God will learn to be converted. William the Hermit was a great sinner, yet by
his repentance he found mercy. Some go to heaven through repentance, others
through innocence. Mary is in Paradise for her innocence, Magdalene for her
repentance. Jews King of France is the Patron of Kings. It is the good
pleasure of God, that men of all conditions should be saved. He has made
election of Emperors, and also of the basest sort of people, of Shooe-makers,
and of Husbandmen. Crispinian was a Cobbler: Athanasius a Labouring-man, yet
was he at length chosen to be a Bishop. There are of all sorts in Heaven (to
our confusion be it spoken) to the end that none might have any pretension for
excuse. God places those in Paradise which love his Commandments and keep
them, and do not quench in themselves his good inspirations. He sets them at
his table: He causes them to eat of his bread, and drink of his wine: He
does not as the men of this world do, use their servants as if they were
slaves; Nay, there be diverse that do a great deal worse, who cherish and
make much of their dogs, but do evil entreat their servants. Then he said
that he should not be abashed if God would elect Princes and not men of base
condition: yea, we could be contented to have patience that he should choose
men; but that women should be gadding to Paradise, that is it that maddeth us.
In the Martyrologe the third of March.
Cunigonda was an Empress, and is in Paradise, so is Catherine of Alexandria,
and eleven thousand Virgins went in one day to Paradise, besides men which are
not numbered. In Ribadineira 25. Ianuar.
Margaret of Hungary was a Queen, she entered into a Monastery, and became so
humble that she would not be called the daughter of a King but of a Citizen.
Cursed be her humility for which we have paid so dear. To this Beelzebub
replied, Amen. Then Verrine continuing on his discourse, said: Barbara was
beheaded by her own Father, and presently the Devil slew him upon the place.
The earth and Paradise are two Countries very distinct and different, here
those that are most rich go foremost, in Paradise those that are most good,
most humble, and most obedient. In the Martyrologe 1. Nouemb.
Marie was a poor Chambermaid, and the Chambermaid of a Paynim, yet is she
now espoused unto the King of glory, and as great as Cunigunda. Margaret of
Scotland was a married woman, and yet she went to Heaven.

Codelana also was a married woman, whose husband strangled her, and afterward
caused her to be thrown into a pit.

Elizabeth was the Queen Dowager of Hungary, and in her great humility betook
her self to be the Mistress of an Hospital.

Notwithstanding we could let pass all this with patience, but we cannot
choose but be enraged at those that have committed folly and were great
sinners, as were Pelagia, Thais, and Magdalene: which we speak without any
prejudice to them or their glory, it does rather conduce with the glory of
God and his bounteousnesse, that he would vouchsafe to take them into bliss,
who did a thousand times deserve Hell.

They that will not believe what is here spoken, will say that these two here
be women, and have had their lesson given unto them: by which means these
discourses will not prove useful unto them, which does put us in great
comfort. A Preacher is often wearied in preaching of one Sermon, and I have
already made fifteen discourses by the mouth of this woman here (meaning
Louyse) and have sometimes made two or three in a day of greater extent and
length, then Preachers in their Aduents. Cursed be thy force, and cursed be him
that has bestowed it upon thee. Beelzebub at this discourse cried out. O power!
Then Verrine said, it is the force which God gives her. How strange is it that
Devils should preach the Commandments of God and his Counsels, and should
teach the religious, Clergy men, Priests, and Seculars, and all sorts of
people? I tell you, here are viands for all people to eat; Eat he that will.
There are not a few of us who are not well pleased with the sauce, but would
rather choose the sauce of Hell. You shall find Notaries that for a matter of
five sous will Register the Acts false, and break their oaths. The Devils are
more faithful unto their Master then you men are.

When the Devils have once sworn according to the purpose of God and his
Church, being thus adjured unto the truth they want ability to lie. Men have
their free will, if they do ill, they do go forthwith to hell; if good,
they are straight admitted into heaven. But the Devil is merely constrained
to speak the truth when God would have it so: they have no freewill to do
that which is good, but are enforced, accursed Fiends as they are, to deliver a
truth. Otherwise to what purpose scrueth the authority of the Church, if oaths
have no tie or power? or to what end are these books of Exorcisines published?
For they that deny this, must deny the authority of the Church, and those
that have composed and allowed the said books. They must further say, that
there was never any dispossessed after the taking of an oath. But they plunge
into a gulf, from whence they can never issue out, and either they must make
search and inquisition, after the curious persons that are in hell, to make
explanation of their curiosities, or after the Saints in heaven, to cause them
to say, that all their writings are nothing worth: And so by a consequence they
will come to deny the Church, and so stand defiled with the infectious opinions
of the Caluinists.

How wonderful is this? that Devils should preach of good intention, pure
affection, purity of conscience, simplicity, humility, and resignation of
the world, and teach men not to reserve the least love of themselves: as also
to show the means toward the attainment of Paradise, and to discourse of
chastity and poverty? The Devils will be a means of the reformation of many
Monasteries, the Devils will yield more furtherance hereunto, then their
Bishops, Abbots, or Prelates are able; to their great grief do they reveal
it: This must be the means of that reformation. Then he took an oath after
this form: I do here swear by that God, whom you worship, and who is your
Creator and Redeemer, that whatsoever I have here spoken is true, and that all
is done for his glory, the salvation of souls, and instruction of the
Clergy, and Laytie, and all sorts of people; for the good and the bad, and for
the reformation of many Monasteries as well of men as of women; All which is
most true. I swear this according to the intention of God and his Church,
which I never did before, and this oath I have taken upon the blessed Sacrament,
and without being spoken unto by you; and have sworn this with all the
solemnities that are required to a true oath, according to the intention of God
and his Spouse the Church, that whatsoever I have delivered was for his glory,
as also for the conue^sion of souls, and the extirpation of Heresies, and
Magic: All which is true, and nothing is here uttered against the glory of
God, or against his Church; And I have said, that it shall have approbation
from the Church, and that I never took such a kind of oath before. And when I
was to take this oath, I said, I do swear by the living God, which is the
greatest oath that may be taken.

After this he said: Those that are so preiudicate as to say, these things are
false and very unsuitable to truth, shall do a wrong to God. They affirm that
God is omnipotent, and yet in effect deny his omnipotency; and perhaps (...)
that God is less If God were not powerful to compel the Devils, it must be
so.
puissant then the Devil. And in regard these events runue in a course beyond
ordinary, there are many that will rather deny Gods power, then confess that
this is true. The Devil by the first article of their Creed, Credo Patre^s
omnipotentem, does prove, that they are to believe that God is omnipotent: And
if it be so, he might then have done all this by a Pismire, yea and greater
things then these; for he can (if the concurrence of his will and power should
resolve thereon) create a hundred thousand worlds out of nothing.

After this, Louyse retired her self into her chamber, as being all in a
sweat, through her exceeding toil and the vehement action of the Devil.
Presently did Beelzebub prince of the Devils in the body of Magdalene, begin to
contest against the mercy of God, in manner as follows.

An admirable inuectiue and complaint of Beelzebub to God, where he sets
down a Brief of the cu^sed abiu^ations and execrations made by the Magicians
when they received the mark of the Diu^ll, and abominably gave the^s^lues unto
him.
O mercy too great! O God, can thou not be contented to take from us
sinners, but must thy mercy also extend to those, who have given and made over
unto us body and soul, and whatsoever else they did or could possess? And
this they gave us in writing, and in schedules signed with their blood, yet for
all this do thou take them from us?

It is A discovery worthy of admiration, and of fear.
strange, that thou take them from us in such a manner, when they have made
renunciation of thee, thy Father, and the holy Ghost, together with all his
goodness, love, and mercy, that they might be made incapable of the same,
and be damned for evermore. They have renounced thy Mother, and all her
prayers that she might make for them, with her womb and breasts, that they
might never prove compassionate in their behalf; her remembrance that she
might never be mindful of them; her will, that she might never pray unto her
Son for their conversion; her understanding, that she might never think upon
them, but might abandon and give them up into the hands of the Devils: all
Angels, and all Saints, and all (...) benefits which God had ever bestowed upon
them, or was to bestow upon them hereafter: all inspirations that might be
infused into them to draw them unto him. They have cursed all that ever God
created for the good of man: all the prayers that Angels, Saints, and men might
make in their behalf, to the end they might be without all possibility of
returning to God, saying, they had naught to do with him, his blessings,
favors or Paradise. They have renounced his passion and blood, with all the
merits thereof, that they might have no power or efficacy upon their souls,
but might lay a pressure upon them of greater obstinacy. They have inuocated
upon themselves the wrath of Almighty God, of his all-knowing Son, of the
euer-bounteous holy Spirit, as also the indignation of the Mother of God, of
all Angels, and of all Saints: saying, the blood of the Son of God fall upon
us body and soul eternally. Yet for all this do thou take them from us.
And notwithstanding that in despite of thee, and all that thou have done for
them, they are desirous to be ours, yet do thou take them from us.

They have taken the Devil and the Magician for their God, Creator, and
Redeemer, Savior, and sanctifier, and will not have any reference or
dependence upon God, but from the Devil and from the Magician, and do
worship, magnify, and praise as well the Devil as the Magician, as if they
were Gods.

They have renounced God who has created all: they have blasphemed him, making
retractation of all the good that ever they did for Gods sake, and attribute
all their subsequent actions to the Devil and the Magician: yet for all this
art thou so good that thou would bereave us of them, and have thy arms
always open to receive them. They were bequeathed and consecrated to thee, and
notwithstanding this, they have by a sure earnest contracted marriage with the
Devil and the Magician: for greater confirmation whereof, they did not stick
to sign it with their own blood: witnessing, that they had now nothing to do
with God, but were affianced wholly unto the Devil. This marriage was
authentically solemnized in the presence of the blessed Sacrament, and written
by the Priest that was the Magician: yet for all this, thou art still so good
that thou would bereave us of them.

I said to Mary, what have thou to do with them to present them to thy Son,
for they have prostituted themselves to all kind of voluptuousness, as well
of men as of devils and beasts. What have thou then to do to present such to
thy Son, who is purity it self?

They renounce their good Angels, lest they might infuse some inspiration into
them to return unto thee. And in counterchange they take the Devil for their
gard-Angell to direct them in whatsoever they do: yet art thou so good and so
merciful, that thou give them in exchange theirvsuall Angel, and wilt do
the same twenty, thirty, forty times, and in the end wilt cause all the
Angels to to be assistant to pluck them from betwixt our hands.

They make protestation that they have conceived such great anger, rage,
disdain and indignation against God, that they would willingly become Devils,
that they might the better hinder others from the fruition of the glory of
God, by those temptations which they would lay close unto them: O blindness,
more great the^ that of Infidels, or of the Devil, themselves. The cursed and
miserable rage of Magicians does resemble mad dogs, or rather the Devil
himself, being partakers of his obstinacy, as do also the good communicate
of the virtues of Jesus Christ.
cursing God that he had made them men, and not Devils: inuocating and
heartely praying unto Lucifer, that he would change his state and condition
with them, and that by exchange he would seat himself in their place, and
they in his: protesting, that they would undergo all the torments, pains, and
punishments of all the Devils, and of all damned souls, which are and might be
so, if they might be able totally to bandie themselves against God, and to
overthrow his intentions: in respect whereof, they would no more care for all
these torments, then they would for a fly. They cause the pictures of their
bodies to be drawn, to the end to give them to Devils and Magicians, that
they might make use of them to offend God. In despite of thee, O God, the
Devils, the sea and the earth do conspire together to swallow them up, at what
time thou would convert them.

They renounce thy passion, and the blessed Sacrament of Confession, and do
pray, that when the Priest should give absolution unto them, that then the
wrath and indignation of God might fall upon them and their blood, for their
final condemnation.

They protest before your Savior, that their desire is that when they shall
truly and really receive the blessed Sacrament, that then the air may be
thronged with multitudes of Devils to take possession of their souls and
bodies, and of whatsoever else is in them.

They protest, that they have no part or portion in God, but would be
possessed by all the Devils, imagining this to be the greatest good fortune
that ever could happen unto them, to have the Devils as guests within them. Yea
they have still such a spleen and The Devils did say that they had in horror
those cursed inventions of Lewis the Magician, which he did daily contriue to
provoke God and Jesus Christ with fresh injuries.
disdain against thee, that by their will there should be nothing in their
body, that should not some way or other make a shift to offend God: giving all
the parts of their body, as their blood, their marrow, their bones, their
humors, the hair of their brows, and all to the Devil and to the Magician
to make charms of the same, or whatsoever else may displease God, his Mother,
all Angels, and all Saints.

O mercy of too large extention for sinners! Thou make show as if thou
did not see nor understand of al these their villainies and abominations,
but art ever ready to present thy wounds unto thy Father, that he might not
unbend and let fly his indignation upon them: saying always unto thy Father:
Father, consider here what I have endured for sinners, I pray you have regard
unto my death, and to the love you bear toward me, and give these unto me.
I will send unto them so many Angels, so many Preachers, and sanctified
inspirations, that in conclusion they shall be enforced to cast themselves into
my arms, as did the poor prodigal child. Let not my blood be shed for them
in vain. Beelzebub continued on, and said, O, o, o, the bounty and mercy of
God, of too large an extent for sinners, O justice, too cruel for Hell. And
said, He does us wrong to take from us those who by so many means have been
knit and fastened unto us, and to the Art of Magic. His bounty unto them is
so great, that, to the end they may be converted, he does travel them with
great sicknesses, and by strange and violent temptations: yet for all this they
would not be converted. He does permit (to the utter confusion of Devils) that
they should be possessed for their more easy conversion: he causes the Devil
to show them the judgments of God, the greatness of their sins, and the
pains belonging unto them, for their more easy conversion: yet for all this
do they remain for the most part obstinate, saying, that all these things are
trifles, and that they are not the first that have offended God, but that there
are many others as well as they: yet for all this God is so gracious that he
ever knocks at the door of their heart, that so at last he may win them home
unto him. The compassion and mercy of our Lady.
Mary does ever present her womb, and her breasts unto her Son in their
behalf, yet have they many times despised and renounced them. She prays her
Son that for her sake he would compassion their wretched estate, and inspire
some or other to pray for their conversion: that being thus beset and besieged
on every side, they may no longer resist God, but may run and shelter
themselves under the wings of his goodness and mercy, as a chicken runs
under the wings of the hen that nourishes it. O, o, o, confusion of the
Devil, of all Hell, and of all the Sabbaths and assemblies of Witches. If the
An exclamation against sinners.
sinner did but know the bounty and mercy of God, he would be ready to creep
and trale his belly upon the earth, and to pray unto stones, thorns, trees,
flowers, fruits, the sea, the earth, and in brief all things that ever were
created, to conspire and bandie against him for the sins and offenses which
he has committed against his God. He would desire to be forsaken of all Gods
creatures, because he has so grievously transgressed: he would think himself
unworthy to tread on the earth, yea unworthy of eternal damnation,
conceiving and assuredly believing, that the greatest grace that God can bestow
upon him, is to stir up all the Devils in Hell to punish, torture and give
castigation unto his villainies, thinking that all this was nothing in
comparison of his transgressions. Furthermore, sinners would pray all that ever
was created to ask mercy of God for them. But, Lord, sinners are so stuffed
with pride and presumption, that they think much, when they have transgressed,
to reveal their sins to a Confessor: but say, what will he do for us, if
we should confess our grievous sins unto him? And because (Lord) they are
so laden with pride and obstinacy, give, give, give them to us; otherwise you
do offer us exceeding injury. Thus being ready to retire and hide my self,
I cried with a loud voice in a great rage, for I was driven into desperation,
and delivered this whole discourse with great fury, and was indeed besides my
self. Finally, turning toward sinners, I said thus unto them: Ha! sinners;
think, think, think upon the goodness of your God; saying unto them again,
Ha, ha, ha! think upon his goodness, and have in your remembrance the mercy
of your Redeemer, Creator, and Sanctifier. Go your ways, and assure your
selves, that if you make not your use hereof, the wrath and indignation of God
will fall upon you, and all hell will rise up in judgment against you.

The same day in the evening were Louyse and Magdalene exorcised by Father
Francis Billet; and in the beginning of the Exorcismes, Beelzebub did fearfully
shake the body of Magdalene, and said: O mercy of God, thou art too spatiously
great! Do thou always (Lord) present thy wounds unto thy Father in the
behalf of sinners? is this a bag that never shuts? Then he said, We that
are Devils do thus torment the souls in Hell in the midst of the flames,
sometimes we toss them of one side, and sometimes of another, and snatch them
from the fire to throw them on ice. What say ye? will you go into this
country?

And speaking unto Magdalene, he said, Cursed be the hour wherein thou were
first possessed, which will cost me so dear that I shall have cause to
remember it for ever. O wisdom of God, too great! O infinite,
incomprehensible, admirable wisdom! O what space and distance have the
judgments of God, and the judgments of men! O wonder, O judgment of God!
whom God is disposed to save, nothing can do him annoyance, and whom God will
retain, Hell cannot take from him. Then Beelzebub spoke to the Devils which
were in the body of Catherine of Isle, who began a little to grumble and to
make a noise: come, come, let us march into the field, we must awake and rouse
up our people. Then said Verrine, Responde maledicte, There is an order among
Devils.
obedi Ecclesiae, Do thou hope to be greater then thy Master. To which
Beelzebub replied: It is not the manner of servants to speak before their
Master. Verrine said, yet do I speak before thee, although I am of less
authority then thou. Beelzebub answered, but it is full sore against thy will.
Verrine said, that is true, for I am constrained unto it. Is it fit that
Devils should fall out with Devils? and turning to sister Catherine, he said,
they will not suffer thee to eat or sleep, yet do thou believe that all
this proceeds from natural causes, Is it not so Catherine? Catherine, do
not thou hinder or give a check hereunto, Very shame did force from her,
tears, after the discovery being a Gentlewoman of quality, and of her self
very harmless.
believe thou art possessed.

And speaking to the Priest, he said: Come your ways, adjure him in the name
of John, Peter, and Bernard* what? must He was very choleric, because the
Exorcist was not very expert to constrain the Devils, and was grieved that he
should be made the instrument hereof.
the Devils acquaint you with the very means? And speaking to Sabbathon,
whose name Beelzebub had formerly discovered, he said: Lucifer could not resist,
and do thou that art but as a petty Cook in Hell, make show of an ability
of resistance? Obedmaledicte. But thou show, that a Pesant is more fierce
and rugged in his disposition, then a Gentleman.

Whilst the Priest was Exorcising and saying these words, Sacro-sancti
baptismatis vnda regeneratus; there are many (said Verrine) that are baptized,
but few that are saved: there are those that would go to Heaven i^ a
feather-bed, but shall be censured with the iudgemen^ of fire. Then he began to
cry, that he was to speak (bu^ it was upon compulsion) of the Concerning
works of mercy.
works of mercy Virginity is not sufficient of it self to lead us to
Heaven, as the foolish virgins conceited: other things ar^ also requisite, such
as are the works of mercy. For God has said that he will not take an account
whether men have read much or said over their Beads often, but they must do
good works, because when the day of Judgment shall come, God will not reckon
with our souls what knowledge they have, but what works they have done. For he
will say (speaking unto the reprobate) when I was an hungry, you gave me not to
eat; when I was thirsty, you gave me not to drink: when I was sick, you
visited me not, when I was in prison, you redeemed me not: when I was naked,
you clothed me not: when I was a stranger, you received me not: when I died,
you buried me not. By the like reason will he also say, when I wandered and went
astray, you reprehended me not for my sin: when in my members I lived
ignorantly, you taught me not: when I was in doubt and misaduised, you
counseled me not: when I was in affliction, you comforted me not: when I
would suffer in you, you have not borne patiently the injuries that were
offered unto you: when any one offended me in you, you have not pardoned these
offenses: when I was persecuted in you, either in the pains of Purgatory, or
in this world, you took no pity upon those that persecuted me, either for the
good of your neighbors, or for the good of those that were dead. Hereupon it
is that God says, Whatsoever you shall do unto the least of mine (speaking of
the poor) I shall take it as done unto my self. And alleging that place of
the Gospel when your Lord reproves Judas of his avarice in blaming of
Magdalene, he said, The poor you have always with you, but me you shall not
have always. And he bare record that Magdalen had done a good work, saying
unto her, that she should be had in memory throughout the world, wheresoever
this Gospel should be preached. I further say, that he shall set apart those that
are damned, and shall say unto the^, Ite maledicti in igne^ aeternu^, which is
prepared for you and for the devils. Then shall he turn to the right side and
shall say unto the good, Come ye blessed: when I was hungry, etc, I say the
foolish Virgins reposed too much confidence in themselves, imagining as many
do in these days, that Baptism, Faith and Virginity were sufficiently
powerful to bring them to heaven. No, it not so: for your Lord did object,
that they had no oil in their lamps; understanding thereby good works. And
when they came to be admitted unto the Supper (whereby is signified the day of
Judgment) and to be presented before their spouse, he said unto them, Neseio
vos. I am a bed, you cannot come in. That is to say, obstinate sinners you come
too late, you will repent you of your laziness. Then shall he turn to the
elect, and say, Come ye blessed of God my Father, possess the kingdom of
heaven which is provided for you and my Angels. It is meet that the empty
seats of the evil Angels should be filled up with men: who though they are
nothing but lumpes of clay, yet shall they be installed into their places.

Then I said, that the Angels were very beautiful, and demanded the reason why
such goodly creatures should for one sin be thrown down from heaven. It was
answered me, because they had more knowledge then men to understand what was
good, and avoid what was evil: but ignorant and frail sinners, although they
commit thousands of offenses, shall yet be received into mercy whenever they
will return.

Then he began to cry again as loud as he could, saying, I know not what to
do: I am constrained to tell thee Magdalene, that thou art a Witch. It is true
Magdalene, thou have been deceived: God will that I reveal it. It is true
Magdalene, thou wast deceived by a Priest who was thy Confessor. It is not to
be wondered if there be a lost sheep when the sheepeheard is stark naught.
This is true Magdalene, he is of Marseille, and is called The first discovery
of the Magician.
Lewis: he is of the Church of Acoules; Francis knows him, but Louyse that
here speaks never saw him.

True it is Magdalene, that Louyse held her tung when Verrine would have opened
and named the Magician.
Louyse would have resisted this, and was not willing at the beginnig that this
should be published. Thou have given and bequeathed thy self unto the Devil
This was done after the manner of all other Magicians, but God disposed it by
his special grace for her salvation.
Magdalene, and have renounced thy God and his Mother: thy baptism, and all
heaven: thou have given a schedull to the Devil Magdalene, which Louyse never
saw. It is a truth Magdalene, that when thou were first seduced, thou were in
thy Fathers house: and as true is it, that thou have given leave and license
unto the Devil to enter into thy body. Take heed Magdalene was much vexed at
this discovery, foreseeing that she^ should also be publicly detected.
Magdalene, take heed, take heed, least thou incur some dreadful
judgment, thou being now confessed as thou art: if it were not so, I had no
reason to speak it. Thy Confessors are wise, and have not revealed thy sins
unto me. This is most true Magdalene: Louyse knows nothing of it: beware
therefore, beware, beware, how thou do conjecture that this should come
either from thy Confessors, or from Louyse.

This is true Magdalene, this is true, never strive and struggle for the
matter: it is for the glory of God, and thou shall receive benefit by it.

It is true Magdalene that he stands not in need of thee, for he should not
be God if he had need of thee, or of any other creature. All shall redound
unto thy profit; do not vex at it. God is so gracious that his end is not to
publish any men's disgrace to the world, but to convert them. Then he said to
those that were present; if you do not make inquiry after him, you shall all
stand charged with him (thereby meaning Lewis). He further said with a high
voice: you Priests, be not you troubled at any thing: evil Priests cannot
prejudice those that are good, neither are the good to be despised or
disesteemed because there are some that are evil. If Lewis will not be
converted, he well deserves to be burned alive.

It is true Magdalene, he first seduced thee to renounce thy God, thy
Baptism, and thy part in Paradise. Thou have chosen Hell for thy Mansion
place, yet shall thou not go thither, because God will assist thee.

It is true Magdalene, the Magician has those schedules: trouble not thy
self, he shall be forced to restore them.

It is true Magdalene, the All night long two Priests of the Doctrine, and two
Matrones did watch with Magdalene and found that for the greater part of the
night she could not stir nor cry: the devils holding her bound in all her
body the better to tempt her, or cause her to despair, if by relapse she did
not fall back unto them.
Priests have watched with thee, and happy was it for thee that they did so:
if they had not, the Devils would have carried thee away.

It is true Magdalene, thou art a Witch, and have performed whatsoever
belongs thereunto in great solemnity: Thou have renounced God at three
several Masses, one at midnight, another at the dawning of the day, and the
third was at high Mass.

It is true Magdalene, God has pardoned thee: resist cursed Beelzebub: the
Devils have no more force then is allotted unto them.

It is true Magdalene, thou have always withstoode thy God, his inspirations,
and all other admonitions as well of the Angels of heaven, as of the men of
this world, so that they could prevail nothing in thy behalf: yet is thy God
so gracious Magdalene, that he has harkened unto many souls that have been
acceptable unto him, when they made intercession for thee.

It is true Magdalene, many have said Masses: many have done penance, and
given alms: many have wrought good works for thy sake, and all this has
been done by thy Fathers and Mothers as well corporal as spiritual.

The goodness of God toward Magdalene.
Magdalene, if the Stars of heaven were capable to thank God for thee, or
the leaves of trees, or the very stones of this Baume, they would willingly do
it: for thy sins in number do surmount the sand of the Sea.

O Magdalene, the goodness of God does not shine so bright in Peter, Paul,
David, William the hermit, in Theophilus, or in Cyprianus as it shines in
thee. It appears not so bright in Magdalene the sister of Martha, nor in
Pelagia, nor in Thais, nor in Marie of Egypt, nor in the woman of Samaria as
it shines in thee. Yet Magdalene art thou a greater sinner then they, Then
Verrine cried to all the Assembly, that they should have compassion of her
soul, and that if God did not protect them with his grace, they would be
far worse then she.

Then he said, humble thy self Magdalene, and acknowledge that thou art less
then nothing. It were no wonder to see a little Innocent go to heaven, but (O
great wonder) to see a soul that has renounced her Maker, Baptism, and
Heaven, to return to God, Hell it self is confounded thereat. Lucifer, now
do all thou can, call together all the Princes which are in the body of
Magdalene: for this is done against thee. Then he began to talk in this
manner. What An exclamation of Verrine against the honor that God gave to
Louyse.
a wonder would it be to see a King take a Pismire, and exalt it unto honor.
Men would be amazed to see him thus honor a Pismire; and this amazement would
be increased if he should take it, and set it in his Chamber to honor it the
more. His Princes would mock at him, and say, there were Ladies enough for him
to honor without exalting a Pismire: or if he should take a Country wench to
wife, they will say that Kings ought The devil is proud, and is vexed, that
God should cull forth a simple woman to be the instrument of such an important
action; and disdaining her, was desirous it might have bin some Queen or
Princess, by which more admiration and honor might be gotten.
to wed with equals, and those of their own rank.

Yet for all this the Pismire should not have ears to understand when it was
honored, nor words to vaunt and boast it self, nor a proud body to swell at
it: and continuing still a Pismire, it would never come to be a Lion, a
Leopard, or an Horse, but would always remain a Pismire. So Louyse because
thou art a Pismire, thou should the more admire the puissance, wisdom,
bounty, and humility of thy King that has made election of thee; and would
have thee to be provident as is the Pismire, fore-casting in the Summer how to
live in Winter. So must thou (Pismire) do; thou must amasse and treasure up
much good works in the Summer of this world against the Winter, which is the
hour of thy death.

From this Pismire will God glorify himself, and make use of her, although
she be but a Pismire; for he is able to make a Pismire speak, if he please.
This will he do, to gain souls unto himself; and she shall do well to
conceive that all proceeds from God, and that she her self is but as a leaf
of a tree, nay less, nay that she is nothing thereby, to declare that all this
comes from God.

Then turning again to Magdalene, he said: Magdalene thy soul is like a
commonwealth; thou must put to death the The Princes, that is to say, the
vices and sins that do reign and bear sway: according to that of Saint
Paul. Let not sin reign in you. Romans 6.
Princes that are within, that a peace may be there established. It is true
Magdalene, disarme them all, their weapons are thy consents; cut off their
heads, and thy commonwealth will be free from danger. Do thou not know,
that God does always work order out of disorder?

Courage Magdalene, humble thy self, and subject thy self under the feet of
every one.

Then speaking to Beelzebub, Verrine said, humble thy self cursed Beelzebub; and
Verrine was the first that made him to humble himself; who setting his foot
upon his head, said, Accursed, miserable, and proud Spirit, Thou would on
Sunday last have plucked God from his Throne if thou had been able, and
would not worship him, yet now thou art debased under my feet. Then he
cried to the Assembly, Come here, and help to humble this cursed Beelzebub;
let every one of you set his foot on his head, and in contempt of him say
three times, Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum. Then he commanded on Gods
behalf, that every one should deiect Magdalene, and humble her, by putting
their feet on her head; and said, Take courage unto thee Magdalene, this i^
behoofefull for thee, for the remission of thy sins, and the confusion of
Lucifer, Beelzebub, and all hell. O great confusion! that the Devils should be
at ods, and combat against devils, and take part with God; it was never before
heard of. Hold thy self Magdalene to be the most vile and detested creature
that is upon the earth, and thou shall prove another Magdalene, and shall die a
penitent. O Magdalene, thou shall be a A Helper, that is, an assistant and
servant to the religious women of S. Vrsula.
helper unto S. Vrsula, and shall be much honored. A great sinner shall find
great mercy, witness the Prophet David, and a less sinner ^esse mercy. O
great, great, great mercy! let every one pray for it.

Then the Priest took the blessed Sacrament at Verrines own instance, to make
him swear, who said, Magdalene, I say this in thy behalf, Adoramus te
Christum, and miserere ei, miserere ei. And as those that were there present
were saying miserere mei Deus, upon a sudde^ he began to howl and cry like a
galli-slaue, and as if he were framed out of rage and despair, saying,
Miserere tui, It is not to be forgotten that when men did attend and watch, to
see whether these words Miserere mei would escape at any time from any, yet they
never did.
miserere tui, miserere tui, Magdalene; to show how God does rejoice at the
conversion of this soul. O Magdalene, the Angels of heaven would triumph at
it, and Lucifer with the whole kingdom of hell would grow sad and dumpish upon
the same. It is true Magdalene, thou art in a desert very happy for thee.
Cursed be S. Baume, O how fortunate is it unto thee, O how disasterous unto
hell. This is the sheep, which the Prophet saw devoured by the wolf, whereof
nothing but the pieces of the ears was remnant; which signifies the soul of
an obstinate sinner; for men in an agony lose their hearing last. That you may
therefore be converted, you must have the ears of your hearts open, thereby to
receive in the inspirations of God.

O Magdalene! worship the right hand of thy God, worship also his left hand;
worship his side Magdalen, where all thy sins lie buried; worship his head that
was covered with thorns for thy sake, Magdalene; and beg from him one thorn
of true compunction. It is true Magdalene, thou have offended him in thy five
senses, and Magdalene, his five wounds have made reparation of the same. A
brave miracle Magdalene, that the devils should say, Miserere tui and should
beg mercy for thee.

Verrine his oath.
And then Verrine swear, according to the meaning of God and his Church, upon
the blessed sacrament (confessing in the said sacrament the real presence with
his humanity, divinity and all his glory) that Louyse knew nothing of this,
neither understood she that Magdalene was a witch, or of the schedule: All
which (said he) is true, and he that would deny this, must deny the power of
God, the authority of his Church, and the virtue and efficacy of Exorcismes:
God having told Peter, that the gates of hell should not prevail against his
Church. Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram. They should further deny all
books of Exorcismes, if they deny that the devil cannot speak truth, when
God forces him thereunto.

And turning again unto Magdalene he said unto her: Thy Magdalene had said
that her father gave her unto the Devil, and that in the power thereof she was
possessed, but being converted, she declared that Beelzebub did cause her to
equivocate meaning within her self her spiritual father. Which declaration
did much comfort her father, who was very sorry if it should so fall out, that
through his fault she should be possessed.
father gave thee not unto the devil Magdalene. It is true Magdalene, thou
did indeed abide in thy fathers house at that time, Magdalene, and yet
tookest not thy bane with S. Vrsula.

It is no wonder that a young girl should be led astray as a sheep when her
shepherd is the means hereof: but this was no shepherd of the Gospel, but
of the number of those that fly away when they see the wolf; nay worse, he is
the wolf himself, and hell is well stuffed with such as he. It is true
Magdalene thou were and art possessed, and it was expedient that the Priests
should watch with thee; for otherwise the devils had carried thee away, such
power had they over thee both here and abroad, and wheresoever thou wentest.
Then he discoursed of Jews, and said: O An exclamation against Jews, and that
he should be burnt.
Jews, if thou be not converted thou shall be burned alive: but if thou be,
then shall thou prove a Theophilus, and a Cyprian. Mary will endeavor to
convert thee; therefore beware Jews how thou resist her. I am the executioner
of that high justice, and am constrained by force unto obedience. The assembly
was much agrieued that Verrine was damned, considering the excellent
remonstrances which he made.
If I were capable of heaven you would peradventure pray unto God for me, but
your prayers will not be available unto me; I am deba^'d from Paradise, the
sentence is gone forth against me. The sentence of the highest is not as an
earthly sentence, obnoxious unto change, and repealeable for money. Ite
maledicti, venite benedicti, shall stand for evermore. Iurauit dominus and non
poenitebit, he shall never repent himself thereof. If the Kings of the earth
make good the performance of what they have promised, who are in comparison but
as gnats; much more will the King of glory, and God of Israel auow his
denuntiations.

Then he said, O great miracle, full of rareness and nouelty destinated to
Gods glory, and to the conversion of sinners; there is nothing in it
prejudicial to God or his Church: it is for the reputation and honor of the
fathers of your doctrine, the Devils having conspired to root them and the
company of S. Vrsula out of the Church; but it is a greater wonder that a
devil should adore God and should confess and say unto the blessed sacrament,
behold my God and my Judge, then if all the Christians in the world should
without intermission call upon all the names of God, and should return back
to go them over again till the day of judgment.

It is no wonder if those do well that have a power thereunto, that is, if
they do often call upon and worship their God: but this is an exceeding great
wonder that those He means this of themselves, having reference unto the
constraint whereby God enforces them to say or do something for the good and
salvation of reasonable souls.
who of themselves have no capacity unto goodness, should yet do the thing
that is good, when it is commanded them from God. This the Devils do without
any expectance or hope of compensation.

And whiles that Pange lingua was said, to the honor of the blessed Sacrament,
which the Priest held, upon the rehearsal of this verse, Sola fides sufficit,
Verrine cried, O this is most true, sola fides sufficit, faith aalone is
sufficient. How can it be that so Damnable curiosity touching the blessed
Sacrament.
great a God should be contained in such a little Host? and he cried out,
saying; yet is it true, he is present here; worship you him, for he is here
really and truly; cursed be the curious. Curiosity will let them drop into a
pit, from whence they shall not be able to issue forth at their pleasure. We
our selves are constrained to worship him and to believe his presence there: we
suggest many forgeries and falsehoods unto the curious, so that they are more
pregnant to believe us, then to listen unto God.

Devils are thieves.
After all this he said, that the Devils were thieves; and added: We use to
enter in at the gate that is, the will, but when that gate is shut, we enter in
at the windows, (as we practice in the houses of Magitians and Witches where
we come in at the windows, that is, the five senses. For our manner is to
make our approches and assaults on that side, where we find them most unable
for resistance. This might suffice to convert many souls, yea even the Devils
themsel^es if they had a possibility to be converted. S. John says, Possumus
bibere, we cannot say this, we cannot be reclaimed: For, In inferno nulla est
redemptio.

The Acts of the 16. of December. 1610.
ON this day in the morning, there chanced to arrive thither a religious person
of the order of S. Francis de Paul, a minime Friar; who kneeling on his knees
near the steps, by which you go to the holy Penitence, there befell this
dispute that follows. When Beelzebub began to cruciate and shake the body of
Magdalene, Verrine, one of the Devils that was in the body of Lonyse de Capeau,
began to say: Fear not Magdalene, thou art very happy to be thus tortured in
this world, for they shall not have power upon thee in the world to come: So it
is Magdalene, that God desires to make trial in this world of those whom he
loves. Believe Magdalene, this is a certain truth, and I am constrained to
utter the same, although my desire was to palliate and keep it close. I know
not what to do, I am not able to withstand it. Then The disputation between
Verrine and a Friar.
the said religious person said unto Verrine: Peace thou accursed spirit, thou
art the father of lies and falsehood. To which Verrine replied: It is true, I am
the father of lies, but being compelled thereunto by the irresistable working of
the Almighty, I must of necessity deliver the truth. The Friar answered: Pease
thou damned spirit, thou can not speak a truth, thou art the father of lies,
and therefore art not capable to speak any thing truly. S. Thomas says, that
truth is no virtue in him that only speaks it, but when the person that
utters the same, is thereby made upright and sincere, then, and not before it
is a virtue. 2ae. 2. qae. 109. art. 1. He further says, that This is an
annotation found there in the margent.
this virtue is no theological or intellectual virtue, but a moral; and
therefore may be pronounced either by one that speaks truth, or by a liar.
Doctor Maldonat upon the That the Devil may speak truth.
8. Chapter of S. John does with great subtility observe, that the devil may
speak a truth, For he spoke the truth in confessing Christ Jesus to be the
Son of God: and albeit it may be objected that he does this to an evil
purpose, yet was it not so in this particular: for although it is to be
coniectured that he spoke by constranit, yet does not this hinder but that he
might speak the truth. He spoke the truth in the third of Kings, 22. Chapter,
when he said that he would be a lying Spirit: as also when he alleged
Scripture to Jesus in the desert, although it was leuelled to a wicked purpose.
Notwithstanding we ought to beware how we believe what he says, if it be not
clear, that it is by coaction and in the virtue of the name of God by
Exorcismes, and that he speaks conformable unto the Scriptures and the
doctrine of the Church; and in this case we are not to believe him, but the
Scripture. Then said Verrine, I will prove unto thee that what I have spoken is
true, and that the Devil is able to speak truth. He replied thou can not,
for thou have no ability to do good, thou art an accursed and wicked Spirit.
Verrine answered: It is true, I am an accursed, wicked, and damned spirit, and
am not able of my self to speak any thing but falsehood, and to act nothing
but mischief. It is true, that of mine own free will I cannot do the thing
that is good, but when I am constrained by Almighty God, there is a necessity
laid upon me to deliver the truth. Then the Friar hearing that Mass was begun,
held his peace. And Verrine said, I will take Gods part, and since I am forced
unto obedience, I will serve him with more obedience then you. Then he cried
out as loud as he could: It is to be understood, if God were not able to
constrain and put his ^urbs upon Devils. See the advertisement to the Reader,
in the last leaf.
who dares deny that Devils may speak truth? I say they may as well deny that
God is omnipotent, and that there is no authority in the Church, and that all
the books of Exorcismes are idle and of none effect. They must also deny and
disapproue of all the oaths which Exorcists do^ cause the Devils to take: for
why do they demand it of them, and make them swear to deliver the truth, if
they are disabled to speak the truth? Or why do they lose so much time which
they employ about those yt are possessed, if they can draw nothing but falsehood
from them.

True it is (said Verrine) when the Exorcists are not circumspect and well
advised, it is likely the Devils make their advantages thereof, and so sometimes
swear falsely against God and his Church: but this is no fault of ours, it is
the Exorcists fault, because they have not had that circumspection as to cause
them to swear, as I have done, according to the intention of God and his
Church, and also according to the meaning of the Exorcist: in which case we
cannot lie, but are constrained to speak the truth.

If this were not so, I should then say that the Devil had more power then
God. But it is clear, the Devil must acknowledge a subordination unto God,
not out of love, but by compulsion, by which they are tied unto obedience.

Then the Friar said unto the Priests and other religious persons that were
there: make this Devil hold his peace, and himself said, peace thou cursed
spirit, peace.

But the Devil ever showed himself more and more courageous to speak on Gods
behalf, and said resolutly, that he would not obey him, for he had a Superior
mightier the^ he (meaning the Friar) yea more powerful then the Exorcist that
did command him. At this the Friar grew angry and said: peace thou wicked
spirit, peace: get thee into Hell thou damned fiend; and spoke to the
assembly: My Masters, you should make him hold his peace: this is a cursed
spirit, and speaks nothing but lies, and says that God is his Redeemer.

To this Verrine answered, that he lied: for he had said that God was his
Creator and Judge, but not his Redeemer. To which the Friar answered, that he
understood him so.

Then Verrine told him, that he had no good ears, and understood him amiss.
Hereupon the Friar said: I do assure you, you ought to make him hold his peace:
and he himself began to threaten him saying: peace thou blasphemous beast,
peace: co^mest thou here to preach lies? Thou say that thou art sent from
God to preach the Gospel: we have Preachers enough without thee. To this
Verrine replied, thou lie, and do misunderstand me, I said not so: thou
know not the bottom of this business, The Hierarchicall order of the
Church does not appertain or agree, no not to good Angels.
and that makes thee to speak so foolishly as thou do. It is most true, I
never so much as said that I was sent from God to preach the Gospel: I should
lie to say it. I said that I was here in the body of this unhappy woman, who
has begged from God that she might be humbled even to the pains of Hell,
for the salvation of her neighbors. I said, that God had permitted me to enter
into this body for his glory, and the conversion of many souls, and in
particular of these two, which thou curious fellow know not.

Thou art a proud arrogant fellow, and worse then a Devil, except thou humble
thy self, and I will prove it unto thee that thou beleeuest not thy God to be
omnipotent. Thou art worse then an Heretic, except thou repent and believe
what I have spoken.

Get thee gone, get thee gone accursed spirit (said the Friar) I will not believe
the Devil. Then said Verrine, I do adjure thee by the living God to come with
me and swear that all which I have said is true. For thou deseruest to be
burnt alive, if thou do not believe thy God to be omnipotent. Why say
thou thy Credo, if thou beleeuest not what I have spoken? It is not to be
avoided: thou must either deny the puissance of God, or confess that this is
true. To this the Friar replied, that there was a There are many women
possessed in Paris.
woman in Paris much resembling the condition of this woman, in whom was
discovered a great deal of knauerie and iugling, and that she did deceive much
people. Verrine told him that it was true: she did indeed cosen many: but
Louyse was truly possessed. Let her life belooked into, and let her be turned
over to the Examinations of the sharpest understandings. She would be ready
even to suffer Martyrdom to maintain this auerment, if need did so require,
because it would redowne unto the glory of her God. Then Verrine ingeminated
that speech to go^ and swear with him, and that Louyse could not communicate
till they were both sworn.

The Friar made great resistance hereunto, and would by no means obey it,
saying, that he would not be commanded by a Devil.

Hereunto Verrine answered: it We are not to obey Devils.
stands not with reason to obey the Devil: I command thee not from my self,
but say unto thee on Gods behalf, that thou ^ome along and swear with me: it
waxes late, and Louyse is to communicate. Then the Friar said unto the Priest
which held the blessed Sacrament: Father, do ^ou command me, for I will not
obey the Devil. Whereupon the Priest commanding him, he came and wore upon the
Te igitur, and then upon the blessed ^acrament. Verrine also taking such an
oath, the like whereof he had never taken before, said thus: I do wear by
the living God, that whatsoever I have said, I ^aue been constrained to utter
the same unto you. It is ^rue, O God, who art here really and truly with thy
bo^ie and blood, with thy divinity, power, wisdom, and ^ountie. The said
Friar was present, when he swore ^hus, to whom he said: I do swear by the
God of Is^ael, and by the God of the Christians, that all which I ^aue spoken
is true. I swear unto thee according to ^he meaning of God and his Church, and
according to ^he Exorcists intention also, that when we are infor^ed thereunto
by God, we must put his good pleasure (...) execution, keeping all the
solemnities that are requi^te in taking a true and perfect oath.

Then the Friar submitted himself, and said that he ^ad spoken nothing
against God or his Church, and be^eeued that God was Omnipotent, and was able
to ^orce the Devil to deliver a truth when it pleased him. and so. submitting
himself, he rested satisfied.

The Devil thereupon told him, Thou art exceeding ^roud, learn to humble thy
self, and be not so ouer-^urious: for the curious fall into a pit, from
whence ^hey cannot free themselves when they will: alleging Calvin, Beza,
Luther, Julian the Apostata, Simon Ma^us; and saying, do not thou boast thy
strength above heirs, for there have been Priests and religious persons that
afterward became heretics, as Calvin, Beza, Luther.

Verrine further said unto him: And of what religion art thou? Does thy Order
command thee to be proud? I will prove unto thee, that thou art arrogant and
selfe-opinioned, and would circle in the omnipotency of God within thy
narrow understanding. Humble thy self, for it ill beseems one of thy coat
to be thus drenched in curiosity. The All Angels have their essential
beatitude, which never augme^teth: yet their accidental bliss does sometimes
increase; as when God reuealeth somewhat of his blessed pleasures unto the^: by
which they do in a larger measure know the bounty, sapience, or omnipotency
of God, and do admire ye same, and do worship him anew, and are desirous to
receive from him fresh revelations, Non in verbo, (as Divines say) sed in
proprio genere. And in this sense does S. Denis say. That Angels propose
demands and questions to Christ Jesus himself, Ipsi Jesus quaestiones faciunt.
supremest Seraphins do every day make new discoueries of great perfections in
God, the same does his Mother, and all the Angels. Solomon, when he dedicated
his Temple, said, He that created heaven and earth, whom the heaven of heavens
cannot contain: and wilt not thou that art but a worm which crauleth on the
earth, submit thy self but would hoope in the omnipotency, bounty, and
wisdom of thy God within the cancels of thine own memory and brain. Upon
this the Friar rested satisfied, and submitted himself with many words of
humiliation.

Verrine also discoursed touching the reason of these present writings, in
form of a letter missiue: the tenor whereof here ensues.

The men of these times are so curious, that God must be as a Gardener unto
them, (witness Magdalen, to whom he appeared in the semblance of a Gardener)
and fit diverse sorts of sallets unto their palats, lest they should be
disrelished; wherein he resembles a good father, who does so affectionately
love his child, that he is ever asking him, What will thou eat child? And if
the child chance to say, I have no appetite, I see nothing I can eat, the
father will cause dainty and exquisite meat to be set before him, the best
that may be gotten: If then the child should say; nothing here pleases me;
the fault is not in the victuals, but in him that is sick, and has his tafte
ill-affected. What does the father then? does he fall a beating of him? does he
threaten and chide him? no; but goes about and searches after other strange
victuals, which may chance to please them for their novelty, as being such
which he had never seen, tasted, or heard talk of. Even so does your God by
you, for he is an hundred times more careful then all the natural fathers
that are. This father both of your souls and bodies, when he observes that
the soul has no appetite unto such variety of good meats, which as a father
he has solicitously provided; such as is the holy Scripture (it is true,
every one does not understand this) which is a meat too lushious, too
delicious, too precious; and all cannot relish and like the same, especially
women and fools; it is too hot for them, and there are hundreds that burn
their The Devil here speaks after his manner, for when the blessed Sacrament
was to be given to the two that were possessed, he resisted a long time, saying
it was too hot, because the presence of Christ Jesus, and the new grace which
they received in the virtue of the same, did augment the pain of the wicked
spirit, which is by fire. (as S. Peter says) The devils are chained up in
eternal fire.
fingers, for being too nimble and presumptuous, and because they would make
their private interpretations upon the same, which they use to square by their
own judgments: and further, he provides for them other good wholesome
food, to wit, the lives of Saints, and many miracles; yet for all this they
are ever squemish, and cannot down with these course cates. Where lies the
fault? it is because their palate is by some infirmity and indisposition
disseasoned, for the meat remains good, though the taste be naughtely
affected. What does this father then? he does love his children so tenderly,
that he enquireth after fresh and unaccustomed delicacies by new and unusual
miracles.

Like unto the Spouse who loves his wife so dearly, that he is ever
presenting her with some new token of his affection.

O Church rejoice now at thy husband; Thou art that chaste wife, whom if any
will follow, he must not walk in darkness, for the holy Ghost does guide
thee by his light and illumination. I am not a whit abashed, that the
Caluinists make refusal of thee, for they are exiled from the bosom of the
Church, and have no light to understand the truth: but I wonder most, that the
children of this Church do not make use of the light of the Gospel. Here now
is nothing spoken either against God or his Church.

The same day in the evening the sister Louyse and the sister Magdalene were
exorcised by Father Francis Billet. Then Verrine turning himself toward
Magdalene, said: Beware Magdalene, Beelzebub would cast thee down headlong into
despair: It is a good sign, Magdalene. He says that thou shall not be able
to resist him; but Magdalene he lies in saying so, for thou have more
brothers in heaven, then thou have adversaries in hell. Take courage Magdalene,
one of thy brothers is able to do more, then all hell set together.

And speaking to Beelzebub, he said: Ha wretched fiend, thou do tempt
Magdalene, and tell her that she shall be damned: I say no, Magdalene, thou
shall be saved: and I tell thee again from the living God, Magdalene thou
shall be saved.

He said again to Lucifer; In Hell I acknowledge thee for my superior, but in
this body God has made me thy Master.

It is not to be wondered at, if many men shall with difficulty be induced to
believe a matter altogether unusual.

A great sinner ought to use great repentance: thou shall repent Magdalene, and
God shall give thee life: put thy confidence in him, for he shall more help
thee, then all Hell can hurt thee. God has promised to hear the prayers of
the just: a thousand ( Magdalene) have begged for thee mercy and grace, and at
the last have found it: for thee Magdalene have they knocked at the door of
mercy, and at length it has been opened unto them.

Thy good works ( Magdalene) shall not be able to save thee, but the blood of
thy Redeemer. It will be The truth is, that many Priests and religious persons
did every day say Mass for her conversion, as the Angels themselves in
cessabili voce proclamant, and the other saints never cease, Revel. 4. Non
habent requiem nocte ac die.
proved that there have been more then a thousand Masses said for thee; and
do thou think that so many sacrifices have been all barren and ineffectual?
shall not the eternal Father have regard unto his Son, equal unto him in
power, wisdom, and bounty? Take a good courage Magdalene, I do assure thee
that he is Omnipotent and euer-bounteous: that he has pardoned thy offenses,
and being that all-knowing understanding, he has taken notice of thy miseries:
for in the glass of his own essence he sees all things, and there is a
perfect representation in him of all events whatsoever, as if they were now
present. It is true, The wicked Spirits might have knowledge hereof by
revelation.
thou blessed Mother of God, thou have presented thy breasts for her, more then
ten thousand times. And thou Magdalene have made tender of thy repentance; and
thou Peter prince of Apostles, have shed many tears for the conversion of this
Magdalene. Ioannes Baptista has also interceded for thee, and did present his
innocence in thy behalf. And thou Dominicke have been very fauou^able unto
her: and thou Bernardus and Antonius have prayed for her.

Take a good heart Magdalene, keep thy own Magdalene, and thou shall become
another Magdalene, or another Thais. God is wearied in expectation of thee:
give him to drink Magdalene: but O Lord how can thou be thirsty, since
thou have no need of thy creatures? But as Christ demanded drink of the
Samaritane woman, and then also when he was nailed to the Cross: so
Magdalene, thou shall do well to let him drink of thy tears, and for a
little of this liquour he shall bestow upon thee the wine of his love, and
shall take from thee all thirstinesse and alteration whatsoever. Observe well
how God honors priesthood in this world, when he uses such extraordinary
and unheard of remedies for the conversion of a Priest that wandered out of his
way.
Who will believe that the Devil should thus endeavor to convert Magdalene and
the Magician?

Magdalene, I do assure thee from God, that he who has delivered the children
of Israel from the red Sea, will, if thou humble thy self, even to the pit of
hell, although thou had committed an hundred million of sins more then thou
have done, receive thee into grace, saying: In quacunque hora. For Magdalene,
he cannot be less then his word. This and many other discourses of a
semblable nature did he confirm and strengthen with his accustomed oath.

Quod licet dicere, licet scribere: Whatsoever is lawful to be said, is
lawful to be written. But as the wicked Spirits do not speak unto men but by
the tongues of men, so neither can they write to men, but by the ministry and
service of men: God not permitting unto them a free use either of the one or
the other. Upon the same day did Verrine dictate many letters, saying to Father
Francis Billet, Write me certain letters after this tenure, and first of all
one to the Priest Here he begins to persuade and labor particularly the
conversion of the Magician, having called him publicly by his name and
sur-name, in a full assembly of people, after he had already won home
Magdalene.
Lewis.

Lewis, for the salvation of thy soul, for the glory of God, and edification
of thy neighbor, come to S. Baume, and obey the Son of the Virgin that
calls thee unto him, or does otherwise threaten thee, that if thou do not
obey him for love, thou shall be enforced thereunto by justice. Come if thou be
wise, come if thou be wise, come if thou be wise, obey, obey, obey for the
honor of the blessed Trinity, come along with those that go to seek thee,
who will accompany thee, and will become pledges for thee. If thou be well
advised thou will come.

For there is a great process betwixt the justice and mercy of God, which are
the two daughters of the eternal Father: obey Mercy the eldest daughter, for
she is ever favorable unto sinners: The Virgin Mary is thy advocate, and
Theophilus prays for thee, and is one of thy solicitors: Cyprian is another,
and was a Magician as thou art: David is another: William the Hermit does also
pray for thee, and so does Matthew the Publican.

Mary the sister of Martha is thy advocate: Pelagia is another: Mary of Egypt
is another: Thais also is another, and the woman of Samaria is another: who
does inuit thee to come and slake thy thirst with that water which God gave
unto her when he was so weary, as she also gave him to drink when she was
converted. Our Lord was so exceedingly thirsty, that being fixed to the tree
of the Cross, he cried, I thirst, that is to say, after the salvation of
souls, especially of obstinate souls, such as thine is: and God from all
eternity has foreseen this miracle.

Be converted, be converted, be converted unto me, says Jesus Christ, to all
trangressing and sin-burthened souls: for I desire not the death of a sinner,
but that he should live and be converted, that God might take mercy upon him.
Take heed how thou check and give impeachment to the words contained in this
letter, and how thou do slight and disesteemest the same.

Think thy self unworthy, yea most unworthy of that solicitude and care,
which God of his great goodness has of thy soul. He has said it, that he
came not for the just but for sinners: and by how much the greater their
transgressions are, by so much the more will the glory The glory and
magnificence of the mercy of God has the greatest luster in sinners, as
Magdalene and Paul, but the glory of his goodness snineth mo^e in the innocents
of God be magnified, and the greater will the compensation be which they
shall receive at Gods hands, if there do precede a great contrition that they
have offended him. Beware of the temptations and subtilties of Lucifer,
Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Balberith, Asmodee, and Asteroth, who do slily drop their
temptations into thee. But as thou did not fear to renounce thy God, thy
Baptism, and part in Paradise, so be not thou afraid seriously to renounce
Lucifer, and all the above named Princes, and that portion which is prepared
for thee in the depth of the lowest Hell according to thy demerits. the Angels,
the blessed Virgin and Saint John Baptist.
Do not sail to come hither, for upon thy coming all Hell will fall into
despair, and the Devils will be put to their last shifts and subtilties.
Behold the seals of those that have seen this miracle, and have been present
when Louyse Capeau was exorcised, and when one of the Devils named Verrine
began to cry as loud as he could, that he was constrained from the living God
to say, that Jews Gaufridy whose abode is at Accoules near the Palace, is a
Magician: and has said and sworn, that whatsoever he has spoken is true, to
the glory of God and salvation of souls. The oath was taken upon the blessed
Sacrament with great solemnity, according to the meaning of God and his
Church, and of the Priest that did exorcise him.

And also the under signed witnesses do promise all in general, that is the
said Jews be converted privately in S. Banme, they will silence his sins as
if they were his Confessors.

Strangers that besides the Ordinary were witnesses to the discovery of the
Magician.
It was signed after this manner. I Paschalis unworthy Priest have seen and
understood the oath that is within written, and am thereof an eyewitness. I
Geraud unworthy Priest, yea the most unworthy of all have seen and understood
the oath that is within written, and am thereof an eyewitness. I Peter
Michaelis, unworthy, have seen and understood the oath that is within written,
and am thereof an eyewitness. I Denis Guillemini Prior of Romoules, most
unworthy, have seen and understood the oath that is within written, and am
thereof an eyewitness. I Balthazar Charuaz have seen and understood the oath
that is within written, and am thereof an eyewitness. Then did he dictate
the manner, how the said witnesses who did voluntarily tender themselves to
carry the said letter, were to proceed in the execution of this Information
in manner This process is very conformable to the Gospel, and altogether
opposite to the devils manner of proceeding.
as follows. To remember that if they came late, they should go to the He
was very familiarly acquainted with the Capuchin Fathers, the better to set a
gloss and covering upon his abomination.
Capuchins, and should give the letter to the Father Governor, together with
the three that he would choose to confer with Jews: and they all should be
present at the reading of the letter, and should first hear Mass although it
were before day, and should receive the Communion to this purpose: and the The
religious of S. Dominicke and S. Francis have a privilege to say Mass before
day, when they shall conceive it to be a matter expedient.
Capuchins should make themselves ready to seek him out as soon as it was
day, and should cause a Mass to be said for a soul that had great need
thereof. And if they shall find him well disposed to renounce Magicians with
all due ceremony and solemnity as the Church has commanded, and to return
to his God, the Capuchins are then to bring them to their Church, and to
examine him, that all may be by him performed, that is requisite to draw him
from the hands of the Devil, and to reseate him in the grace of his God. And
in this case it shall not need to bring him hither, unless it be afterward
to give thanks unto God, to his and Mary Magdalenes glory, and to the further
honor and reputation of Saint Baume. And if he be converted, then those that
go thither are to tarry there two or three days if there be occasion for the
same, and shall make known unto him many particulars which they have observed
from these Exorcismes: and shall speak of the ingratitude of obstinate souls
unto God, to their everlasting perdition, and to the confusion of Devils and
all Hell. As also, how one of the servants of Beelzebub was forced to cry out: O
the great mercy, O the great mercy, O the great mercy of God! men are
ungrateful, and notwithstanding all their ingratitude and renunciation of God,
he does yet take them into favor without any exprobration of their faults
against them. Also, how the said servant of Beelzebub did out-braue Lucifer, and
adjured Beelzebub, treading him under his feet, and commanding the whole
Assembly to set their feet upon his head, and how he was contented to
assubiect himself to whatsoever was commanded him by his own slave (meaning
Verrine) and how that if Verrine had been capable to be prayed for, they would
have made intercessions for him: But they being not to do this for him,
because his place was determinatly set down to be in Hell, God commanded him
to say unto them, that they should rather have compassion of this soul that
had a capacity to be converted, and should pray to God for him. Among other
Memorials touching Lewis the Priest, there was this ensuing advertisement set
down. That they should choose three of the most ancient, learned, and able
Capuchins, that the Father the Governor could make election of, who were to
go to the house of Madame She is a devout and virtuous woman.
Blanquart, and to cause Lewis to come along with him: and that those who were
to go to enquire after him, should disclose nothing to Madame Blanquart, The
better to cover the business that was in question.
but should only say that they were come about an affair of importance, and
that she should rest satisfied with this generality. There were then five of
them that were to go from hence, who with the three Capuchins should make
eight, and Lewis himself the ninth: and thereupon they should tell him that
the nine quires of Angels would rejoice at his conversion, and that he should
turn home if he were wife, being now detected by the providence of God.

After this did he dictate another letter to the Superior of the Capuchins, of
the Covent at Marseille in the name of Father Francis Billet: the form whereof
here ensues. My brothers, I beseech you for the honor of God forthwith to
enquire after M. James This was a great friend and familiar of his.
Priest of the Church of Accoules, that you together with him may find out M.
Lewis, whom you are not to leave until you have brought him into the house of
Madame Blanquart; the Priest that shall be with him will be able to give
assistance unto you. And if the said Lewis shall be any whit bettered by this
present letter, the other is to be kept back, and you are to shroud all these
things in secrecy as if you had heard it in confession: thereby to show, that
this proceeds from God and his Church, A charitable and Evangelical manner
of proceeding is no way compatible, or agreeable with the Devil.
who will not have sinners to be openly discovered, till they have been
charitably admonished by their brethren, as Christ says in his Gospel. And he
himself says, that if any one sins, admonish him privately between you and
him. He has had already one admonition from Francis Billet, Priest of the
Doctrine, which he has utterly rejected, and made no account thereof, and
would not be brought to confess the truth. He is now upon the second point,
which is, when God commands to take men fit and proper to execute a work of
this nature. Wish him to beware that he make his use of the third point: which
is, that except he be converted, God lays his command upon his Church, that
is bound more then any wife of the world to obey her husband, with extremity
of rigor to punish all them that are not obseruant of his commandments and
counsels. The superscription was. To my dearest brothers the Reverend Father
the Superior, and Friars of the Covent of Marseille of the order of the
Capuchins, at Marseille. Within the said letter there was a scrowle containing
this that follows. Take heed of the third: Cursed be the Priest whose
conversation suteth not with the ways of God, and who has promised his
Church, when his The punishment and transgression of the Commandments is
generally addressed unto all; but that of Counsels unto those only that have
made vows.
Orders were given unto him to serve, love, and fear God, rejecting the love
of all creatures for the love of him. And seeing the Devil is more powerful
over the soul then God, and since thou do acknowledge, obey, and harken
more unto Lucifer, Beelzebub, or whatsoever else is hellish, then to thy God,
and do entombe the glory of God, the salvation of thy soul, thy part in
Paradise, and the edification of thy neighbors in neglect and utter oblivion:
as also, because thou give occasion of scandal, if thou be not wise to
follow first the Counsel of God, and then the advice of thy best friends: hence
it is that the Devil does seriously employ himself, and labor the conversion
of thy soul, although he be forced thereunto: all vengeance and malediction
light upon thee. O rare and ever to be admired wonder: God himself who is
Almighty, was not able to pluck thee back from thy perdition and sinful
estate, neither could his Mother, nor the Angels, nor Saints, nor any
terrestrial creatures whatsoever work any good upon thee: yet did he make
reservation of the most unmatchable wonder that ever was brought forth to act,
that the Devil called Verrine should be the instrument of thy conversion, not
from his proper and frank will, but constrainedly and by enforcement, worse
then any gally-slaue or captive that ever was exposed to command: being,
terribly threatened thereunto, and having a desire to give stoppage and
hindrance to these proceedings, obiecting if a man did well, he had a ground
whereon to frame unto himself some hope of recompense, but that this man was
in expectation of nothing but of his eternal damnation: For so will it happen
unto thee if thou resist the Almighty. Make use therefore of these admonitions,
and put in practice the precepts comprised in these letters, for it is
impossible for thee to palliate thy faults before God, as Adam and the Pharisie
thought to do. The Pharisie boasted of his good works, and contemned the
Publican, saying that he was not as that man, yet was the one of them wicked
before men, the other before God: the one confessed that he was not worthy to
lift up his eyes to heaven, and returned to his house justified: the other was
confident of his works, and hypocritical countenance, and returned home like
unto the (Jews) full of sins: but God will receive thee into grace, as he did
Theophilus, and Cyprian who was a Magician as thou art. He that is more
desirous of your welfare then you your self are, sends this letter unto you.
Beware that hell open not her jaws to devour thee, if thou neglect these
letters, which are directed unto thee by the appointment of God, and pronounced
by a Devil named Verrine, that now remains in the body of Louyse Capeau, as
thou well know; Neither gave thou him unto her by thy charms, with this
intendment or purpose to convert thee, although if thou be not too wilful in
thy unbelief, it will so fall out unto thee.

Then did Another manner of proceeding in case he do not repent upon the sight
of the letter.
he dictate another advertisement to the Capuchin Fathers, as here In the name
of father Francis Billet, as before.
ensues. My He presupposes, that those who carried the letter, had made
rehearsal of whatsoever was passed.
dearest fathers, I beseech you for Gods cause to put a deed of charity in
execution, to the glory of his sacred name, and salvation of souls. Come along
with this Priest, and suffer him not to step a foot from you, but let your
vigilance have an eye over him, as if he were a malefactor. For he is in the
Devils claws, you shall do well to bind him with a stole under the mould of
the head, and bring along with you the book of Exorcismes, and if you shall
think it necessary, you may do well to exorcise him, forbidding Beelzebub and
all hell to hinder it. God grant you his grace to execute his will, and that
you give no stop unto the same, that the said malefactor may be brought to S.
Baume, where the miracle shall be wrought if he himself be no hinderance
thereunto. the 16. of December. 1610.

Then he dictated a letter for the father Guardian, as follows. I entreat the
father Guardian, that he would cause (if so he please) three of his Friars,
such as he knows best able to walk, to go unto S. Baume, for a business
purely aiming at the glory of God, and the salvation and conversion of a soul,
that is in great distress.

After this was finished, he dictated another letter to Madame Blanguart, as
here ensues, in the name of father Romillon. My daughter, I pray you for the
love of God, to lend a chamber unto these men, who are come to treat of a
business of great weight and importance; neither is it fit to make you as yet
acquainted therewithal, it being forbidden me by one that has power and
authority both over you and me. Curiosity is the mother of much mischief, and
the daughter of Lucifer, where as opposite hereunto, humility, simplicity, and
obedience are the sisters of Christ Jesus. In the mean time you may enjoy and
gather the fruit of this obedience, which will be very aduantageous unto you.
And remember, that when God commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son, he asked
not why or how: but humbled himself, and did adhere rather to him that
commanded him then to himself. So should the true and perfect paragon of
obedience demean himself, if he will do the will of God. I rest your
spiritual father John Baptista Romillon, superior of the Christian doctrine
in despite of Lucifer. From S. Baume this 16. of December. 1610. Superscribed,
to Madame. Blanquart at Marseille.

Within the said letter was enclosed an advertisement to sister Catherine of
France, as follows. She was the superior of the sisters of the order of S.
V^sula at Marseille, and was at that time upon special occasions at Marseille.
Catherine, of France, be you very circumspect how you out of curiosity do
reveal any thing to Madame Blanquart, of the Priest you wot of; and withal
beware how you tattle of it unto the sisters, but remit the manage of all this
business unto him, who is ever wakefull for his own glory, and the salvation
of those souls, whose ransom he has paid at a dearer rate, then ever you are
able to value. Further, you are to take heed upon pain of disobedience unto
God himself, how you intermingle your opinion and judgment in things that are
impertinent for you to meddle withal. Be satisfied with this, that God is good
and so vnsearchably wife, that he has no need of your advice of the same.
Verrine has dictated this letter by Gods appointment, and I Francis Billet the
unworthy Priest of the Christian doctrine have written it in the name of
father Romillon, And at the foot of the letter, there was written: Louyse de
Capelle humbly recommendeth her self to the prayers of Martha d' Aguisier, and
of Catherine of France, and sends unto them, to beseech them, that they would
cause all the sisters at Marseille to pray for her, for she stands in great
need of the same; but principally she desires the said Martha to pray to God
for her, that he would enable her to endure whatsoever her redeemer shall be
pleased to lay upon her, and that she may suffer all things merely for his
sake.

In the name of Louyse.
After this did he dictate another letter to the superior of sister Louyse as
here ensues. She that is most unworthy to call you her mother, does pray you
for Gods sake, and entreats you from your superior, to obey These sisters
made dainty to send their gouernesse to S. Baume, although their superior had
sent for her.
him in those things which he shall now impose upon your performance, without
any replication, gainsaying, or contradiction whatsoever; and without disputing
or saying, How shall we be able to undertake such a business? we could not
come if we were all at home, and how shall we now (when we are but few)
venture upon that which many would not dare to undergo? It is the Devils craft
and wiliness, ever to cavil and dispute against obedience, yea to cause
grudgings and mutinies against superiors and governors; obiecting unto you,
that they do many times impose upon you such difficult and uneasy commands,
that it is almost impossible to effect them. But remember that the most worthy
mother of God is the gouernesse of this house; give therefore the keys unto
her, for the government appertains to her, and she shall be more regardfull
and studious of your good then your selves can possibly be; for she is not tied
to those hindrances as you are, to your spiritual exercises, to your prayers,
and to the holy Communion; neither is she filled with self-love as you are.
Under a shadow and pretense of good, many times religious persons do withdraw
themselves from the commands of their superiors, and commit many great and
gross incongruities, although not so much out of malice, as for the most part
out of ignorance and self-love, which at some times we are content to
acknowledge, but for the most part our depraved nature causes us to dissemble
it, so that it lies hidden in the face of hypocrites. For (say they) how can
the desire to receive the sacrament often, to pray, and perform those
exercises that conduce unto repentance proceed from the Devil? alleging that
God has spoken by his Prophet: Repent, for if you do not repent, you shall
die the death: Who dares say that this is not true? It is confessed to be a
truth, but God looks further, he would have a perfect Cassandra, a full
humiliation, obedience, simplicity, and resignation of all things. He does
therefore let you know, that you are not to neglect the least word of your
superiors command, Louyse does therefore pray you to embrace that council
which is very reasonable, and which at the time of her departure from you, you
were pleased to lay close unto her; which is, that she would endeavor to be
obedient, and to put her self wholly in the hands of God. Which she taking in
good worth, does likewise desire you to share in this advice, and to enjoin
the same unto your spiritual daughters: exhort Margaret Burle, and Martha d'
Aiguisier to do the same. It stands with reason, that when the gouernesse is
obedient, none of the rest should behave themselves with any dislike or
contumacie; For rebellion and disobedience is the daughter of Lucifer, as
humility is the daughter of God, and should therefore be your sister. Come
therefore accompanied with her, she is of a noble parentage, but yet does so
bow her self to obedience that she is continually pressed and active to do the
will of God her father. She will go with you to heaven, and will assist you to
climb that steep and wearisome mountain: Expect when you are come hither,
things so full of strangeness and admiration, that you would not for all the
gold in the world but see, understand, and be made familiar unto them. But he
that will have profit must take pains for the acquisition thereof. No pain,
no gain. The subscription was, Your most unworthy slave, full of great
boldness and presumption, sends this unto you; you know my insufficiency
and want of understanding, perfectly well: so that you will apprehend with
ease, that she that sends this, had never that ability of judgment to
fashion such a letter, nor the boldness to speak unto her gouernesse with so
little respect and ceremony. But this proceeds not from her self, God would
have it done, by a Devil that did dictate al these sayings. Your slave Louyse
Capelle. Keep this letter safe, and bring it back with you, and read the same
aloud before all the sister Nuns and Assistants, except the little Pensioners:
also read it before Mistress de Saint Jacques, and pray for Louyse, who has
great need thereof.

The superscription was, To sister Catherine, gouernesse of the house of S.
Vrsula at Aix. Then did he dictate another letter to the fathers Andrew and
Matthew Arnoult Priests of the Christian doctrine in manner as follows. My
dearest brethren, I send unto you to request your speedy presence here at S.
Baume, that you may be acquainted with some things of that rare and admirable
quality, as the like has not been seen from the beginning of the world.

And in regard that love is the daughter of God, I ^m commanded by my The
father Romillon as her superior commands her.
superior and yours, to send you out of my love this letter, which I could not
but perform; for I should have been shrewdly burdened, ^f I had neglected the
same. It is to tell you, that you ^orthwith come hither without fail, and not
ask wherefore, or how, or we cannot come, because we ^aue a great charge,
and are here but few in number, ^hese excuses and tergiuersations do all flow
from the Devil. Remember that true obedience does never ^nter into dispute,
especially when the good pleasure of God is to be executed in matters of such
importance ^s these are; humble your selves in imitation of Christ jesus, and
do not murmur and say, This cross is hea^ier then I am able to bear. He
would never utter such ^ thing but like an innocent lamb, and as an ox under
^he yoke, he suffered himself to be led away, and car^ied his cross without
disputing or reasoning the mat^er with the hangman. He said not, this mountain
is so ^teepe that I cannot climb up unto it, but submitted self to the
guidance and government of his heavenly Father. It stands with good reason
that the servant should be directed by his master, since that the master has
been content to be led by his slaves and cursed servants, yea, by hell it
self. These good Fathers would not hear talk of those things, and did, as it
were, blush at the^. They were rather of opinion, that they were mere fancies,
and had no communion or agreement with Father Romillon
Therefore humble your selves and be obedient, otherwise you shall incur
Gods heavy displeasure, unless you do that which I have advertised unto you.

I deserve not to be obeyed at your hands, He said he was commanded and
constrained by the appointment of God.
but he who caused this letter to be written, does well deserve it from you.

After all this, he did dictate another letter, which begins, Andrew
Chicolle, Louyse prays thee to cal^ to remembrance the speech which thou
did use unto her in the Chapel of S. Vrsula in Confession, when she
said, that she had prayed unto God to have the grace to suffer for his sake.
Then did thou say unto her (observe well my speech, look you observe it
well, and call it to mind) Suffer thy self to be guided and directed: which
advise she afterward found to be of special use unto her, and being now
acquainted with the truth thereof, she is desirous to return unto you some
fruit of your own counsel, whereby you did the^ particularly give instance,
in the obedience which we^ did owe unto our superior, when he sends for us.
Louyse being commanded by her Superior to come from Aix, resisted and made
scruple of the same; being tender of her reputation, and fearing the defamation
of being possessed by the Devil.
You well remember the resistance and denyalls which she at that time made
against God and her superior, notwithstanding your counsel together with the advice of Matthew Arnout, and of Peter Thion was treasured up in her heart, and
proved afterward very useful unto her. And God is well pleased that
acknowledgment of these things be first made to him, and then unto his
creatures for the love of him. She does therefore exhort you thereunto, since
for her own part she has sped so well in obeying the pleasure of God and of
her superior: which she has no reason to conceive but that you (if you be
wise) will also be very ready to perform.

For unhappy and miserable is that man, who gives good counsel unto others,
and can practice or follow none himself.

Your most humble and unworthy, the slave of God, and for his love the slave
also of his creatures, Louyse. Pray unto God for her, and cause others to do
the like, for she stands in great need of the same.

The same day departed the said Paschalis Priest, Geraud Priest, Peter
Michaelis, Denis Guillemini Priour of Ramoules, and Balthazar Charuas to go to
Marseille with the said letters; who promised to give a good account of their
proceedings.

The Acts of the 17. of December.
THis day, Verrine for an insallible mark to discern whither this spirit came
by Gods permission or no, did yield very readily his obedience: and in token
that he was there on Gods behalf, he said he would suffer Louyse to
communicate without any resistance whatsoever, upon the commandment of her
superior, father Romillon: which before this time he never did; and did
dictate very distinctly unto us the disputation of the 16. of this present
month, by the virtue of the like commandment.

Also Louyse being twice or thrice as it were ravished in an ecstasy, she
recovered and came to her self, as soon as her superiors command was laid
upon her.

The same day Magdalen was shrewdly tempted by the Devil, and was depressed
with a great and extraordinary sadness. And whiles Mass was saying, the
temptation ended; Magdalen performing all acts of humility, and weeping very
bitterly in S. Baume, when she called to mind what had happened unto her. In
the morning she was exrocised by the Dominican father, and Verrine began to
speak in this manner. Let the Luxurions live, let those that bear false
witness live, let these and the like live for hell: but let obedience,
simplicity, a good intention, pure affection, unspotted conscience, humility
and resignation of the world live for the living God; as do all they that are
belonging unto the train and company of the Lamb: I say, that immaculate
Lamb. He that will conquer, must suffer. Petrus thou have seen thy master
in the mountain of glory, and have endured martyrdom for his sake: and thou
James have drunk of his cup, which thy mother did so little esteem of.

Surrender your selves up into the hands of God, he knows what is good for
you, and shall be a guide unto you in all your ways.

Ioannes Euangelista thou did tell thy master, Possumus; and did
indeed afterward prove a Martyr; but it was a martyrdom of passion and
greese, when thou were with thy master at the Cross. He that will go to
heaven must honor God, and love his neighbor as himself: and be ready to
depart with his goods for his neighbors body, and with his own body for his
soul: and if any shall remain obstinate, they shall frye in those
unquenchable flames. It is true, many There were public sacrifices for all
sinners, especially for the most enormous: of which they have of all other the
most need: and this was done for sinspast, present and to come.
Sacrifices have been offered up unto God in the behalf of Magdalen and Lewis
the Priest.

Thou Louyse did beg of God to suffer for his sake, and thou shall suffer,
and for the better support of thy patience, God will augment and double thy
force upon thee. And to show that this proceeds from God he shall make thee
obedient. Then Beelzebub said, that Magdalen had given up her keys unto him.
Verrine answered, Thou lie, God sees more clearly then thy self, thy aim
is to overthrow her and make her perish, by impaciency and despair. No, no,
Beelzebub, this soul belongs unto God: But put case she had made a bequeath
of her soul unto thee, I say that God may at any time take her home unto
himself; cannot a King enter into his own Palace at any time that pleases
him? Beelzebub answered, That is true, but not against the will of the creature.

Then said Verrine unto him, He will enter either by force or love, and will
have her to himself, although she had committed all the sins of those that
are damned in hell. If Judas had been penitent, if Cain had craved pardon, if
Adam Adam afterward did repent. Sap. 6.
had not stood upon his iustifications and excuses, God would have forgiven
them: of such unspeakable goodness is the God of the Christians, and so well
does humility please and accord with him. The God of the Turks and the Gods of
the Gentiles are all Devils, there is but one God, one Church, one Baptism.
The God of the Christians is the true God, the Baptism of the Christians is
the true Baptism the Church of the Christians is the true Church. That is to
say, of their law.
The Baptism of Turks or Jews is of no avail for the soul; The Christian
shall say, In te Domine speraui, and shall never perish. It is true Magdalen,
thy life shall be written and described from the first three years of thy age;
and Louyse shall endure much sorrow, and afterward dye in pain; but the end
crowns the work.

Think not Magdalen that thy God will come to thee and take thee by the hand:
No, no, he will not descend in his humanity for such a purpose. Where is thy
Credo, Magdalen? thou must now believe Magdalen, do thou look for miracles,
as many others do?

To this Beelzebub said, I have nothing to do with that Credo. Verrine replied,
Ha wicked spirit; it was not for thy sake I spoke it. Magdalen shall be
converted in despite of Lucifer and of all hell besides. I am true of my word.
Beelzebub answered, No, no, she shall be mine, she shall be damned, for the gate
of mercy is shut against her.

Then said Verrine, It is not so, her will to do well will prove acceptable and
pleasing; and thou say this (accursed as thou art) to plunge her into
despair. But the ^ust shall say, In te Domine speraui, and shall find the
gates of Paradise opened unto them: as witnesses S. S. Augustine does prettily
discourse upon the 30. Psalm. in ye interpretation of these words speaking of
the merits which have not pieceded, and the benefits of God which have
prevented the sinner. Hoc me eruit(says he) quod me iustificat, quod ex impio,
pium facit, quod ex iniquo iustum quod ex caeco vidente^, ex cadente surgentem,
quod ex fle^te gaude^te^.
Augustine.

The Church shall examine this whole tract, wherein is nothing contained either
against God or his Church. ^ hereshal many be illuminated, and he that shall
diue into the botome of the sack, shall easily approve the same; the curious
and proud shall have their abode in the pit of hell, and shall not have the
power to believe. Then he said, Carreau did tempt her to obstinacy. Magdalene
was often persecuted and extremly tempted by ye devils, so that she did
sometimes seem to waver.
Carreau cannot fill thy heart, Magdalen, thy part is set triangle-wise, and the
blessed Trinity is to replenishe and comfort the same.

The same day Verrine told Magdalen roundly and rigourously of her faults being
in her chamber, and spoke unto her in this sort. Magdalen, if thou resolve not
upon thy conversion between this and Christmas, thou shall be everlastingly
damned, and burnt alive, and shall not for all this escape our hands: as none
have ever escaped us these hundredth ninty nine years, because we made them all
to despair. This indeed will be the Magicians confusion, but shall leave no
touch or taint upon the company of S. Vrsula, the company of the Christian
doctrine, or upon thy father, whom I have pronounced innocent, though Beelzebub
Beelzebub took this false oath, and did afterward thus excuse and gloss the
same, saying he meant her spiritual father.
took a false oath against him, saying that thy father had given thee unto
him, which was false, for thou of thy own accord, and from a full and frank
will did give thy self to Lucifer, and to all his adherents, renouncing
God, the blessed Trinity and Paradise: renouncing all the merits of the Passion
of Christ Jesus; all the prayers of the sacred mother of God, and of all Angels
and Saints: taking and choosing hell, accepting the same as thy last and
everlasting habitation: saying, that thou had rather live in this world in
all varieties of delights and villainies, then to serve God thy Creator, The
blindness and desperate madness of Magicians.
and thy Redeemer Jesus Christ: promising Beelzebub to be obedient unto all his
commands, and that thou did give him with all thy heart, thy body and
soul, with the powers thereof, reserving nothing to thy self but hell, which
those that are culpapable of the like abominations do deserve, if they remain
and dye in their sins: making a schedule written in thy blood by thine own
hand, and giving it to Beelzebub; which afterward the Magicians got into their
custody.

It is true, she did not enter into these infernal courses her self, but was
induced and by allurements drawn unto it, by the thieves of her soul. But
Lodouicus seeing that dreadful wolf of hell to approach, left this sil^ie
sheep to be seized by him, yea intised her into the claws of ravenous wolves,
which are the Devils of hell.

She was young, which will be a good plea for her; because God is accustomed
to compassionate youth, witness the prodigal child, who left his fathers
house, as Magdalene has done, and fed with hogs, as she did.

Yet did he not die in his obstinacy, but acknowledged his fault, and
prostrated himself at the feet of his father, in great humility. So if
Magdalene shall cast her self at the feet of the mercy of her God, and shall
knock at his gate, that father of pity will command her to be let in, and
will bid the fat calfe to be killed: he will also cause new garments to be
fetched and cast upon her, which signifies a good conscience and repentance,
and will put a ring on her finger, to declare the faith and trust she ought to
give to the words of her father, and how grateful she should be in her
acknowledgements of his benefits: Then is she to ^o say, Father, father, I
have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
esteemed thine, entreat me as one of your hirelings, although most unworthy
of such a place as that. Thus should Magdalene humble her self, and should say,
approaching to the seat of his mercy, Father, I have sinned against heaven
and against thee, against thy blessed Mother, against the whole Court of
heaven, and against all thy creatures, I am therefore unworthy to be called
your daughter, nay your slave, nay I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to
heaven; but take me unto your mercy, (if it stand with your good pleasure)
who am the most wretched and disconsolate creature that lives under the heaven,
or upon the earth. Then he added further: Magdalene be converted, and abandon
thy sins: thou have been hitherto gently led on in calmness and in
softness: thou have been privily reproved by secret inspirations, by
preaching, by reading of good books, by many spiritual instructions which
have from time to time been infused into thee, as well in the house of S.
Vrsula, as by the fathers the Confessors, and other learned and illuminated
personages, who have given them unto thee both for thy practice, and for a
remedy against thy adversaries. He further said, Magdalene being rebelliously
bent against her God, and the admonitio^s of his Spouse the Church, and God
seeing her perdition so near, and her self so obstinate in her sins, and
having by all the aboue-named remedies profited nothing, has permitted that an
unworthy, yea thrice-vnworthie sister of the Company of S. Vrsula, Louyse
Capelle, who of her self is less powerful then the leaf of a tree, a stone,
or a pismire, yea who conceiueth her self to be unworthy of the title or
style of one of Gods creatures, should pronounce these things by the
appointment of God almighty, and a Devil, named Verrine, should by her mouth
dictate and deliver all these writings.

Then he made this remonstrance unto Magdalene, saying unto her in a great
Magdalene suffered her self to be gained away at times.
surie and chase, as if he had been mad, that God was infinitely angry with her
if she were not amended, or did remain in a determinate kind of obstinacy.
And he for his part did speak with as great assuredness from God, as ever the
Prophet Jonas did speak to the people of Niniue, when he said unto them, If
you repent not, you shall all perish: but they were wise, as Magdalene will be,
and followed the example of their King, who took ashes and cast them upon his
head, to appease and slake the wrath of God against them.

He also said to He means that Magdalene had not as then showed so great
signs of her repentance, as that the Devils had left all hope to regaine her.
Magdalene, Art not thou an accursed woman, that the Witches Sabbath is kept
here? Blushest thou not, that these Sabbaths and abominable conuentions are
kept here for thy sake, and that Magicians, Witches, Hags, and Sorcerers do
bewitch all these that are here? Yea, Father Francis Billet felt strange
motions within himself, but resisted them, and called for the grace of God.
Francis himself has taken in a charm whilst he was drinking.

Verrine further said unto sister Magdalene: If God were capable of sadness,
he would bewail, Magdalene, the great uncertainty and suspense wherein thou
keep him, touching thy conversion. Then did Verrine threaten her with more
absolutnes and authority, then ever her Superior did use toward her, or any
creature in the world beside. And good reason has he for the same, because he
was to execute the will of the Creator, being (as he himself said) as the
Kings Sergeant, who speaks in the Kings name and authority, and commands,
saying, If you do not put this in execution, and obey the King, you shall be
grievously punished, because he that withstandeth his King, deserves the most
severe punishment that can be inflicted. So the sinner that rebelleth, and
grows obstinate against his God, not keeping his commandments, nor observing
his and the Churches Counsels, he deserves sharp correction, yea tortures and
hell it self.

Also he said: O Magdalene, convert thy self, God is most gracious, and full
of pity. Thou art vexed Magdalene, to contemn and set at naught the delights
of this world, and yet regardest not the pleasures of eternity.

Then he said: Magdalene did at times waver shrewdly, like to one that begins
to be recovered of a grievous and long sickness, and staggers when he offers
to go, and is ready to sink for weakness, but then leans and staieth
himself on his staff.
Miserable, accursed, and damned as thou art, art thou not truly unhappy, to
believe that which comes from Lucifer, and give no heed unto me who am
here from God? Art thou not unhappy to believe that Louyse is the author and
expresser of these things? O Magdalene, thou do believe it, and this belief
is exceedingly prejudicial unto thee. It is true Magdalene, and I must lay it
close unto thee, thou did double and had a false intention before God,
and thy opinion was that Louyse spoke these things from her own head. And this
is true, Magdalene; as for Louyse she is possessed, Catherine is also
possessed, and so are the rest that are bewitched, but they know nothing of
what is here delivered; whereof thou Magdalen art the only unhappy cause. It is
true Magdalen, thou art proud and ungrateful, having a heart of stone, a heart
harder then a Diamond: thou conceiuest that God is thy debtor; O thou proud
caitise, how willing would thou have been to pluck him, if thou had been
able, from his throne of Majesty. But be of good courage Magdalene, and humble
thy self, thy God is so good, that although thou had run through all the
sins of the world, and of all the damned, thy God can show thee mercy, yea
and will pardon thee thy offenses, if thou humble thy self and be penitent.

The same day in the evening Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by Father
Francis, and Verrine spoke in this manner: Who has ever beheld the like, that
a Diuill should enter the lists against a Devil? we are all damned for ever,
and what we do, we do by constraint, for there is no jot of charity dwelling
in us. I auerre that this woman is possessed, and has three Devils in her
body, for the particular conversion of two principally, and then for the
conversion of many others. He that will not travel to Mount Caluarie, shall
not ascend Mount Thabor: God did intimate thus much unto the mother of the
children of Zebedeus. Peter denied his Master, but he repented, and wept very
bitterly, yea afterward died for him; and was crucified for his names sake.
Our Lord had many friends and associats that did bear him company at the Table
at Easter, Whitsontide and Christmas, but there were few that received him
worthily, and a small number that presented themselves before him with due and
serious preparation.

I take God to witness, his blessed Mother, and all Saints, that I do now
tell you, if you do not repent, and acknowledge the benefits that God has so
plentifully powered upon you, you are not worthy to be partakers of any
Sacrament, nay you deserve to dye without the comfort of them.

Those that are curious, are liquorous of more knowledge then is expedient for
them; which they make inquisition after in the pit of Hell, as do the
Caluinists, and all other Heretics, who would interpret the passages in holy
writ, not according to Gods meaning, but interpose their own giddy and private
fancies, and reject the meaning and exposition of the Church. Young Against youth
people be you penitent, you pamper up your flesh with such delicacies and
niceness, and let in all pleasures with such a full scope unto you, that you
stand under the arrest of high treason against God. We tempt youth and make
them fall like mellow figs from a tree when they are shaken by a strong
wind, neither need we to help this wind by our breath. I am as a Sergeant,
and execute my commission; I say, you may attain, if you will, unto heaven:
yet are you obstinate, and think that God is endebted unto you, and that the
way to Heaven is easy and open.

No, no, I tell you that God cannot sin, nor lie; ponder well upon this so
fearful a sentence, Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum. Go ye cursed into Hell,
and live for ever in all misery in that other world, together with those whom
in this life you have obeyed and hearkened unto.

We that are Devils do dandle and make much of them with a thousand varieties
of torments: we bestow sights and visions upon them, but they are the visions
of Devils, that would at one clap strike all men stark dead, to have but a
side long glance of their horrid deformities. They do also see the souls of
the damned, who having in their first creation been fashioned with much bewty,
are now as hideous in their semblance as are the Devils themselves.

You have indeed the Saints to intercede for you, saying, Lord give them of the
water of life; but you are to conceive your selves to be unworthy of that
life, unless you humble your selves, believing that you are unworthy of such a
place as Hell, nay, if that God shall make ten thousand helles, yet are you to
think that your deserts do surmount the torments of them all. If you fast in
this world, you shall feast in the world to come. The excellency of the choice
delicacies of the world to come, does breed a sacietie and disgust of the meats
you here enjoy: and whosoever could but get a crumme or the least relish in
the world of those dainties, they are so exquisitely prepared, that they would
cause all the viands of this world to be loathed. We may talk of them, but
we shall never taste them, it is too late now to repent us. That horse is not
a horse of price and value that gallopeth not but when he is spurred; and he
who serves God with an ill will, is of no reckoning. It is many times a
greater fault, to omit that thou ought to do, then to do that which thou
ought to omit. Three sorts of servants of God.
There are three sorts that serve God, the first serve him as slaves, and they
are those that are always in Hell: Others serve him as Hirelings, and those
have regard to nothing but to the reward of Heaven; and are like those that
work and travel merely for their profit: and there are those that serve him
more faithfully, who serve him as children out of mere love.

A virtuous child has no regard unto the goods of his Parents, neither does
he murmr at those blows which for his reformation they give unto him; but
is respective of his duty, and is serviceable unto them merely out of
affection: so do the children of God, they serve him, not out of expectancie
of reward, but from the strength of their love. A cup of fresh water that is
given unto the poor, pays a whole years ransom in Purgatory. O great God,
it is no wonder, if neither beasts, Barbarians, nor He means the Indians in
that state wherein they were before their conversion, being people removed
far from God, as S. Paul speaks of the Gentiles, Ephesians. l.
Indians do know thee: for they either have no understanding or do live in
darkness: but I marvel at thy children the Christians, that they do not
acknowledge thee, whose name and stamp they carry. For a Christian has his
appellation from Christ, as the Bride bears the name of the Bridegroom. In
the blessed baptism, God the Father takes the soul for his daughter; the
son takes it for his sister; the holy Ghost for his Spouse; and all the
blessed Trinity for their Temple.

Irreuerent behavior in Baptism.
You do so little reckon of Baptism, that when you approach to this Sacrament
a man would say, that you went to some May Game or dance, for you talk in the
Church, and do nothing but laugh, using many other scandalous misdemeanments
of this nature, and do indeed any thing, rather then conceive of this
Sacrament with reverence. S. John did not run into such an error, but when he
baptized our Lord, he baptized him in great fear and devotion. How great an
oversight is this in you, thus to dis-esteeme the Sacraments that have their
institution from God himself, and are the pillars on which this Church does
lea^^e; neither is there any Sacrament that has not drawn blood from him.
Then Verrine set his foot upon Beelzebub, and said; Beelzebub, I do adjure thee
by the living God, that if thou have any thing to reply, that what I have now
said is not true, thou give answer thereunto; speak Beelzebub, whether that
which I have spoken be true or no. I do further adjure thee by Lucifer, that
if thou can take me tripping, thou do directly tell me wherein I lie. O
cursed Beelzebub, thou can not reply against me, for I deliver the truth, and
that by the appointment of God. Thou art accursed, and as wretched as my self:
speak wicked spirit if thou have any thing to say. Then Verrine began to cry.
All you The people of Towns and Villages there adjoining did flock thither in
great troops.
here may observe (speaking to the Assembly that was there present) he is my
Prince, but I do not now acknowledge him to be so. It is true Beelzebub, thou
art my Prince, but I here renounce any superiority which thou pretendest to
have over me. I also renounce thee Lucifer, and the authority of all the Devils
in Hell, for we are not powerful to resist the Almighty. You, who take
Lucifers part, can reply nothing of any moment or importance, neither have you
more force then a sort of Flies. All this while did Verrine, in contempt, tread
upon Beelzebub, saying: Thou proud Spirit, and full of arrogancy as my self,
thou swellest and art in the highth of pride. I hope there is no offense done,
if that these proud creatures be dejected and thoroughly dishattened.

Then Verrine said to Magdalene, Magdalene the gate of Heaven is opened, so is
the gate of Hell, and there men may enter in at full Carroche, yea four
Caroches together may have easy passage thither, and all four may enter in a
front: but the gate of Paradise is so narrow, that few pass in thereat, and
much humiliation is expedient to enter in at the same.

Over this gate, Obedience is seated, and under it is Humility, on the one
side stands Charity, on the other, Hope; and Perseverance is the Porter that
lets in those that come thither. Humility represents the birth of the Son
of God, and Obedience signifies that the Son of God has humbled himself
from his birth, until the time of his death.

Sin is more ugly and deformed then the Devil. If a man-had a convenient
house of his own, and a reasonable competencie wherewith to live, and yet
without cause should give and cast himself into the hands of Turks, and
should from them receive hard usage and entertainment: if such a one should
plain himself, men would say unto him; Friend, you were not well advised: you
lived well in your own house, and who is cause of this calamity but your
self? I say there is no man that would compassionate such a fellow: Even so,
every man has somewhat whereby he is enabled to make opposition against the
world, provided that he have the grace of God: but if he will sin and
inuassall himself to the Devil, who will pity his case? He is disabled in
his brain, that enjoys liberty, and does voluntarily render himself up to
slavery. Then he confirmed this speech with a solemn oath, and after said,
to what use and purpose are wholesome waters if there be none to drink of
them? you must frequent the Sacraments, that you may make your profit and
advantage of them. Magdalene, the judgments of God are not to be squared by
the judgments of men: you are to stoop and abase your selves in this world,
if you will ascend to that which is to come. This which I have spoken
(Magdalene) was never hammered in the shop of Hell.

The Devils have at sundry times preached, and broached diverse curiosities to
the prejudice and perdition of those that entertained the same, but the things
which I deliver, conduce to the amendment of men's lives and conuersations.

The souls of men fall as thick into Hell, as the Corn does from the Mill.
Men go to Hell by thousands, but they enter one by one into Heaven: though it
be not always so. At times, there have gone to Heaven 10000. Martyrs in one
day, and 11000. Virgins in another day, and many other arrive there after
sundry manners, according to the good pleasure of God.

The same day Verrine was asked, why Magdalene was not yet endowed with upright
intention, since she followed his instructions, and the day before the
conception had heartily renounced Satan. To this he answered, that he is
perfectly possessed with upright intention, that casts no lustful wink or
glance of the eye on any creature; yet a man might have an honest heart,
although his intention do fleet and waver, and might be as it were placed in
the middle, seized upon by neither party. Then he said, that he was not able to
speak one word before another, but as he received them from above, so he spoke
them.

The Acts of the 18. of December.
THe same day, as Father Francis one of the Order of S. Dominick did say Mass,
at the elevation of the Chalice, Verrine began to cry, saying: It is a truth,
that the body and blood, and the whole humanity and Divinity of our Lord,
all, all is here present. God is at this time contented to obey him that says
Mass. This God who is so See the Page 18.
powerful, does subject himself to obedience: yet you that are but lumpes of
clay, are so refractarie and rebellious, that you labor to withdraw your
obedience from so good a God: obey him, obey him.

After this, when some would have Louyse to communicate, he spoke aloud, and
said: go, and call me hither Romillon; this is to teach you obedience. O He
desires to be commanded. See the Answer to the fifth doubt after the Epistle
to the Reader.
Romillon, thou must command me in the power of that blessed obedience, and by
the same power thou must command her to communicate. Then he said, communicate
all you first; Louyse shall be the last. And before she did communicate,
Verrine began to say, be well advised how you go to Of those that go to
Confession without due preparation.
Confession: there be many that goo to Confession, and enquire after a Priest,
and desire the Priest to make their Confession for them, saying: Father, tell
me a little my sins, for I have forgot them. What fools are these, do they
think that Priests are Gods and Prophets, or that they know those sins which
they have neither seen nor committed. I am verily of opinion, that such as
they should give absolu^ion unto the Priest, because it accords with reason,
that he that confesses should receive absolution. There ^re others, that will
not stick to commit many sins, and when they come to Confession, they say,
why should I confess my sins to a Priest? I think it very ^nfit to reveal
all unto such as they: they are men and ^inners as we are. But I would know of
them why such ^inde of men should go to Confession at all, if they ^oe not
subject themselves unto the authority of the Church? The Church does
positiuely command and ^ay, Thou art to confess all thy sins at the least
once a ^eere. Then he said: Take good heed to your Con^ession: it is a
business of no small importance: this I ^ffirme to my own confusion and
damnation, but God ^lmightie does force me thereunto. Then he swore that this
was true, and that in confirmation thereof, Lo^yse should See the 19. page.
communicate without any contradiction ^r repugnancie: an accident that never
happened since ^ee came thither, but only once, to strengthen and ^onfirme the
disputation which he had with the Mi^ime Friar.

When Magdalene was about to read the above ^entioned letter, directed to the
blessed Mother of God, Beelzebub began to resist, and hinder the same: whereupon
Verrine stood up and said: take courage Magdalene, persevere, and hold firm
for God: Mag^alene believe me, Beelzebub is almost disweaponed: ^ake courage
Magdalene and persevere; thou have be^un well I assure thee Magdalene, and will
swear it unto thee.

It is true, I am the Verrine styles himself Gods Sergeant.
Sergeant sent by commission from any King to execute that design which he
has recom^ended unto my charge much against my will: but like ^ Gally-slaue I
am forced to obey him, and am come with a rod, and knock at the door A
profitable and useful dis. course unto Magdalene.
of Magdalenes heart: but I found it shut, and all the windows closed up, so
that I knew not where to enter, but was upon the point of returning back. But
God commanded me, that I should knock at the gate in good earnest, and should
get it opened. I performed his pleasure, and have not varied from it a jot.
Yesterday I knocked, and to day it was opened, and then the stone which kept
the door fast, was taken away. It stands with reason, that he who proves
rebellious, should have the most grievous punishments inflicted upon him.

This is true Magdalene, persevere, persevere Magdalene, for thy God is come to
dwell with thee. God herein resembles a King, who sends his Sergeant at
Arms to see his Commission executed. When the Sergeant comes, he says: Open
door, for I come from the King: then are they constrained to open unto him,
and he casts his staff into the house, and returns to the King saying, his
Commission is executed. The King makes use of a paltry Sergeant that is not
worth a farthing for the performance of his services, as if he were a man of
value and estimation, for the Kings authority has no reference or dependencie
upon the Sergeant^ so does God make use of me (who am of no reckoning) to be
the instrument of things that are good and commendable. Take courage Magdalene.
Thou have indeed a great Indictment, but take comfort Magdalene, for Mary is
thy Advocate, thy President, Commissary, and Solicitor, even as Monsieur du
Vair being the first President, is also the most sufficient Solicitor that is
in the Parliament of Aix: Cheer up thy self Magdalene: all are thy advocates
on high in the Parliament of Paradise.

It is true Magdalene, thou have but begun to day seriously and in good earnest
to be converted: at all other times thou were newtrall and betwixt two, neither
against God, nor for the Devil: but now thou do re^olutely take arms
against Beelzebub. This is true Magdalene, this is true. Then Beelzebub began to
bustle up himself and said, there is yet a time wherein she may be had:
whereupon Verrine rose up and took Beelzebub rudely by the hand, saying: Thou
lie Beelzebub, thou have no part or portion in Magdalene. Believe it Magdalene
thy sins are forgiven thee: it is most true, and I will take my oath of it.
Then he swear upon the Gospel, that all which he had delivered was true,
saying: I swear by the living God, by the power of the Father, by the wisdom
of the Son, by the goodness of the holy Ghost for confirmation ( Magdalene)
of all the words which I have spoken. But do not you think that I will leave
Magdalene thus: there is no reason that she should go to Paradise without
humbling her self under the burden of repentance. I tell thee Magdalene, thou
must be repentant, and must with all lowliness and debasement of thy self
make resignation of whatsoever appertains unto thee into the hands of thy
God; thou art to suffer him to do with thee whatsoever shall seem good unto
him; thou art to obey thy superior as if he were a God on earth: for it is
said: honor the Priests because of their dignity and calling: which in regard
the Angels themselves cannot paragon or equal, it stands with reason that
you should have them in good esteem and veneration. O Magdalene, these are thy
Gods on earth: honor them, and do all that which they shall command thee,
agreeable to God, his Church, and their authority: obey, Magdalene, and humble
thy self, crave pardon of all, and beseech every one to say a This was the
fashion of public penance.
Miserere for thee; fall down groueling upon the ground, and bid all come and
put their feet upon thee, to the utter confusion of Beelzebub, Lucifer, and of
all hell, yea of Verrine craves his own confusion.
Verrine himself that does command it. After this he began to say, take all
this as spoken to thy shame, and thou shall reap profit by it; it will
minister unto thee occasion of contrition, and of satisfaction; it will assuage
and lessen the pains which thy sins have deserved. Then he cried aloud as
one beside himself, It is true Magdalen, thou have been buffit^ed, thou have
been spit upon, and have borne a thousand disgraces and disparagements, but be
of good cheer Magdalene, all shall turn to thy advantage. He further made
great exclamation, saying, It is a Chapel, where behind a certain pillar
there is a piece of the mountain, whereun^o the Angels carried S. Magdalene
with great singing and melody, much rejoicing at her repentance which she there
performed for the space of 30. years, as she told an honest religious person,
that presently died after she had revealed this unto him, as was foretold him,
in token of the truth thereof. Syluest. Prieras has wrote the history of her
fol. 5. post. Pasch.
O great goodness of your God! how wretched shall you be if you do not serve
him with all fidelity? for a little affliction which you endure in this world,
you shall be clothed with robes of honor in Paradise. Your God is so
gracious, that for a little pain which a man here endures for his sake, yea
for a glass of water given for his love, or for a little mortification in this
world, he will esteem more of these, then of a long and languishing durance
of the flames in Purgatory: and turning again to Magdalene he said, Be of
good cheer Magdalene and be glad, and take into thy possession and use those
two wings, whereby men's souls do soar up to heaven, that is, love and fear:
the one touches the earth, the other climbeth heaven. The two wings that
carried Magdalene to S. Pilon, were the love which she did bear toward her
God, and that filial fear which kept her back from offending against him.

The same day did those that were sent to Marseille with a purpose to give the
letter unto Jews, return from thence, having effected nothing in the
business; For it seemed strange unto the Capuchin fathers, that they should be
actors in reclaiming of him, and would by no means proceed in the same, till
they had taken advice and direction from father Michaelis, unto whom they sent
certain fragments of this their brotherly resolution, and one of their reasons
against this was, because at that very time there was in the City of Aix one
possessed in the covent of the Capuchins; where the Devil swore cross and
opposite to that, upon which the correction and pretended reformation of Jews
was founded, saying, that Jews the Priest was no Magician, neither was
Magdalene bewitched. This being thus related in the presence of Verrine and
Beelzebub, Verrine said that this D^uell was sent from Lucifer to stagger and
make doubtful the truth of these things, and that he had taken a fal^e oath;
for the Exorcist did not deal with that circumspection as he should, in
exacting this oath with those solemnities that are requisite unto the same:
that is to say, he was not made to swear according to the meaning of God, of
his Church, etc. Yea Beelzebub himself contrary to his wont and custom (for
he did always stand in opposition against Verrine) said in great choler and
fury: yes, that which Verrine tells you is most true: for that Devil was
expressly sent from hell, to say that Jews was no Magician, and that Magdalene
was not bewitched: but he spoke not truth in saying so, neither did he swear
according to the meaning of God and of his Church, and that he was now
grievously punished for the same. All which he confirmed with a solemn oath,
unto the which he was enforced, as Magdalene did afterward testify to have
inwardly felt in her self.

The Father Michaelis at that time preached the Aduent at Aix.
same day I received a letter from father Michaelis, dated the 16. of December.
1610. in this te^our.

Reverend father, Pax Christi vobiscum. I was well pleased to hear such good
news from you, and to understand that your labor toward those poor souls
was not idle and without fruit: of the which I do so well approve, that I
delegate over unto you all my authority as well of Inquisitour and Priour, as
of Vicar general. Cudgel these Devils lustily, who are Gods and our sworn
enemies. The manage of these affairs I wholly leave unto your self, as being
well practi^ed and dextrous in things of this kind, and by Gods assistance hope
to see you after Christmas. So recommending me unto the prayers of your
reverend self, of the father Vicar, and of father Gadrij, saluting you, and
desiring you to tell Friar Simon from me, that he bestirre himself lustely
herein, I rest, Yours most affectionate in the Lord, Fr. Sebastianus Michaelis,
Vicarius generalis, Prior, and Inquisitor fidei. From Aix, the 16. of December.
1610.

The same day after dinner Magdalene seemed to be much changed, being full of
spiritual joy, and ready to do and leave all for the love of God. She said,
that the day before she had received many blows, and much disgrace without
any fear or trembling in her heart, although Lucifer endeavored at the same
time to make it appear otherwise in outward show; and that she had received
and taken in good part those instructions and dis^ourses which in S. Baume were
proposed unto her. She said that in the said place she did for the space of 3.
or 4. hours sensibly feel a kind of gentle sweetness, softly distilling and
dropping upon her heart, with a quiet internal silence so admirablie pleasing,
that in all her life she had not known, nor seen, nor heard the like.

She was also that day shut up within S. Baume, and confessed, that the They
oftentimes assembled in a place that is under the Church, and joining unto the
chamber where Magdalene lay.
Sabbath and assembly of Witches was kept in S. Baume. In the evening they were
Exorcised by father Francis, and Verrine after his accustomed manner began to
say, They that make difficulty to believe that the Devil constrained by
Exorcismes may auow and swear a truth, are worse then Heretics, because they
must deny the virtue of Exorcismes, the authority of the Church, and the
Omnipotency of God. I could tell you all the villainies and sins you have
committed, but I am tied up from doing mischief. We that are Devils can do
nothing but that which is evil, and Angels can do nothing but that which is
good: but men are able to do either good or evil, as being endowed with a
free will, and yet, O God, there are of these creatures that do rebelliously
demean themselves against thee, and are indeed worse then Devils. The pains
that men suffer in this world are as flowers and Roses in comparison of the
pains of Hell, which are true torments indeed: I tell you the fires of this
world are imaginary and painted in respect of the fires there, and all
furnaces are as nothing if they be compared but to a spark in Hell: Devils are
as wild and ravenous beasts: they bite in their embracements. We promise much
and perform nothing, because where nothing is nothing can be expected. You
that are Unto Priests and religious persons.
Priests be circumspect and advised in your calling, because it is no offense
if a man neglect and turn from an Angel of heaven, to do honor and
reverence unto you. The Angels indeed do incessantly behold the face of their
God, but you with four words do make him descend upon the Altar, and since
herein the King obeys his vassal; how wretched must that Priest be that
does rebel and mutter against his superior: you lumps of clay, it will not go
well with you, unless you humble your selves and be repentant. Disobedience
was it that turned Adam out of Paradise, and the same disobedience cast Lucifer
headlong out of Heaven; If God were capable of sadness, he would weep when
he sees a rebellious and disobedient man, so highly does that sin displease
him. Every one ought to live contentedly in his vocation. You that are Priests
and religious persons ought to study, preach, and search out the truth, for
you are sequestered from this world to be servants unto the light. Many seek
truth and cannot find it, because they search after it with a dim and obscure
lantern: other search it with a greater and fuller light, and they find it.
Faith is this light, and humility the door that opens unto truth. The
curious walk upon the brinke of Hell, and thinking always that they shall
find out what they make inquisition after, they do at last stumble and fall
down, the head first, and the rest of the body after: witness the Caluinists,
Calvin, Beza, Luther, these were the heads of our new Heretics, and all the
body, to wit, those, that follow and adhere to their opinions do fall into
this gulf, if they die obstinately in their fancies: this is it they must
look for unless they be converted.

You that are in religious Orders attend seriously unto your vocation, and
observe the commandments and counsels of God, and know that your life is a
light unto worldlings, and a pattern or copy of their lives and
conuersations: you must study a new book, a book that has but two leaves;
the first leaf contains the manner of attaining unto perfect humility in the
birth of the Son of God; the other leaf contains the obedience which till his
death he ever practiced. I tell you, that those who shall read this book
advisedly and as they ought, I dare be bold to promise them on Gods behalf
life eternal, because in this book is comprehended the beginning and end of
perfection. He that is humble is neither curious nor rebellious, but is apt for
commands and full of obedience; and the obedient cannot die but live eternally:
by obedience I understand such a kind of subjection that shall no way be
disagreeable unto God or his Church, or the salvation of souls; for if I
should say otherwise I should lie. And I say (turning himself to the Assembly)
speaking unto you in general, not in particular, that our Lord had twelve
Disciples, of whom one was stark naught: The Jews were formerly the true
children of God, but now they are a reprobate Nation: so I say, if you see a
wicked priest, you are not presently to ground from hence that all the rest are
like unto him: if you see a wicked Friar or religious person, you are not by
and by to conjecture that their religion is naught; But here is the great
misery of worldly men, who when they see a wicked Priest, are presently ready
to say, this is the conversation of them all: I say unto them that herein they
do belly them, and they are not to speak after this manner; for the wicked
cannot prejudice or disparage the good, and those that thus despise Priests do
it to this end that they may have freer scope to live in liberty and
licentiousness. The book of humility is hard to be understood by a man that
is not very intelligent, but when he once shall know the interpretation of the
same, he will find all manner of virtues contained therein: for she is a
Queen that brings with her many Princesses and Ladies in her train: and as
in a chain one ring follows and depends upon another; so does humility
upon obedience: the groundworke of true perfection is humility, and the end is
obedience. Great God for this cause wast thou borne, for this cause did thou
die; thou were borne in a manger, and died'st naked upon the Cross, and have
endured death it self, yea a most cruel and ignominious death.

Against single cumbates.
Cursed be those that shall fight in single cumbate, for hereby they
transgress the Commandment of God, and of their King, and do contemn the
Excommunication of the Church. Many children are so iladuised, that they
believe neither father nor mother, and do well deserve the miseries which do
afterward overtake them; Absolon may be a true witness of the same.

In the world all things go by friendship and partiality, but it is not so
with God; the Monarch and the beggar; the fair and the foul; the lame and the
perfect are all alike, if they be in grace alike. You of the laity keep the
Commandments of God and his Church, and you shall be saved: Heaven was not
made merely and solely for religious persons: be you only careful to love
God, and to serve and obey him. Such and so admiral is the power of God, that
he stinteth not himself to the praises of Angels or of his creatures, but
goes further, and commands the Devil himself, (by compulsion and not out
of love) to glorify him and to put his good pleasure in execution. Though all
Angels, all men, and all Hell should incessantly enlarge and extend their
speeches to relate at full the glory and perfections of God, yet could they
never attain unto the same; it is an abisme whose bottom is inscrutable, and
cannot be diued into by the greatest Seraphins, or the Mother of God her self,
God is only he who can comprehend it. Many curious persons conceive their
judgments so able that they can comprise within the same all Gods power, all
his sapience and goodness, and all his other perfections. Ha! how short
comes their understanding of these mysteries; they must humble themselves if
they will go to Paradise, you cannot go any other way; believe me, this is
the path that leads to Heaven. See the Answer unto the fifth Objection to
the doubts after the Epist. to the Reader
The same day Verrine bid Father Francis Billet to take the Stole, and the
book of Exorcismes, and willed him from God, and in the virtue of the^ to
command him to dictate this ensuing letter directed unto a Priest of the
Christian doctrine that was tempted to doubt of his vocation: the Exorcismes
being performed accordingly, he began to dictate in form as follows.

Dearest and well-beloved brother, I here advertise you that we assuredly know
for a truth, that whatsoever your Reverence has conceived against your
vocation is nothing else but a mere suggestion of the Devil, who is an utter
enemy to God and all obedience. He endeavors to infuse into you rebellion
against God and your Superior, and would have you to believe that your
judgment is able to comprehend all the secrets of God. But I assure you it
would require and take up all our time if we should endeavor to learn and
enquire into the secrets of God. For his secrets and judgments are so abstruse
that none of themselves can be certain of the manner of them. Many there are
that have a conceit they know the will of God, and that their understanding is
very perfitely illuminated: but for the most part they are beguiled. For we
see by daily experience, that they may be deceived, and no question are
deceived, since every day there are new wonders full of rare and admirable
strangenes, discovered in this our God. And perceauing a burden and pressure
upon my soul, if I should be wanting unto you in this office, I have sent
this letter unto you to wish you instantly to dispatch your self hither for
S. Baume with as much speed as possibly you may. If you come before
Christmasse, you shall understand, as I conceive, diverse passages so excellent
in themselves and so aduantageous unto you, that you would not for the world
but be made familiar with them, for they are so full of nouelty and
strangeness, that no man alive did ever see the like. Know that Louyse Capean
whom you have formerly been acquainted withal, one of the unworthiest and
meanest Sisters of the company of S. Vrsula that are at Aix, is bewitched and
possessed by three Devils that are within her body. It was a Charm that gave
way to this possession of Devils, which did befall her by the permission of
God, and out of a zeal she had to suffer Hell it self, and all the pains
thereof (so that she might not be separated thereby from her God) for his glory
and the salvation of souls. And being settled for many years in this
resolution, and coming often times to blessed Communion, she prayed still
unto God that he would take compassion upon the souls of her neighbors, and
this she demanded with such ardency of desire, that it is almost impossible for
any to attain unto the like. And being moved by him that internally spoke unto
her and said: Whether, if it were expedient, to hazard thy body and to expose
it even unto death for the salvation of thy neighbors, would thou willingly
undertake the same? she accepted of it many times, saying, that she was ready
to endure all, and that it was fit to prefer the soul of our neighbor before
our body or our own life. Thus God out of his great goodness has made choice
of her for a work which neither you nor I ever dreamed of, nor should ever
have believed, if we had not seen the experience of the same: and those who
have not had the opportunity to behold it, may perchance hereafter at the least
have means to read this wonder. For every one labors with all diligence
that may be to make such unhard of events, and so strange a Miracle to appear
unto the world. And I do assure you, if you did but understand it aright, you
would leave meat and drink, nay your very studies to have knowledge of that,
which every day offers it self unto our considerations. For Father Michaelis
being inspired from God, counseled Father Romillon to bring Magdalene from
Palud, and to search out al other that were bewitched and bring them to S.
Baume, that they might there make their vows. Being there, Louyse Capeau came
from Aix her self alone, accompanied with none of the rest that were
possessed, where she found Magdalene already arrived. Touching Louyse, she
would by no means at the first hear tell of Exorcismes, saying that she was
not possessed, and that all might arise from natural causes, or by the
sleights and power of the Devils that were in the body of Magdalene. She was at
Aix when they It was discovered by certain strange and unusual gestures.
discovered themselves, and it was done in the time of Confession^ (then was
Magdalene at S. Maximin) and although her Confessors did clearly demonstrate
unto her, that this strain and fancy of hers against possession, could no way
suit with probability, yet was she so swollen with pride arrogance and
rebellion, that she would not submit her judgment unto her Superior, who
commanded diverse to make inquiry of this matter at S. Baume. And the Devil
within her said, I will not obey him: so that when it was offered unto her
consideration, how that she was no win the presence of God himself (for it was
within the Church of S. Vrsula) and when he that confessed her at the time the
Devils began to be discovered, did reprove her, and say, They did at first
impure all unto Louyse, but after the discovery was made, it was judged that
the Devils within her, made her speak in that manner.
How dare thou to speak thus before thy Superior? She answered, that she
would subject her self to the command, neither of Governor, nor Gouernesse,
neither would she regard or think of them: that she thought her self more
knowing, how to conduct her self in her own behauiours and deportments, then
they could be: that she would rely upon her own judgment; and that Superiors
did many times command things very unfit to be put in execution. All this while
did not she understand, that this was a stratagem of the Devils, to give
hindrance and stop unto the work which is now so well begun. And although
the Devil would have shifted this off by sundry slights and collusions, yet in
the end either by force or out of love she was contented to be obedient;
although she still was stiff in her opinion, that she would not suffer her
self to be exorcised. But God changed her intendment, and disposed her heart to
embrace the good pleasure of God and of her Superior, and to renounce and
disclaim her own: so that she came to S. Baume, and there suffered her self
to be exorcised. Whereupon one of the Devils named Verrine began to speak and
to tell his name, and after many adiurations where withal he was chained and
bound up, he revealed the names of his companions; and upon the continuance of
the Exorcismes, he said and swore (taking a solemn oath with all the
properties and particulars there unto belonging) upon the blessed Sacrament,
saying these words. I swear by the living God, that all which I have spoken is
true. And further, I swear according to the meaning of God and his Church,
that the Devil and all Hell have made a combination and solemn agreement to
ruinate the company of the Christian doctrine, and the company of S. Vrsula,
because there is a dependence of one upon another, and by abolishing the one,
the other will of it self fall to decay. Many other things he spoke at this
Exorcisme, and bade us not from Romillon but from God to send and search after
all Some Priests of the doctrine were tempted to forsake their vocation,
because of these possessions, and grew factious at the last against their very
Superior.
those that were tempted, and particularly one who is very high and haughty,
and is too full of conceit of his judgment and of self-will, and to warn him,
if he be wise to submit himself to the will of God, and to his obedience,
that is, to return to his calling, and that he come hither to plead for
himself, For here is (said he) an Advocate, that is so skillful in matters
of pleading, that he will quickly ease and disburthen him of all care and
scruple, and of all those doubts which did stagger him in his apprehending of
the pleasure of God: for having sought the same with an obscure and dim
lantern, it was not to be wondered at, if he were not able to find it.

But God seeing him thus benighted, did send unto him a bright and clear
burning flame, so that he can now no longer shift things off with excuses; if
he be wise let him come, that it may be discerned what belongs unto the
light and what unto darkness; what to lies and what unto truth, and what
difference there is between his judgment, and the judgment of God. Come
therefore hither with all promptitude and readiness, and for-slow not your
time, to be informed in a point that touches you so nearly, and call to
mind how earnestly you have besought God for this very particular: and these
prayers of yours God has heard, so that you need not fear to be forsaken; as
they have been a sweet sacrifice unto him, so shall they prove very
profitable unto you, if you will but humble your self to his good pleasure.
Remember what God has spoken, that he will give grace to the humble, and
resist the proud of heart. You are unworthy to know his pleasure, neither shall
you ever understand the same, if you do not bow under obedience, and humble
your self toward him. You may turn over as many books as you will; this is
a new book and very lately composed, and not yet published to the world:
within this book there are not above two words; and yet here is comprised the
Epitome and abridgment of all perfection: this is our Philosophy and Divinity,
which we are so seriously to study.

Call also to your remembrance, that they who will not read this book, are
very unworthy to ascend unto so great and sublime perfections. Come therefore,
and trifle not with any studied or prepared delays, for God expects you,
that he may bestow upon you that which with such ardency you have besought at
his hands, that is, to open your understanding, that you may be made acquainted
with his will. Remember what he says, Ask and you shall have, seek and you
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Call to mind, how often
you have knocked at the gate of this King, and how he who had the key of this
gate, to wit, Peter, has said, yea, and interceded for you as for the
Cananite, saying, Lord, give to this poor blind man that which he demands
(who would have thought then that thou would have proved so dark in the
knowledge of Gods will?) But God grew angry at these intercessions and said, I
do not use to cast away my graces upon a proud man. If thou say, that thou art
not proud, then think thy self to be deprived of light, and that he who
conceiteth himself to be humble, does notwithstanding appear in full pride
before God. But if thou say that thou art proud, I also will confess the same,
and there is no hurt done, if proud men be taught and lessoned to be humble.
If thou tell me thou art humble, I must be bold to say that it suteth not
with truth: for he that is humble indeed takes no notice of his own
understanding or will, but suffers himself to be guided as a blind-man by
him that leads him, and verily believes that the other feeth better then he:
and if thou be blind, then can it not be hurtful, that he who of himself is
deprived of light, should go and seek it of him who has the same. And I do
assure thee thou shall plentifully find it, if thou obey the will of thy
Superior, and acknowledge thy self to be subject unto him: that is to say, to
the Reverend Father Romillon. Louyse prays you for the love of God to beg of
God five things for her which she has long desired, and that you would also
lay hold upon them for your self, that is, an upright intention, a pure
affection, integrity of conscience, simplicity and humility, together with
obedience and resignation of your self in all things that may concern the
glory of God, for the salvation of souls, and for our good in particular.

She further entreats, that you would be pleased to pardon her, if she has
been too presumptuous to take on her to teach you; for it is not her intention
so to do, but the urgent necessity of the matter is such, that she has
been hold to make thus much familiar unto you, which she prays you to take
in good part. She should be very sorry, notwithstanding any pride that may be
in her, but to take all your counsels and admonitions with due respect, and to
humble her self to him whom she knows to be invested with so great dignity
as is the calling of Priests: for she desires nothing more then to honor them
as Gods on earth, and as befitteth so high a dignity. Your most humble,
affectionate and obedient servant to do whatsoever you shall be pleased to
command, Francis Billet the most unworthy Priest of the Congregation of the
Christian Doctrine, being a witness of what is above mentioned.

The Acts of the 19 of December. 1610.
THis day at the elevation of the blessed Sacrament, Verrine began to speak
aloude when he saw them take the was candles which they use to light at the
elevation of the Sacrament.

This light which you here see, represents the faith which you ought to have,
of Gods being in the blessed Sacrament with his Divinity, Humanity, and Blood:
yea, I say further, he is also within the Chalice. What seek thou further? I
confess it, it is a truth, is it not sufficient that I have confessed these to
be present in the blessed Host? And so fell down and worshipped him.

Speaking of God, he said, yes I adore thee, Adoramus te Christ. And when they
came to these words, Redemisti, etc. he cried out, You, you, not me, for he is
not my Redeemer, but a severe and terrible Judge. Then he made an exclamation,
and said, O great miracle! although in saying thus, what novelty do I speak?
for it is no new thing that the Son of God should yield obedience unto a When
it is said, that God obeyed the voice of Joshua, the meaning is, that he granted
him that which was desired of him, that is, he stayed the course of the Sun.
Priest.

It is not strange that Almighty God should begin a new creation, or raise the
dead: but the strangeness is, that a Devil should to his rume discover his
own associats in relating truly the fact as is in this History.
Ha God! it is no great wonder for thee to raise the dead, to make the blind
to see, or the dumb to speak, with many works of wonder of a parallel nature:
but the wonder of wonders is, that the Son of God with four words should be
made to descend upon this Altar: although I could tell you another great wonder
too, and that is, that the Devil is here forced to deliver the truth. I do
auerro, that it is more strange that a Devil should thus deliver truth, then
to create 1000. worlds, or to raise 1000. from the dead: for it is a matter of
ease and course with God, to command those things that give no stop or
resistance unto his will. When God created the World, he said but, Fiat: When
he raised the dead, he said but the word, and all thing obeyed him: But when he
comes to command a Devil, he had need to employ all his power to enforce him
to perform his will. For the Devil is so mischeeuously bent, that he The
example of Satan communing with God is set down in the 1. chap. of Job.
resists as much as he is able, and is ever disputing with God, propounding
diverse reasons unto him, saying, they have preachers, and they have stoore of
books, let them give credit unto them.

He further said: God is like the master of a great shop, he is his
crafts-master in all trades, and will give every one of you wherewith all to
employ himself. He is so skillful and gallant a Tailor, that he cutteth out
garments with much dexterity, and wants nothing but whom he may set on work.
He is well experienced to cut out your work, you Ecclesiastical men may do
well to employ your selves under him, because you that are priests ought
rather to lead the life of Angels then of men, and are to be instrusted with
the counsels and Commandments of God.

Then he turned himself to the Layity, and said; No no, the Priests have not
the world at will as you conceive: they must be humble, chaste, and poor, and
must chastise and mortify themselves sundry ways, which is a point full of
difficulty unto those that are deuoid of charity. Then he spoke to the A
discourse unto the Monks and religious persons.
Monks, and said: You that live in Cloisters, have an eye unto your estate,
for it is not enough to be mued up in your walls, and then to live at your
ease, no, you must rise at midnight, you must be very studious; you must be
humble, you must be modest. You should be a glass unto secular persons, and
harmless and unblameable in your conuersations: yet do you worldlings think
that religious persons do live in idleness and ease. I tell you, that the
employment of one hour at men's studies is a greater toil then the travels of
a laboring man that sweateth at his work a whole week.

The good conversation of religious persons is of inestimable use amongst
Christians, therefore obey God and his Church, and ten thousand souls will be
converted after your example. Say not we are young: if you had a license or
warrant from another world, I might then perchance advise you to delay your
amendment: but think of death, and consider how suddenly men are surprised by
it. Death is a these, and steals upon men when they least look for it.
Happy are they that are found to do good, and miserable are they that wallow
in their sins when death approaches: for death will spare neither great nor
small.

A discourse unto the poor people that were present in that assembly.
Then he spoke unto the Laity, and said: you are to line every one according to
his calling. In Paradise there are Kings, and there are poor people: for some
of all estates and conditions are saved. Do not mutter and say, we are poor,
we have not wherewithal to live: God will have regard unto your poverty, and
will save you: but the great ones cannot excuse themselves: you that are poor
have reason to rejoice, when you shall consider that God became poor for your
sakes.

God is a Tailor that wants nothing but workmen; he is a Physician and a
Surgeon that makes inquiry after those that are infirm or wounded.

Read well the book of the Crucifix, and you shall there find all variety of
knowledge: if thou do object, I am not able to read this book, I tell thee
thou lie, for this book may be read by men and women: yea by people of the
most gross and muddy capacity that may be: you may read it in Churches, in
your houses, in your beds, and in the fields, and all manner of understanding
is treasured up in this book, that may any way concern the salvation of your
souls. Look on this book and read it well, for in it you shall find all
sorts of virtues: humility, poverty, patience, obedience, and whatsoever else
may make full a man's perfection. Rich and poor, and people of all conditions,
look in the glass of the Cross, and behold therein a God so great, so
humble, and yet so full of Majesty: you shall there see your God poor, and
will you then hate or detest poverty? If pride suggest these haughty thoughts
into you, think that your God took man upon him to humble himself to the
death of the Cross. It is a greater miracle to see God dwelling in the flesh
of man, then to behold the creation of one hundred thousand worlds. The Word
equal unto his father has taken humane nature upon him, to suffer and to be
put to a cruel death. And you Mary have endured much also which has bin the
cause of the salvation of many souls.

If a King should have a slave, and would redeem him by giving 10000. Crowns
for his ransom: this were a great sum and an extraordinary favor; but if
he should give a Million of gold, his grace and love would show it self the
more by how much the more the sum increased. But this would appear but a
slender courtesy, if having but one only son he would give him away to
redeem and purchase back this slave unto him: how infinitely would men marvel
at the cortesie of such a King? But all this is nothing in comparison of your
God who has but one only Son, yet gave him up for you that are sinners: this
son (I say) that is equal to his father in power, in wisdom, and in
goodness, that is, the blessed Word.

O great wonder! that the Son of God should thus suffer for such ungrateful
creatures, who make so little profit of the same. If stones were capable of
understanding, they would express some action of acknowledgment; and if leaves
could be furnished with the same, they would also declare their thankfulness:
but you are the most ungrateful of creatures, and do not acknowledge the love
and tender care that God has over you, whose greatness is such, that if you
had but the least knowledge or side-long glance thereof, you would creep with
your belly upon the earth, and would esteem your selves unworthy of that
deiection. God is a glass, and blessed is he that takes Christ Jesus, and the
mother of God for his glass to look on. It is true, that whilst she lived
in the earth she was contemned and held to be a woman of mean condition: but
know you not that Gods custom is to abase the proud? you that are poor would
very feign live in the desert of this world, but you want money to buy drugges
or confections of the Apothecaries: this want may easily be endured. Come and
understand what may more nearly import you, how you ought to be devout to the
blessed mother of God. I tell you those that are devout unto her shall never
die in mortal sin. Mary is the sinners advocate. There is a great indictment
between God and the soul, the blessed mother of God makes the report, the
Angels and Saints are the Advocates. Mary is the poor sinners refuge, and thou
Magdalene have obtained remission of thy sins. Let the Cross therefore be
your Grammar, your Philosophy, and your S. Thomas. Then he confirmed all this
discourse, and diverse other matters by an oath as his manner was.

Then he spoke to An exhortation unto Magdalene.
Magdalene, and said; Well Magdalene, are you satisfied now? Is it not better
to obey God then Beelzebub? Then Magdalene said aloud, yes, I find a great
deal of difference betwixt them. Verrine replied, a minute of the joys of God
is more thon the eternity of all hell, and all the delights of the world put
together.

The manner of Magdalens transformation in soul, and of other persons.
Magdalene, thou must change thy self, thy name shall remain still Magdalene,
but touching thy first works, thou shall be Magdalene no longer. Thou shall
be changed Magdalene, and as it were transformed from what thou art into a new
form. You know that those who make cheese when they have failed in making it
good, they do vnmould it again and make it better: even so God, when he
sees a soul disfigured and defeated of shape by sin, he takes it unto
him, and does alter and fashion and new frame it, and so makes it pliable unto
his will. And as the cheese does still remain the same cheese, so does the
creature remain still the same creature: but he that has refashioned the same
is Omnipotent, unto whom all things owe subjection, and whom the Devils
themselves obey when they are constrained to execute his pleasure. The creature
may for a short space resist, but God having waited a long time, and growing
now impatient to stay so long without doors, says these words. No, no, I will
enter in, I am master of this house, and am come to fashion this Image a new,
whom the Devil has so deformed. I am the Jesus the Painter, Magdalene the
picture and Image.
Painter; shall not I mend this picture when it seems good unto me? Witness
my Passion, when my holy and sacred face was covered over with spittle, but it
was to make my countenance shine the brighter: I am content that in this world
you should be despised and defaced even by the Devils themselves, for all
creatures are my pictures: I am the Painter, and have made them all: but the
Devils my mortal enemies do often come by stealth and disfigure these
portraictures, and do deface them after such an outrageous manner, that I my
self do tremble to behold them. But remembering that they were my handy-worke,
I take the pencell of holy inspirations with the colors of my graces, and come
to this picture and give him the first draught by contrition, and another by
confession, and after that by satisfaction. I am content that the linen cloth
should still remain the same, that is, the body and the soul of the creature.
Now God, who has all manner of lively colors in his hands, knows well to
dispense these colors as seems best unto him: giving men the white of
Humility, the red of Charity, the orange of Patience, the green and yellow of
Hope, that he may one day take comfort in this-his pourtraying: and that this
excellent piece may come and give him thanks in that he has framed him and
fashioned him anew, when the Devil in his malice had razed and disfigured him.
Thus does God by the soul of Magdalene: she was a portraicture that God
himself had made, but Beelzebub, Lucifer, and all Hell did bandie themselves
and were resolved to deface it: not once or twice, but I dare say a thousand
times. God being impatient to see them so maliciously bent, was desirous to
convert her, gave her to understand, that he had a long time with patience
waited for her, threatened her with great authority, with words so strong, with
such violent strokes as it were with hammers, that she was constrained to open
the gate to him who says; Open unto me and I will enter in, and dwell with
thee, it is long since that I have been here at thy gate Magdalene, suffer me
to enter in and give me thy keys.

The Magdalens Act of humiliation.
same morning, after the Exorcismes were finished, Magdalene performed three
acts of humility: at the first she craved pardon of the whole Assembly: at the
second she desired to be forgiven by all those that were absent, confessing
that she was not worthy so much as of Hell, and entreating, that they would set
their feet and tread upon her. Hereupon Verrine said, that this was more
pleasing to God, then a whole years repentance. At the third, she said to the
Assembly, that she would lie along at the entry of the Church, desiring all
that were present to tread upon her, as the most wretched creature of the
world, which was accordingly performed: then That it should be performed in
this humble manner, for all those that passed by did tread upon her that was
possessed. He speaks only of those that were actually possessed.
Verrine said, that such an act of humiliation was never before performed by
any that ever was possessed, and that Beelzebub would rather choose to be
tortured in Hell a thousand years then to have endured such an affront and
infamy in the body of Magdalene.

Disputation between an Heretic and Verrine.
The same day about two a clock in the afternoon there came thither in the
company of certain Gentlemen, a Huguenot that would needs dispute with the
Devil. When suddenly the Devil Verrine began to say, She whom thou see
here is the daughter of an Heretic, she is of S. Rhemy, her father and
mother died Huguenots, and Monsieur de Beaucamp is her kinsman, who would have
dissuaded her from dedicating her self to the service of God; but now by his
permission she is bewitched and possessed, having three devils in her body. Do
not thou conceive that thou art now to enter into the lists of disputation with
a woman; no, thou shall not direct thy speech to her, it is I that will grapple
with thee. Come near, and ask what thou will. To this he answered I ask
nothing. Then said the Devil, you are quickly satisfied; it seems you are
very rich, that you have need to ask nothing. And bid the Gentleman propound
what he had thought to have said; What is it (said he) that you would be
resolved of? To this the Gentleman said, How prove you that the Church was
the true Church? The Devil answered, There is one God and one Church. The
Huguenot replied upon this, I believe the Church. Verrine said, Do thou
believe the true Church which is the Church of Rome, I know thou do not
believe it?

He answered, let us leave that point, I affirm that I am in the true Church.
Verrine replied that it was not true. Then did the other bid him to show some
reason, whereby it might be declared whither the Saints may pray for us or no.
Verrine said, Who so denies the Prayers and Intercessions of Saints, denies an
Article of his Creed, which does confess the communion of Saints.

Then replied the other, I am not satisfied with this give me a better reason.
To which Verrine answered, Do not you your selves pray sometimes one for
another? You know full well, that you pray for your Kings and Princes, and do
you conceit, that there is less charity in Paradise? I say no: for standing
before the presence of God, and God being Charity it self, it falls not
within the compass of doubt, that Saints pray for us. But the other said, that
for all this he was not yet satisfied.

Then Verrine told him, Thou art proud, yea and curious in thy nature, thou
deseruest not to have fruition of the light, for thou do not endeavor to
search forth the same. Then they fell upon the point of the blessed Sacrament,
and the Huguenot said, that it was necessary to believe that his divinity only
was there, and not his humanity. Verrine answered that he was really and truly
there, both in Divinity and Humanity, and alleged diverse reasons for the
same, saying, that who so denies that, denies the first Article of his
Creed, Thou do acknowledge (said he to the Huguenot) in thy Creed, that
God is Omnipotent, and yet do now cross that, and denyest here his
Omnipotency: for if he be Omnipotent, then is he of powerfulness to perform
the same; which he also does for his body and divinity are in the blessed
Sacrament, whereunto he added, that Gods word joined with his power could not
but take effect, and that when God had affirmed a thing, it was impossible for
him to lie.

Then said the other, And I affirm that we receive him not but by Faith.
Verrine answered, This (by Faith) will lead you all to Hell, if you be not
humbled, and give way, unto the truth. The other said, And how is the body
here, when it is said, that he sits at the right hand of God? Verrine
replied. It is true, he is so: yet does he not say, I can be no where but at
his right hand, he said, when he made the first institution of this blessed
Sacrament; Take, this is my body and my blood, it is not said, this is by
faith, but it is said, This is my body: as often as you do this, you shall do
it in remembrance of my Passion. Then Verrine added. You deceive your selves,
in that you think that the body of our Lord does fill or take up any place.
No, no, it is not thus, for his body is a glorified body, and is adorned with
all the qualities of a glorious body, yea I do further say, that he being more
perfect then all, has therefore a body so blessed above all other, that he
occupyeth no place, but is covered and shrouded in a little He means the
visible accidents, and speaks according to the phrase in Scripture.
bit of bread only.

Disputation between Leu^athan and Verrine.
Then there began a disputation between Leuiathan and Verrine in the presence
of the said Huguenot and of sundry Catholics, one of the Devils speaking an^
sustaining the cause of God (which is Verrine) and the other, to wit, Leuiathan
(who is the master of all Heretics) the cause of Lucifer, and speaking
interchangeably, they reasoned to this purpose.

What? (said Verrine) is not God Omnipotent? May not he exact this service
from the Devil, to enforce him to do his will, when it shall be best pleasing
unto him?

Leuiathan did co^tradict him, for he is the father of lies, and did lie in
whatsoever he here uttered.
Leuiathan taking the Huguenots part, replied. My friend, do not believe him,
we are all the fathers of lies. Ha! you shall show your self very weak to
give credit to his words; believe me you are in good way, believe me, and hold
on your course. Verrine answered, thou lie, and art not able to prove it.
Leuiathan said, I will swear solemnly that he is in a good way. Verrine
replied, thou art an accursed spirit, and wilt take a false oath against God
and his Church. Leuiathan said unto him, No, I say, I will take mine oath
according to the meaning of God and his Church. Verrine answered, Thou can
not do it, unless thou have some sinister and reserved intention. Leuiathan
said, leave this talk, you need not search so deeply into the botome of this.
I only bid thee, answer to what thou ought.

Verrine said, I am here on Gods behalf. It is true (said Leuiathan) and I am
here, on the behalf of Lucifer. Then Verrine said, that is the very reason
that thou art not able to say what I say, but only tellest lies, thou art in
the body of Magdalene, that thou may destroy souls, but I am here to save
them. That is true, Leuiathan. Then said Verrine, will thou take an oath, as I
will, affirming that there is but one God, one Baptism, and one Church? I am
here to take part with God. Leuiathan turning himself toward the Huguenot,
said, Be resolute my friend, be resolute, thy Church is the true Church, thou
may safely follow these paths.

Then Verrine told him that he lied, and that it was the Church of Darkness,
wherein no truth was to be found: and because they took not the help of a
candle to direct them to the habitation of truth, but stumbled along with a
dim and darksome Lanthorn, what wonder was it if they miscaryed from their
way, and could not attain unto it. Leuiathan said, No, this is the true
Church, which is beawtified with the fair appellation of the reformed Church.
Verrine replied, I tell thee it is the Gulf of Hell, because the curious tread
dangerously on the brimme of that Gulf, and are ever laboring and digging
near the brinke thereof, and not being able to find that which they search
after, they do at length tumble in: and when the head falls into this pit
first, the rest of the members of that body do easily follow after: witness
Beza, Calvin and Luther, who alleged and said, that they were Priests and
Religious persons, yet did they despise all Religion, and all Ecclesiastical
Discipline. And although darkness issued from thence where light should have
remained, yet for all that, (said Verrine) men ought not to take away
Preist-hood, or to abolish the orders of Religion, because there are some
wicked Priests, and ill-disposed Religious persons. For prooofe whereof he
alleged, that in the company of our Lord himself, there was a Judas: yet who
would be so foolish to conclude that the rest must be as wicked as he. Then
said the Huguenot, He speaks of the whole sect of them.
how prove you that God has commanded us to pray to Saints? Verrine answered
him, it is an Article of your Creed; if you be wiser then God, why go you not
and pluck him from his Throane? To this he said, I am not yet satisfied in this
point, but tell me, how prove you there is a Purgatory? Verrine replied, yes.
I will prove it easily unto you: I affirm that God has said, that no defiled
thing shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven. To this the other answered, that
he was not content with his replications, because the Devil is the father of
lies. Verrine said it is true, we are the fathers of lies when we have free
and uncontrolled scope to speak from our selves; but being constrained by God,
we have a necessity imposed upon us to deliver the truth. What? think thou
that thou disputest with the woman here? Thou art too arrogant; thou deseruest
not to have thy understanding enlightened: thou art too curious, and what thou
have here heard will not be available unto thee. The Huguenot replied, hold
thy peace, thou art not able to answer, and art indeed but a block head.
Verrine answered, it is not words will bring men to Heaven, there must be an
addition of some thing else: faith and good works are to be thought upon by
those that will go to Paradise. Here upon Leuiathan said, turning himself
toward the Huguenot: my friend believe me, stand stoutly to it, I will
accompany thee if it seem good unto thee.

Thinking that he had all this while spoken unto her that was possessed a
Maiden of some 19. years.
Then the Huguenot said, with all my heart, shake hands, and let us go if thou will. To this Verrine said (directing his speech to the Huguenot) Soft and
fair, soft and fair, the Devil has no power on her body, although he use her
tongue as his instrument to express himself. But you Sir, where do you
conceive you are, in some wood or at some May Game? and taking him up very
sharply he said, the Devil take al those who never go to Church, but to commit
a thousand sins and impieties. The other said unto him, is there no shame in
thee, that speak thus before thy God: thou art worse then a Devil to
pronounce these words. O accursed wretch, said Verrine, thou do not deserve
the least glimse of light: for when thou spakest this, thou did conceive
thou had spoken unto a creature not unto the Devil: thou miserable
loathed, and abominable caytiffe: thou art worse then the Devil: yea, thou
have inwardly resolved to commit some notorious sin: get thee gone thou
wretch, get thee gone. Dare thou to be so hardy, as within a Church where the
blessed Sacrament remains to conceive that which thou have conceived: thou
deseruest death, thou obstinate fellow. Then He went away much discountenanced
and ashamed.
the Huguenot departed, and Verrine said unto the Catholics that were present.
What? did you see how this wretch shrunk away, learn you by his example, and
do not do as you have been accustomed, kneeling only upon one knee when you
came to hear Mass. No, no, you should not misdemeane yourselues thus, but
should behave your selves as malefactors before your Judge.

In The Devil might represent unto her imagination both the one and the other
at one time. The very same happened unto the woman of Laon that was possessed.
the evening, Magdalene only was exorcised, and during the time of Exorcisme
there was represented unto her a vision full of horror and amazement, for she
saw two Devils in the semblance of Serpents, each of whom held a soul in their
mouth that seemed unto her more deformed then Hell it self: and the fright of
this spectacle did endure long after the Exorcisme, and had not quite left her
when she made relation of the same.

The same day father Francis Billet wrote unto the Priests of the doctrine in
this manner.

He does inuit them to come thither, to shake off that tentation which they
had, to relinquish their Company and Order, as receiving much scandal from the
same.
Dearest and best beloved brethren, I beseech you in the name of Almighty God,
that you would be pleased to come hither as soon as possibly you can: yea if
you could to depart upon the very day or the day after at farthest, that this
messenger shall arrive unto you, and to come hither; where you shall understand
of diverse passages and occurrences so strange, so unheard of, and so useful,
that he who is not present to see and to be made acquainted with the same will
hardly believe it. For they are things of that high nature, that who so
understands not the bottom and foundation of it, will hardly humble his
judgment unto the truth thereof. But come, because this matter touches the
glory of God, and of his Church, the conversion of souls, and the honor and
advancement of your vocation. Come then, and do not wonder if, I do so often
inculcate this word (come) unto you, for I do assure you that it is a matter
of importance. Letters speak but once, and therefore I had reason to make
frequent repetition of this word. Come then with all the speed you may. I
should conceive my self guilty of a great offense if I had not disburthened
and cleared my conscience by writing this letter unto you. You may object unto
me, that I am too easy of belief, but come and you shall see, that I am not
alone of this opinion: If I am deceived, there are others in the same case,
whose judgments I must believe to be more able and more piercing then mine
own. I do assure you, that if you had seen and observed these things, you
would receive great contentment thereby, and would rest very well satisfied.
For God has permitted, that a sister of the Company of S. Vrsula, most
unworthy though she be, to be bewitched, having three Devils in her body. Her
name is Louyse Capeau, who having from her youth begged of God to set her in
some course of life wherein she might remain to his greater glory for the
salvation of her soul, and the profit and good of her neighbor: and being
entered into that vocation wherein now she stands, in the first year of her
nouiciatship God began to instill into her, strong and vehement desires to
endure, for her neighbors, all temporal pain whatsoever: yea to undergo the
torments of Hell it self, if it might be done without her separation from
God; and having persisted till this time in her request, especially when she
was to receive the blessed Sacrament, at length she had her desire, and did
accept with great patience all the said pains and torments ever saying these
words: Lord I think my self unworthy to suffer any thing for the love of you.
She made all these requests without asking any man's advice, because she ever
conceived, that it was no way within the compass of sin, so that when she
found her self possessed, she was much abashed thereat, and wondered with her
self from whence it might proceed.

But God, from whom this was not hidden, did save us a great deal of labor,
by laying his charge upon one of the Devils that were in her body to answer
unto the Exorcismes, and to deliver the truth what the end was, wherefore he
remained in her body. And although the Devil after many adiurations which the
Exorcists made unto him, seemed obstinate in his silence, and would give no
resolution unto any thing that was propounded; yet being commanded on Gods
behalf, and by the authority which he has given unto his Church, and by the
virtue and powerfulness of Exorcismes, he did in conclusion roar aloud, as
though he had been outragiously mad, with such high and affrightfull cries,
that he was heard a great way off; and so turning to Magdalene of Palud, he
said three several times, it is true Magdalene, it is true, it is true, Louyse
is possessed for thy sake, and for thee does she suffer this affliction. O
Magdalene, Louyse is thy pledge, and repeated these words three times: her body
shall be afflicted particularly for thy soul, and by a consequent for many
others. Then speaking to Louyse he said; consider that thou art an accursed,
detestable, wretched and abominable creature, and so repute of thy self before
God. I am constrained to lay it close unto thee: endeavor to believe that of
thy self which diverse would persuade thee to believe. If thou think thou
shall be hurt thereby, thank thy self, I cannot do withal. Do thou not
know what is commonly said? harm watch, harm catch, thereby meaning the
torments which she had and was to suffer, saying unto her, that she was not to
vex her self, if these afflictions did fall heavy upon her: for, said he, why
would thou then ask them? Cursed be the charm by the which God shall
receive so many offerings of thanksgiving, and men so many showers of benefits;
and repeating three times cursed be that charm, it was not (said he) our
intention, no^ the purpose of the Magician and the rest that agreed thereunto,
that these things should be brought to so unexpected an issue. Our intendment
is always sinister and mischievous, to cause all villainies to be set on foot
and acted, and to procure judgment to follow on the neck of them: we have
been constrained from God to pronounce and declare him innocent, whom we
suggested unto Louyse to be the author of her troubles; we have opened and
disclosed the name of the Magician by the virtue of Exorcismes, and have cried
aloud that he is such an one. Notwithstanding all this declaration of mine, yet
will your apprehension come short of these things whose life consists rather
in their action then in their relation. Afterward, upon the day of the
conception of the blessed mother of God toward evening there were diverse
discourses uttered, full of excellency and use, which he promised should
continue till Christmasse. He did in particular labor the conversion of
Magdalene, and in her the conversion of many others: so that those who heard it
twice a day at the time of the two several Exorcismes returned from thence
with full satisfaction, the whole assembly being filled with the admiration of
it: Whereupon I will ingeminate this word unto you again, come if you be wise,
and herein make declaration of your wisdom: for true wisdom is to harken
and be obedient unto the will of God. But you may object, how prove you that
this is the will of God? Do but come and these doubts shall be cleared up and
dispelled. You know that there is no good but is accompanied with some
difficul^y, come, come, and be assistant unto our Lord, and suffer your selves
to be a little diseased for his sake who for the love of you did not fear to
approach to Mount Caluary: do not you then from the duty you should be are
unto him, be dishartened to undergo i^ is trouble: he has showed you the way,
follow your Captain. And since you are his soldiers, it stands with reason
that you should abide in your Carrisons (I mean your vocation.) Come and be
not fearful to combat with his enemies, for now occasion does present it
self, the enemy is discovered, and you are to fight no longer in corners: and
God having regard unto their patience that have suffered so much for his sake,
will in a full measure recompense the same. The Devil had sworn very
solemnly, that all Hell had a resolution to abolish and root out the Christian
doctrine and the Company of S. Vrsula, to their utter ruin and perdition; if
their power bad been of sufficiency to compass the same, God himself
permitting this for his glory, as he did tolerate the like practice upon Job.
And to assure us the better hereof, he has suffered the Devil to reveal it,
who has been enforced to affirm that God would do now as he did by Job,
work good out of these tentations, which the Devil projected for evil
purposes. God is very cunning to draw good out of evil, and is like a skillful
Surgeon who when he observes a man to abound with more blood then is
expedient for his health, he launceth him, and draws that unnecessary
superflux of blood from him, not thereby to kill him, but as the Surgeon takes
some blood from him that is sick, the better to prepare him to be cured, and
this is done to preserve him from many inconveniences and dangerous maladies
which otherwise would grow upon him: so does God demean himself toward us
having permitted that we all, without exempting any one should be tossed in
this tempest. For the Devil himself did affirm, that he had left none of us
unattempted, but said aloud, Francis, be not angry, thou have had thy share in
these tentations as well as others: and so have thou James (speaking to Father
Rets.) It is true Romillon, it is true, all thy people have been tempted, but
be of good cheer Romillon, for thou shall regaine them all. Peter Barmond has
been tempted likewise but you will recover him, and most unhappy shall he be
if he do resist it. And he charged us to send for him: whereupon there was a
letter written which also did concern the Fathers of Aix, and was delivered by
Father Rets.

We do already see a good and happy beginning in Magdalene of Palud who is now
much strengthened, and exceedingly altered in her inward man. Beelzebub and all
the Devils in Magdalens body are forced to obey God; and Verrine does so taunt
and brave them on Gods behalf, that we all remained greatly astonished. He
would not stick to say, cursed art thou Beelzebub, and you Balberith,
Leuiathan, Asmodee, Astaroth, and Carreau: yea he out-dared Lucifer himself,
telling him that it was fit Almighty God should be obeyed, and not Lucifer or
Hell, or the rest of the Devils. He would oftentimes cry aloud, Beelzebub thou
art my master, and I am a vassal of thine when I am employed from Lucifer, but
now I have my abode here by the appointment of God: hence it is that I speak
so arrogantly before my Prince, and do brave all Hell, saying to Beelzebub,
Beelzebub I charge thee in the name of Almighty God that thou lie all along upon
the ground; and so treading upon him, Verrine uttered these words full of
arrogance and pride: where are thy Princes now Beelzebub? and you that are there
abiding, what is become of you now (speaking to the Devils) you are all of you
Princes, at the least five of you: if you have any command or authority, I
charge you answer me, I give you leave to call Lucifer to your aid, now he
has an excellent occasion to show himself. How now Beelzebub, will thou suffer
thy slave to tread thus disdainfully upon thee? Then crying to all the assembly
he said: These are my Princes, but now I do not acknowledge them to be so,
but I do this by compulsion not by love, by constraint, not by grace. Beelzebub
answered him not a word, but stood full of shame and confusion, and was able to
resist no longer. Verrine then began to speak aloud to those that were there
present (for there was much people there) come all of you, come, come, I say
and fear not to triumph over Gods enemies and yours. Then the Company came and
trod upon him, Beelzebub not daring to reply against it, or to mutter one word,
but remaining exceedingly dismayed. Many other discourses were delivered by
him, the relation of which would take up too much time; come you if you please,
and you shall be more particularly acquainted with him. Your most humble and
most affectionate servant Francis Billet Priest of the Christian doctrine, has
written this letter. Then he signed it, as did also Franciscus Domptius, and a
good distance below it was written. I Magdalene of Demandoul do testify and
confirm that all which is written in this letter is true, especially that
which mentions my repose of conscience. I find my self much changed, blessed
be God and his sacred mother; for I assure you she has much assisted me. Pray
unto God that he will give me perseverance, and his grace, that I may be a
thankful acknowledger of his manifold blessings which in such plenty he has
heaped upon me.

The Acts of the 20. of December.
THis day Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised, and in the middle of the
Exorcismes, The conference between Verrine and Leuiathan.
Leuiathan entered into the lists of discourse, and said unto Verrine. O Verrine
now thou have nothing to say: then Verrine replied, it is not for thy sake I
speak, I now belong unto a greater master then thy self, and him am I to obey.

Leuiathan said, hold thy peace thou art a proud spirit. To this Verrine
replied, it is true, we are all the children of pride. But is it not true,
have not I humbled thee? No said Leuiathan, thou have not been any cause
thereof; I tell thee it was the creature whom thou have humbled. Verrine said,
thou lie, it was not that creature; whatsoever has been done, has been done
for thy confusion and her conversion. Wretched caitiffe as thou art, I am here
an Ambassador from the living God, and thou an agent from Lucifer; dare thou
deny this said Verrine to Leuiathan.

Not I, said Leuiathan: then Verrine said, I am an Ambassador from God, who
has sent me hither to put his will and not mine own ends in execution. To
this Leuiathan replied, are there not other Ambassadors? There are Angels, and
there are Preachers, is it not so? It is true said Verrine, but thou art not
ignorant that when a King would employ an Ambassador, he has choice of
Princes, great Lords, and Gentlemen; yet if his pleasure be to send some
Lackey; why, he is a King, and may command and do what seems good unto him;
for he may use small things to effect matters of great weight and importance.

Leuiathan answered, there is a great difference between them. True (said
Verrine) yet if the Kings of the earth be invested with this power, how
abundantly more shall the King of glory possess the same. It is true, there
are Princes, there are Angels, and great Preachers: yet if his pleasure be to
command his meanest slave, who shall hinder him to do it, since he is
Omnipotent? yet is he not a whit the less King, or the less great, this does
not diminish or bring an ebb upon his glory: nay it is so different from that,
that it is a touch of his greatness to be able to force our will, for of our
selves we are all wicked, but God is able to transform our rebellious nature
into obedience, yea to make thee Leuiathan, and thee Lucifer to stoop and
double under the yoke of subjection; for he is above you all and can easily
force obedience from you. Leuiathan said, What? do thou look to draw men's
attention unto thee? thou art but a Devil.

True (said Verrine) I am but a Devil, but being by God compelled to deliver a
truth, I cannot but perform it. Know thou not, that he raised Lazarus from
the dead, and that his all powerful word in speaking a fiat, framed whatsoever
seemed good unto him? Yes, (said Leuiathan) but Lazarus did not hinder or
resist that miracle that was wrought upon him, but these creatures here do
impeach and stop (as much as in them lies) the execution of Gods pleasure.
Verrine answered, He is omnipotent, and changes evil into good, nay, he is
of more force to attract and express grace out of sin, then hell is of
malice, to draw sin out of grace: for he is king of the whole earth, and when
he commands whatsoever suteth with his good pleasure, I see he is obeyed;
because he that does command it, is a King. God were not himself, if he were
not more powerful then his creatures, nay I affirm, that then the Devil
would be mightier then God, for he can work evil out of good, and cannot God
work good out of evil? You see how bold I am. Leuiathan said: God does indeed
call Against sinners.
men unto him by many secret inspirations, by the teaching and instructions of
learned men, by the threatening of his judgments, and by the Angels themselves,
yet for all this they are so hardened in sin, and so gross of heart, that
although they see themselves hemmed in on all sides, and cannot avoid to be
converted unto their God, yet in their arrogance and flintinesse of heart, they
will not stick to say, Lord thou art willing to receive me, but I am not
desirous to come unto thee, for I have naught to do with thee. I had rather be
a pray unto the devils, and have a full fruition of all sorts of pleasure, then
be received of thee, and casheere them.

It is true, said Verrine, that thou have spoken. There be sinners of that
improvident obstinacy, that they will remain determinately settled for many
years together in their wickedness, so that God is incited to a kind of
anger, and would be full of impatiencie at it, if such passions could take
place in God.

But I affirm, that they cannot reside in God, for they would argue an
imperfection in him: but if God were capable of impatiencie, or if he could be
grieved, I say, he would weep when he beholds those obstinate souls. But
God is not subject unto grief: for they who affirm that the sins of men do
strike a sadness into the holy Ghost, are not to be understood as if the holy
Ghost were indeed grieved, it is a sin to think so, but that he does dislike
and abhor these abominations; yet being an excellent painter, he is able,
when he pleases, to correct any deformity in this his portraicture. Thou
know Leuiathan that this is true, and that I am here by the appointment of
God, but am tied and bound from revealing of sins. Leuiathan said, Thou
lie, for thou have divulged them, and art now convicted of a manifest
untruth. It is true, (said Verrine) but this is done for the good of these
sinners, neither could the miracle be manifested, if the sins were not
divulged. Then turning himself to Saint Magdalene, he said these words: It is
true Magdalene, thou were a sinner, neither does it redound unto the dishonor
of God, or lay any disreputation upon thee that thou were so, nor is there any
diminution of thy happiness because thou did formerly offend. That is
true, said Leuiathan, but there is a great difference between this and that
Magdalen: she needed no Devils to convert her, but was reclaimed by her own
care and industry, and therefore it is not probable that God has sent thee
into this body for the conversion of these two souls, since there be many
other means to bring this to pass without thy help who art the father of
lies, and whom no man will scarce believe. Hold thy peace (said Verrine)
accursed spirit as thou art, and give me audience. It is true, I am in this
body, God having suited and fitted his pleasure to the desire of this creature:
I am here expresselie from Almighty God, for his glory, and particularli^ for
the conversion of these two souls, and miserable shall they be if they be
not converted.

Thou tellest me, that Saint Magdalene was not converted by the Devil, it is
true, but we live not now in that time when God came down from heaven, and
with his Humanity and Devinitie did labor the conversion of souls: but I say
withal, that he is still the same God; and therefore is able to give birth
unto those works, whose greatness may equal the former.

It is a truth (said Leuiathan) that God is not in the world as in times past,
yet has he bequeathed unto his Church his Sacraments, Preachers, and many
other remedies which were not practiced in those days. But none did ever read
that God made Devils his instruments to convert souls, since they are the
fathers of lies, and stuffed with all kind of malice and falsehood. Who without
great difficulty would give credit unto them? there is no man but would be
ready to object, that God has many other means to gain souls unto him,
without taking the service and furtherance of the Devils.

It may be so (said Verrine) but tell me Leuiathan, are there not oaths
whereby a truth may be averred. Leuiathan answered, Know thou not that we Of
these false oaths, see the acts of the 18. of December.
never stick to take a false oath? I am sure thou know it; witness the
oath that was lately taken amongst the Capuchins, you know my meaning. To this
Verrine said, Either make it appear unto me that there is no oath that may
bind and stand in full strength, or else thou art vanquished. For I say, that
an oath taken according to the meaning of God and his Church, with all other
due ceremonies and circumstances requisite thereunto, does bind and is in force,
and whosoever will deny this, must deny the omnipotency of God, all the
authority of the Church, and all the books of Exorcismes.

To what purpose do men exorcise, and make interrogatories unto devils, if
their replies be never consonant unto truth? It were an idleness to be
prodigal of so much time, and to wast so many years, if this were so. It were
much better that Exorcists should spend their time otherwise, and take upon
them some other course of study. To this Leuiathan answered, I have affirmed,
that all oaths are not true, because of the sinister and perverse meaning and
reservations of the Devils. I confess (said Verrine) all are not true, because
when the Exorcists are not heedy and well advised of what they go about, we
are so mischeevous that we reserve some secret and sinister intention, but
when we are enforced like gally-slaves by the power of God, I tell thee we must
obey his pleasure; and therefore Leuiathan thou art consounded. For I my self,
not from my own will, but upon constraint from God, have lessoned and warned
the Exorcists to apprehend aright all the intentions and ceremonies whatsoever
that are requisite in the making up of a true oath.

Then said Leuiathan, How dare thou speak thus in my presence, know thou
not that I am mightier then thy self. I grant it, (said Verrine) thou art
mightier then I to do a mischief, for thou have more knowledge to do it, thou
being of the order of Seraphins, and I only of the order of Throanes. I am one
of your slaves, but let me tell you I do not now respect any of you, (meaning
the princes that were in the body of Magdalen, every one of whom he braved one
after another.) What? (said he) answer you nothing? Are you such gallant
doctors, and can you make no reply? Ha, you would answer now if you knew what.
Come on, speak, speak.

The answer unto this blasphemy is set down in the following discourse.
Leuiathan replied, know thou not that when sinners are obstinate, they are
incapable of conversion: nay, God himself is not able to win them unto him;
witness Judas, whom our Lord could not convert. How can thou then conceive,
that a Devil should bring this to pass, when God himself by the practice of
all his art and cunning cannot accomplish the same. Verrine said, I have
affirmed that God is omnipotent, and may make an alteration in the free will of
man, and change it from evil to good. Know thou not that God is a cunning
Painter, who can fashion and make up a picture when it seems good unto him,
and is contented, if they do but leave him the table to work upon. It is true
(said Leuiathan) if the creature do not hinder it; for God has created man
without his aid, but cannot save him unless he cooperate and give assistance
unto it. Verrine answered, If the body and soul do remain together, it is
all that God desires, who well knows when to take his pencels to correct and
perfect up this table. I affirm further, that if he will he is able to make it
more beautiful and more goodly then ever it was before, which he may easily
do by laying on colors of more freshness and luster. Know thou not that
he is the father of the prodigal child? If the fathers of this world be thus
loving toward their children, and do cherish them, and yet do sometimes
threaten them, not to hurt them thereby but to make them wiser and better
advised: how much more shall he shake the rod of his judgments over them to
preserve them from the hands of Justice.

And when the child of God shall acknowledge his fault, then shall he return
unto his father, and humble himself before him; for as the prodigal child did
demand his patrimony to be given unto him, which when he had gotten from his
father into his own hands, he wasted all in riot, and was at length driven to
such necessity, and extreme penury, that he was forced to feed with hogs:
so fares it with sinners, God heapeth on them such plenty of his blessings,
that they are even glutted with the multitude of them: yet when they have
consumed all in the height of prodigality, this gracious father embraces
them, and takes them unto him, if they will not add wilfulness unto their
wast. For if worldly fathers are so loving, shall not God who has created
them, be much more gracious and good then they? I grant (said Leuiathan) that
there are many prodigal children, but very few propose that first prodigal
child for their imitation, that like unto him they may return to God. For when
they have trifled and melted away all their goods, and have fashioned
themselves to take the impression of all manner of impieties, yet do they
remain in their obstinacy, and are still nailed fast to whatsoever savoureth
of malice and mischief: and notwithstanding that God calls upon them by many
inspirations, yet are they resolved to reply unto these his holy motions; We
will take our fill of all worldly pleasures, whatsoever it cost us. It is
true, said Verrine, but yet when God will, he can work good out of evil, for
otherwise he could not be Omnipotent. It is no impotencie or imperfection that
he is not able to sin or lie; it is rather an argument of his Omnipotency,
and of his transcendent perfection. We are both of us Sargeants, and do both
execute our commission, though after a different manner: for thou do here
fulfill the will of Lucifer, but I do accomplish the good pleasure of the
Almighty. Thou may think that I do brave thee; I tell thee still that we
are Sargeants sent, as it were, from two several parties, and do the will of
them that sent us: and although we do not both execute the same command, yet
are we still Sargeants. So if two preach, and both think they deliver truth: as
for example, a Preacher of the Church, and a Minister, although the action of
preaching be common unto them both, yet does it not proceed from the same
spirit, because the Preacher of the Church utters the truth, but the Minister
has his understanding perverted by errors, and does interpret diverse passages
of the Scripture according to the giddines of his privatfancy, and is so
self-conceited (for they have al of them a touch of curiosity) that he does
imagine he is able to bound in the Omnipotency of the Father, the wisdom of
the Son, and the goodness of the holy Ghost within the narrow limmets of his
own understanding. But such come far short, and have their brain too much
scantled, to comprehend God and his infinite perfections. God is wise, for he
is Wisdom it self, and needs not the advice either of Angels or men, much
less of devils. I tell thee Leuiathan, that I am but the bare reporter of these
things, and to effect this I do thus trouble her that is possessed: for except
God did put in use his authority and force which he has over Devils, he were
not God. I am of opinion, that those who will not humble themselves, might do
well to assault God, and take his glory from him, and translate Lucifer from
hell to seat him in Paradise. It is a gross error to conceive that God is not
more able to convert evil into good, then the devil is to change good into
evil. I affirm that God is omnipotent, and therefore may do al things, and
when he pleases to put his power in practice, he can force the Devil as a
Gally-slave, and as like unto a Judge, can make the malefactor to tremble
before him, and can compel him to accomplish his will when it seems good
unto him. They that do not believe this, are accursed, and want the first
article of their Creed, which faith, that God is almighty. I submit my self
to these things, because God himself obeyed his Executioners when they nailed
him to the cross. The Saints, whe^they were lead to the place of their
Martyrdom, obeyed the will of their executioners, and yet thereby they did not
intend any glory either to the hangman, or to the Devil, no more then did our
Lord, unto whom the virtue of obedience is most pleasing and acceptable:
whereof I will now speak.

I resisted as much as I could, and said unto our Lord, no, I will not deliver
this truth: he told me, thou shall be enforced thereunto. I answered, No, no,
they have books enough that do plentifully declare this argument, but he
constrained me so that I must now begin with the virtue of obedience. Then
Verrine began to say. What say you now to this point, learned Doctor (speaking
to Leuiathan:) Thou art the Doctor of the The places and offices of devils are
distinct.
Heretics, come and deliver your opinion. And thou Beelzebub, thou art that
proud one, and do fill men with curiosity, and cocker them up in their
arrogancy: And thou Balbarith, thou art he that say, He that loves God,
will have him often in his mouth, and by this means make me^ to fort wear
God: And thou Asmodee, thou art he who do corrupt youth with thy loose
speeches, and lascivious looks: And thou Astaroth, thou art he who assaultest
men with idleness, especially you that are Religious persons: and thou
Carrean, thou hardnest men's hearts, and think to gain all before thee:
know thou not that with one poor word, with a Fiat, he can do whatsoever
seems good unto him? do thou not know that he is able to raise the dead? I
tell thee it is very easy for him to do it; witness the daughter of the
chief Ruler of the Synagogue, when he took her by the hand and bad her rise;
which signifies unto us, that a sin committed in thought, and only known
unto God and only hurtful unto the soul alone of him that does commit the
same, is easily pardoned.

Three sorts of dead men.
There are three sorts of dead men, as there are three sorts of sins: For
there is the child of Naym the widow, whom they carried out to be buried:
thereby intimating unto us, that there are some who are dead in vain speeches,
and they are carried out of the city, that is: they flow from the soul into
the mouth, and are there uttered, and the offense thereof commonly tends to
the scandal of their neighbors. This is represented unto us by that young
man, whom our Lord commanded to rise, and gave him to his mother. Whereby he
gave signification unto sinners, that when they have offended, they are to be
presented unto their mother, which is the Church, as God commanded to be done
by the young man, as you well know. There are others that are dead in works,
who are, for the most part, those that dwell in their sins, and remain
obstinate in them 20. 30. 40. 50. years, represented by Lazarus who had a
stone laid over his grave. And the reason why God commands to unbind him is,
that he might declare how much authority he has bequeathed unto his Church,
and how much Priests ought to be had in honor and estimation; in reproof of
those who say they will not confess themselves, obiecting, why should I humble
my self before a Priest? is he not a man, nay, is he not a sinner as well as
I? why then should I declare my sins before a Priest? God is gracious, and
will pardon me without confession. Then Verrine began to speak of obedience in
this manner. Touching Obedience.
Obedience of all virtues is the most pleasing unto God. Charity is a great
virtue, because without it there is no entrance into Paradise. Faith is also a
necessary virtue, for without faith it is impossible to please God. Hope also
holds the same rank, because it is our guide to heaven. Humility also is
the groundworke of all virtues. To be brief, all moral virtues are
profitable, good and praise-worthie: for I do not affirm that a man may
attain unto heaven without Humility, and without Charity and other virtues;
but I aver, that he who stands possessed of obedience, is garnished with all
other virtues whatsoever. Obedience is the most excellent of all virtues, I
mean perfect Obedience, for he that is perfectly obedient, is humble and
charitable, he is confident, and persevereth unto the end: nay, I say further,
he that is truly obedient cannot die, I mean an eternal death. For some may
object unto me, that Isaac was very obedient unto his father Abraham, yet did
he finish the course which nature had proportioned for him, and died. I say no,
for Saint Paul says, that those that are blessed from above do not dye, but
says they sleep as it is true. Isaac, thou sleep, and shall be awakened
at the day of judgment. If thou have the integrity of Obedience, there will
be no opposition against thee: consider this well you that are Religious
persons, and have undertaken the vow of Obedience. Remember that your God was
obedient even unto the death, I say unto the death of the Cross: he did not
murmr against his Father, and say, Father this Mountain is too steep and
uneasy to come unto (meaning Mount Caluary) no, he said not so. He did not
speak unto his Father that he should so provide that he might suffer death in
a Chamber or in a Hall, because this mountain was so loathsome, and so full of
displeasing objects that it seems a very compound of noisome savors. No, no,
with a full desire and free acceptance he embraced death for the love which
he bare unto you.

You that are religious persons learn to obey your Superiors when they impose
any thing upon you, and say not my Superior commands me things of such
uneasy performance, yea, almost so impossible to be done that I know not how
to turn me unto them. A religious person will not stick to say: Ha, my
Superior commands me to declare my fault openly before people: this will
edify my neighbor but a little. Let his Superior command him to go to Rome,
and he shall say, I know not the way thither: let him inioyne him to fast, and
he will say, Ha, my father, I am of so tender a constitution that if this
penance be imposed upon me, I shall be sick: how harsh and unpleasing is it
to be put to wear shirts of hair. My Superior is so froward that he is not
to be endured. If the Superior shall say unto him, thou shall undertake to
murder one of thy brethren, and the other not knowing the intention of his
Superior, who speaks this from his mouth not from his heart, only to prove
him, will gainsay him, he is not obedient, and therefore not humble: for
obedience is the daughter of humility, and he that is truly humble is
always obedient.

Learn you that are Monks and Friars, and read in this excellent book, that
is to say, upon the tree of the Cross: It is your God who has observed his
three vows carefully, and as he ought: the vow of Chastity, for he is purity
it self, and surpasses all the Angels and creatures whatsoever as one that is
immaculate and without blemish.

Touching the vow of Poverty, he hung naked upon the Cross. He might have
been accompanied with his train of Princes (which are the Angels) he might
have had garments to cover him, and whatsoever else was needful, yet he
despised all, to demonstrate unto you that are Religious, that you ought to
surrender your purse and treasure unto him, and suffer your Father to provide
for that which is necessary for his children.

Touching the vow of Obedience, he has been more obedient then ever any was, I
speak this to you Priests and Monks: behold your selves well in this glass,
and read over this book advisedly, it consists but of two leaves, and yet
contains all perfection: there are but two words within this Book, Obedience
and Humility, yet if a man be rightly informed how to draw out the
quintessence of this Book, he shall there find all sorts of virtue that may
any way further or yield conducement, to the attaining of so high and sublime a
perfection. To what end do you exhaust your selves with studying, and do so
painefully employ your selves in reading of books? Be but conversant in this
book and you shall be able to perform the will of God.

If a servant obey his Master, how much more ought a child so to do? We that
are Devils are as servants or rather slaves, and do nothing but constrainedly
and by compulsion: but you that hope for an heritage in Heaven, are bound to
love and serve him. I further say, that God has three sorts of servants: There
are that serve him only by constraint, and those are such as only fear Hell,
and if that stumbling block were away, they would not care to drench themselves
in the puddell and pollution of any sins whatsoever. Others serve like
hirelings, as do those whose scope and aim is the attainement of Heaven,
saying, God has promised unto us Paradisus therefore we shall do well to obey
him. But there are a third sort more advised, who do not make either Paradise
or Hell their scope, but do the will of their father purely out of love, and
have not their end mixed with any secondary regard of recompense: they set
their confidence in God with their whole heart, and believe his providence in
preparing for the^ whatsoever is necessary: for (say they) if his care descend
to birds and beasts, how much more will this his care extend to us? God herein
behaueth himself like a Merchant who separat's farthings from sous, crowns
from pieces of four, setting every sort a part by it self against the time he
shall have employment for them, yet does he not contemn his other money. So
fares it with God, he takes Religious persons, and those whom he has
marked forth for his service, and puts them to his use and employment, that
they may perform some service of importance for his glory: yet does he not
despise the laymen, but receaueth them all if they walk in his commandments,
as does the Merchant all the rest of his money. Those that are refractary would
have their Superior to be obedient unto them and not they unto him: this is
not well. No, they must be obedient beyond others, for know you not that they
are tempted by the Devil beyond others? If a great Prince or a great Lord
offer to appropriate himself to the service of God, presently do we oppose
and affront this his godly designement, we tempt him and say, Sir you leave at
ease in your own house, you have thus many Pages, and thus many Gentlemen that
wait upon you, besides many grooms and Lackies: you are able to live
plentifully and never trouble your self: besides you are of a great house:
Sir, do not slave your self when you may live in liberty You shall have a
Superior of base parentage, will you ever endure to obey him? You must bear
the scrip up and down the town: you must wear a shirt of hair, and must
discipline your self. Ha Sir, this is too great a burden, you will never be
able to hold on this course: divert this resolution, believe me (says the
World) and they are not a few that believe and follow these persuasions. The
child in reason ought rather to obey his Father then the slave his Master. The
Master and Mistress, when they have disobedient and stubburne servants, do
presently pay them their wages, and say unto them, you are not for our turn,
you are to depart and go forth of our doors: so should a Superior demean
himself to his inferiors when he sees them inclined to contumacy and
rebellion, Get you gone, go forth of doors, for you are not to be here to
follow your own fancy, those that behave themselves vnduetifully are not to
abide here. But they may object that it is lawful to propound unto the
consideration of their Superior some kind of commands whose lawfulness may
be questionable, and say, Father, in my opinion such a thing may be better done
this way. No, beware of replications, for such a one ought to submit himself
and think that his judgment may easily go awry. I grant, that in some cases
he may modestly reprehend his Superior, but always in great charity, not by
way of reprehension but by way of advise, saying. Father, it seems unto me
that you have done such a thing, or have uttered such a speech, which in my
opinion might better have been done or spoken after this manner. But this is
to be done in great humility and fear, as if he were to speak before God.
Because Superiors are Gods on earth, and those that yield unto them obedience
cannot do amiss, provided always, that the thing which is commanded be not
In what case the Superior is not to be obeyed.
against God or the Rules of his order or against himself: for in this case he
is not tied unto obedience. Nay, I say further, he is bound to slight him, to
oppose him, and to reprehend him if he should command any thing that might
directly derogate from God or the good of his neighbor, that is to say, he is
to speak home unto his Superior, to open his fault and lay it before him if
the fault be public, as if he should command any one to preach heresies, or to
do something contrary unto his Vows, I affirm that in this case it is
lawful for the inferior to reprehend his Superior.

In the evening, Louyse and Magdalene were exorcised by Father Francis, and the
Priest who exorcised them recited many appellations of God.

Then Verrine said, Say but the God of the Christians, and thou have reckoned
them all, for that is the beginning and the end of them. All these names of
perfection and ten hundred thousand more do agree unto him: these are no
matters of scorn or mockery, cursed are al they that do not believe it. Then
God being willing that By way of Revelation or intrinsic intelligence.
Verrine should speak something touching Confession that men's souls might be
instructed and bettered by it. Verrine answered God, that they had banqueted
sufficiently, and that there was no reason why Devils should be men's
Physicians: they will not believe Angels, nay they will give no credit unto God
himself: for they have said, that he was a dronkard, and a fool, much more
will they affirm that the Devil is a liar.

If thou say, that then by a consequent they must deny thy power, the
authority of thy Church, and the virtue of Exorcismes, I answer, that they do
already deny the communion of Saints and the Sacraments. And if thou say
that thou will guide them with thy light, I answer that they neither search
nor seek after the same. The Turks may have some shadow of excuse, and may
pretend ignorance, but Christians may learn (if they will) those things, which
they are to believe and take knowledge of. You are the Pictures of this master
painter; and unhappy are they that suffer themselves to be soothed up by the
fair semblances of the Devil. The co^straint which the Devils s^fter when God
commands them.
Cursed be the hour wherein I am thus forced to open the means how men are to
confess themselves.

Against Leuiathan the seducer.
Thou art he Leuiathan who make some to deny the wisdom, others the
goodness, and many the power of God: thou art he who teach them new
interpretations, which antiquity never heard of; thou art the author of all
heresies that ever were, are, and shall be. Thou art accursed, and would
have plucked God from his Throne: thou art blind, and those that follow thee,
say Credo without Credo; and when the blind leads the blind, both fall into
the pit. Thou art the Doctor of the false Church, and although the father and
mother should forsake their own child, yet would God never abandon his Church.

He means a child that is at liberty, and keeps house of himself: for
then the father is not bound to carry an eye over his child, but the Pastor of
his soul is to take care over him, as long as he lives.
A father is not to answer for the sins and faults of his child; but he
that is a father of souls must be accountable for the transgressions that are
committed by his children. You therefore that are the Father and chief
Pastor, look you unto your charge. Confession is to preceede the holy
Communion, and Humility must take possession in your hearts, if you will have
your requests granted unto you. If a King be to be entertained in your house,
you will presently deck forth the same, and make your preparations suitable to
so great a State; and how dare you then receive into your uncleansed houses the
King and Lord of glory, when your Consciences are defiled with all manner of
pollutions? It is as if you would lodge God in Hell. Of Confession and Penance.
For the sinful soul is the habitation and cage for Devils, and is a
Christian soul, not indeed, but by appellation only. You come into a Church
and kneel upon the ground, and wish that Mass may be quickly finished, but
you do not consider that the Priestly dignity surmounteth the rank and
condition of Angels. I tell you, you are to bow your knees as often as you shall
hear the name of Jesus: we are a great deal better then you, for although
we obey not God for love, yet do we yield unto his pleasure by constraint,
and in the virtue of Exorcismes.

If a Harbinger of Court should come and tell thee, behold the King is desirous
to come and lodge in thy house; thou would make many excuses, because thou
do esteem thy self unworthy of such honor; and would labor to garnish
thy house with whatsoever might be pleasing, or might add any beawty unto thy
habitation. So should you take the broom of true contrition and repentance, to
brush and sweep the chambers and rooms of your soul, that when the King
shall come to reside there, he may make it his Palace.

You that are poor and ignorant people, you must not say when you kneel to
the Priest in Confession. Father, declare unto me my sins; this is no good
form of proceeding: for if in matters of slight importance concerning the
body, every man has his understanding Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui
Domine. Romans 2. Conscientia accusante, aut etiam defendente.
quick and able, much more should their conceptions be free from dullness and
earthinesse, in those things that appertain unto the benefit of their souls,
and which are of a higher consequence: yet contrariwise men for the most part
are insensible and dull in the apprehension of them. There are those that do
daily confess themselves, and do yet forget many of their offenses; how then
shall they give an exact account of them, that confess themselves but from
year to year, or from six months to six months? Thou will not shame to say,
Father I do not remember my sins, let me hear you to ask and examine me.
O deaf and blind caitife! art thou able to give audience unto the Devil, and
to fall into those sins, which he inticeth thee to plunge into, and do
thou refuse to harken unto the voice of God, who desires to breath into thee
the remembrance of thy misdeeds?

Others say, To what purpose should I confess my self? Is not the Priest a
sinner as I am? Have I nothing to do but to expose my sins to his knowledge?
Beware of these contempts, I tell you they are instigations of Satan, framed
purposely to bring Priesthood into disgrace, which is a calling more high and
noble then is the dignity of Angels: for the Angels do indeed contemplate the
face of their God, but he It is a phrase of speech used in ye Scripture where
it is oftten said, that God descended on earth, or the Word came from Heaven,
as also the same phrase is given to the holy ghost, although they stir not
from thence, neither move they by a natural and local motion, but they are
here often in the truth.
discendeth from Heaven upon the Altar, at the consecration made by a Priest.

Your process that is entered in the high Court of Heaven, is full of
difficulty and doubt, so that the event thereof is not known to the Saints
themselves: yet is the Mother of God a party with you, who together with your
guide-Angels is ever pleading on your behalf, and saying, Lord take compassion
on them.

Before the time of Confession, prove your selves, examine your own
consciences, pray unto God with tears, and make your intercessions unto Peter,
Magdalene, and the good thief. The good thief of his own accord confessed
his sin, and reproved his companion, What? have thou no fear of God? He was
also pricked in heart by contrition, saying, Domine memento mei. Lord remember
me, he also did in a sort satistisfie by dying, for he linked and mingled his
death and torments with the death and torments of Christ Jesus.

Your God does endeavor to draw you unto him by many admirable means, he will
divide the contrition, and acknowledgment of your sins amongst you, and will
stir you up to recall them into remembrance, if you will give ear unto him.
You should be patient in whatsoever adversity may befall you: you should ever
stand before your judge, like unto men that are guilty of high treason, and
should think that the pains of Hell are not of equal proportion unto your
demerits, and that you are not worthy to That is to say, they are worthy of a
higher punishment, and that to endure them, is a favor in respect of their
deseruings: as a Parricide is not worthy of whipping.
suffer them.

God is better known unto them that cast down their eyes on the The example
of the Publican and the Pharisie in S. Luke 18. cap.
earth, then to those that stare up to heaven. For what are you but a compound
of dust and ashes? meat for worms, and a pitcher of hansome earth, apt to
break, and subject to a thousand miseries and mischances? You are therefore to
abstract your cogitations, and to place them above upon the goodness of God,
who for your sakes has created the Heavens, and filled up the number of
Angels, yet are you still hardened in your iniquities.

God pardons man's offenses easily, if so be that he lends his help and
forwardness unto it: for God is he that does operate, and man does cooperate
with him.

If you should dwell in a darksome house, and would feign enjoy the benefit of
the light, you ought to open the door unto him that brings his torch lighted
unto you, for he is not worthy to be enlightened by the torch, that will
refuse to open the door to him that brings it. And if he should afterward
complain, that he sits in darkness, and by means of being deprived of
this light, he is not able to work, he will be answered, that himself is
the cause of his own misery, and that he justly loses the light of the day,
because he shuts his doors against it. Thus when God speaks to the soul
that is ouercast with mists and darkness; open thou poor blind soul, open
the gates of thy will unto me, I am that Sun of Justice, which will
Dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam lucem.
illuminate and shine upon thee: yet will not the soul open unto me, but
chooses rather to be wrapped up in darkness. And why? because if I should
enter in, I should discover by the cleernesse of my light whatsoever lies
buried in obscurity, and should chase thence that palpable darksomnesse,
wherein the soul is so dangerously muffled. But alas! it rather labors to
be shadowed with darkness, and to wallow still in voluptuousness and delights,
(which are lost in their very fruition) then by pains and industry to be
blessed with the full possession of a perfect light.

Confession follows contrition, and before Confession every one ought to
examine himself, and say, O my God! what am I, that I should receive such
manifold blessings at thy hands? Thou have redeemed me from the claws of
Satan, and have retired me under the couerture of thy wings. Good God, I
esteemed my self a malefactor waiting to hear the sentence of death
pronounced against me, and yet have thou in goodness repriued me from this
prison, which is narrow, dark, and full of horror, and besides the free
donation of my life, thou have infranchised me with the servants of God. Good
God, I was a malefactor and stood convicted of grievous and master-sinnes, yet
was it thy good pleasure to remit them unto me.

After Satisfaction.
Confession, every one is to look unto satisfaction, but how many are there
that hold not themselves endebted to God, but that God is a debtour unto them?
Who so demeaneth himself in this sort, let him know, that Heaven is barred
against him, except he labor to strengthen himself with good works, and not
to appear empty-handed before his God. For to what purpose serve the
commandments, if good works be not necessary to salvation? You go awry, if
you imagine to be saved by doing of nothing; for God cannot lie. Therefore you
may boldly say unto him, Ha! my God, with what abundant mercy have thou
brought back my soul from Hell, and endowed it with thy sanctified grace? Good
God what have I miserable creature deserved to have thy favors doubled and
heaped upon me? O infinite and immense eternity, thy benefits toward me know
neither end nor number, and I frankly confess my incapacity to comprehend
them. God of mercy, thou have condemned those once-beawtifull and goodly Angels
to the pit of Hell, for one sin of pride, and do thou take compassion of
me? what of me, that have so often transgressed against thee?

After By intelligence and revelation. See the following Act. This is also a
discourse of the blessed Sacrament: but having mentioned by compulsion the same
things formerly, he was unwilling to begin another discourse of an argument to
full of disgust unto him: and touching which he had as yet no commission to
speak of.
this discourse God commanded Verrine to give the assembly there present the
last course of confections and sweet meats. Then began Verrine to confess and
say, I am able to say no more, let them go to the Apothecaries if they will,
and buy them comfeits. What regard I whether their mouths be sweetened or
distasted; for my part I would they might be all dragged by us to hell, they
should see how well we would entertain them. God answered him, This supper is
not dressed for thee. I command thee to say and do that which I have now
decreed. After much resistance, Verrine said, I can resist no longer, he is
far stronger then I* and being omnipotent as he is, he will be obeyed by
fair means or foul, otherwise he could not be omnipotent. Then said Verrine,
God himself has instituted the blessed sacrament of the Eucharist, I speak
it as forced unto it, and against my custom, and the fashion of the other
Devils. For when they were to speak of God, or of Mary, they were all
accustomed to say, him and her, without any other addition; but I who take Gods
part, God leaving him to his natural disposition, and not employing his
absolute force against him.
and am not now-sided with hell, am constrained to speak these words, Sacred,
and Saint, and Paradise, for confirmation of which I am ready to take my oath.

Then before the Communion of the Priest, Verrine added; Ponder in your selves
how God says, open me thy heart: for to you does it belong to open, and
garnish it with faith, hope and charity; and to believe that Christ Jesus is in
the blessed Sacrament with his humanity and divinity.

Of the blessed Sacrament.
You will ask me, how or by what means is he there? I tell you, you are not
with such curiosity to pry into the means. Believe simply that he is a
glorified body, and takes up no place, and therefore may easily lie hidden
under the species of bread.

Having spoken thus, he said unto the Priests that were there present: You
that are Priests, how could you dare to touch your God, if he were there
visibly and not under the form of bread? I tell you, you could not be so hardy
as once to approach unto so great a light: for his sacred mother on the day of
his nativity, dared not as it were to touch his hands, although she had carried
him nine moncths in her womb. Know ye not that Moses when he came down from
the Mountain, and had spoken with God, was feign to cover his face with a
veil; for otherwise the people could not endure to speak with him, so
brightsome was the light that beamed and proceeded from his face? Then he
suddenly turned to Leuiathan, one of the Devils in the body of Magdalene, and
said, Hola! you that are such an illuminate doctor, what is it you now say?
plead now thine own cause (O Doctor) in a close corner of Hell, as hereafter
I my self may chance to do, but now I am a partisan with the Doctor of
doctors, who is also wisdom it self. Then again he turned his speech and
said, Beware, beware Of the holy Communion.
you that approach unto the holy Communion, how you receive God in your hearts,
whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain. If the King of France (O man) were
desirous to come to thy house, would not thou presently say, Ha, sir, my
house is too little to give entertainment or harbourage unto your Majesty; I
beseech you sir, spare your pains to visit my poor cottage, and have respect
unto my wants and poverty. To this some or other will answer, It is the Kings
pleasure to have it so, he is wealthy enough, and will cause whatsoever is
necessary to be conveyed unto thy house, for he has his Pages, servants,
and train, that will take care of these things; he has no need to borrow thy
goods, or any thing else that belongs unto thee, it shall suffice that thou
lend him thy house; and because where the King is, there is the Court also, by
a consequent the King honoring thy house with his presence, it shall put on
the nature and appellation of a Palace. So does God when he comes to thy
soul, if thou do but bequeath unto him the habitation of thy will, he will
hang the rooms thereof with the rich Tapistrie of all sorts of virtues. The
holy Communion is the table of the King of glory, yet do you carelessly venture
upon the same, as if it were the common board of an Inn, or as if it were a
maygame, and place to dance in. The Pages and seruitours of this table are the
Angels, yet not regarding all this, you give a thousand occasions of scandal
in the Church, to wit, by thoughts, words, and other misdemeanors which I will
not speak of, yea you there act diverse villainies and uncleannesses, where of
the Turks would blush to be found guilty. Ask therefore those sweet fruits,
the seven gifts of the holy Ghost, and so shall God water you with the dew of
his grace in this world, and cloth you with eternal glory in the world to
come. How easily would you loath all the pleasures of the world, if you had
relished your mouths never so little with the delicacies of your God. You that
are poor are many times riotous, and spend in an hour all that you have
gotten in a whole week for the maintenance of your families. A Christian
should imitate Christ Jesus; Qui manducat indigne, etc
and since that reward is the fruit of labor, in vain does he who will not
labor expect a reward. Think again and again upon this fearful sentence,
which God will one day pronounce Ite maledicti, then all processes shall be
ended, And there shall be no more Appeals. Give thanks unto God after you
have received the Communion, for it is a great blessing, which he bestows
upon you, in that he has vouchsafed to admit you to the participation of his
body.

It were a clemency not easily parallelled, if a King should gr^^t life and
liberty to a man that stands convicted of high treason; but it is a greater
wonder to withdraw souls from sin, and to win them to grace: for sin is
of a greater distance from grace then heaven is from earth: The Devils and the
damned are witnesses of this.
hence it is that the remission of one only sin, does challenge from you a
perpetual giving of thanks.

The least blessing that God bestows upon a man is of more worth, then if a
mighty King would make a free donation unto him of all his dominions. And what
think ye? Did not God give you a soul accompanied with the three goodly
faculties thereof, that you might use it and them to his glory?

The sin that is committed out of frailty is against the Father, and is
easily pardonable: the sin against the Son, who is the eternal wisdom of
his father, is out of ignorance, and is excusable: but the sin against the
holy Ghost, who is that everlasting goodness is hardly pardoned; some may be
reclaimed that offend this way, but very rarely.

After this, Verrine by a most solemn oath confirmed all which is above
rehearsed, and in honor of the five wounds he said five several times,
Adoramus te Christ, etc. and toward the end saying this word, Redemisti, he
subioyned Redemisti, that is, you, and not us Devils, who are in hell. Then he
said, Great God I adore thee, who art here covered under a little Host; cursed
be that Christian, who reputeth himself to be a Christian, and does not
believe it, he is far worse then a Devil.

This same day in the morning, Beelzebub departed out of the body of Magdalene
and said unto her, farewell, I go to see thy friend who is in great
perplexity: and so he went to Marseille to aid the Magician (as he said)
against those, that did advise him from father Michaelis, to have regard unto
his conscience. The same day father James de Rets came from Aix to S. Baume,
and brought news that father Michaelis had A consultation of this business
with sundry religious persons.
consulted at Aix with the Capuchin Fathers, touching this particular, and that
he had sent diverse unto Marseille and willed them to be careful in a
business of so rare and high a consequent.

The Acts of the 21. of December.
This day in the morning the Dominican father did exorcise; and as soon as the
Exorcismes began, one of the Devils which was in Louyse asked him saying, In
the name of God, why do thou exorcise me? who gave thee authority to do it?
the Exorcist answered him, God and his Church. Then said the Devil, can God
compel a Devil to deliver truth? The exorcist replied, that he could. To this
Verrine said, Believe it not, for we are all the fathers of lies. True (said
the Exorcist) you are the fathers of lies when you speak from your selves and
that which is your own; but when you are constrained by Almighty God, I
affirm that then you may speak truth. Verrine replied unto him. Tell me if
there be any power or authority in the books of Exorcismes to force us to
take a true and a binding oath, answer me now to this? It is true, that we
may take a true oath? as for example, when you interrogate us in the name of
God Almighty, and by the authority of the Church, tell me if in that case God
has given that power unto you, to force us to take an oath that binds, to
wit, according to the purpose of God, and the meaning of the Church. It is a
truth (answered the Exorcist) that God has bestowed this power upon his
Church, and us. Verrine replied; I spoke this in confutation of those that
auerre, that Devils cannot speak truth: I tell you that such do in effect
devise the omnipotency of God; and therefore they may save a labor in saying
their Creed: and if they do say it, it is after the Heretics cut, that say
their Credo without a Credo; for they say it with their mouth, and deny it in
their heart. I therefore auow, that since God is omnipotent, he may easily
constrain the Devil to execute his will.

A Dialogue between Verrine and Leuiathan.
Then did Verrine turn himself toward Leuiathan, and said: Speak Leuiathan,
if thou have any thing to say for thy self. Leuiathan answered: I shall loose
of mine honor, to hold discourse with my slave, I am not disposed to talk.
Thou art feign to say this (said Verrine) because thou have not wherewith all
to oppose or thwart that, which on Gods behalf I have delivered. Leuiathan
answered: God does not use to send devils abroad to preach. That is true, (said
Verrine) See the answer to the first objection after the Epistle to the Reader.
neither is my errant hither, to be a Preacher. Leuiathan answered: What need
all these words then? They are no words of mine (said Verrine) all my knowledge
is nothing available unto me; but he who causes me to speak, is wisdom it
self, and all these things do proceed from the Almighty. Speak now
(illuminate doctor) defend thy self, O thou doctor of Heretics? I do here
my duty, and discharge my commission, speaking merely from the strength of
that which God commands, and not out of any fancy I have thereunto: I have
not so much charity in me, as to speak it from my self, but what I have
delivered, is wrung out of me by maine force and compulsion. Speak now unto
this, perchance you may get advantage by that which I have spoken.

Then said Leuiathan, If I did see here any one whom I might call mine,
(meaning Heretics) I would not make dainty to speak. Think thou
(answered Verrine) that God is like unto men, who are curious and choice in
their phrases, and lay a varnish of eloquence upon their speeches? I Observe
the manner of speaking when God will discover any thing to Spirits, or will
keep any thing close from them. Dicta and facta sunt.
tell thee, that with one sole motion of his will, he reuealeth by an
intrinsicke manner of understanding, whatsoever he pleased shall be
accomplished: but the truth is, thou art pusillanimous, and have nothing to
reply. Leuiathan answered, I neither fear God nor his Angels; and why then
should I fear thee who art but as it were a lackey. It is true (said Verrine)
I am but as thy lackey, yet might thou answer if thou have any courage
residing in thee. But thou art a very illiterate doctor, and those that follow
thee, must needs stumble in the dark, so full of obscurenesse and falsehood is
all thy doctrine. Dare thou swear that thy doctrine is consonant unto truth,
as I will swear that whatsoever I have here delivered, proceeds from the
living God? Leuiathan answered, Yes, I affirm, that it is all true. Verrine
replied, Accursed spirit, dare thou swear as I will? Yes, that will I, said
Leuiathan. Verrine answered him, thou can not without reserving some private
and malicious meaning. Leuiathan then said. Well, let us break off this
discourse. To which Verrine answered: If thou might be let alone, I do
easily conceive thy inclination to swear falsely; and the reason is clear,
for thy doctrine is false, and if thou God is never a witness unto falsehood.
should take thine oath, thou would swear falselie, and not according to
the intention of God and his Church, Not so (said Leuiathan) I tell thee I will
swear according to the meaning of the Church. Will thou swear according to
the meaning of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Church, said Verrine?
Leuiathan replied: What need all these cautions and restrictions. They do
declare (said Verrine) that thou are vanquished: for thy intendment was to have
sworn according to the Church that is called the Reformed Church; and is the
Church of Calvin, Beza, Luther, Arius, and the like Heretics. You may do well
(said Leuiathan) to believe this babbler, you may perhaps find him to be a great
Prophet. Verrine said: It is true, I am of my self a Verrine in all his
discourses confessed himself to be a Devil.
miserable Devil, as thou art, but after much resistance, and long disputation
against God, I was at last constrained to speak the truth: for God is the
Prophet of Prophets, and he it was, that made Balaams Ass to speak.
Leuiathan answered: What? does God interchange commerce of language and
conference with a Devil? Yes, that he does (said Verrine) but by a secret kind
Observe, that it is by intelligence.
of intelligence, and we resist (as much as is possible for us) his
commandments, yet at length we are of necessity tied unto obedience. Then
answered Leuiathan: For mine own part, I frequent no company, but the
society of brave and worthy fellows. Accursed spirit as thou art (replied
Verrine) know thou not that when God does work, he works not for the
bodies sake, but from his regard unto the soul? I tell thee, the soul of a
pesant that is endowed with the grace of God, is as precious before his
Creator, as is the soul of a great King or Monarch. It cannot be denied but
they are poor, yet God is able to enrich them, and to store up much grace
within them. Speak now Leuiathan, It may be thou shall gain some one or other
unto Lucifer, and shall not loose all thy labor. Leuiathan answered, Ha
Verrine, thou know well, that I gain more upon great personages, then upon
pesantly and base people. It cannot be gain said (quoth Verrine) but that a
man of note and quality is more encumbered to clear himself of evil, and to
apply all his actions unto good, then is a poorer man: yet may an honest
plain Country man be a cause of much good; as a clown of a wicked
disposition may be apt enough to practice a great deal of mischief. Poor
and rich are indifferently equally in Paradise, for there is no distinction in
that place between them. And least any one should mis-understand me, and
conceive that there is an error in my words, I do explane my self; I do not
say, that there shall be no diversity amongst them in the several degrees of
glory, for who so in this world is stored with most grace, shall in that other
world attain unto a great portion of glory: as appears in Magdalene, who
having loved much, had much sin remitted unto her; and therefore she is the
second person after the There is nothing repugnant hereunto why this should not
be so.
mother of God, and so is it also decreed and ordered by the Church in the
Letany. O S. Dominick an enemy to Verrine.
Dominicke, thou art my mortal enemy, and art now dwelling amongst the
Thrones, and hold that place, which formerly did appertain unto me: I say
not that thou art there as an Angel, but as a Saint blessed for evermore: for
as there fell Angels of every Order some, so God to fill up the seats that
were void by the downfall of Angels, has placed the souls in them, dividing
unto every one that place of glory which he judged they had deserved. Then said
Leuiathan, What have I to do with this preacher? Verrine answered, I came not
to preach, and those who understand me, cannot say that they have heard a
Verrine denies that he is a preacher. See the answer to the first objection
after the Epistle to the Reader.
Sermon, but that they have seen two persons possessed to be exorcised, and
that the Devil in one of them did speak and discourse variouslie.

Then Verrine spoke to the Exorcist, and said: Why do thou not command
Leuiathan to speak. Upon this the Exorcist said, Leuiathan, why speak thou
not. Verrine answered, because he has nothing to reply. Then said Leuiathan,
I do warrant it unto you, that my doctrine is the truth, and not the doctrine
of the Church of Rome. True, said Verrine, according to thy perplexed and
cursed intention. I tell thee, that although the Bishop of Rome should lead an
ungodly and a vicious life, (which yet I affirm not, for I touch upon no man
in particular) but suppose that it were so, yet should not the authority and
the power that God has delegated unto his Church be hereby diminished or
impaired: for the power is always the same, as in the Church the sacrifice is
always the same be the Priest good, or be he bad that does sacrifice: for the
Priest deriueth his power from God, not God from the Priest.

Then he cried, hola Lucifer, come hither, for I will dispute with thee of the
Mass, of Purgatory, and of Invocation of Saines: my doctrine issues from a
fountain which is never dried up, to wit, Jesus Christ, who is the light of
the world, as says John the Evangelist.

Leuiathan, among the supreme Seraphins, thou were the third after Lucifer:
What say thou now learned doctor? Dare thou affirm, that in the Sacrament
of the Eucharist Christ Jesus is not really and truly there. I my self am able
to tell thee, O doctor without knowledge, that God being Omnipotent, may make
his body descend upon an hundred thousand several Altars. Do thou use thus
to bait men's souls with thy fair speeches, steeped in all alluring
sweetness?

And The distinct offices which Devils have in tentations.
thou Balbarith, who do make the Gentry to believe that it is a piece of
valor to swear and blaspheme the name of God without intermission, speak if
thou will. Approach thou also Astaroth, who art the master of idleness. And
thou Asmodee, who do undo and debauch youth by thy continual allurements.
And thou Carreau, who hardnest men's hearts. I perceive you have nothing to say
for your selves, and yet do you labor secretly the subversion of men. Upon
this Verrine turned him to the assembly and said: Look you observe the
commandments of God, and of his Church, which is not subject unto error: for
Christ Jesus her Spouse is ever with her, and guides her by that clear light
which ever streameth from him. Be attentive unto Sunday and Holi-day Masses,
for those that observe them not, having no maine or canonical impediment to
hinder them, do sin mortally. The Church is more solicitous to instruct you
then a natural mother can be ready to succor her child that is in danger.
There are who go to hear Mass as a laboring man goes to his work without
preparation, or as if a man would go to Plays or Revels. Consider, consider
these things that are so full of admiration; I Verrine, as I am a Devil, would
rather choose to suffer the pains of hell 20. 30. 40. 50. years, then to tell
you one word suitable unto what I now speak: and if this creature here were of
force and strength sufficient, I would cry so loud in her, that men should
hear me half a league off. Conceive of me as of one that is nothing else but
a firebrand in hell, not worthy to be burned in that fire: and in these
contemplations think of your selves, and the pains of that other world, as a
malefactor would do that waits hourly for the sentence of his death. I tell
you that this expectation is many times more grievous then the torment it
self, and does often prevent punishment by hastening on of death.

Say unto your soul, Soul remember thy worth, and consider how God has
created thee capable of eternal bliss. How expedient then is it, that thou
walk in the commandments of thy God, and that the Bride should be obseruant
of her Spouse? All that thou can perform is not able to balance the least of
his mercies; yea, he should show compassion toward thee, in punishing thee
with the tortures of hell.

You that go to Church to hear Mass, are to say, Soul whether go thou?
Thou go to receive either thy salvation or damnation. I do not say (said
Verrine) that sinners offend God afresh in going to hear Mass, but I affirm
that they are like unto those, who when a shower of rain falls, stop all the
spouts and conduitpipes of their cisterne, for fear left the water should be
conveyed into it. If those are not watered with the dew of Gods grace, the
Priest is no cause thereof but they themselves, whose heart is fashioned out of
stone, not composed of earth which is apt to bring forth fruit.

Say further: Soul, let us go and crave pardon of God: for being a wretched
malefactor, and worthy of condemnation, it is reason the soul should
prostrate it self and implore his mercy. Yet fares it not with sinners as
with malefactors, who appeal unto the Court and Counsel of the King at Paris,
for oftentimes, notwithstanding their delays and pains, they loose their
life, and the first sentence of death is ratified against them. But your God
does inuit you unto him, saying: Come unto me and I will refresh you: ask and
I will give you. Notwithstanding, the requests which you present unto me, must
be of virtues and of spiritual blessings which concern the salvation of your
souls, not of earthly goods, or of riches, or of knowledge, or of any
curiosity whatsoever. Search after the light of your souls, for God does
communicate it to all the world, to rich and poor, to noble, and to men of
base condition. Your memory Touching the blessed Trinity.
resembles the eternal Father, your understanding the Son, your will the
holy Ghost, and all your soul the sacred Trinity. The Father says unto you,
call to mind the benefits which I have divided amongst you: the Son says, in
these benefits which you have received from your God contemplate his power, and
his mercy, his wisdom and his justice: the holy Ghost pusheth you on to the
fear and love of your God. The memory, the understanding and the will are
three things, and yet but one thing: the Father; the Son, and the holy Ghost
are three persons, and yet but one God. When you hear Mass, enter you into a
deep meditation, and say thus unto your selves: Infinite God, and Saint of
Saints, I do not know but this may be the last Mass that ever I shall hear:
for you are to take a strict account of your conscience, as if your last hour
were pronounced against you, since that death does threaten you all, at all
times, and in all places. But alas, what man thinks upon these things: the
Angels tremble before the Majesty of God, and the malefactors are lulled
asleep in their stupide repose and security: the first borne do honor their
Creator with all awful reverence, and the servants go on in their uneven
courses without any fear at all.

Then he cried unto God, saying: of a truth thou art the God of might and
puissance, and make thy self to be obeyed by men and Angels, yea, by the
Devils themselves, as it plainly appears at this instant. Herein thy
Omnipotency does make full declaration of it self, and amazeth the world with
this new wonder: for, O great God, thou do not esteem the wisdom of this
world, but al they that humble themselves shall participate of thy light, and
those that are puffed up shall remain obstinate in their pride.

You should demand three things from your God before all things else
whatsoever: first the glory of heaven, then whatsoever appertains to your
salvation, and thirdly the good of your neighbor.

You are also to beg of your Creator in humility of spirit, that he will make
you prosper and grow by the dew of his grace, and this you are to do as
malefactors upon your knees with an halter about your neck, and must say: My
God and my Lord, grant me thy light to consider and confess my sins, implant
within me a penitent and broken heart, that I may bewail my offenses, and have
my sins in detestation, that so I may be accounted worthy to receive
absolution from the Priest. If thy body may stand thy brother instead to save
his soul, do not delay to bestow it upon him, or if his body have need of
sustentation by thy goods, thou art not to deny them unto him: for it is not
the will of God that you should give a soul for a soul, or a body for body,
or goods for goods, but that you should prefer the salvation of a soul
before the life, and the life before goods and worldly possessions: not that
you should always be tied unto this but that he who puts it in practice
does do the will of God: for God has said, thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, but how few are there that do this?

Then he cried out, and alleging an example answerable unto what he formerly
spoke, he said, Ha Thomas, thou were not ignorant of the death of thy master:
thou knew well that he was to rise again, yet did thou say, except I
touch the prints of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not
believe. I do not speak this to disgrace thee; but I say, that if thou
had been more pregnant to believe, thy Savior had not reproved thee:
neither should thou, as afterward thou did, have had experience of thy
frailty, yet were thou named in the roll of the Apostles as well as the rest,
and did afterward constantly suffer death in confirmation of that truth
whereof thou had formerly doubted. God pardoned David, that you might know
he has power to remit sins: he did eat with the Publican, to declare that
he came not merely for the just: nay, I say further, that your God does make
narrower search and inquisition after the lost sheep, which is the sinful
soul, then after that soul that stands in her sanctity and innocence. O
great God, thou art that true shepherd who has laid down his life for the
salvation of his wandering flock: thou have searched and at last found thy
sheep, which stragled away from the pasturage of their shepherd.

The same day Magdalene said, that there came a certain Devil from abroad to
speak with Carreau, who was one of those that resided in her body, saying,
come quickly, for Beelzebub calls for thee, and forthwith Carreau flew forth
from her like lightening. She also said that Beelzebub was departed from her
body all that day, and had never stayed from her so long. And that she saw
Beelzebub to return, while she was reading a letter, that made mention of the
mother of God.

The same day also, father d'Ambruc sub. Prior of the Covent of S. Maximin came
to S. Baume, to inform himself touching Louyse, because many gave out that
she was not possessed. And the same day toward evening were the two women
exorcised by Father Francis Billet, whereupon Verrine began to speak in this
manner.

What Beelzebub, art thou returned? Beelzebub answered, whence had thou notice
of my return? Verrine said, the servant knows his master: and added, The
head draws after it the whole body, so that if it fall into a pit the body
must of necessity follow after. The flock of sheep goes after the shepherd,
witness us accursed spirits who have believed Lucifer as our head, and as our
shepherd. I have been desirous to gain thus much upon the belief of Louyse
that she would conceit her self not to be possessed, and that I am here by
the appointment of Lucifer: for this day have we compassed her in with these
tentations, telling her, that she of her self gave life to all these actions
and gestures, and that a woman might of her self deliver all such discourses
as these. There are those that say, put case that God would convert a soul, or
reveal some truth unto his Church, is it probable that he would make the
Devil his agent in an employment of so high a nature?

But I auerre that the Church has received the Inuestiture of authority from
God, whereby it is enabled to command Devils, and to enforce them in the virtue
of Exorcismes to deliver truth, and that the Devil by his oath may give
assurance of the truth, if so be he be forced thereunto by the power of God
communicated unto his Church, and by the virtue of Exorcismes, and that all the
conditions and ceremonies of a solemn oath be performed: yet for all this
there is a religious person who faith, that I am not able to speak a truth: I
answer him, that as I am a Devil I cannot speak truth indeed, but am herein
of his opinion: yet as I am sent from God who is able to draw good out of evil
I am constrained to deliver truth, and to take an oath for the further
ratification thereof. He must deny the first Article of his faith, and in stead
of Credo, say Non credo, if it be false that the Devil may be forced to utter
a truth: for God has given all his authority to the Church to command Devils,
and to constrain them to obey the charge which is laid upon them. But I am not
a whit abashed, if this woman stand doubtful whether she be possessed or no,
when the religious persons themselves make question of the same.

Verrine constrained to speak.
Then he spoke to God and said, I could endure with more ease the torments of
hell 50 years together, then to pronounce thy name only one time; yet do
thou force from my mouth speeches of reverence unto thy Saints, which is much
against the nature and custom of Devils. Give this charge to thy children who
look for a share in thy heritage, and expect a recompense for their obedience
unto thee. They have so many famous and notable Preachers and many books
furnished and fraught with all variety of learnings, and will thou have me then
to speak to men of all sorts both wise and foolish, who wait for no other
retribution but the torments of hell? It is no wonder if the Devils seek to
withstand God, when his very children who have a portion in Paradise declare
themselves heady and refractary against him. Was it ever known that Devils
should advise men to invoke the Saints, yet am I constrained to persuade you
to pray unto them, especially unto S. Dominicke. Cursed Touching S. Dominicke.
be thy devotion Dominicke which thou did bear toward the Virgin Mary the
mother of God. Cursed be those religious persons that have entered into thy
Order; I would rather be tortured in hell, then to found forth thy praises and
the commendations of Bernard. Let me possess you with this truth, that the
Saints make intercession for you, and that Dominicke is one of the intimate
friends to the Virgin, as also is Bernard. It is thou great God that
constrainest me to exalt Dominicke my greatest enemy, and would make it
clear unto all, how blessed and good a thing it is to honor and love thy
mother, and have enforced me to make thus much familiar unto men, that they may
with the greater feruency of devotion serve her.

Dominicke I hate thee as I do the plague, and I should take more contentment
in that external darkness of the bottomless pit of hell, then in these
discourses which I lavish thus upon thy praises. Thou were The Saints who are
most devoted to the Virgin.
ever very devout unto the Virgin, as were also Bernarnardus, Stanislaus,
Anselmus, and thou Stephanus who have contracted great familiarity with her. He
that will be beloved by the blessed mother of God must serve Dominicke in
feruency of spirit: you are first to crave the mediation of the mother, and
then to make your redress unto the Son. There are many who are devout to
their Creator but few unto the Virgin, yea there are not many amongst women
themselves that consecrate their devotions unto her: and yet he that will
gain eternal life must make his approach unto this Mary, Mary is the Scala
Coeli, so Fulgentius calls her in his Sermon of the Virgins praises: for
without the fruit which she carried there had been no ladder for us to mount up
into heaven, and the tree was as a ladder whereby we were enabled to pluck
this fruit.
ladder of heaven, and the Saints are the steps of this ladder, so that he who
will enter into the Palace of the King must first ascend by these stairs. You
are all guilty of high treason, and there is not any that can conjecture what
will be the state and issue of your cause but God only: therefore present
your selves before Mary with all humble and submissiue behavior, before you
approach unto her Son: and first take the advice of Dominicke before you
prostrate your selves to the mother of God. For it would savor of intrusion
and much presumption to thrust into the conference of a Queen, and not to
prepare her unto the same by a Mediator. Be you therefore regardfull to gain
the good opinion of some one of her familiars and favorites, by means of whom
you may more confidently get access and admittance into her chamber, and have
spaedier audience when you are presented unto her, whereby your request shall
be with greater expedition granted unto you: for this is the will of him who
is the fountain of all grace.

Dominicke, though thou be my sworn enemy above all that are in heaven, yet am
I compelled to depain^ thy praises and have already made worthy mention of thy
Order upon the day of the conception of the Virgin: and it is Gods pleasure
that men should now be more devout and addicted unto thy Order then ever
formerly they have been, because thou art the Virgins darling, and art able to
prevail much with her in men's behalf.

You will tell me, that God has created heaven not for beasts, nor for Turks,
but for Christians; I grant it, yet for all this your devotion must not cool
within you, neither must your life be bestiall, nay worse then the
conversation of Infidels.

The Saints who are full of charity and all perfection will obtain
sanctification for you, if you direct your prayers to them for that purpose,
and do not make intercession for these temporal and momentary commodities. By
performance where of you shall fulfill the will of the Saint of Saints.

You may peradventure conceit that God will come down from heaven and take you
by the hand, and so lead you with him to his kingdom: he does indeed behold
you a great way off, and goes before you with open arms, but before you be
entertained with his embracements, you must have recourse unto Dominick,
Stanislaus, ^ernardus, Anselmus, Stephanus, and to your guard-Angell, and
entreat them to convey you into the Palace of his Majesty. Also those that are
desirous to speak unto the Queen must run the same course: for it is she above
all that makes intercession for you, neither is there any better acquainted
with the pangs and torments which her dear Son suffered for your sakes, then
is her self. Touching the Angels that are guardians unto men.
Honor the Angel that is your guardian, for he is one of the Pages of your
Sovereign King, and always beholds the face of God in his full of Majesty
and glory. Be ever careful of your salvation, and say unto him, O my good
Angel that take charge of me, lend me thy hand and bring me the directest
way unto the Court of this King; and do me this favor as to make my
introduction unto some grace with your Prince. I tell you that all Saints are
Kings and Princes, and have great authority and power in the Court of that
Sovereign King. The body of a man is not more different from the soul, then
is the Court of this world from that celestial mansion. If you had but tasted
the delicacy of the wine of love which was broached in the Mount of Tabor,
without doubt you would despise all things in comparison of it. This wine is at
one time both delicate and pure; but the wine of voluptuousness is mingled and
sophisticated with water, and retains no sweetness or savor. Who so
drinks of the wine of heaven, shall quench his thirst as Magdalene did, who
drank at the feet of our Savior.

The Court gates of the King of glory are very narrow, and every one that will,
cannot enter in thereat. For first a man must knock at the gate of mercy,
taking an Angel for his guide, and humility and obedience for his two
companions; for you can have no admittance into the kingdom of heaven if you
be not associated with these two virtues. The Son of God is the protector
thereof, who died obediently upon the Cross: nay more in being obedient unto
his executioners he was obedient unto the instrument of the Devil, and may
therefore in right now challenge obedience from him. He who shall devoutly
serve the mother of God, and Dominick, shall be sure to obtain plenary
remission for his sins.

After, all this, Verrine confirmed all with an oath which he took very
solemnly, imprecating the wrath of God upon himself and all hell. Then he
said three several times, but with a great deal of resistance, Aue Maria, and
in saying of Ora, he added, Orapro illis miseris peccatoribus nunc, and in hora
mortis, to the honor of the mother of God and of Dominicke. And then he
cried, O Dominicke, never did thou receive so much honor from a Devil,
but thou do merit this and much more; and turning to the Sub-prior, he said:
cursed be thy coming hither, which has brought such shame and confusion unto
Devils.

The Acts of the 22. day of December.
This day in the morning the Dominican father did exorcise; in the beginning
whereof there happened a disputation between father Peter d'Ambruc, Subprior of
the Covent royal of S. Magdalene at S Maximin of the order of S. Dominicke,
and the Devil Verrine, who was one of those that possessed Louyse Capeau. The
said Sub. prior affirmed, that he could conceive no true proof or
demonstration, to induce him to believe, that the said Louyse was possessed.
Verrine answered him, Thou please me well in not believing it, and in
affirming that all these extraordinary actions and gestures do expressly
proceed from her self. The said Father said, I will never believe her
possession. I perceive well (answered Verrine) what thou beleeuest, thou say
Credo, and non Credo, and art indeed irresolute and doubtful. Thou may tell
me that thou art bound to believe it, because it is an Article of faith* but
what commendation is this unto thee, when thou do not believe it? The said
father replied; thou art not able to speak Latin: to which Verrine answered,
God will not have it so, but constrains me to speak in the vulgar tongue.
Then said the father, Thou lie in saying so. I lie not (said Verrine,) I tell
thee again, God will not have it so, that Louyse may be the more abundantly
humbled, and that we might have the greater power to tempt her concerning this
point; that so she might for a time give easy credit unto those, who tell
her, that either this which she does, proceeds from God, or from the Devil
alone, or that all these strange deportments, and discourses, are made and
counterfaited by her self. No no, Gods pleasure is that she should be
dejected; for it is no matter of difficulty to believe that which a man
beholds. Then replied the said father, It is false, and thou give my
ielousies no satisfaction Verrine answered, What desire thou to build and
firm, in thee a belief that Louyse is possessed? Do thou believe it, or
do thou not? I do very well perceive that thou are not hasty to believe;
yet is this a very unusual accident, neither is she possessed after the
ordinary fashion of many, who strive to express themselves with eloquent and
affected phrases, and so make a cheat upon men's belief and upon their souls
also: but I am here on Gods behalf, to convert souls, and not to deceive
them.

Then the Exorcist holding the Book of Exorcismes in his hand, commanded him
in the Name of God to answer unto such things, as he would demand of him. But
Verrine snatched away the book by violence, and threw it to the ground,
saying, What? Will thou exorcise Louyse, when she is not possessed? Then he
said unto her that was possessed. No Louyse, do not suffer thy self to be
exorcised any longer, thou art a fool, and art not possessed. If thou permit
them to exorcist thee, I will cry aloud, that thou art given over unto the
Devil; but I will take heed how I swear this. Notwithstanding this, the
Exorcist gave not over to exorcise and to adjure him that he should answer.

Verrine then said unto him, What would thou have me answer unto?
Afterward he turned to the Subpriour, having first made answer unto certain
Latin words in the exorcisme, and said. Thou art well skilled in latin, is this
latin of the vulgar kind or not? Louyse understands all this passingly well,
her Father and Mother have brought her up to speak a great deal of latin,
have they nor? And so mocking him, he continued on his speech, The Heretics
have a custom to teach and instruct their children in the latin tongue* do
thou not know this? Ha! it is but a little time since Louyse first learned her
Consit^or, and was not able to read the office of the Virgin. All this while
the Exorcist ceased not to adjure him: unto whom Verrine said, I will not
answer to any thing, but am resolved to resist as long as I am able, and when
I can resist no longer, I will prostrate my self on the earth, and will
withstand God with all the force I have. This he spoke in an extreme fury and
violence, making semblance as if he would flee from his place of abode. Then
Verrine began to speak unto God, saying, No, no, I will do nothing, I will
oppose my self against thee with the greatest reluctance that I possibly may,
I have no stomach to praise and do honor unto mine enemy. S. Dominick an
adversary unto Verrine.
Why should I praise him, whom I would, if it lay in my power, willingly
disseate from the place he holds? I will do nothing, it is in vain,
especially since some of his Order are here present; I will do nothing, I
will not give them so great an occasion of consolation. After this he said, He
has commanded me to quiet my self, and therefore like a gally-slaue I am
constrained to do Gods pleasure, and to say to my confusion and despite, that
Dominick has obtained a grant from the Mother of God, that those of his Order
may live in great perfection; yea, that they shall live untainted from the
pollutions of any mortal sin. It is a great perfection not to omit to do
wel^ because omission does not necessarily imply a mortal sin.
Yet before he spoke this, in that disputation between the Subpriour and him,
he had affirmed, that the walls and enclosures did not sanctify men's souls,
and that many times, much villainy was hatched in Cloisters: but his purpose was
not to accuse any in particular, and that those who were naught did not blemish
or lay any aspersion of infamy upon the good. Then the Sub-priour said, Are not
we to commit any mortal sin by our Rule? Verrine answered, No. And being
asked if the Order of S. Francis might bear a mortal sin. Verrine said that
it might: as might also the Order of Claire. Then he subioyned, that the Devil
did more cast about to circumuent a man that was in a Religious Order, then to
triumph and get the victory of a thousand others: because (said he) we privily
undermine the wordlings of these times, and do manage them as we please, and
as the mother would do her child: we suggest unto young women, that they
should not be so strict in observance of the Mass upon Sundaies and Holydaies,
but should bequeath that time to the decking up and imbellishing of themselves,
and to other vanities. To young Gentlemen we say, thou art young, now or never
thou must abandon thy self to thy pleasures, make much of thy self, and
frequent Tennis-courts, and public meetings for dancing. Thus do we take them
off from devout meditations, and quench in them any motion and desire to be
present at Euening-song, or to do that which is the duty of a Christian to
perform; but contrariwise we do present unto them a thousand occasions to
commit villainy. But when we labor to seduce a Religious person, we use more
wariness and circumspection: Astaroth is he that then bestirres himself,
sometimes suggesting, that he need not make such haste to say Mass;
sometimes endeavoring to make him careless in his devotions, and telling him
that it is a matter of slender consequence, and that he should not make it so
heinous, to be wanting sometimes in the observation of these petty duties.
Much cunning is to be spent in hooking in one of these, we must knock at his
gate, and at his windows, that we may get entrance into his mansion: yet are
we for all these attempts oftentimes crossed of our designement, so surely do
they shut up all the passages that lead into them. I speak it not, as if all
did so, there are not a few that give east entrance and access to Astaroth.

Then It is an allusion to ye constraint which was forced upon him by the
Exorcismes. As if he should have said that he was compelled three manner of
ways, by the will of God, by the merits of the Virgin, and by the
intercessions of S. Dominick, all this being acted in a church of his Order.
he said, that there were three Exorcismes made against him in Heaven, one
from God, another from the Virgin, and the third from Dominick.

Hereunto he added, that if he had power he would disgorge all his curses
against him, who first began the reformation, and against all his inspirations.

Ha Michaelis! thou have never seen Louyse, yet do we strive to gain so
far upon the belief of men, as to persuade them, that Romillon and Michaelis
have taught and lessoned Louyse, but she shall be better examined.

I am not abashed, that there are many who believe not these things, for it is
the manner in all new miracles of God, to find some stop and contradiction,
as appears in the miracles of Christ Jesus, and in those which were
afterward wrought by the Apostles, as also in those that were of old
performed by the Prophets.

The works that proceed from the Devil are entertained gladly; so that when a
great event befalls, and receives no This for the most part falls out to
be so.
affront or repugnancy, it is an argument that it comes not from God. Great
God, thou have many friends at thy table, but how is their number diminished
when thou come to suffer on the Cross? The Kings of the earth use to eat
alone, but the King of glory with company. Peter, when thou did dest deny thy
master, then did thou begin to suffer with him. What should become of the
miserable sinner, if that all the Saints had lived in innocence? Magdalene,
what should become of the penitent, if thou had been as Catherine of
Sienna.

O blessed Mother of God, thou wast conceived without original sin, and have
alone lived without Original, actual and venial.
any spot or taint at all. Martha did follow thee in thy example of virginity,
and is a great familiar of thine; as Magdalene is of thy sons. Miracles do
ever meet with some opposition, as appears here in this: for this is a new
miracle, and an evident demonstration of the Omnipotency of God, the like
whereof has not been wrought since the first being of the world, and yet can
God work a hundred and a hundred miracles, fuller of astonishment and
rareness, then this is. This miracle was wrought by God, at the particular
instance and solicitation of the Virgin, of Magdalene and of Dominick, and
intended primarily for the reformation of his order. And cursed be him that
does reform it, for they are not few that will redress all disorders both in
themselves and in their fellows, especially in the Order of Dominick: and
whosoever shall remain uncomfortable to this reformation, shall be in great
and imminent danger. Some will say, I have nothing to do with the reformation;
another will object, I am of a tender and delicate constitution: another will
excuse himself with, Father, I am too young, and this is too hard for me to
undergo. Nevertheless, many shall take upon them the Order of Dominick,
because his Rule cannot tolerate any mortal sin, and because of the
Reformation of his Order. And they will make choice of this Order, when they
shall understand what great immunities and privileges Dominick has obtained
for it at the hands of the sacred Mother of God: unto whom he was ever
exceedingly devoted, and is beloved again by the Virgin for his continency and
purity. Many also shall enter into this Habit when they shall hear of the
perfection of this Order, and what a sweet savor it renders up unto the
Almighty. In like manner shall the Congregations of the Christian Doctrines
and of Vrsula floorish and spread their branches, yet without any prejudice
unto other Orders, and the Reformed shall live in purity as the Angels of God.
At the end of the Exorcismes it was held fit that Verrine should solemnly
swear upon the blessed Sacrament, for confirmation of that which he had above
spoken.

And first they asked him in what manner he had spoken of the Conception of the
Virgin: to which he answered in these words. Those who are here present are
of different opinions. The Exorcist commanded him to express himself
distinctly and clearly, if it were the will of God that he should utter the
truth herein, and if God had revealed any thing unto him concerning this point.
Then he plainly told them that Touching the conception of the Virgin.
she was immaculate from the beginning. Then did the Exorcist command him
again, that he should more amply discourse of this point before them all:
whereupon he began to speak in this manner. I affirm that the Eternal
Father when he was resolved to send his Word upon the earth to repair the
breach of mankind, and that the Word was ready to do the will of his Father,
then did he determine to create a creature particularly for that purpose, to be
the blessed Mother to his Son: who being also that King of power, was able so
to fit all things, that his Mother should cooperate together with those
blessings and gifts which he would endow her with all; which was just and
agreeable unto reason. I say, that when he saw and knew (for he is the
wisdom of his Father) that his blessed Mother would not oppose against that
which he had decreed to do in a matter of such consequence and importance, as
was the Conjunction of the Divine nature unto the nature of man, he judged it
fit and expedient that she should be for ever exempted from the vassalage of
sin, whether it were original, actual, mortal or venial: hence it
comes, that she never did trespass against God her Father. And if John
Baptist and Jeremy were sanctified from their mothers womb, how much more
should the sacred Mother of God outshine them in purity, when amongst all the
creatures that were ever fashioned by the hands of the Almighty, she is the
most eminent and perfect, next unto the humanity of her Son. And as in God
there is no time either past or to come, but all is present with him, and being
besides a clear and spotless cristall, that is never misted over or made
dim by darkness, he foresaw in this Idea or glass, that his blessed Mother
should in the whole race of her life gently submit her self to his good
pleasure, and obey the Angel when he came unto her. For if Eve had her
creation exempted from sin, it stands with reason that the second Eve
should have a greater dowry of integrity then ever the first had. And as the
first Adam being the type and figure of Jesus Christ, was created without
sin, and from a mould of earth that never was mingled with uncleanness; how
much more shall this second Adam surmount the first in the excellency of his
humanity. And as God took from the first Adam when he was a sleep one of
his ribs, and thereof created Eve, so God the Father while the second Adam
that was to come slept in his bosom, By his eternal knowledge and foresight
into things.
took one of his ribs and framed By his intimate graces which are
communicable unto a creature. And it is a metaphore borrowed from the ribbe of
Adam
another Eve from the same, that is, the blessed Mother of God. The Father
contributed thereunto his power, the Son his wisdom, and was content that
she should have a greater portion of wisdom then the Seraphins or any other
creature whatsoever, next to his humanity that was to come, and manifest it
self unto the world. And the ribbe which Almighty God took from Adam when
he slept did prefigure and fore-shew what I have above declared. In like
manner the holy Ghost did communicate his goodness unto her, not that
essential goodness which is co-eternall with him, but a goodness of that
proportion and magnificense as could possibly be bestowed upon a pure and
immaculate creature. After this discourse, Verrine did dictate the form that
was to be held, to give testification that all this was spoken and understood
in this manner.

We whose names are vnder-signed have heard and seen all that which has
been spoken by the mouth of Louyse Cappeau who is possessed by three Devils by
some witchcraft that together with them was given unto her: and further we
have heard one of the Devils named Verrine, after much resistance and renitency
against God and the Exorcismes, yet being at the length forced by God unto the
same, to deliver all that is here written touching the blessed Mother of God
and the Eternal Word, to their glory and the salvation of Souls.

He further confessed in a great agony and chase, that there was no salvation
out of the Church of Rome: that there was but one God, and one holy Baptism,
and therefore by a consequent but one Church.

Afterward he said that al these acts were, to confirm that which he had
formerly touched, concerning the Order of Dominick, and to show how agreeable
his rule was to God, and his blessed Mother, and that this Miracle was wrought
in favor of that Order. Observe here, that this was spoken, after that
Verrine had said that this Miracle was wrought for the glory of God, and for
the honor of his blessed Mother, Magdalene and Dominick.

Then to confirm whatsoever he had above spoken, he took an oath the
strongest and most binding that a Devil possibly could take, and if ever an
oath had power to tie, it was this oath. And added, that there were some of
opinion, that no oath was of validity before God; yet when he said unto his
Apostles that they should cast out Devils, and foresaw that these Devils being
full of all iniquity, would not by their good will obey the commands of the
Church, unless they were adjured in the Name of Almighty God, he gave his
Church authority over Devils, to be able to constrain the^ by the virtue of
Exorcismes. I affirm therefore, that the oaths of Devils are in force when
they are discreetly ministered unto the^. And the oath now inquestion is taken
with as great solemnity as possibly may be in such a case, I having sworn
upon the honored and blessed Sacrament in the Name of the Father Almighty, in
the name of the Eternal Wisdom, which is the Son; and in the name of that
infinite goodness, which is the holy Ghost. It is also taken according to the
intention of the whole Church militant and triumphant against the meaning of
Hell, and any sinister or reserved purpose whatsoever, whereof the Devils many
times make their advantage if the Exorcist do not look about him with great
wariness. And after he had taken this oath, he called for the wrath of God,
of the blessed Trinity, and of the whole Church militant and triumphant to
fall upon him. The like imprecation he made against all Hell, and that in the
presence of the whole Assembly.

You may here behold the list of those that were present and heard that which
is above spoken, and who signed their names unto the same, Friar Peter Dambruc,
Francis Billet Priest of the Christian Doctrine the Exorcist, Romillon Priest
unworthy, Godam Doctor in Divinity, Friar Peter Foruer, Vicar of S. Baume, A.
Porchieres, Lange, Carret, Baltazar Charuaz, A. Lymory Priest, Honorat, Boeuf,
John Flotte Priest, Denis Guillemini Priour of Romoules, Friar William Cadry.

Then in confirmation of whatsoever he had spoken, Verrin was constrained to
worship the holy and blessed Sacrament, and to say three times, Adoramus te
Christ, quia per Sanctam Crucem tuam redemisti hos, non autem nos.

After the said oath, he said as he did the day before three times, Aue
Maria: and then he said other three times, Oraproillis Sancta Matter Dei: and
again other three times, Ora pro illis sancta Magdalena: and other three
times, Ora pro illis sancta Martha: and other three times, Ora pro illis sancte
Lazare. But in the Salutation of the Virgin he refused to say Matter Dei,
because (said he) it is a name of the greatest excellency and perfection
amongst all the attributes of her praises.

After dinner in the presence of the Sub-Prior before named while he was
speaking to Magdalene, Beelzebub returned and entered into the body of the said
Magdalene, and bad Leuiathan come forth, who presently Thus did Magdalene
afterward report.
performed the same; he said the like to Asmodee, who came forth like a flame
of fire mingled with sulphur: he further said to Astaroth, come thou forth
likewise, and he flue out of her with extreme stink of rosen and sulphur.

Afterward, as Verrine did dictate the disputation that happened between him
and the Sub-prior before said, Beelzebub came and demanded to have the two
Devils that were with Verrine, to wit Gresill and Sonneillon. Verrine told him
they will do you no good, for thou see that the Princes who are with thee
are able to stand thee in no stead. Beelzebub said unto him, come thou also
along with me. Verrine told him, I cannot yet leave my master, let it suffice
thee that I bestow my servants upon thee, and immediately Gresill and Sonneillon
came out of the body of Louyse, and she sensibly felt that they came from her
in the manner of wind. Yet did not Beelzebub leave entreating of Verrine to go
with him. Verrine answered, He speaks of Jews the Magitian.
Why do thou thus entreat me? I cannot go, and if I should go, my See the
answer unto the 5. doubt after the epistle to the Reader.
presence would prejudice your dessignement. Beelzebub said, speak not thus,
for we are companions. Not altogether so (said Verrine) the Devil has seduced
her and the Devil shall bring her home to the confusion of all Hell. Then said
Verrine, well, I must go then, but it shall be to convert the Magician, and bid
the Exorcist to They that were thus possessed felt themselves much lighter and
in greater ease, when the evil spirits departed from them.
take the book of Exorcismes, and to command him in the name of God to go
thither, which the Exorcist did, and presently Verrine came forth, saying, I
go against Beelzebub. Then did Louyse feel his departure from her like unto a
wind. But as he was coming forth, he said, I do not leave thee altogether.
Being departed from her, Louyse remained in her ordinary temper resenting only
the pains that proceeded from the witchcraft.

The same day in the evening were these two women exorcised by father Francis
Priest of the Doctrine, and Verrine began to speak as follows.

Soldiers follow their Captain, and when Beelzebub departed we went after
him. God would win unto him the souls of such as are grown stony in their
obstinacy: his desire is that you would shunn that which is naught, and apply
your selves unto that which is good. We have been at Marseille, and have
diverse times knocked at his gate, and Beelzebub, observe how slender thy forces
are when thou do demand for help of my servants. Beelzebub, thy affairs
run in a low ebb, and this is the reason why thou art now so sad and
dumpish, Beelzebub thou art at thy wits end what to follow. Then he spoke to
Magdalene and said, Magdalene, let not thy courage be abated for those few
torments which thou now endurest, for the pains of Hell are far more
grievous. After this he spoke unto the Devils, and said, come all ye Devils
of the air, all ye Devils of the earth, and all the Devils of hell, come all
to help and succor Beelzebub; but your coming will be to no purpose, and your
assistance not worth your coming, for all of you are in comparison, but as
leaves of trees.

Then turning to Beelzebub, he said: be of good cheer Beelzebub, know thou
not, that where thou loosest one, thou shall gain ten: ha cursed spirit,
ought thou not to consider, that these souls were not created by thee?
Do thou not see, that God will take them unto himself? Thou have inueagled
thousands from him, and think thou that he will ever dissemble this?

If An inuectiue against the Magician.
it were possible that leaves of trees could weep, they would shed forth
tears of blood for this wretched sinner, so vast are his offenses before God.

Then Verrine turned his discourse to God, and said: great God! how good, how
bountiful, and how sweet art thou? I am tortured and tormented, and have not
the patience to behold thy great goodness toward the grossest sinners,
especially toward this man whom I am forbidden to name. O all powerful God,
why do thou not untie and let out those heaps of water, or hurl down thy
lightning from heaven to destroy this wretch, and to bring him to utter
perdition, who sends souls to hell more in number, then the hail that
falls upon the earth? I tell you, God can dissemble this no longer, neither
will he any more endure his execrable villainies: but his pleasure is, that he
be either converted or punished. The impatiencie which God takes at the loss
of these and other obstinate souls, is not such a kind of impatiency as may
any way darken or prejudice his perfections, but it is rather an argument in
him of unblemished goodness: for God in justice should dart down lightning
from heaven to destroy them, or suffer the earth to gape and swallow them up,
who have better deserved this punishment then Dathan and Abiran, whom the earth
devoured up for their rebellion. O Lord God, he cannot fly from thee; whether
he descend to hell, for according to thy essence thou art there, or whether he
does imagine to stray from thee by wandering like a vagabond up and down the
world, for thou see all, and art every where: or if he would ascend unto
heaven, for there the gates are shut against him. So that if he be not
repentant, he may perchance fly, but he cannot euade.

Great God, thou have made reservation of three things to thy self, and
would not that sinners should intermeddle or dip their fingers in them, to
wit, thy glory, judgment and vengeance.

And because the guidance and government of things is most proper unto him,
you must let him alone in his course of government, for he knows well when to
take the cause of innocence into his own protection. What? think ye that God
will suffer this iniquity to branch up higher? I tell you he is wearied with
his long sufferance; and therefore will see the end of this indictment, and
howsoever this business shall fall, he will be sure to fashion and shape it to his
glory, and the salvation of souls. A prediction that the Magician should be
burned.
I say further, that if he be not converted, he shall be burned alive: if he will
needs perish, God will leave him to himself, for this good God for his part was
not wanting to him in any thing. God resembles a father of many children, who
are all stubborn and rebellious against him, and will not obey him neither by
allurements, nor by threats: then does this father say unto them that they
deserve to be punished, because they are disobedient to their father, and will
not harken unto him, neither for hope of inheritance, nor for any other
admonitions or inducements that may be laid before them, but do continue on
in their contempt against him.

It is a thing full of astonishment, that God should provide this great remedy
for you miserable and accursed sinners, and yet the number of those that lay
hold upon it should be so small. There are some that conceive that God is
indebted unto them, thinking with themselves, that he has promised Paradise
unto them, and that heaven was not destinated to intertaine beasts or Infidels,
but for Christians. It is true, God is vexed with a holy kind of impatience,
when he considers the mischievous and malicious purposes of men: he has
purchased their souls at an high and inestimable rate; for the satisfying of
which payment, it was expedient that divinity should be united unto a humane
nature. Thou also, who art the powerful mother of God, did suffer much for
their sakes, and were under the Cross, and near unto thy Son: yet for all
this, do they renounce thy Passion (O God) the nails, and al other instruments
of thy torments; and do thou still hearken after them, and willingly subject
thy self to death, to save them? Why art thou so fond over them; is not thy
blessed Mother in heaven with an infinite number of Saints and Angels? If all
the drops of water in the sea, all the leaves of trees, all the Stars of
heaven were capable to sound forth thy praises, they would all bless thee, O
God, and give thee thanks for those manifold benefits which thou have conferred
upon men: yea, the blessing of their creation alone does challenge everlasting
giving of thanks. Besides this, he has given his Angels charge over you, who
do ever intercede on your behalf, and say, they will be converted, they will
be converted, you must have a little patience. The Virgin Marie is also ever
mediating for you, yet are you regardlesse of all this, especially this wretch,
who shall either be burned, or be converted: for God can no longer suffer or
look on villainies of so soul a nature; and this will be the end of this
business.

The messengers of the King have been at his gate and have diverse times knocked
there: I my self also was present, but not any way to further the project of
Beelzebub.

Then he spoke to Beelzebub, and said: Accursed feind, thou did imagine that
I would combine with thee, but thou art deceived: for I cannot swerve from the
commission of my Master. I did indeed suffer my servants to give thee
assistance, but for my self I took part against thee, and made that journey
of set purpose to declare unto him, that as the Devil had seduced him, so the
Devil should be an occasion to set him right in the true way. Then he took
a solemn oath, that whatsoever he had now uttered, was agreeable unto truth.

The same day, when Verrine was dictating that which he had formerly delivered
touching the immaculate conception of the blessed* Virgin Marie, the Mother of
God, he was asked what he meant in saying, that the humanity of the Son of
God did repose it self in the bosom of his Father, and that then God did
form his blessed Mother out of one of his ribs. To this Verrine answered; You
may here cavil and say, that then this proposition must be true, the Son is
before his Mother. I tell you, that the humanity of Christ Jesus (as all other
things whatsoever are) was always present with his celestial Father: for with
him nothing can be said to be past, or to come, but all is present: the Son
is before his Mother, That is, with the eye of his grace.
because the Father did first Because of his dignity.
behold the humanity of his Son, before he beheld his mother: yet for all
this you cannot properly say, that the one precedeth the other, for in God all
things are present.

The Acts of the 23. of December.
THis day Verrine began to make a furious inuectiue An inuective against the
Magician.
against the Magician, saying with great outcries:

Accursed wretch, thou deseruest to have thy life restored unto thee ten
thousand times, that thou might so many times suffer death; yea, thou
should die as often as thou have sacrilegiouslie offended.

Notwithstanding, God would yet deal favorable with thee, if thy self give
no stop thereunto.

Ha you Capuchins! you shall be punished with temporal calamities, because
you did vary from the form which was prescribed unto you. You might well
conceive; that Almighty God has communicated power unto his Church, to be
able to command Devils: and your charity that you should bear unto your
neighbors might have persuaded you hither, that you might take information of
all things; but he is not always absolute, that conceiteth he is already
sufficiently informed.

Then said Verrine to the Dominican Father (who ever wrote what he delivered)
I must go thither the third time; consider how God loves this soul: Before
Christmas you shall see the bottom of this sack emptied, there was never such
villainy seen, neither was there ever the like miracle, or the like remedy.
Verrine also said unto the Dominican Father, in the presence of the
aboue-mentioned Sub-prior. See the Apology unto the 5. doubt.
Take the book of Exorcismes, and enjoin me in the name of God to go the
third time to Marseille, to solicit and labor the conversion of the Magician.
When Verrine issued forth, Gresil who held his place, declared that he would
speak to the Magician in another manner then he did to Magdalene. And as
Magdalene at the first would not believe, because the Devil busied himself in
the cause of God; or rather because Louyse did take upon her to teach and
instruct her, or else some Devil in her (as was reported) so should not this
Magician regard any thing which should be spoken for his reformation.

The same day in the morning the Dominican Father did exorcise, and Verrine
began to speak in this manner,

The will that is guided by the grace of God is able to compass any thing, and
is mightier then the powers of hell it self. How Idle then are they that say,
I cannot be converted? It is unbeseeming to add excuses to your sins, it was
the old dotage of Adam and Eve.

Adam thou had sufficient grace to keep thy self untainted, but thou
did suffer thy self to be abused, as many wretched sinners do every day.

The soul is the mistrisse, and the body as the Chambermaid: yet when the
soul shall say, let us rise betimes to pray and serve God, the body will
forthwith oppugn it, and say, I am yet but young, let old age first approach:
we shall have leisure and time enough before us, to be repentant.

The memory will say, let us call to mind the blessings which are showred upon
us from above: the understanding will thereunto adioyne, let us contemplate the
goodness, wisdom and power of the Creator in these his blessings; and the
will is ready to push us on, to love and fear this good God, because he is the
sourse and first original of all your happiness.

The soul will say, I will heedfully observe thy divine inspirations, and will
bequeath my self unto thy service, I will endure no longer that my servant
should invade the government of my house. To which the chambermaid will reply,
Ha mistrisse! what mean you to do with your self? take compassion of your
tenderness, you are of too delicate a composition, to be martyred with such
austere courses of life: you have time enough to repent you, solace and glut
your self with delights, whiles occasion is offered, and use your goods with
freeness and profuseness, that you may vary and run through all manner of
pastimes, whiles the time will give this liberty unto you. Then Verrine said,
My words (you see) savor of the spirit, and do maintain, that the soul is
and ought to be the mistrisse of the body. It is certain that where the
chambermaid holds the raines of government in her hands, the family will
soon sink and fall to decay: therefore it ill beseemes the body to bear
sway, because it resembles a woman, who wants discretion to govern her
self; and God will not exact a reckoning from the body, but from the soul,
and the soul shall have the precedence of the body both in the reward and in
the punishment; because the soul ought rather to believe him that framed it,
then the servant. A blind man is unfit to reign, and why? because he is blind.
The soul compared to a Commonwealth.
The soul is a commonwealth, and if the conscience be in quiet, all the rest
is the more peaceable: Hence it is that the soul should govern and not the
body, because it is deuoid of all true apprehension of the misery which it may
suffer. Eve spoke but once in excuse of her fault, but the body grumbles and
kickes perpetually.

Your God has an armory garnished with all perfections, and can every day
present new graces, to those that demand them of him, for he keeps them in
his storehouse to bestow them upon his children. In like manner has your God
given the holy Scriptures, the new Testament, and the lives of Saints unto his
Church, yet he rests not here, but does every day offer new presents unto
her.

Embrace your God, who for you hanged naked upon on the Cross; for he is your
father, and the blessed mother of God is your advocate, Angels and Saints are
your brethren, and their pedigree is very noble. God will also ennoble you
after the same manner, and this nobility is more venerable then all the royalty
of descents that may be given to the Kings of the earth.

See the Apology unto the 5. doubt: there is further mention made hereof in the
page

A discourse touching the late King. Mounsieur Boutereau Advocate in the
Counsel, does elegantly (as his manner is) express this Saint, in the life of
Henry the 4 lately deceased, which was composed by him: who did expressly send
into Flanders to father Francis Domptius, that faithfully collected this
history, to be informed of that which is here spoken: which for the better
assurance and attestation of the truth, he sent unto him word for word:
Although there be also other witnesses thereof. The two discourses in Latin
and French did contain this relation here word for word: so that we dared not
to change one title hereof, as we have for borne the like alteration through
the whole frame and body of this history. God turn it all to his Glory.


The King of France lately deceased did worthily esteem of this nobility; he
did humble himself, and call upon his God, demeaning himself in his presence
as a malefactor, and oftentimes heard Mass with much devotion and effusion of
tears. I tell you, many Priests do not so attentively meditate upon the
greatness and excellency of God, as he did; therefore was his death a kind of
martyrdom, because he would rather suffer death for the regard and reverence
which he bare unto his God, then give credit to that which the Magicians had
foreshowne unto him, and in dying he pronounced the word Jesus, and
recommended his soul into the hands of God. He had offended his God, as David
had done before him, and was guilty as he was, and they were both Kings of
mighty Nations: but this had been infected with heresy, as thou Louyse
formerly were: yet O Henry, it is a truth, thou art now in Paradise. Be glad
Marie of Medicis, for thou have the honor to have wedded a King, who is now a
Saint in heaven: and if thou shall imitate his godly end, God will inuest thee
with the same honor: and thou Dauphin now a young tender King, be thou an
imitator of the rare indowments of thy father, who was so solicitous to give
thee virtuous education. And do you all love this Prince, for he well
deserves to beeloued by you, and cursed be him that shall bandy or plot
against this Prince, and will not yield all dutiful obedience unto him,
especially unto a Prince of so sweet and harmless a nature as this is: who
will prove another Jews in France, that for his great virtue was canonized a
Saint. Rejoice little King, for thy father is high in the glory of heaven. I
speak now to you, that are but worms of the earth, examine well your selves;
for if your Prince did so humble and deiect himself, how much more should you
be prostrated in the lowliness of spirit? think and consider seriously of
these things.

He is called Seruus seruorum.
Since also the holy Father does humble himself, who knows no superior in
this world, it is to be admired that you should be negligent or dainty in
humbling of your selves.

The same day Verrine went again to the Magician; but before he departed from
the body of Louyse, he discoursed of the wretched estate of the Magician, and
of the mercy of God toward him, almost in these very words.

A mauellous Apostrophe unto the Magician.
Certainly Jews thou art an hypocrite, and a Pharisie, and under the show of
piety thou have heaped up such a multitude of transgressions and other damnable
sacrileges, that they are not to be numbered. Of a truth Jews, thou do
outstrip all magicians in malice and impiety, and art the chief of all their
sabbaths and assemblies. Of a truth Jews the Devils are of opinion, that hell
it self will not be sufficient to afford punishments for thee proportionable
unto thy villainies. I tell thee Jews, they will protest against God, if thou
be not converted, and will beg of him, that he would make Hell six times more
horrid and terrible then it is, that thou might be tormented there for
evermore. Of a truth Jews, Cain, and Judas shall be adjudged innocents in
comparison of thee: for Christ Jesus had not as then shed his blood for them,
as he has done for thee. I tell thee Jews, thy abominations are of that
height and insufferable presumption: that God himself would bewail thy
wretched estate, if he were capable of tears: and every one would willingly
bring a faggot to burn thee, and would say; Just God make this impious villain
to live a thousand times, and so many times to suffer death: yet is it a
certain truth, Jews, that this good God is ready to die again for thee, and
would, if need were, come now down from heaven, and suffer himself to be
crucified on this He means the Cross set up in S. Baume.
Cross.

Besides the blessed mother of God and all the Saints do of pure pity plead
thy cause, I tell thee truth Jews,: not that they have any need of thee, but
that thou may bring back those souls which thou have led into perdition.
Of a truth Jews God has sent his messengers and guard unto thee, and they
have cast the rod of their power into thy house. Nay, I say more, unreasonable
creatures would beg mercy for thee at Gods hands, if they were endowed with
reason. What I deliver is most true, for nothing is impossible to God, who is
able to make a Devil of an Angel, and a Saint of a sinner.

The same day in the evening father Francis Billet did exorcise, at the
beginning whereof Magdalene moved all the assembly to commiserate her case, by
reason of the deep and extraordinary sighs which she pitifully breathed
forth, whiles the Devils were inwardly torturing her. And Verrine said, you
that hope for a future reward, see you obey your God, and you that are already
Saints with him in heaven, and have now the full fruition of grace and eternal
glory, as the end and vp-shot of your labors, be you also plentiful in your
duty and obedience toward him. But I damned Verrine confesses himself to be
damned.
wretch as I am, expect no recompense of my pains and travel.

The Acts of the 24. of December being Christmas-Eve.
THis day in the morning the Dominican Father did exorcise, and Verrine
discoursed in these words.

Gods pleasure is that all men understand, that the Devils themselves do obey
him, and tremble before him. I tell you A discourse upon ye nativity of Christ
Jesus very obseruable and worth the reading.
God was wearied with your impieties, and therefore leaped down from Heaven to
earth in the womb of his blessed Mother that he might redress them. Blessed
Mother of God, thy Son was impatient to be enclosed up so long in thy flesh,
not for that he deprehended in thee any thing which might distaste him, but
because his desire was to come into the world, and to issue* forth from thy
holy prison with all the speed he might, to give light unto the world that
remained dark, and to make his brightness communicable unto his creatures. Of a
truth Mary thou art the Moon, and thy Son the Sun of this world: the
Saints are also the stars that shine in the same. And therefore was this
Sun sent by the celestial Father not only to illuminate and derive part of
his light to the Moon and Stars, but to give light unto every man that
comes into the world: which illumination could not spread it self over the
earth, unless he had manifested himself to the earth by his nativity. Wonder
not that I have often said, that this was a work of admiration: for Kings have
their Palaces and bedds furnished even to prodigality, but good God, thou
could scarce find a place to be borne; yet might thou have built for
thy self a Paris, or have chosen the city of Rome in her greatness, or have
caused some Royal Palace to be prepared for thee, for thou art wisdom and
goodness it self, and have created heaven and earth of nothing: Nevertheless,
though the guide and providence of all things depend of thee, yet would thou
not make choice of eminent and magnificent places for thy Nativity, nor of
Queens and Princesses that might be assistant unto thy Mother in the time of
her t anell.

Great God, thou art more powerful then all the great ones of the earth, and
yet how il do thy creatures demean themselves toward thee.

Joseph S. Gregory in his 26. Homily makes a comparison between Joseph and S.
Thomas, for both of them were scrupulous and doubtful of the truth for a
season. God permitting such staggerings sometimes in our understandings, to the
end that our assurance may be the stronger.
thou did doubt at first the verity of these things, but were afterward
fully satisfied that the Mother of God was a Virgin before her delivery, at her
delivery, and after her delivery. Thus The doubt that some have of this History.
do many now question this very miracle which God has wrought among you, to
wit, that the Devil should tell the truth, but so is the will of the most
Highest, who by his means would renew the league and amity which is between
his love and his creatures. O blessed Mother of God, thy Son is the true God,
begotten of his Father. Let it enter into thy consideration, how choice and
exquisite a Mansion did so mighty a Father provide for this only and
well-beloved Son, in whom he was so well pleased: and think with thy self,
what presentiments did thy dear Son prepare to offer unto thee as his Mother?
Blessed Spirit, where was the goodly beds with all the rich and pompous
furniture which thou did provide for thy Spouse? Where were thy easy
Litters to carry her? Where were the Caroches? Where were the horses? There was
but an Ox and an Ass there present, for other living creatures are too proud
to be witnesses to such humility. I say that God refused those creatures that
were proud, as is the horse: he rejected the Lions, who figure unto us
arrogance: he cared not for Mules, who are the Hieroglyphics of malice: he
was only contented that the Ox and the Ass should be present, who are beasts
full of simplicity and deuoid of maliciousness. The Ass points out unto us
the body, the Ox the understanding, so as, when the Ass and Ox do draw
together, they do bear the yoke of the Lord. The Angels were there the
Princes, Lords and Courtiers, which is evidently declared unto us by that
melodious song, Gloria in excelsis Deo. Thou Francis, could well have
distinguished the difference between the music of this world, and such
celestial harmony, for thou did so well apprehend the sweetness of that
heavenly Instrument, that upon the touch of one only string thou did
forget nature and those necessary actions of eating and drinking. For it is
most certain, that who so has but a taste of the sweetness of Heaven will
have all the pleasures of the earth in no estimation. Great God! all things are
subjected unto thy will, for do thou but speak the word, and what is there
that dares resist thee? Hence it is that thou made choice of a poor and
contemptible Virgin to be thy Mother, because thou would pattern and square
forth from thy self, a perfect example of humility unto others.

Who would ever have affirmed, that such a one as she should be the Mother of
Almighty God? Who would ever have thought that her Son which she carried in
her arms had been the living God, Creator of Heaven and Earth?

In like manner did thou issue forth from that chaste womb of thy blessed
Mother, without any taint or corruption of thy integrity, as a Sun-beame
passes through the glass without breaking of the same, but rather makes it
more clear and brightsome.

Great God, thy blessed Mother and Joseph, when they were at Bethlem were
forced to use an unknown stable for their dwelling place.

I am much displeased at this thy too great humility, when I observe the
haughtines which swells mankind: I mean not Kings and Princes, but I speak
of baser and more subordinate fellows, who are indeed very shrubbs and flies,
yet if they fail in their expectation of the smallest commodity that may
befall them, they presently fall a murmuring, and think thou do them wrong,
although it be nothing so, and that these cogitations are miscreated in them by
errors and the wrongful mis-apprehension of things.

O Joseph, thou did enquire after some lodging wherein you might retire
your selves, but there was no room in the Inn, and why? because they knew you
not: for if they had had advertisement who you were, they would assuredly have
lodged you in their house.

But God was content to take harborage in a poor beggarly lodging, being
almost vntiled and open every where, and not being locked and made sure for
their safety. You therefore that are poor can have no place for excuse of your
intemperatnesse and impatiency, but you are to be contented if you have but
where-with-all to intertaine your life and soul together. You are not without
a stable and a cratch wherein to lodge the King of glory, the stable is your
soul, and the cratch your heart.

Joseph and Mary accepted of the stable, although Christ for his part could
have been contented to be borne without doors in the open fields: but he
made election of a stable, not because he had need of it, but in regard that
it had need of him, that so it being honored by his presence, might be a
place of more renoume then all the Kings Palaces of the world. If God had
permitted the ordering and determination of this affair to the will of the
Seraphins, or Sages of this world, I tell you they would have run a clean
contrary course unto that which God had ordained. But good God, thou did by
inspiration put it into Joseph's heart to choose the stable, because thou
would publish unto the world, that thou do not despise the soul of any
man, that so, all pretext and shadow of excuse might be taken away from those
that would otherwise object, I am too poor, I am not fit to lodge my God: for
the soul of a poor man is as acceptable unto him as is the soul of a King,
if it stand established in the grace of God. The place where God was borne, is
no more a stable, it is a Palace, and a Church, and many account it a great
happiness to behold it: so thy soul shall no longer remain a stable, but
shall become a Temple and a Palace when God shall take up his lodgeing in the
same. Profane not therefore this stable with mortal sin, but rather
sanctify it, and make it more venerable then this Baume, into which no man may
enter but barefooted.

Bid sin and Satan, when they labor to thrust themselves into that place, to
depart from thence, because it is a stable reserved only for God* to come and
take his repose therein. Then will your God come unto you as a little child,
wrap him up charily in his swathling bands, make much of him, cherish him, and
handle him with gentleness and devotion.

Mary brought him forth into the world, yet did she not dare once to touch him,
much less would you be so hardy to handle him if you were acquainted with him:
but fear without love is fruitles and unprofitable, and if love should not
surmount fear, what man is he that would have the boldness to appear before
him? Thou that art his Church, how ungrateful a Spouse should thou be, if
thou did not make acknowledgement of thy husbands benefits toward thee.
Art thou ignorant what the Lord said to Peter? Feed my sheep, for you that
are Priests could not be true Shepherds, unless you were careful to feed
and give sustentation unto your flock. I do not speak this, as if I would
have you convey them into some fat pasturage of this world, but my meaning is,
that you should communicate the Doctrine of their God unto them.

It is true John the Evangelist, that thou were privy to many mysteries, and
have not buried thy Talent nor fed upon these royal viands alone, but thy
resolution ever was, to make distribution of the same to others: and dare you,
proud and haughty wretches, conceive that you are humble, and yet will not
divide some portion of your knowledge unto your neighbors?

Besides o John, thou have diuulged the visions which thou have seen and thou
John Baptist, thou have not bin silent all this time of aduent, but have said,
let all mountains be humbled, and yet how many mountains are there that
extol themselves?

Michaelis, thou have also enlarged thy voice at Aix in imitation of John
Baptist saying: Make straight the way of the Lord: yet have there bin those,
that were present at thy Sermons, that carpe at thee, and say, that thou have
not a glib and eloquent tongue: Others there are, who have bin merely incited
out of curiosity to harken unto thee: others murmr, that thy gesture which
thou do use in preaching, is not graceful: to some others they object, that
their vain of preaching is too domesticke and familiar, and say, they had
rather hear young Divines preach, because they are more curious and neat in
their composures. These are not worthy to hear the word of God, and deserve to
be shut up in the dungeon of Hell, because they will not harken unto Gods word,
whereby they may be nursed up to salvation.

Touching the labors and pains taken by Preachers.
Then he said, accursed wretches, do you deem that the trauells of Preachers
are nothing? I tell you, they many times forbear to feed when hunger seaseth
upon them, and to repose themselves when sleep does overtake them: they warm
not themselves when they are benumbed with cold, and do travail a fresh when
they are already tired and wearied. Wherein they do like faithful children
who are not allured by the promises of Heaven, nor yet affrighted with the
threats of Hell; But as a dutiful child obeys his father, not out of any
second respect but merely out of affection, so the true children of God
respect not their particular interests, neither do they decline those laborious
courses which they have undertaken, but discharge that duty whereunto God by a
sanctified vocation has called them. And of this number are Priests, Religious
persons, and Preachers.

A sign of predestination.
One sign and infallible argument of eternal predestination, is to hear the
word of God with willingness and alacrity, to make a free confession of
himself, to communicate, and to serve Mary the Mother of God, with all
submissiuenesse and devotion. Gerson and some others hold this Tenent, that he
was sanctified from his mothers womb.
Then he said, it stands with good reason, that he who was to be the Guardian
unto the Virgin should be invested with a prerogative of greater excellency
then all other Saints, and was to have precedence of John Baptist and the
Prophet Jeremy. For he was to be the Spouse unto the Mother of God: and was
to be the maintainer and putatiue Father of her son. Mary was indeed thy
sister, Joseph and thou do always show thy self a dear and trusty
associate unto her. He said further, that Joseph had for a space a touch of
fear and jealousy upon him, not understanding the mystery which lay veiled
over in silence, neither do I wonder at it (said he) for Mary was not of the
humor of the women of these times, who do blab and disclose unto their
husbands all they know: she was of a contrary strain, and did commit all that
was revealed unto her by Gabriell the Archangell who came from that supreme
Counsel of the blessed Trinity, unto the close custody and guard of secrecy
and silence. Al her words that came from her were full of weight and wisdom,
for Mary was not like unto Eve, a multiplyer of words and impertinent
discourses.

At dinner also Verrine spoke of sundry subjects, tending much to edification:
and amongst the rest he discoursed, that the souls in bliss did more thirst
after the salvation of our souls, and the enjoying of our company with them in
Paradise, then Hell and all the Devils together could after their ouer-throw
and perdition; for the power and efficacy of the Saints in Heaven, far
surmounted the impiety and malice of the damned. He further said, When you sit
down to eat, imagine that those blessings which are set before you do point
out unto you three things, Accipe, Read, Time. Accipe, take thy refection;
Read, give thanks unto God; and Time, beware how thou be found ungrateful
for such manifold blessings.

In the mean space some or other had given part of a honny-combe to these two
women, which they had found lying on the ground, and was blown down from a
tree by the wind. And Verrine from this honnycombe took occasion to
discourse, and to say unto Magdalene, Magdalene thou should propose the Be
unto thy imitation, which silently flies up and down and gathers the
extraction of whatsoever juice is most precious among the flowers, by this I
mean virtues.

Magdalene Acquisition of virtues.
go thou likewise to Saint Vrsula, and from every one of thy sisters pluck a
virtue: from one gather Humility, from another Patience, from another an
upright intention, from another Charity, from another Obedience: for thus,
Magdalene does that industrious honny-fly demean himself, and sometimes dies
through his laboriousnes and travel, for he was framed to take pains. You
are to do the like, and should die after the same manner. Then he spoke
further of the blessed Virgin saying, O immense God! Mary did bear thee
according to thy humanity, and thou did support her according to thy
divinity: for of a truth thou were at one time a little Child, and a mighty
God.

God The cooperation of the creature with God.
would have the creature to cooperate with him, as is verified in thee O
Mary:unto whom although God did enlarge his bounty, and did garnish thy mind
with rare and inestimable indowments, yet did thou still appear more
humble, and should not indeed be the Mother of God unless thou had
contributed somewhat of thine own unto his working: it being his good
pleasure that his creatures should ever make contribution of something. You
have nothing to bestow upon him but your will, from which no man is to exempt
himself: give him therefore your body and soul, for that will content him.

The same day Verrine compared himself to a barren and withered tree, and
although (said he) God has spouted such sap into me, that by the power of
it I do bring forth sweet and wholesome fruit, yet am I still a barren and
an accursed tree; and shall never behold the face of God, but shall always
remain a Devil: yet thus much I may say, that there was never any Devil
raised to the like honor as to laud the Name of God, and to accomplish his
pleasure, as I now am: And he further said, that he had promised unto him a
diminution See the answer unto the doubts, the 10. objection.
and abatement of some degrees of his punishment, if he did his duty with
faithfulness.

The Acts of the 25, of December being Christmas day.
A pious discourse upon the feast of Christmas.
ON Christmas day, toward midnight the three Devils which were in Louyse were
commanded to go to Marseille, to labor the conversion of Jews the Magician.
At that time was Magdalene lulled, and as it were, benumbed with a heavy
slumber, which proceeded from the Devil, and endured all the time that Mass
was saying, and the Mass once ended she returned again to her accustomed
temper.

The same day, and hour aforesaid, the Dominican Father did exorcise Louyse
and Magdalene; and then Spirits do go and come with incredible celerity.
Verrine began to speak in this manner. He that will come to the knowledge of
his God, must look for him upon the earth, and make inquiry after the little
child which lies in the stable: as he is your Judge, you must look up to
Heaven, and tremble at his Divinity, but as he is a little child, you must
intertaine him in your affections. According to his Humanity he is but little,
but according to his Divinity he is a great God, and worthy to be praised.
Every one may (if he will) dedicate his service unto this little child,
neither can any excuse himself from the same, for there is no man but has an
Ox and an Ass; the Ass signifies the body, the Ox the soul; for the soul
resembles the Ox, that easily knows his masters cribb. This Ox and this
Ass must vngrudgingly bear the yoke that their master lays on them, that is
to say, all mortifications, afflictions and troubles, and whatsoever else
hapeneth unto a man by the will of God, all which may be said to be the yoke
of the Lord. This yoke is sweet, and this burden light to all those that do
perfectly love him: you must not therefore say, I am not able to bear it, for
God commands nothing that is impossible. It is a truth, that he indeed was
laden with a yoke that was very combersome, and with a burden exceedingly
heavy, for his Cross did ouerlay him with an intolerable pressure; yet did
he not call unto you, behold my Cross, carry you it as I have done: No, he
says not so, because he knows your debilitie will easily sink under the
same; but he says, carry my yoke, because the burden thereof is very
portable, to those that love God and serve him as they ought. God has his
troops of Angels and Saints about him, neither is it to be wondered that
Angels obey him, and that men put his will in execution, but that Devils, who
are already condemned to the Galleys of Hell should yield him their obedience,
here is it that does amaze us with astonishment and admiration. Great God, why
do thou not cause these things to be delivered by some Seraphin, or some
learned Preacher, and not to be divulged by the mouth of this silly woman? Or
why should I be constrained to disclose my name, in an action that is directly
prejudicial unto Hell, and to my great grief, that am forced to pronounce it?
Then he said, many believe not this; but I answer them, they have not seen
God nor Paradise, and yet they believe both the one and the other. Certainly
Thomas thy God (unto whom it is impossible that he should tell a lie) has
said, that he would rise the third day: and what? did he not rise the third
day? Certainly he did, but because thou did not see it, thou would not
believe it, but did say, I will not believe it, except I may touch the
prints of the nails. There is none among you that ever saw him die in person,
yet do you believe that he suffered death for you. Know you not what God said
to Thomas, blessed are they that shall not see these things that thou see,
and shall believe. There is no need of faith in those things which we
manifestly and plainly see: as if I should tell you that this Priest is
standing at the Altar, I imagine you would believe me, neither should this
faith of yours contain any great matter of merit, because you see this
together with me. All the fruitless sciences and speculations of Cicero,
Plato, and the other Heathen Philosophers, to what purpose serve they, but to
travel and consume the spirits of a man by imaginary contemplations? These
waters cannot appease the thirstinesse of the soul, and by consequence are not
powerful to yield due and convenient refreshments: but the smallest delights
of a spirit endued with virtue, does surpass all worldly delectations: and
cursed may they be, who for the fruition of momentary pleasures here, hazard
the loss of that eternal felicity. Your God is a cunning Surgeon, and of the
choicest esteem amongst those that are most famous: he well knows when to
search the wound, and forecasteth how it may be healed: and apprehending the
means, he presently comes furnished with such salues and medicaments, as he
conceiueth most proper for the cure. God is Father unto two daughters, Mercy
and Justice; but mercy obtained the right of eldership in the house of God, and
you know those that are the elder have a kind of prerogative over the other.
Mercy is sister unto Christ Jesus, and she it was that said unto him, that it
was fit that he should suffer al those torturings and contempts, which
afterward he subjected himself unto in his Passion. And although both these
sisters proceeded from the same father and mother, yet is it a certainty, that
the one is in more grace and neerenesse then the other. For God the Father was
more indulgent unto mercy then justice, yet are they sisters, and both
daughters unto him; because he is no less just in exercising his justice, then
he is gracious in declaring his mercy. It is no argument of imperfection in
God, that he powers down the viols of his wrath upon the wicked, and rewards
the good endeauours of the just, it is rather a demonstration of his
omnipotency, to render unto every man according to his works.

Of a truth thy inward parts (O mother of God) are as the shop of an Apothecary
full of fragrant and aromaticall odours, which the holy Ghost has furnished
with all varieties of perfumes and spices; that is to say, with his fruits, and
with the adundance of virtues and graces. I further say that Mary is an
enclosed garden, and the holy Ghost is the gardener, who could well tell how to
manure this blessed plot of earth, sowing therein all kinds of beautiful
flowers, and ingraffing goodly and vernant trees, charged with excellent
flowers and fruits. Thou ( Mary) art also a tree, thy holy cogitations are the
leaves, thy seruent desires are the flowers, and thy little Jesus is the fruit
that was brought forth for your salvation. The nature of this fruit is
admirable, so that it was accounted worthy to be made a Present for the
eternal Father, on the tree of the Cross, for the expiation of your sins.
Let your memory recall into your remembrance these blessings of your God, and
let Joseph who signifies your understanding, bow his knees in a corner of the
stable, and take in so high a mystery with his most attentive contemplation.
Mary as having a greater portion of light, is of more neerenesse, and figureth
unto us the will: the understanding labors to comprehend him, but the will
shunneth such wild conceptions, and demeaneth it self like unto the mother of
Christ Jesus, who dared not at the first to touch him, but at length Mary who
is the will, takes him in her arms, and bears him up and down; for love at
the last overcomes fear. Take therefore the Child Jesus, play with him, and
wrap him charily in his swathling bands, he is but a little one, and therefore
very tractable; endeavor then to be diligent about him, bring with you little
bands to roll him in; and to be brief, provide your selves of whatsoever may
be needful for him. He is a little child, and yet a great God, as it is
written, Unto you a child is borne, and unto you a son is given. He is young
and tender, his hands are swathled up, so that he cannot strike, come
therefore and draw near unto him; but withal consider that he is also a
severe Judge to those that refuse to obey his will. If Abraham should have
reasoned the case with God, when he commanded him to sacrifice his
well-beloued son Isaac, and should have said, how or in what manner is this
possible to be done? I tell you, he had not merited to be the father of the
faithful. Be you humbled therefore before this God, and believe that he is
yonder in the blessed Sacrament, for his body is a glorified body, and takes
up no place.

I say further, that it, is not enough to have this child Jesus wrapped up and
swathed in his clours, but you must warm him with the mild heat of perfect
devotion, which is a permanent and standing seruency of the blessed spirit.

He also spoke many other things; to wit, that those that were most humble are
most high in Paradise, as Christ Jesus and Mary do well exemplify unto us,
that love allayeth and extenuateth labor, for the Devils As a man that being
obstinately set and bent on a thing, will rather be plucked asunder in pieces,
then be beaten off the same.
failing in the point of love, are more grieved and extremely cruciated in
saying an Aue Maria, then in suffering the torments of ten thousand years in
hell. It stands also with reason (said he) that if Princes be forced unto
obedience, the inferior servants do not stand out in defiance. He further
said, that if a man could but see the soul that stands in the state of
grace, and have a full view of the total beauty thereof, he would sink down
and die for joy and admiration, thinking that he beheld the glorious Deity: but
this is a request not fit to be demanded. If thy body complain of thy hard
usage, say unto thy soul, Soul, thou must not groan and sink under this
burden, take notice of thy own worth, how thou art created to sway and have
dominion: be thankful therefore unto him that has framed thee, God is not
like unto men, for a man does many times omit to do a good turn to him that
has deserved it from him, and is ungrateful for those benefits which he has
received: but your God foresaw the ingratitude of men, and heard with his ears
their sins that cried loud for vengeance, yet for all this his resolution was
firm to give his Son unto you. Your Redeemer was borne at midnight, receive
him in to you: your body is the stable, your soul the cratch to entertain
him: and although he be a King, yet does he not disdain so mean a place as
a stable: There is no man therefore that can excuse himself. You are to warm
this little child, and do not say, I have no fire to warm him by, for the
holy Ghost is a burning furnace, and will let you have fire enough if you will
but lend him fuel, that is to say, your sins, whom he will cast and consume
in the neuer-dying flames of his love. After all these and many other
discourses in a great rage and violent agitation, he made this abiuration as
follows.

I Verrine in the name of all Magicians of both sexes, forcerers, and
forceresses do renounce and disclaim all the abiurations which they have made
against the power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, and the goodness
of the holy Ghost: I do further renounce all the abiurations by which they have
disclaimed and forsaken the blessed Virgin, all the Angels, and all the Saints
in Paradise. I also renounce all their abominable impieties through which they
have made choice of hell for their eternal habitation, and have told God that
they did not regard his inspirations and graces, but desired an everlasting
sequestration from him and his Angels. Then in the name and right of all Hell
he cried, I disclaim all donations and schedules which they have made unto
the Devil. Afterward he said, Believe me, God is so powerful, that he is
able to cause the Devils to bring together in this Church the bodies of all
Sorcerers and witches, that they may hear their sentence and judgment
pronounced against them. I speak in general, not in particular. Then Why a
Devil was employed in this work, he being but a contemptible and slavish
caitise.
he added, that therefore God would not use the ministry of an Angel,
because if he should come inuisibly, men would say that he was a Devil: but
if he should appear in the form of a man, they would say, This is but a man,
and would not regard his message. God herein resembles a King, who having many
Princes, subjects and servants waiting on him, takes one of a more ordinary
and cheap condition, to be employed in his embassage: and this he does, not
so much to honor this servant of his, but rather to manifest and magnify his
greatness; for he needs not the countenance or authority of his Ambassador,
because all the power and splendor where withal he goes is derived unto him
from the King. So God would not choose any Prince or great subject of his Court,
but was pleased to serve his turn with the most sordide and base slaves he
could think upon, who are the Devils, not thereby to honor them with the same
of his employments, but to publish the more his greatness and absolute
command, unto to the world. For God compels the devil to be the instrument
of effecting his will, and gives him authority to bring that to pass, which
he shall adiudge fit, to his greater glory, and to the utter confusion of all
hell. Hence it arises, that God is pleased to make experience of a new remedy,
for the conversion of souls, and for the more ample expression of his bounty.
When Verrine bad done, Gresill his companion made the like abiuration, as
aforesaid, and that was also made by the mouth of Louyse whom he possessed.
After him the third Devil, that was in the same body, and was called
Sonneillon, made his renunciation like unto the former; and added, that when
the Magicians and witches were there present, they were mightily dismayed to
see and hear these things: and that this would turn either to their greater
condemnation, or else to their conversion, if they would apply their wills
thereunto.

Then did they all three confirm that which they had auowed by a solemn oath,
and added, that something or other they were to discourse of, at the
celebration of every Mass.

At the morning Mass, the Dominican father began to exorcise, and Verrine
spoke in this manner,

Man is the head and chief of his family; it is a thing unsightly and full of
indecency, that the government should be put into the hands of a woman, for
women are to be subject unto their husbands. It therefore is proper unto the
head to govern, and unto the master to command: the soul is the head, the
body but the woman: the soul is the mistrisse, and the body but the
chambermaid: yet does the body ever grudge and grumble against the soul,
saying, Why do we disquiet our selves with this early rising? we should now
take our repose, and make use of the creatures for our pleasures and
contentments, while we have time to do it; and in the declination and setting
of our age we may have leisure enough to think of our conversion. If the
mistrisse be discreet and well advised, she will keep this chambermaid no
longer, that takes thus upon her to prescribe and give directions, but will
turn her out of her house. Thus ought the soul to demean it self toward
the body, when it complains, and ought to say, Flesh, thou art but the
chambermaid, and not the mistrisse; it is thy duty to serve, not to command. I
tell thee, if thou will eat hereafter with me of those choice and rare
delicacies, whose plenty knows no satiety, thou must not now grudge and
repine at labor. Know thou not, that it will be said unto me, Soul,
render me an account of what thou have done, thou wert' the mistrisse, and
should therefore manage thy government with discretion. A man that chances
upon a sober discreet wife, is in reason to entrust her, and not his servant
with the domesticke and home-businesses of his family: but thou have done
clean contrary. You that are men are just of the same humor and say. We are
tender and of a delicate composition, and must a little cherish and make much
of our selves. Others will say, let us be frolic, I can live without
working; I have many goodly possessions; I am noble in my blood, and am
descended from such a race: I am able to keep thus many horses; maintain thus
many gentlemen in my attendance, and be waited on with thus many Pages and
Lackeies. Another will complain of his old age, and how unable he is to
undergo the burden of penance at those years. For this cause do those
families perish and lie buried in their ruins, where this cursed chambermaid
bears sway. Do not you resemble those that as the Proverb noted of them, are
facete and pleasant abroad, but sullen in their own houses. Then Verrine
speaking to the assembly said, you promise Paradise unto your selves; but
think you not to attain unto it without much sufferance and adversities in
this world; for the servant is not greater then his master: And if God was
first to suffer, and then to have admittance into glory, would you expect to
enter into heaven on horseback, or in your Caroach? I tell you nay; but you
are to come thither on foot, and to be besides laden with store of good
works: otherwise it will be told you, I know you not, you cannot come in, for
I and my children are in bed. Whereby you are not to conceive, that these beds
are beds of down and delicacy, as some lazy persons might apprehend it; No,
these words shall be spoken to the stuborne and obstinate sinner, that hates
to be converted. If you will be saved, you must not abandon your selves up to
wantonness, which does emasculate and weaken all virtuous desires in you. You
all stand charged with the heavy burden of your sins, prostrate your selves
before this little child, which lies in the manger, and come unto him with
the full burden of your transgressions, that he may unload you. If you say
unto me, you have no sin; I must tell you, that it is false, for all men are
sinners. Sin is like unto wood, pile it up and lay it on a heap, that when
the holy Ghost comes, he may set fire to the same, I mean the fire of his
love, which searches still for stubble, and other such combustible matter,
that it may consume and burn it. What man can here excuse himself? has not
every one a staff in his hand, whereon to lean and support himself, which is
the will? whatsoever you have besides, you owe unto God, but this will is your
own, since God has made it over unto you; and therefore take this staff unto
you: For God is the shepherd and you are the sheep of his pasture, whom if
the woolfe come to rauin upon and to devour, he will take the staff of your
will, and will swinge him so soundly, that he shall never return for his
prey, but to his own confusion.

Then did Verrine inuit all the creatures of Heaven, all the Quires of Angels,
all Saints, especially the blessed mother of God, as also the whole Church
triumphant and militant, to praise God for the repentance of sinners,
especially of those that were obstinate, as Magicians and Witches, Sorcerers
and Sorceresses, in these words. Verrine in the name of al Magicians and
Witches, Sorcerers and Sorceresses, and by the appointment of that Sovereign
God says, O ye four elements praise ye the Lord, all creatures reasonable
and unreasonable praise the Lord, whatsoever has grouth or motion laud the
name of God: Earth, Sea, Air and Fire, trees and stars praise ye all the
Lord, etc. I tell you, that if all the creatures of the world could make their
eyes gush forth with tears of blood, they would bewail as much as in them
lies the impieties of Magicians and Witches, so abominable are their courses
before God. All these things were pronounced by him whilst the Priest held the
blessed Sacrament in his hands to give the Communion to Louyse and Magdalene.
After this he renounced those abiurations of Magicians and Witches, Sorcerers
and Sorceresses, as he had formerly done at midnight Mass. Gresill and
Sonneillon did also the same three several times, once when the Creed was said
in the Mass, another time at the elevation, and the third time at the
Communion. In like manner these three Devils confirmed by oath all that was
above mentioned, in the same manner as at the midnight before. The same day the
Dominican Father wrote a letter to father Michaelis in answer unto one of his,
written the 13. of this month, wherein he entreats him to come to S. Baume.

The same day Verrine said unto the Dominican Father, command me in the Name
of God, and by the authority of the Church triumphant and militant to go
forth about an employment which God has imposed upon me: then he called
father Romillon and father Andrew Godan of the Order of S. Dominick to be
witnesses hereunto and then departed.

Moreover, there happened a very memorable accident on the same day, for
Beelzebub began to speak in this strange manner as follows. Verrine not long
ago cried out that all Hell was constrained by God to renounce whatsoever the
Magicians and Witches had proiected; and I Beelzebub constrained to make an
abjuration.
Beelzebub chief of the Devils that are in the body of Magdalene, am compelled
by the Almighty to make the like abiuration* in effect, contrary to my
resolution, and the greatness of my pride. Before the tribunal of God all
things are so exactly waighed in all the circumstances that the Devils have
nothing to reply against it.
Yes, yes, yes, in despite of my self, and against my customary pride and
rebellion in the name of all my companions, I renounce. I renounce, I renounce,
I say, whatsoever I have suggested unto Magdalene, as well for the time past as
for thetime to come, both against her God and conscience: Yes, yes, yes, I
revoke it all, I condemn and disclaim it now at this very instant.

The same day at high Mass were the two women that were possessed exorcised by
the Dominican father, and Verrine began to speak in this manner. Thou God of
power, cause now an Angel to descend from Heaven, upon this Altar that these
men may believe. what meanest thou to do? Will thou use the ministry of a
Devil in a business of this importance? Thou have here Doctors able and ready
to say the same that I say, men will ever be saying that Louyse is not
possessed, cursed be her folly, I could endure Hell better then her.

Then The temptation usual against Nobility.
the said Verrine began to scoff at Beelzebub and his Princes in this manner,
What Beelzebub, art thou the master of Pride, and do thou now slinke away in
this sort? Thou art he that do suggest unto the Nobility: What sir? will you
yield to him, you are noble and of an ancient stock, why will you abase your
self before a fellow of such cheapenesse? You must not do it, it does detract
from your nobility. Miserable Beelzebub, was it not thou that would have
thrown God from his seat of Majesty? How art thou now abased, having nothing
to reply, and being swallowed up in shame and confusion. And thou Leuiathan the
Arch-Doctor of The temptation usual against Heretics.
Heretics, art thou not he that bestowest upon them the appearance and show of
light? But thy light is nothing else but darkness, for no man can give that
which he has not. Thou bring an itch upon the curious, to dispute of this
place, and of that place of Scripture, because it is not interpreted as it
ought to be; and seeing them to be proud beyond measure, thou did by this
course hinder them from humbling themselves. I tell thee that the proud and
curious shall not enter into Paradise unless they become humble and lay aside
their curiosity. What answerest thou unto this, thou art a jolly doctor, and
very pregnant in replies; but I see thou have little to say for thy self and
give sufficient proof of thy insufficiency. There be here very able men
that would gladly hear thee argue, but it appears that thou art confounded
as much as thy companion.

And Temptations to single combats.
thou Balberith that do secreetly whisper in the ears of Gentlemen, and
do tell them, that what they love in their heart they should oftentimes use
in their mouth: and by this means thou make them to deny and foresweare God
from the head to the soale of the foot. Thou do also suggest unto them;
what sir? do you not mean to defend your reputation? Can you endure such an
affront? Remember such and such speeches, and how he thus and thus belyed you:
he is a base fellow, and in an vnder-ranke unto you; I tell you you must
revenge yourselfe upon him, and call him into single combat. Thus though they
be forbidden by God, excommunicated by the Church, and prohibited by the Kings
Edicts, yet are they transported beyond their temper and reason, and do desire
nothing but to come to blows: neither lies it in the power of man to give
prevention unto these mischances.

Temptations against youth.
Then Verrine iested at Asmodee, and said, and thou (accursed fiend) do
persuade young folk that it is no sin to offend God, and so do spread a
veil over their eyes, that they cannot have the light to be their guide, but
are forced to stumble in the dark.

And thou Astaroth, master of the slothful, be thou their speaker, and defend
thy cause, for thou art a powerful Prince, and do excuse no man: Kings and
Clergy men are allured by thy blandishments, and thou have access euery-where,
even when the gates and windows of men's hearts are locked up.

And Temptations to hardness of heart.
thou Carreau art he that maintainest that Lazarus could not be raised up to
life, by Lazarus meaning the obstinate sinner: but I do hold it as a truth,
that he may be raised again, not of himself, but by the assistance of the
Church and of God, who said, Lazare veniforas, and so commanded the stone to be
taken away. He it is, that is able without pain unto him, to do whatsoever
seems pleasing in his sight.

I affirm that God is able to take away the stone from the heart of an
vnrepenting sinner: but he must confess himself and receive absolution from
the Priest, according unto that authority which God has given unto his Church:
and in this manner is the dead raised up to life.

Then he said, he that wants charity is not truly noble, for true nobility
comes from above.

All the Citizens of heaven did rejoice at the birth of the Son of God; A
brief discourse touching the feast of Christmas.
neither is there any difference there put between the soul of a King and of
a beggar, if it stand in the state of grace.

Unto you a child is borne, and to you a son is given: he is both a King and a
Judge, yet but little in his nativity, that it might be published unto all, how
tractable he is and how easy to be appeased, even with an apple. The apple
signifies the soul with the three powers thereof; the Memory points out
unto us the Father: the Understanding, the Son: and the Will, the holy Ghost
D^dicate and bequeath your thoughts, your desires, and your works, to this
Child, whereby you shall also offer up unto him, the odor, sweetness and
bewty of this apple: this is the present that will appease and still him; and
for this cause was he made contemptible that you might be bold to tender the
same unto him. He is coeternal with his Father, which Marie, and none but she
did at the first understand, yet had he not where to lay his head; give
therefore now unto him the stone of your heart, that he may make a pillow of
the same whereupon to repose himself. If the deceased King of glorious memory
should have given his Son the Dauphin unto you, it is to be conceived, that
you would have received him with great joy and applause: the celestial Father
has given unto you the Dauphin of heaven, equal to himself in Majesty; the
Kings of the East came from a far to seek after him and to worship him, and
does it not become you to adore him in like manner? The time is at hand, that
God will fill the void seats of heaven; that great day of the Lord
approaches, wherein he will place you in Paradise for evermore.

Then Verrine said, I Verrine do renounce, etc. as is before mentioned at
midnight Mass. After that, he invited again all creatures to praise God, for
his vnexpresseable bounty and infinite mercy, as is before written. When he
Diverse judgments touching this history see the page 27. 28.
had finished his abiurations, Gresill followed with the like, and last of all
Sonneillon did the same: who further added, Almighty God mai'st thou be pleased
to create a thousand hells anew for all those that will not be converted, give
unto them a thousand lives, and as many as there be stars in the firmament
(for all this is very possible unto thee, that they may suffer as many several
deaths, as they had several lives bestowed upon them.

The same day in the evening the two possessed women were exorcised by Father
Francis Billet Priest of the Doctrine, and Verrine began to discourse thus. The
heat of hell is not more unsupportable unto me, then are thy Exorcismes, and
would God, I had been dease when I was first exorcised. Then he said,
Beelzebub, thou tormentest Magdalene, yet let it not trouble thee Magdalene, for
it is now our custom to do thus, because we were guided neither by reason
nor counsel. The Exorcist said unto him, Recede maledicte, who answered him in
latin, Non est tempus. And when the Exorcist said, Angeli decantanerunt,
Gloria, Verrine spoke these words, the Devils themselves did say, Gloria in
excelsis Deo, for that it was no wonder that the Angels did sing, Gloria in
excelsis Deo, but the miracle was, to hear this Gloria chanted forth by the
Devils: and if it were put to their choice, they would rather make election to
suffer all the torments of hell then once to pronounce this Gloria. He Diverse
judgments touching this History. see the p. 15.
farther said, some men do cavil and say, that the Devils cannot deliver a
truth, miserable and stupid wretches, is not God powerful to make Angels and
men and devils to obey him? Others say, that these are mere iuglings and
fables: Others, that they are stage plays and inventions: Others murmur,
because they see no sign, and because those that are possessed do not speak
all kind of languages: Others believe that Louyse might carry away these
discourses which she had uttered from the many sermons which she had heard.
It is not to be wondered that men believe it not, for it is a thing full of
nouelty and rareness. And thou He did examine this, two several times, first
at S. Baume in ye month of January then next ensuing, where he looked into
the verification of all these discourses, and took knowledge of the witnesses
that had been present at the acts. In the second place he did read with great
aduisednes and attention this whole co^posure written in the Latin and French
copies. There is a likelihoode also that the whole body of this history will be
re-examined at Rome by the authority of the supreme Inquisition.
Michaelis art to examine all this, and then the censure of the Church must
pass upon it. But as he was esteemed healthie who was indeed infirm before
God, as appeared by the Pharisie, so he esteemed himself infirm before God,
who was indeed sound and healthy, witness the Publican.

O blessed mother of God, thou did not imitate Eve, nor questioned the Angel
with After the Angel had once said, Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te, etc.
she never replide against it with the quomod^ of infidelity.
quare and quomodo, but thou did forth with say Ecce ancilla Domini. The
Serpent suggested unto Eve, God has given you to eat of all the fruit of
these trees that are in Paradise: whereunto Eve answered, he has commanded us,
not to eat of this fruit, and added much idle language besides, so that at
the last she gave credence unto the serpent, whereupon Adam fell also by the
persuasions of Eve; but he should have said, that it was not lawful for her to
take the apple, that he had no commandment from God to do it, nay that he was
expressly forbidden. Wretched sinner if thy body say unto thee take and eat
there is no offense in it, thy soul as Mistrisse of the body must give check
unto it, and say, I will not venture upon it, for God himself has prohibited
it: And if thou chance to be so seduced, beware how thou follow the dangerous
tract wherein Adam walked, but humble thy self without asking quare and
quomodo, but rather confess thy self to be unworthy to suffer even the pains
of hell for thy sins. Then he said, there are many that say unto the Priest,
Father reveal and remember unto me my sins, but the Priest must in reason
answer them, it is your part to examine your selves, and to disclose unto me
what your transgressions are, for I am not God or a Prophet, that I should be
able to know the secrets of your consciences; your cause is here to be heard
and pleaded, the client ought to furnish his Advocate with instructions. I tell
you in this case the Priest is to demand his absolution from him, because he is
confessed and not to penitent person: and men of this humor are worse then
unreasonable beasts. The Confessor is sharply to reprehend such kind of men,
but his reproves must be interlaced with discretion, and must say unto them
that they wittingly, and willingly have offended, and therefore they are to
pray unto God, for his illumination, who is not dainty to grant the same to
those, that beg it of him in humility: we must search for this light if we
will find it; and knock at Gods mercie-gate that we may attain unto it. For
it is the sister of that eternal Word, which does easily open this gate unto
you: nay I say farther that this word is mercy it self, and yet it is
environed with awful Justice. Justice is the sister of mercy, and the
individual companion of Princes; take away the punishments of offenders and
behold all order in confusion, and all civil Policy trampled upon and
contemned.

An Apostrophe unto Magdalene.
After this he spoke to Magdalene, and said, Magdalene keep this child with
all the chariness that may be, wrap him up in the swathling bands of the
mortification of the five fenses, for he is ever presenting his five wounds
to God the Father in thy behalf, which he received upon the cross for thy
salvation. These are those precious pearls whose estimate is so beyound all
value, that God the Father casting but his eyes aside upon them can deny no
suite which he propounds unto him. Jesus is a goodly flower in the garden of
Mary, and always stands in the sight and presence of his Father. Marcella,
it was thou that did cry, blessed is the womb that did bear thee, but the
divine word answered, rather blessed are they which hear the word of God and
diligently keep the same.

Then he said, O ye Kings of the East, you have worshipped this child; what
pomp found you with Joseph and Mary his Mother, surely nothing but an Ass and
an Ox in a stable. Who revealed unto you that the King of glory was there? you
did certainly behold the brightness and radia^^re of his face as the witness
of his Divinity, with this he struck the soldiers to the ground who came to
apprehend him, and to bind him with cords. And thou good These, who told
thee, that he that was crucified upon the cross with thee, was a King? I am
sure thou did not behold any Crowns, Scepters and Triumphs, or any such
customarie pompes and preparations: yet did thou not desist from crying
Memento mei cum veneris in regnum tuum. For although he had a crown of
thorns platted upon his head, yet instead thereof he has acquired for you a
crown of immortality, and in stead of his nakedness, he has clothed you with
the robes of glory. If a King should say unto a Gallie-slaue, I will take thee
for my adopted son, were not he senseless and dishearted, if he should
reply unto the King; Sir, I am tied up here with a chain and therefore I
will not be called your son. You are all guilty of high treason, and your
estate baser and more full of slavery then those that row in Galleys, for
they at the least can beholde^ the Heaven and Earth, but you that are sinners
are overtaken, and encompassed with darkness. God says unto you I will make
you Kings, I will enroll you in the catalogue of my children, I will set you at
mine own table, and will enrich you with all my treasures, only cleanse your
selves, and purge your souls from those filthy and ill favoring ordours
wherewithal it is is defiled. O Christians, be not solicitous how to nourish
your bodies, but be you careful for the food of your souls, receive the
Communion often, for Christ Jesus is many times consecrated, and many times
sacrificed. Before you do communicate, see that you diligently examine your
selves, for you cannot too worthily approach unto this table, for although you
should live a 100000. years, yet ought you ever to prepare your selves: Let
your humility keep wing with Gods mercy, for so you shall draw unto you the
humanity and divinity of your God. O blessed mother of God you have attracted
the God of Gods from heaven to be conversant upon the earth: he made this great
leap (as a Giant) because you became the servant of servants, whose humility
when he had once perfectly vewed, he presently made choice of you for his
Mother.

The holy Ghost is the God of love, of devotion, of good desires and of
compunction: knock at his gate, and he will give you whatsoever you shall
demand of him, as he did enlarge his bounty to Magdalene, Peter, David, and the
good thief. Besides, all these Saints are most ready to fly to your aid, and
do desire your salvation an hundredth thousand times more then your selves.

God has made three things, unto whose greatness no other work of his can
aspire unto: that is, Heaven, the humanity of his Son, and his Mother. Joseph
notes unto us the understanding, and Mary the will: Say therefore unto Mary,
teach me to obey and love my brother: Say unto Joseph, (who is Mary's
guardian) make me to apprehend and to be sensible of my misery: and then will
this child stream down upon you the dew of his grace, and fear; of his
love, and obedience. Your Redemer obeyed his Mother and Joseph, yea he was
content to stoop unto the commands of the ministers of Satan, not that he
would thereby add any reputation unto him or his kingdom, but because he
would be a president unto the proud of his great humility. The Devil does
here discourse of wholesome and useful observations, do you cull out the
things that are good (as if a wicked Priest should propose these exhortations
unto you) and if you will not, I tell you, you shall not be by me Observe that
he tyeth no man to believe him. See the answer unto the 2. objection after the
Epistle to the reader.
constrained thereunto. After all this he took his oathe, and did call the
wrath of God upon himself, if he had not sworn sincerely and in truth: he
also added Sancta Maria ora pro eis, Sancte Joseph, Sancta Magdalena, Sancte
Dominice, Sancte Stephane, the arch-enemy unto Sonneillon, orate pro eis.
Cursed be they who say, that the blessed Saints do not make intercessions for
you

The Acts of the 26. of December being the Feast of Saint Steven.
THis day in the morning the Dominican Father did exorcise and at the beginning
of the Exorcismes, Sonneillon who was in the body of Louyse began to discourse
in this manner.

I am constrained to speak of Stephen, and concerning superstition. Come
hither Asmodee. Thou art that accursed one which teach Magicians to use
ligaments, portractures and resemblances of wax, brass and stone, together
with other abominations of the like nature, to the end that they may fire men
and set an edge upon all fleshly prouokements unto lust. Then do thou cause
the Priest who is the Magician, to baptize these statues, wherein he does
commit a most grievous sin, so that he that should baptize a Dove, an Eagle,
or any other ^oule of the air, should come far short of the abomination of
the same: for the birds do after a sort bless God by their melody and voices;
although they have not a capacity of being baptized, because they are beasts
and are without understanding: yet do I affirm, that those who should do
this, should be less culpable and sinful, then those that baptize these
idols which are the statues of Devils. O execrable Priest how careless art
thou of thy dignity and calling? I speak of wicked Priests not of those that
are good, in general not in particular, and I do advertise you, that they are
Magicians, and by a consequent, slaves unto sin and Satan.

The slights and subtleties of Asmode^.
There are many sorts of Magic, of Magicians and Witches, Sorcerers and
Sorceresses. Ha wicked Asmodee, thou blindest and seducest the great ones of
the world, by telling them: you are mighty and powerful, who will call you to
an account if you offend God? You may do whatsoever your heart desires, none
dare reprove you. The law is not made to cage in or control such as you, you
are he that made the law: who then dares to wagge his tongue or to attempt any
thing against you? There are also some great personages that give ear unto
Magicians, and are scholars of this Diabolical Art, that by the assistance
thereof they may aspire unto places of greater eminency.

Asmodee thou art ever whispering in their ears, and saying, Sir you are a
Prince, sublime your brave conceptions, and lift them up to a kingdom, then
you are to think of an Empire, and then you must conquer the whole world,
like another Alexander. By these means their reprose is disseasoned with these
wild and whirling apprehensions: and they are many times so forgetful of man,
which they continually bear about them, that they give commandment to be
adored as Gods: as appears by him, who waded into the Sea, to see if any
thing were mightier, and more powerful then himself. The Devil does cherish
all ambition, and whatsoever sauoureth of goodness he has in detestation: he
does ever solicit all sorts of men of what quality or condition soever they
be. But would to God he only insinuated himself unto the houses of great
personages, he is euery-where, and tempts all persons without choice or
distinction of sexes. This This is a description of pride and selfeloue, which
esteems that the hayres and nails, nay the very excrements themselves are as
gold or precious stones.
appears in Nabuchodonosor, who was tempted with a desire, that whatsoever
he did eat, might be converted either into gold, or into the semblance and
show of gold; who for his pride was afterward by Gods permission transformed
into a beast, and so at last became humble: for when he remembered what he was
and grew penitent for his excessiveness of pride, he afterward was thought
worthy to be saved, Touching the point of Salomons salvation their appears no
certainty of any thing touching ye same in the Scripture. There are arguments
of both sides, and the Doctors of the Church do differ in their opinions upon
this particular. It is ^uident that Nabuchodonosor repented. See the Apology
unto the 4. doubt, after the Epistle to the reader.
Solomon, I can tell you, was the worlds wisdom, yet did the Devils intrappe
and take him by Magicians and women, so that he is now burning in the flames of
hell because he never was bruised and humbled with such repentance as deserved
acceptance from God. David indeed offended his God, but he did seriously
repent, dewing and watering his couch with tears, and eating his bread mingled
with ashes, that he might declare unto all, how much his heart was humbled and
made tender.

He further said to Asmodee, Accursed spirit, thou art also he, that do
veil and cast a mist over the eyes of such souls as are seduced by thee, and
then thou lockest up their ears, that Gods word may not pierce and penetrate
even to the pith and inmost part of the heart: that so being both deaf and
blind, they may lose all hope of their share in the kingdom of God. I mean
not the deafness and blindness of the body, but a spiritual deafness and
blindness, for it is not doubted but those that are corporally blind may
enter into the kingdom of heaven, neither is the light of this world
necessary thereunto: else what should become of the poor men that are blind?
there should not one of them be saved; therefore I say that God speaks not of
the light which we see and comprehend, but of the light of faith. Then he The
slights and tentations of Baalberith.
spoke to Baalberith and said, Impious and accused Baalberith, thou art he that
do continually make Gods name to be blasphemed. Thou also suggestest. What?
are not you a great counselor? do not you moderate the scales of Justice? are
not you a great familiar of the Kings? whereof should you stand in fear: Upon
these suggestions do thou lay the first foundations of single combats and
Magic. But thou thy self being blind and full of villainy, do make those
to fall, that follows the paths wherein thou do trace. Thou do also say,
Your rank and quality will bear thus many Lackeys, thus many Horses, thus
many Pages: for from these external apparances will men judge of your true
Nobility: but I tell thee, Touching true nobility.
true Nobility is ever accompanied with liberality, and as it is studious to
act those deeds that savor of charity and bounty; so does it hate all
viciousness and prodigality. Thou will never stand forth to answer for thy
Disciples, when God shall demand of them an account of their works. Resist the
Devil and he will fly from you: there are too too many that suffer themselves
to be deceived: for some will chase at the poor that beg alms of them, and
tell them they are too importunate; yea they will not stick many times not
only to withdraw their alms, but to bestow many stripes and blows upon them:
others say unto the Devils, give us a dinner in this world, and we will bestow
a supper upon you in the world to come: others there are that will lay an
imputation upon a whole company, for the default of some one that does not
orderly demean himself. Behold Baalberith, cursed are all thy doctrines and
instructions. He Against those that go to witches.
further said, There are those who when their children are bewitched, will use
unlawful means to know who the witch is that did it, and in stead of having
recourse unto God that he may by his good blessing cure the same, they go
unto a witch, and entreat him to come and heal their children: wretches as
you are, your misfortune proceeds from the Devil, and you with your children
were innocent, but are now partakers of the evil. Ought you not to go to God,
who knows the reason why he has permitted this evil, and not to the Devil
or the sorcerer, to understand from them the remedy? you ought not to have
familiarity with him, but to give the Church notice of the same, and seek
redress from them, who have the care and charge of souls: But clean contrary
unto this, you eat and drink with sorcerers, and by a necessary inference
with the Devil, unto whom they have abandoned themselves bodies and souls,
surrendering up their part of Paradise, and all the pretensions they may have
for heaven. The outrageous madness of Magicians.
Nay I say further, they are of that impious and execrable disposition, that if
it lay in their power, they would betray God into the hands of Devils. The The
witches that were converted did assure unto us that this was true, so that they
are but plagues and the authors of mischief in the house where they abide.
Devils do also cause them to renounce that natural affection which they
should carry toward their fathers and mothers, and to all those unto whom they
are tied unto by propinquity of blood: they forbid them to pray for them, and
which is more to be abominated, they do many times command them to murder
them: for it is the custom of Devils, to mischieue those whom they should
love, and to return evil for good; as it is the property of God to render
good for evil. I say further, that the children of darkness, do serve the
devil with more diligence then the children of light do their God; It is a
toil to serve the Devil, but it is a repose and contentment to serve God.
yet is there a great difference between the service of God, and the service
of the Devil. for your service unto God is associated with a settled and
in-disturbed repose, but the bondage of the Devil is full of great vexations:
for he commands them day and night, winter and summer, in sickness and in
health, and in what state soever they be, they must make their appearance, and
if they fail but the least scruple or minute of time, I tell you they are well
beaten for their slacknesse, so that a gally-slaue is not so manicled and
bechained, nor a lackey so buffetted and beaten, as they are chained and
beaten, that make but the least omission in the Devils service: and which is
worse, he gives least recompense unto those that serve him most, for he has
nothing indeed to bestow upon them. Do you serve him with the gr^atest
faithfulness that may be, yet all the reward you shall gain thereby, is
nothing but the horrid pains of hell; witness those that have died without
confessing themselves, and such as have departed the world in the like sort: I
speak in general not in particular. The children of God when they die, do
recommend their souls unto God, saying, In manus tuas, etc. But the last words
that the children of Satan breath forth are, The final obstinacy and hardness
of heart of witches, together with their blindness of understanding.
The Devil take me body and soul. This is the recompense which they demand of
him, whom they have so industriously served, and this is it which he has
promised to bestow upon them. And certainly they do well deserve hell.

Then he said to Asmodee. What say thou? Is it not all true which I have
here delivered? Asmodee answered, that it was so. Sonneillon replied, swear (
Asmodee) that it is true, and I will take my oath with thee. Asmodee said, I
will not swear with thee. The Dialogue between Sonneillon and Asmodee.
Sonneillon answered, swear thou then by Lucifer, and I will take mine oath on
the behalf of God. To this Asmodee replied, I tell thee I will not swear, yet
I confess and do assure every body that what thou have said is consonant to
the truth. Then said Sonneillon, do you not perceive the malice of this
accursed fiend. He uses these tergiuersations and delays, to stagger your
beleese; and it is Gods pleasure that you should merit more in that God (to try
you) will not comn and him to swear, then if he had actually commanded him to
take his oath; for then he must of necessity obey. But let it suffice, that I
do swear by the living God, that whatsoever I have above spoken is most true,
and therefore let this satisfy you; which being spoken he accordingly took
his oath. This oath contains four remarkable points and observations.
He further said, I will also swear that the Church will approve of all this,
and that never Devil spoke in the presence of his Princes as I have done:
hence it is that I shall See the Apology unto the doubts, the 10. object, aftet
the Epistle to the Reader.
receive an abatement and mitigation of my torments. Besides, God would never
endure that this should be acted if it were counterfaited, because it would set
open a vast gap, to let in the perdition of many souls.

He further said, consider here the goodness of your God, whose manner is to
set first before you those things that are worst: for you know that
hither-vnto, the viands which were served in unto you, have not been very
pleasing, because we did nothing but ingeminate your offenses. We must
therefore now serve in unto you a banquet of confections. Then A discourse
touching S. Stephen.
he said, God has commanded me, who am a great enemy unto Stephen, to praise
those that in imitation of Stephen do forgive their enemies; he pardoned those
that maliced him after the example of his great master Christ Jesus, saying,
Pater ignosce eis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. But O great God, why did
thou not first recommend thy mother to John, and John unto thy mother? the
reason was, not because thou would not do it, but because thou would
give an example unto all the world, of remitting and pardoning the injuries
done by their enemies.

The riches of this world are but trash and of-scowring in comparison of
Paradise. You will here object: What, is there silthinesse in Paradise? I say
unto you, that there is not, for no unclean or imperfect thing can enter into
heaven, but I call riches trash, because the Elect make no account of them, and
the blessed Saints do not esteem of silver, gold, precious stones, and all
the riches of the world.

The servant is not greater then his master: the Master entered not into heaven
on horseback, but naked, and hanging upon the tree of the Cross. Why
therefore should you tremble at afflictions, troubles, persecutions, or
whatsoever may deiect and make you humble? it is for your good and his glory
that these crosses make you thus to double under the weight of them, for by
this means will he place your souls and bodies in Paradise.

O wondrous accident! the world is conquered with the desires of it, Satan is
an enemy to Satan, and his kingdom is rent and divided within it self, not by
his consent, but by an irresistable compulsion. After all this discourse he
said unto God, Sonneillon his constraint.
Ho! cause an Angel to speak, or a man to deliver these things, and let me
befreed from this unpleasing office. There are indeed many Preachers, but few
harken unto them, and if any go to hear them, they go to surprise and entrap
them in their sermons, and to quote their gestures and actions. O blindness!
that men should be more attentive to the voice of the Devil, then to the word
of God uttered by a Preacher. Imitate Stephen and pray for your enemies, for by
this prayer did he merit to behold the Son of God, and did win Saul to the
bosom of the Church, who before was a persecutor of the same, and did keep
the garments of those that stoned him: And Saul thou know, that his charity
did plead for thee at the bar of the Almighty. Stephen whiles he was yet
young was one of the first Deacons and Treasurers of the Church, a lover of the
poor as if they were hi^ brethren and a great familiar of God: it was
therefore needful that he should suffer, as did you Margaret, Vrsula, and the
1100. Virgins, and also you Catherine, Barbara, and Catherine of Sienna: that
so by your examples others might be lessened to be filled with sufferance and
patient bearing of whatsoever tribulations should be laid upon them. And thou
Stephen if thou had not been such a notable instrument of Gods glory, as
thou wert', the Apostles would never have thus esteemed and honored thee. Say
but ( Father) every day for thine enemies, and it is sufficient, for it is a
powerful prayer and full of efficacy. The abridgement of all perfection is, to
pray for your enemies, and it is a The powerfulness of prayer for our enemies.
well-pleasing sacrifice unto God, for he loves the souls of his enemies a
hundredth times more, then he does the bodies of his friends: and one Aue said
for your enemies is of more weight and importance, then an hundred (Pater) for
your friends. It is an easy matter to pray for your friends, but it is harsh
and unpleasing to pray for your enemies and such as go about to kill you: this
is a morsel not easily swallowed, yet does it exceedingly conduce unto
salvation, and is the path which chalketh out unto you the way of life; if it
be done in uprightness of intention, in purity of conscience, and in charity,
for the glory of God and salvation of souls. I tell you such prayers are no
less effectual then the prayers of many Saints; yea then ecstasies and
rauishing in spirit, and other such admirable mysteries. He that prays for
another, has said enough for himself. Then he said unto Beelzebub, thou art
startled at that which I have spoken, I plainly see that it does much disquiet
thee: what answerest thou unto these things? And thou Asmodee, make thy part
good if thou have what to reply: but I see you are tongue-tied and cannot
answer, therefore I will prosecute these things further. Then he swore that al
which he had spoken should by public approbation be allowed: and speaking to
himself, he said: O The tentations of Sonneillon.
Sonneillon, thou art he which temptest men with envy, and do withdraw men
from praying for their enemies: for this cause Gods pleasure is thou should
speak against thy self and against all hell, he has taken thy own weapons
and forced thee to beat thy self with them. Then he was asked touching three
Articles, first of the state of Nabuchadonosor, next of the state of Solomon,
and then whether he had said that S. Stephen was broiled upon a gridiron, for
thus did some understand him. He directly made answer, that Nabuchadonosor was
saved, and Solomon damned, that this opinion was a It is a problem in the
Church.
problem in the Church, and that his damnation was revealed to many Saints,
but in modesty they would not attempt to make it known: that now God will have
his Church to be certified of the truth thereof, for many read his fault, but
no man ever saw any mention of his repentance: that God would clear up and
dispell all the doubts that shadow his Church, before the consummation of the
world: for he will endow his Church with some new donations, and will enrich
his faithful Spouse with some fresh remembrances of his affection. And this
stands with reason; for if a King to grace his Queen will make expression of
the affection which he bears toward her by new gifts and presentiments, how
much more shall God being more great and good then the Kings of the earth have
both ability and will to enrich his Church with new immunities and endowments.
John the Evangelist, thou art an Eagle and have soared higher upon the wings of
divine wisdom then any other: and although many mysteries have been revealed
unto thee, yet did thou not understand all of them, for the Armory of God
is inscrutable and full of hidden perfections, and he may from thence, when it
seems good unto him, bring forth many strange novelties. I affirm further,
that neither the highest Seraphin, nor the blessed mother of God her self do
comprehend all the secrets of her Son, or of his humanity. For God is above
all, and after him is Mary, who although she be a woman, yet is she the second
after God, and is nevertheless the mother of God.

After dinner, Sonneillon uttered many things tending to edification, that
Virtue was ascended up to heaven, and in her ascent had let her The mantle of
impiety.
mantle fall, which, Impiety that remained upon the earth, took up and clothed
it self therewithal: under which couerture and mask it comes abroad to
deceive men, who otherwise would decline the rock of such seducements. He
further said that the damned should be punished in all the faculties of their
soul, in their memory, understanding, and will, together with their five
senses, and all this by the vision of Devils. At the evening Verrine said, that
the time would come that his He repeated this over diverse times, time will
make the truth thereof to appear.
name should be rased out, and that many men should see the same. The same
evening Louyse was not exorcised, but Verrine made a terrible inuectiue against
Magdalene, because she grew cool in the acknowledgement of Gods mercy toward
her, and had not yet humbled her self with a full and perfect repentance. Then
he admonished every one in particular, how they should discreetly carry
themselves in that great business of their salvation.

The Acts of the 27. of December being the feast of S. John.
THis day in the morning, the Dominican Father exorcised, and Verrine after his
acustomed manner began to speak thus.

Harken and be attentive, the The revelation hereof (if it be true) was
reserved for the feast of S. John the Evangelist.
hour of that great day of Judgment is at hand, for Antichrist is borne and
brought forth some months past by a Jewish woman. These are Predictions whose
truth or falsehood time will bring to light, in the mean time we must hold us to
that which the Church teaches and practices.
God will raze out Magic and al Magicians, and witches shall return home unto
him: the Sovereign high Priest shall give them plenary absolution, and all
their accomplices shall be laid open unto the world. These are not fables or
fancies, or words of jest and derision: I foretell you these things by the
appointment of the holy Ghost, all which is true, I bear but the name thereof,
and the Church shall hereafter admit it as a Revelation. God would prevent the
Devil, and therefore he does cause this annunciation to be made, that the day
of After the signs of the last judgment, there shall come a shortime wherein
all things shall be hushed and quiet, in which men shall lull themselves in
security and sleep as in the time of No^h. Luke 17.
Judgment is at hand, and that See the Apology unto the 3 doubt after the
epistle to the reader.
Antichrist is borne. Seven years before the great day of the Lord, the earth
shall bring forth no fruit, the women shall not conceive, and many signs and
wonders shall be seen as is in part already made manifest. For the son
rebelleth against his father, the daughter against her mother, as you see by
experience every day, and that now there are some of all Nations under Heaven
who are converted.

John the Evangelist, thou have been entrusted with many celestial secreets:
thou were a dove in thy simplicity, and did lean upon the breast of thy
Redemer at his last supper, and do now take thy rest in Paradise Some
Doctors are of opinion that S. John is in Paradise body and soul, but in the
parallel with the three following he means that his body is in that
terrestrial Paradise with the body of Moses.
Moses, Enoch and Elias you are there also, for your bodies were never found
upon the earth.

Great God of the Christians, thy Saints have many revelations, but such a one
as this was never disclosed unto them, because the time of this Revelation was
not then come; and the son of perdition was unborn.

I tell thee O Spouse of God, thou shall be beyond measure ungrateful if thou
make nice to receive so excellent a present sent unto thee by thy husband, but
I am assured thou will receive it, as shall also the chief dealers in Magic, if
they will be converted, whereby they shall reap much mercy and favor, and
then the secular arm shall have no power to inflict the rigor of justice upon
them. It is the good pleasure of God, that his goodness should be founded
forth by them, and that they should be the means of the conversion of many
souls, as they were the instruments of their perdition. The The conversion of
Magicians.
Priests duty is to absolve Magicians and Witches that shall repent, and crave
of God the remission of their sins. And thou This was put in practice at Aix,
as it shall afterward appear.
Prince of Magicians shall be particularly sis^ed and examined, and God shall
menace and affright thee by the Devil, because other creatures have no force
to work upon thee. France is infected with this dangerous Art of Magic: all
the sisters of the company of Vrsula are bewitched at Marseille, at Aix, and at
many other places, so that the country swarmeth with the multitude of charms.
Come, and draw near unto the child Jesus, his hands be tender and cannot
gripe you hard: yet ever have you in remembrance that this child only shall
be your Judge: that of all Nations some shall be converted, and that this
miracle shall be spread abroad over all the world. There are yet many void
seats in Heaven which God will have filled. Lucifer The brauado of Verrine to
Lucifer.
, thou go about to get those souls, for whom thou have paid no ransom,
but God has fully showed that no man can wring that out of his hands which he
has determined to save. In this, God does offer unto consideration a new tract
of his wisdom, power and authority, which thou could not perceive: for he
confounds and beats thee by a Devil, who is thy servant and subject, and
by two women he does convert souls, and set all hell in an vproare and
distraction. For since the time of this accident, more then a thousand souls
have been converted to the faith: yet did thou accursed spirit think, that
thou know all things, when as I ^ell thee, Marie her self knows not all,
although she be enriched with perfection, and has much authority and power in
heaven. These discourses are not drawn from the pit of Hell, for the tree is
known by the fruit. When God gives the fire of Charity, he also adioyneth
thereunto the cinders of humility; for the fire is conserved under the ashes.

Then he spoke to Carreau, and said; thou also art a wretched spirit; thou art
he that say that God was not able to raise Lazarus to life, I tell thee thou
lie, and he shall convert the Chief and ringleaders in Magic, and God
shall be praised for his great goodness by those that shall behold the same.

A great reprehension and inuectiue against men. See the Apology why this is
the highest signal of Gods indignation.
God perceaueth, that men esteem not of his Preachers, and therefore sent the
Devil to deliver his truth by the mouth of a woman: Physicians to new maladies
have new remedies and appliances: so because this sickness of men went beyond
ordinary, it was expedient, for the cure thereof to apply extraordinary
remedies, especially to those whom the Devil had deceived and conquered. I
affirm, that it is necessary to go to Rome, for God will have this business
examined and looked into.

Then he desired to have his oath ministered unto him; and because he had
revealed diverse things full of nouelty and admiration, it was thought fit,
that he should swear upon the blessed Sacrament. And whilst the Priest was
holding the same, Verrine spoke of diverse matters, and amongst the rest, that
the Touching religious orders.
company of the Christian Doctrine, and of Saint Vrsula, and the order of Saint
Dominicke should sprout up and flourish, (always without offense unto other
Orders, as unto the Jesuits and the like) that the Father, Mother, Uncle and
Aunt, and almost all the kindred of Louyse were damned; that it was thought fit
that she should speak this with her own mouth, and that he himself was
constrained to reveal, that they were damned, saying, It were a strange wonder
that a woman honorably descended should speak this of her father and mother
in public from her self, out of her fits she is of a composed understanding
and very sensible in her discourse.
Louyse of a truth thy father and mother are damned in Hell. Who would ever
have told John Cappeau, and Louyse de Baume that their daughter would openly
publish unto the world their eternal damnation. I do not conceive Louyse that
thy heart is made of stone.

Then Louyse wept very bitterly so that the Assembly was so melted with
compassion, that they all fell a weeping also.

After that Verrine had for a season keept silence, upon the sudden he cried
out again, the father of thy father, the father of thy mother, the father of
thy grandfather, and the father of thy grandmother, and all thy kindred be
damned: then he said, the King See the page 259. touching King Henry the
fourth.
of France of happy memory was an Heretic, but died in the state of grace:
father Romillon, the superior of Louyse was also an heretic, but now he is
her spiritual father; also Louyse her self was at the first brought up after
the fashion of heretics.

Then Verrine began to cry, that God might do well to use the service of a
Queen, or a Princess in a work of this nature, in the which if he had made
choice of Vrsula who was a Queen or some such as she was, it were not to be
wondered. And directing his speech unto God, he said, Why did thou not
rather choose a Queen or an Empress, then this worm here? But thou will
reply, that thou have no need of thy creatures, but that they have need of
thee, that thou art always ready to bestow upon the^, if they will further and
cooperate with thy heavenly pleasure, that it suffices thee to find a soul
framed and disposed unto that which thou would impose upon it. Of a truth
Louyse, thou have begged at Gods hands to suffer the pains of hell, if it
might be agreeable unto him, and this thou have desired for the enlarging of
his glory: yet that this might be without any final deprivation of the sight
of God, according to thy request, God has yielded unto thy petition, because
thou did put thy self upon his pleasure, and did not indent with him
to suffer after such and such a fashion, but did make a free offer of thy
self to be disposed by him as he pleased. And the truth is, all shall redound
to the glory of God, to the exaltation of his Church, and to the advancement of
thy calling: yet art thou to expect nothing but confusion and shame hereby,
which thou do confess thou have well deserved, to wit, all sorts of
injuries and reproachful contempts which thou can suffer for his love. When
his discourse is not drawn from Scripture the Devil constrains no man to
believe. And we conceive that this which is here so spoken is spoken out of
flattery.
It is true Michaelis, thou did indeed affirm that thou had an
inspiration infused into thee, to put such an intended reformation in practice;
I tell thee, it is rather a revelation, but thy humility was pleased to give it
that modest appellation, for those that are humble, had rather call it by that
name.

I tell you, that the Revelation of Michaelis, the inspiration of Romillon, and
the will of God, do make a Trinity, that is, one thing in three, for the
other two are dissolved into the will of God. If two different persons do meet
in the concurrence of friendship, I affirm that there is but one heart and one
soul, so when the creatures conform their will unto the will of God, they have
then the same will with God.

After many other discourses he swore in behalf of the sacred Trinity, and of
all the church triumphant and militant to the confusion of all Devils, and to
his own utter disgrace and shame; which oath he took in great solemnity upon
the blessed sacrament, disauo^ing all double and sinister intention. Moreover
he called Beelzebub, and all his companions, saying unto them, speak now if you
have any thing to reply, if I have keept in any thing that is fit to be
revealed, I promise you to deliver it, for all this not one of them dared so
much as to grumble. Then Verrine began to cry in the presence of the blessed
Sacrament, how admirable is thy power great God, who have permitted, yea and
commanded the Devils to bring hither to his Church Magicians and witches to be
informed of that which from thee I am constrained to speak against them. Hell
is divided and in distraction, it waxes feeble, and the cousonages and
subtleties thereof are dismasked. He did exorcise when he was at S. Baume as
shall be seen afterward in the acts of the last of December. page
Jews the Magician shall exorcise, the witchcrafts of the house of S. Vrsula
are at an end, and all the sisters shall be delivered, except Louyse and
Magdalene, who are to go to Rome where Verrine by the mouth of Louyse with
Magdalene shall make his declarations.

The same day Verrine said to Magdalene, give the keys of thy house to God,
who is the father of thy family, as the soul is the mistress, and the body
the servant of the same: give the keys to God the Father, the staff of
command unto the Son, and the fuel that is in thy house unto the holy
Ghost, for they will setle a good order there, which is beyond the sphere of
thy power to accomplish. The same day also Verrine was asked how he meant that
Moses was in the terrestrial Paradise, because the Scripture mentions his
death. Hereunto he answered, This is a new revelation.
He may well be dead, and yet be in the terrestrial Paradise too, according
to his body, for God might raise him up to life, because he is one of the four
trumpets, who are appointed in the last days of the world to denounce the
judgments of God to the four parts of the earth: and it is certain that
neither his body nor the body of John the Evangelist could ever be found. But
some man may here cavil that the Apocalypse mentions but two witnesses, to
wit Enoch and Elias whom Antichrist shall put to death, Verrine answered, that
which John has said of the two witnesses is a firm truth, yet does he not
exclude others but makes mention only of them that were to give testimony of
God by their death, and not of John or Moses who had already tasted of the same.

The fall of the Angels.'
Then he said, that his rank was amongst the number of Thrones, and that he
had command over three legions of Angels. That the greatest ruin and downfall
that was in heaven was the fall of Thrones: that all the Princes and heads of
all the orders were fallen, that the greatest breach was made by the ruin of
Thrones, and that therefore God would fill up his breach by the means and
labors of Thrones.

He further added, that Beelzebub had tempted Adam and himself Eve, and spoke
to her in the shape of the Serpent, but in all his temptations which he used
toward her, he ever retained the face of a gitle.

The same day in the evening the Dominican father exorcised, in the beginning
whereof Verrine began to gibe and to be pleasant with Beelzebub, saying, A
Princes fashion is not to beat a base fellow himself, but commands one of
his meanest servants to do it: so fares it with thee Beelzebub, thou art not
worthy that I should avenge my self upon thee; I do not care if. I bid my
servant to do it. Then he spoke to Gresill and said, Cudgel me this Beelzebub,
wicked wretch as he is, that would dare to pluck God from his Throne, but
therein his forces and designements were broken and crushed to pieces.

I am Gods Apparitor, I will be paid with good money, yet shall neither thou,
nor I ever attain to Paradise, although he were willing to bestow it upon me.
I do not say that he will give it me, but I affirm, that I shall be more
happy then thy self, because there is a reward that attends upon my labors
and paineful endeauours: so that although I shall not enjoy felicity, yet at
the least I shall not be tormented with the like extent of punishment; for God
has promised to allay and give See the Apology, the 10. doubt after the
Epistle to the Reader.
mitigation to the same.

Moreover he said, wretched Beelzebub, I see thou will speak, speak on, for
all will light upon thy own head. Beelzebub replied, I speak not to thee* Ha
Beelzebub, said Verrine, I perceive it goes hard with thee, the keys of
Magdalens soul are not now in thy custody, for the gates are shut up, and the
rod of command is taken from thee.

Then the Exorcist spoke these words, Ecce non dormitabit, whereupon Verrine
said, true, the Devil never sleeps, but is ever wakefull to do a mischief:
God never sleeps also, but he always is vigilant to do good, for his
goodness is greater then the iniquity and malice of all hell.

John, thou were the disciple of Love, and Magdalene the handmaid of Affection.

The action of Antichrist.
Antichrist when he comes shall cause himself to be adored, and shall have
Kings and Princes to be attendants in his train, but what reward shall they
have of him? just nothing. He shall cause himself to be carried pompously in
the air, and say that he is Christ and the Messiah, but he shall be
convicted of a lie, and be proved to be Antichrist. Then shall there be
discerned the difference and distinction between the children of God and the
children of Satan. The Jews were once Gods best beloved children, but because
they would not take knowledge of their God, but after a flood of so many
blessings, did crucify him upon the Cross, for this cause did God repudiate
and reject them. Christ Jesus was promised unto them, but they would none of
him, no not when he prayed for them, therefore they are deservedly deprived of
so glorious a light; for he that hates that which is good shall in the end be
seized upon by that which is evil: the patient is well enough served, if the
Physician leave him, when he refuses and scoffeth at his counsel.

The several sicknesses of men.
You are all subject to sicknesses, some are infirm in their head, others in
their brain, some in their eyes, others in their ears. Now if God who is the
true Physician of your souls, shall ask you whether you be sick or no, will
you answer you are not sick when you are? for he well knows by your pulse
how you are affected. To those that are troubled with a pain in their head,
that is to say to the proud, he ministers the sweet and gentle physic of
deep humility; to others that are sick of impatiency, of curiosity, or the
like diseases, he does The medicines for these sicknesses.
ordain and point forth for every man a particular remedy according to the
nature of his infirmity. But there is always some bitterness in these
potions, which breeds a difficulty in the Patient to take them. Mis-conceiue
me not, as if I should speak of corporal medicaments which are composed of
herbs and simples, I speak spiritually of all sorts of virtues, which are the
true receipts to cure languishing souls; take therefore and taste this
medicine, I dare assure you it will make you whole, although you were sick even
unto death, for you have a very cunning Physician.

See the Apology, the first doubt after the Epistle to the Reader.
Then he said, alas, behold the great day of Judgment is at hand, for
Antichrist is borne. If virtue seem bitter unto your taste God will sweeten
your mouths with divine consolations, and will not that you should rise from
his table with your palate disseasoned. It is high time O ye Christians to
surrender and give up your will into the hands of your Creator: give unto him
the three powers of your soul, your memory, that you may have him in
remembrance, your vnderstanstanding, that you may think upon his benefits, and
your will, that you may be obedient unto him. Imitate the Oxen who feed all
the day and chew the cud, or ruminate in the night: and let the servant no
longer govern your house. The holy Ghost is at your beds side, and has in his
hand a potion for the health of your souls: the ingredients are, a little
humility, a little charity, a little patience, a little perseverance, a little
hope, and a little resignation. This potion is not without some bitterness and
mortification, but he is at hand with the sugar of his consolations to sweeten
and allay the offensi^enesse thereof. Ought you not first to go unto Mount
Caluary, and there taste vinegar and gall, before you feed on those delicious
viands, and drink that sweet wine and hipocras of heaven, or have the fr^ition
of the vision of that eternal brightness? Receive therefore the Sacrament of
the Altar, for it will preserve you, it will restore you, it will consolidate
whatsoever is loose and disioynted within you: yet must every one of you
always say unto himself, I am a miserable sinner, and most unworthy to
receive my Creator. Thou John Baptist was by were this great S^crament was
first instituted; thou did rest thy self upon the breast of the Son of
God, at what time there were many celestial secrets revealed unto thee: thou
know full well that this is a Sacrament of love, and that the best advice
that may be given is, that men frequent the same every The frequenting of the
blessed Sacrament.
fifteenth day, and have this meditation continually in their minds, that
Antichrist is borne. You are therefore to play the parts of valiant and able
soldiers, and not to show your selves base or womanish ^ nay I say further,
that Virgins and married women are likewise to arm themselves against him: for
The time that is prepared for martyrdom.
the Church had never such plenty of martyrdomes as shall be in the time that
is prepared for the same. There shall be two bands and two armies, the one
belonging to God, the other fighting for the Devil, and in this army shall
Antichrist be. God would save his whom he has redeemed with the price of his
blood: on the other side, the Devil would rauine upon that, which is none of
his own. Nothing happens but by the providence and will of God, and his
pleasure it is that this time should come. When Antichrist shall be in his
ruff and bravery, he will say, I am Christ, I am the Messiah, and he will
have many associates that will auow the same: but the true Christians shall
tell him, thou art not he, thou art Antichrist. The same God who said unto the
Ninevites, repent, does now call upon you, my judgment is at hand, repent
therefore and be converted. Children, obey the voice of your father: shut,
shut, O shut your gates against Satan, if he would enter, say that God has the
keys. If the Devil be importunate, if he knock with impatience, if he would
enter by violence, go presently to the master of the house, and tell him, Sir,
you are our good shepherd, there are strangers without that would enter
forcibly upon us, and if we be not mistaken, there be wolves without at the
gate. Sir, you have the keys, you have the staff to beat them hence, you are
able with the least wink of your eye to make them avoid the place: upon this
information he will rise and chase them away to their confusion. Have your
recourse to the Child Jesus, he will be your Purueier and supply your
necessities. Present your service to Mary, and she will aid you. Why do you
rather choose to lavish away your time, then to pray for the health of your
souls? you are first to honor the blessed mother of God, S. John, and
Magdalene, and then the love of God shall be conferred upon you. Is it not good
reason to reverence the blessed mother of God since that you are her children?
I assure you, that no man living can make a bad end who has honored and
reverenced the mother of God, Magdalene, Martha, Catherine, Vrsula, Dominicke,
Anselme, Stanislaus, Stephen, Anthony of Padua, and the Innocent children, but
be wary, for in the greatest feasts and solemnities there is most unruliness
and disorder.

The reprehension of the wise men of this world.
You deceive your selves when as you say, that if God would have revealed these
things unto his Church, he would have chosen the ministry of Preachers, not of
Devils: but God is wise enough, yea he is wisdom it self, and does little
need to have your advice, or the counsel of Angels themselves. If he would
have taken the advice, either of Angels or of men, when he selected and culled
forth his blessed mother from all women, they would have told him, that it had
been better to choose a Queen or a Princess; for the blessed Virgin was
accounted mean and contemptible in the eyes of the world. In like manner, if
he had taken any to advise with all, touching the place of his Nativity, they
would have told him, what Lord, choose a stable? can you not with as much ease
choose a Palace? But it is the custom of God to do that which seems good
unto him, and not to follow the fancies and giddy conceits of men. Then did
Verrine take his oath, that all this above mentioned was true, as he formerly
used to do.

The Acts of the 28. of December being the Feast of Innocents.
ON this day the Dominican father exorcised, and Verrine began to speak in
this manner: There are two books, The book of death kept by Satan is nothing
else but the sleights and devices which he has to ensnare us. But if by this
book of death you understand reprobation, then is this book in the eternity
of God as the book of Predestination is.
God keeps the book of life, the Devil the book of eternal death, in
which he registreth down all men's sins, as God in the other book sets
down all men's good works, whereof S. Martin is witness. The Devil ruineth
all, and God restores all, for from a work of baseness he draws actions of
wonder, and makes that which is unfruitful to become fertile.

The way of life unto death is a broad and beaten way, but the way to return
from sin to grace is full of mistakes and windings. It is not Gods manner to
employ the service of those that are drenched in mortal sin, when he would
bring about some important work for the advantage and good of his Church: as
also the Devil does not effect any great matter for the advancement and
augmentation of the kingdom of Hell when he uses the ministry of one that is
settled in the grace of God. For there is a sympathy and consent betwixt God
and his creature, whom he employeth in his business.

God being omnipotent can easily out of unfruitfulness, nay out of a straw
work plenty of wonders, yet is it requisite, that this straw do not let or
give hinderance thereunto: for the reasonable creature has free will given him
by God, that by doing well he may merit, as by stooping to that which is
naught, he may be punished.

It is not with men as it is with Devils, for we are forced to do the
commandment of God, which men absolutely are not, although God being the Lord
of all, and their Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier may lay his command upon
them: but the Devil whose nature is depraved and deuoid of the grace of God,
does nothing but by compulsion. God has created his creatures without any
consent or approbation of theirs, yet he does not operate in his creatures
without them, neither shall any be haled into the kingdom of heaven if he
have no mind to go thither: God will open many means for the attainement of
that endless bliss; but if a man will none, The shipwreck of men comes from
themselves.
God will leave him to himself, and then he is utterly cast away. This
shipwreck of himself comes not from God, but from the creature, who out of
pure malice does abandon the Mansion of his father, that by his precipitate
courses, he may cast himself into the fire of Hell. A good King makes a good
subject. The Concerning the deceased King Henry 4. see more at large in the
page 219.
deceased King of famous memory was a lover of peace in his life time, and
therefore God did crown him with glory and peace in that other world. Do not
contend and cavil, whether he were an heretic or a Catholic, for the end
crowns the work: he had offended with David, and God showed mercy unto him
as he did unto David.

It is the Devils property to bring men from evil to worse, but God nurseth
men up from good to better; for no unclean thing shall enter into heaven.

Then Verrine said, at the pronouncing of these words of the Exorcismes, Tu
Innocentium persecutor. Of a certainty Herod, thou wast a blood-thirsty man,
thou would have thy self styled the Messiah, and yet did endeavor to
slay the true Messiah indeed, in that massacre of Innocents: And although he
was able enough to defend himself from thy murtherous designements, yet would
he decline thy rage, that he might teach us not to tempt the providence of
God.

Herod thought to kill Christ Jesus, yet on the other side the Kings of the
East came to worship him. Good Kings! what saw you in him to draw you to such
an action so derogatory (as it might have seemed) from your States? He
appeared unto you but a little child: Mary was no Queen, and there was no
train, only Joseph, an Ox and an Ass. Where was his Crown, where was his
Scepter, where were his hangings of Tapistry? where was the royal bed? what
could you behold there but cob-webs of spiders sticking on the rafters, and an
Ox that heated the child with the abundance of his vaperous breath.

Thus you must do. The holy Ghost breaths on you the breath of devotion, and
do you lend your breath unto the little Infant, and being joined together, he
shall be the fire and you the ashes. The breath of the holy Ghost is a fire,
and represents unto us charity; and your breath is the ashes of the meekest
humility, for under the ashes is the fire preserved. Learn hence to speak of
sacred things, advisedly, and seriously according unto truth, and beware
whether you be rich or poor, how you blaspheme against him. Which kind of
poverty is the best.
The poverty of this world is not the means to make you happy, neither does
God esteem much of this poverty, for there be many that are now howling and
frying in those infernal flames, that reposed too much confidence in this
poverty. Blessed be the poor, but they must be poor in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven. Are you ignorant in what this poverty of spirit
consists? It consists in this, to possess no other thing but God and him
alone, for there are many poor people in the estimation of the world, who are
rich enough in their ambition, and yet are there many Kings, Princes, and Noble
personages, who are owners of nothing but of God and themselves: For riches are
amongst indifferent things, neither hurt they those that make good use and
appliance of them, according unto the Commandment of God, Consolation unto the
poor
Then Verrine turned to the poor that were there, and said, There is not one
amongst you, but is better accommodated for his necessities, then was the Son
of God when he lay in the manger, you should therefore say unto him, when he
profereth his kingdom unto you. Good God, I am not capable of such a bliss,
and still you are to acknowledge your own infirmity: you must also descend
down as it were to hell, which you are to do either in this life, or after
you are dead: when therefore you are afflicted with adversities say unto him, I
am ready to suffer with my Redeemer, for I have deserved much more, yet does he
compassion my tottering and distracted estate, and cheereth me up with the
beams of his mercy. I assure you, that both I and you have to do with a severe
Judge, therefore humble your selves and you shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Grudge not that God has made such an one rich and thee poor, or that
he has endowed such with wisdom, and has left unto thee nothing but
foolishness. For he created the Angels and marshalled them in their orders,
there are the Seraphins, The Cherubins, and the Thrones, etc. every one in
their several rank and station, and although there be such variety and
diversity amongst them, yet you cannot say that they are subject to confusion.
If you direct and level your actions by an upright intention, that is to say,
if you square all your doings by the rule of Gods glory, the salvation of your
soul, and good of your neighbor, Satan will easily flee from you. Let your
soul be furnished with three things, with upright intention in your memory,
with pure affection in your will, and with sincerity of conscience in your
understanding. The memory by calling to remembrance some wicked thing,
offends not God; the understanding by considering thereof, incurreth no
mortal sin; but when the will interposeth it self, then is there a
consummation of the sin.

The book of the Crucifix.
Read diligently the book of the Crucifix, for in this book you shall learn
poverty, patience, humility, and al virtuous knowledge: be not curious to make
inquisition after humane literature, for this shall be sufficient for your
full instruction. He further said, that if a damned soul could break from
hell, he would endure all torments whatsoever in hope to enjoy the vision of
God, yea, this soul would say, that all these torments were but as flowers and
roses. Then he added, God is united unto his Church, as the nail unto the
finger of the hand.

The acts of the 29. of December.
ON this day while the Dominican father was saying Mass, Verrine held
disputation with God, and on the sudden he thus expressed himself by the
mouth of Louyse.

On this day Jews the Magician was upon his way iourneying toward S. Baume
This was uttered with an admirable vehemence of spirit, so that the woman was
all over in a great sweat. He seems to lesson us with what seruency of
spirit and charity we should pray unto God for such misled and wandering
souls. And he made Louyse pray, by moving her tongue, as also he caused her
to dictate letters in ye name of Louyse, not in his own name, to which the
said, Louyse gave consent as unto a thing which she much desired. See the
annotations upon the 304. page
Great God, I offer up unto thy Majesty all the sacrifices that have been
offered unto thee from the first creation of the world, and do also make
tender of all those that are or shall be presented before thee, until the
consummation of time be ended, and all this will I do for Jews. I also
present unto thee all the tears and repentance of all the Saints that are in
thy Court triumphant and militant; and all this will I do for Jews. I offer
all the prayers which have been, are or shall be made unto thee, and all this
will I do for Jews. I further tender unto thee all the ecstasies and
rauishments in spirit, as well of men as of Angels, which have been, are or
shall be sent unto them, and all this will I do for Jews. Moreover, I would
(by Gods appointment I speak this and not as I am a Devil) that the multitude
of such as offer, were mightily enlarged in their number that so the oblation
might be the greater, and all this I desire for Jews. Then he said,
Everlasting father, I now present and lay before you your wel-beloued Son,
who is in the hands of the Priest that now says Mass, and all for Jews. See
the Apology and the answer unto the 9. doubt.
I do further offer unto you all the merits of his blessed, and dolourous
passion, trusting that you will take compassion on him. After this he said,
Pater de coelis Deus miserere Lodouici, Fili redemptor mundi Deus, miserere
Lodouici, Spiritus sancte Deus, miserere Lodouici: Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus,
miserere Lodouici. Sancta Dei genitrix ora pro Lodouico, Sancta Virgo virginum
ora pro Lodouico: Sancta Maria ora pro Lodouico: Sancti Angeli and Archangeli,
orate pro Lodouico: Sancti Patriarchae and Prophetae orate pro Lodouico: Sancti
Apostoli and Euangelistae, orate pro Lodouico: Sancti Martyrs orate pro
Lodouico: Sancti Confessores orate pro Lodouico: Sancta Virgins and Viduae,
orate pro Lodouico: omnes Sancti and Sancta Dei orate pro Lodouico. O Lodouice
veni, veni Lodouice. A prediction of the coming of Jews
Why do thou linger thus to be converted unto thy God? God is wearied, God
is thirsty, and craves to have his thirst slaked by thee Jews, but thou like
unto the woman of Samaria refuses him, and say, thou have not a pitcher
wherewithal to draw water for him. Yet is not this a sufficient excuse,
because he desires to drink of the water of thy soul, which thou may
minister unto him by thy conversion. Jews, Jews, Jews, take the speediest
and swiftest coursers that thou can get, and come quickly, for if thou will
thou may yet be converted. God is more powerful then the Devil, neither
can any one pull by violence from him that which he has resolved to retain
unto himself.

After this was spoken, the Dominican father did exorcise, and at the beginning
of the Exorcismes, Verrine was very pleasant with Beelzebub, and scoffed at him
saying.

Hola Beelzebub! I pray thee relate unto us in what estate are the affairs of
Hell: if I be not deceived thou droopest, and seem to be troubled with the
headache: it may be that these honest men have affrighted thee. Thou do not
imitate my example, who desire the censure of the Inquisitour of the faith, and
of mine own accord call for the most penetrating and judicious persons that
are. But I perceive thy stinge is taken from thee, yet is it not fiftene days
ago, that thou did conceit with thy self, that thou were able to chase
God away from S. Baume. I would have thee now express thy self.

Beelzebub answered. I will speak when I see cause, and not when thou will have
me. Well, well, said Verrine, I see thou have nothing to answer. Then he said
to Carreau, thy weapons are wrested from thee, for that stone which was before
so hard, is now mollified, and the blood of the lamb shall souple and soften
the same. Jews say, Miserere mei, for thou art yet blind, but at thy arriual
hither, He never assured the conversion of Jews.
peradventure thou shall have a greater portion of illumination. O poor
Princes, where is now your state and power, how cursed is he that lends his
ear unto your sly suggestions? What? can you give away that which you have
not? Ha, ha, if the Princes be astonished and at their wits end, what shall
the poor lackeies then do? I tell you, that since God has appointed me to be
here, I will dis-mantle and unfold all your subtleties.

A simile against those that are s^rupulous in believing this wonder.
I do not wonder if this seem harsh unto some men's belief, for if a man
should show unto another that is altogether ignorant and unexperienced, the
eggs of silke-wormes, and that this man had never seen or heard what manner
of thing this silk or these worms were, and should be told, that by the
assistance of that industry which God has bestowed upon man, there should
worms be engendered of these eggs, which being fomented and diligently
cherished, would in time spinne and make silk, whereof excellent veluets and
taffaties should be made, from a piece of which a fair Altar-cloth might be
taken: I say, that this rustical fellow being deuoyd of judgment to apprehend
these particularss, and altogether unpracticed in this art, would in conclusion
say, that he did not believe one word of this, for it is a difficult matter to
believe that which a man cannot comprehend. But he that is conversant herein
does very well understand the art of cherishing and bringing them to their
perfection. Your Merchants also do easily believe it, for they know the manner
how the worms make silk, and the art how to dress a fair piece of damask
from the same, yet they had need of great patience before they can see a piece
perfected up and finished.

The application of the simile.
So fares it with God in this work, he has taken a little, grain such a one
as my self (said Verrine) and another abject creature a little grain also,
called Louyse, and will from their weakness draw works of power and wonder,
that you may know that he needs not the help of his creatures when he would
put any great design in execution: for being Almighty, and the sovereign
master-fencer, he does always reserve some blows and passages of his art, of
his power, and of his wisdom to the confusion of all Hell: but the Devil
does presently teach all the skill he has to those that give themselves unto
him.

Moreover he said, you are all of you prodigal children, for some of you will
not tarry at home in your fathers house, other of you that tarry at home, lead a
debauched and vicious life, and at the last are forced to diet with hoggs.
Wallow not in these your delights, for they are but the outward pills and
rindes of akornes, the fragments of the feeding of hoggs: let it enter into
your consideration, that the composition of your souls is very noble, and that
it stands neither with decency nor honesty to serve Kings with husks, for if
the steward should serve them so, he should well deserve to be sharply
punished. It is not Gods pleasure that you should seed upon such course and
sordid viands; he has set you at his table, and will feed you with the bread
of Angels. The tables of great personages are abundantly profuse in delicacies,
but what agreement is there betwixt Christ and Belial? The loftiest trees are
most obnoxious to storms and falling, but the low shrubbs stand safe upon the
ground. It is not enough to be seemingly honest in the eyes of men, as the
Pharisie was, and yet to have a heart stieped in the gall of malice before God.
Then Verrine said, that he would discourse no more as he had done, but bade
them ruminate well on that which he had said, for Louyses voice was to be
preserved for other occasions. The same day in the evening the Dominican father
exorcised, in the beginning whereof, Verrine and Beelzebub did dialogue-wise
confer one with the other, their speech was touching the state of Magicians and
witches, and of diverse kinds of superstitions to the astonishment and
admiration of the whole assembly. He further said that very evening, that
father Michaelis had been dogged and pryed into by sour Devils and so many
Witches, to bewitch him, and that the charm was so violent in operation, that
if he had once taken it he could not have outliued it three days.

The acts of the 30. of December.
THis day in the morning the Dominican father did exorcise the two women that
were possessed, and before the Exorcismes began, the said father did humble
himself before them all, and craved pardon of the assembly, in that he had the
day before, been guilty of some open impatience.

Then Verrine said, many times the mistress is as foolish as the chamber
maid, and does nothing that is pleasing in the eyes of the master, but is too
much addicted to her ease and delicacies. What then does the master, he
complains on them both, and takes away the keys of the house from them, yet
without any manner of violence. The goodness of God, and the malice of men.
The same does God by the souls of men, for when he perceives that neither
the chambermaide who is the body, nor the mistress who is the soul, does
perform any action agreeable unto him, he (as master of the house) takes the
keys from them, and shut's the gates and windows himself, that thieves might
not break in upon them: yet does he all this without violence or noise, and
patiently causes the said keys to be delivered up unto him. Then he labors
an atonement and reconciliation between the mistress and the servant, but in
case they should resist and grow refractary, then does he suffer them to fall,
through their own default into the bottomless pit of hell: for as the proves
has it, they that neglect to do good are at length o^ertaken with evil; and
he who does not choose Christ Jesus for his host, shall have the Devil to be
his companion.

Christ Jesus is the good sheep-heard that leads his sheep into pastures
fatned by his body and blood: he is a sheepe-heard and a lamb together, and
was offered up as a sacrifice for your sins: give him the staff of your
will, and leave the guide and government of your selves unto him, for he will
preserve you from the fury of ravening wolves. Cursed be the sheep that does
not suffer it self to be guided by him, it does well deserve to be devoured.

The sheep does graze and chew the cudde, so (says Christ Jesus) must you
take and eat not flesh that is dead, but the living and celestial food of
his body, there is no dainty in the world comparable to this viande. Paul in
his ecstasy of spirit had an essay thereof, so had also some others after him:
yet is there still plenty of this food, and the treasure of Gods mercies is so
infinite, that the Seraphins themselves cannot found the depth or know the end
of his riches: for they do ever see new and undiscovered perfections in God,
marvel not therefore if he bestow a new rePsent upon his Church.

Then he turned to the image of S. Magdalene, and said, O Magdalene, thou were
abiding in this Baume, where thou did repent, neither is it lawful for any
man to enter into the little cave where thou did lie, but upon his bare
feet, and I Verrine am of opinion that God will hardly give way to a man
hardened in his sin to pass into that sacred place. God spoke to Moses from
the ^iery bush, Put off thy shoes, for the place whereon thou treadest is holy
ground, and I also affirm that this place is no less sacred then that,
because the Sacrament rests here which is the Saint of Saints, and An
authentical history reports this.
Christ Jesus himself in his divinity and humanity came down from heaven to
visit Magdalene in this Baume. Consider therefore seriously you that approach
unto the Communion, how precious a food it is which is administered unto you;
to the serving in of which the Angels themselves are assistant as the servants
and pages of God. O Marie, sacred mother of God, thou were the first that
did taste of this meat, and wer' more familiar there withal then any other
creature whatsoever, for thou did humble thy self at the coming and
salutation of the Angel, and did repute thy self unworthy to be the
servant of servants of the Lord. It is the custom of God where he bestows
other virtues to circle them in all with perfect humility, to the end that the
soul be not stained with the spots or pollutions of ingratitude, but may
acknowledge those benefits which it has received. For the grace of God is a
weight by which a man sinketh into the gulf of his nothing, and is drawn up
again on high to make a conjunction and concurrence of the creatures will to
the good pleasure of the Creator: by this means also does he understand how
slavish and fearful his condition were, if that God did not wing and protect
him from all danger. Mary, thou art she that like a weight did draw down
thy Son from heaven to earth, not for thy own sake alone, but for all other
distressed sinners, so that he who will enjoy everlasting life, must have
recourse unto thee. God indeed is that fertile cloud from whence all virtues
drop down upon men. Thy son does indeed present his wounds before his
father, and thou art a remembrancer unto thy son of all the services and
offices which thou have done unto him, not by way of ostentation, but out of
love, and to the end thou may obtain mercy and forgiveness for
comfortless sinners. Whilst thou liued'st in this world thou were fired with
zeal and charity, how much more now when thou art so near unto the furnace of
love, and the fountain of mercy. An inuectiue against Jews the Magician.
Then he said, Jews has committed an infinite number of sacrileges against
God, and has caused a thousand and a thousand persons to deny their Savior:
but God is desirous to expect a little longer the event of things. Magic is the
most pernicious and diabolical art that may be. France has taken a strong and
spreading infection of the same, and at Paris the schools of Magic are more
frequented then the divinity lectures in Auignon.

God has oftentimes offered himself and as it were waylaid the soul of
Jews, sometimes by preaching, and sometimes by other inspirations, but he
would not give him a drop of drink.

Beelzebub drew him on to practice Magic and enchantments, the schedules are
now in his hand, he has been the occasion that many have died very strange and
sudden deaths; and although God does labor his conversion, yet does he
thrust away and reject the same.

All that which has been above spoken, began upon the day of the conception
of the Virgin in the very place of penance, to figure out unto you, that you
are first to receive into your embracements repentance, represented unto you in
Mary Magdalene; and then innocence, pointed out by Mary the mother of God. When
he had thus said, he took his oath as he was accustomed.

The same day in the evening were these two possessed women Exorcised;
whereupon He spoke of the Magician.
Beelzebub said, I am assured that about this time they hold their synod and
assembly, will he relinquish this charge, to come hither? I must go see. Then
Asmodee issued forth to give advertisement unto the Magicians and witches, as
he said.

The same time, which was about nine of the clock at night, father Michaelis
came to S. Baume, from Aix, The arrival of father Michaelis to S: Baume.
whence he came with his companion father Anthony Boilletot, and the master of
the Chapter House at Aix, having finished his sermons for the Aduent. Upon
whose arrival, there was inquiry made after Jews, for father Michaelis did
imagine that Jews was come, because he set forth from Aix the day before, in
the company of two Capuchin fathers: but he was not as then arrived.

The Acts of the 31. of December. 1610.
THis day in the morning were the two possessed women exorcised by father
Domptius the Dominican: and Verrine began to speak in this manner. This is to
be understood, as in the piecedent Acts.


Blessed mother of God, Veni Maria, veni in adiutorium Lodouico; Sancta Maria
Magdalena, veni in adiutorium Lodouico: Sancte Ioannes Euangelista, veni in
adiutorium Lodouico: Sancta Martha veni in adiutorium Lodouico. Then he said,
Most sacred mother of God, thou know those insupportable pains which thy
Son suffered on the Cross; Verrine also did invoke many other Saints, that
were assistant unto Christ at his passion on mount Caluary. Afterward he
added, O sacred humanity, I adjure and charge thee in the name of thy eternal
father, that thou offer thy wounds for Jews: I charge thee, that thou present
before him, all the pains, punishments and tortures, which thou did
suffer, for Jews; make thou profer also of that thirstinesse which caused such
a drought in thee upon the tree of the Cross. And continuing his speech to
Christ Jesus he said, What Lord? are you thirsty? you are a fountain that can
never be drawn dry, you are a sea of waters; you are the seller of all sorts
so excellent wines, and do you cry Sitio? Lord the souls that are in Paradise
are able to quench this thirst. But some one will object, what? can Christ
Jesus be subject to thirst, and such natural infirmities? is not his body
glorified? said he not, that the Saints in heaven should no more hunger and
thirst? how can God who is the center of all perfections, have upon him such an
impotency in nature? Verrine answered, God is weary without weariness, he is
impatient without hastiness; he was thirsty on Mount Caluary, but it was after
the salvation of souls, for whose sake if it were expedient he would once
again be re-crucified, on this very There is a great fair Cros^e at S. Baume.
Cross of S. Baume, if his body were passible and subject to suffering: O how
inexpressible is his compassion toward you? Then he said, This is the Friday
of your redemption, and the day of Jews his justification, if he please: let
him ponder upon these words, Remittuntur tibi O Lodouice peccata tua: and also
these, Vade in pace. Jews why do thou thus fore-slow thy coming? O ye
Capuchins, Capuchins, Capuchins, hasten your pace, and come quickly. But you
will object, that you are barefooted, and that it is impossible for you to make
such festination. The stop which was laid to hinder the Magicians coming by
great store of rain, that tell down in great plenty two days together.
indeed Hell did yesterday and to day raise such a storm, and made the clouds
to spout down rain after that unmeasurable manner, that the Devils had well
hoped to give some stop unto thy work (O God) but thou art ever omnipotent,
and do make thy creatures to stoop under thy commands, although they be
most rebelliously bent against thee.

Then speaking to Magdalene he said, Sigh not thus, God has the key of thy
soul, and will give thee meat from his own table. Thou Beelzebub art heavy,
but I am glad; knowing that whatsoever is held by the puissant hand of God,
cannot be plucked from him, by the strength or policy of hell.

The soul is a Vineyard.
The soul is a goodly Vineyard, purchased at an high rate, but the number of
those that manure and labor the same, is small and not worthy to come into
consideration: yea some of the laborers themselves suffer the Wolf to steal
in, and to make havoc in this Vineyard: the master whereof is the Son of
God, who is without mother in Heaven, and without father on earth, a second
Adam, conceived of a Virgin without sin. The Eucharist is the Sacrament of
love, and the nourishment of souls, translating you unto glory, and making you
as Gods. Paradise is the habitation of Saints: but if thou would be absolute
and complete in perfection, descend by contemplation as low as Hell, and say,
I am unworthy to suffer the pains of Hell, although that horrible pit of
sulphur was built for such as I am, who carry in my bosom the wellspring of
all sins and wickednesses. But how few are there that arrive to this point of
humiliation, and vnder-valuing of themselves, although it be the center from
whence they are to begin, and the highest assent whereunto they are to climb:
yet this debasement of themselves takes little root with the greatest sort of
men. Who is he that will believe that himself is the cause of all the evils,
pains and judgments, that have been so fearfully rained down upon you!
especially if he have from his youth lived in some religious Order, and
observed the rules and precepts of his Superiors? yet is this humility the
extract of all perfection, and the Queen that draws after her, all the other
Princesses, Ladies, and Damsels: and which is more, the mother of God is
humility it self, and does therefore the rather exact it from you. God has
given two wings unto the soul, the one of fear, the other of love; the first
has regard unto sin, the second does apprehend the goodness of God.

He that eats at a Kings table, will not sit with foul and vn-washed hands,
though otherwise he be of a rude and boisterous behavior: and will not you
be careful to wash your hands with the water of contrition, and make confession
of your sins? Christ Jesus at the first institution of the blessed Sacrament,
did wash the feet of his Apostles, and Peter at the beginning would have
hindered him; but when he saw, it was the good pleasure of his master, he
then subjected himself thereunto. Judas himself set his feet upon the breast
of the Son of God, that they might be washed, yet would he not for all this
be converted. John leaned upon the heart of his master, and therefore had the
wings of an Eagle given unto him; so that he was afterward the adopted Son
of the blessed Virgin. The judgments of God and men are infinitely different;
for many are sickly, and in a consumption by their sins before God, who in
the estimation of men are very healthful: and contrariwise those that are
sound before God, are ^eeble before men. God will come to judgment with
terror and power, all things shall tremble before his face; the Touching the
day of judgment.
Angels and the righteous shall go before him like burning Torches, all
creatures shall behold this awful spectacle, and shall be arrested before
this Majesty. Then shall the books be unfolded, and all shall be laid open
in public. You have many here that are shamefast and nice to confess their
sins: in the mean time the Devil booketh down all that is actionable, and
has ever his pen and ink-horne ready, so that he omitteth nothing, and
intends to object it against you openly and to your disgrace. It were a folly
beyond pardon to beg a straw of a mighty King, for Princes Presents are like
themselves, magnificent, and they are not to be disseasoned with petty suites:
Thus, should not you crave the straw and stubble of temporary blessings from
the King of Kings, but you should beg of him the treasures of heaven, which he
himself is contented you should request at his hands. Pray him to give you
patience, humility, and other virtues; and be not ever soliciting him for
fair weather, for rain, for the riches and preferments of this world. Whether
it rain, or whether it be fair, be thankful unto God, and cooperate with
him in all things, so shall you give best satisfaction unto him.

The arrival of the Magician.
This day in the evening there came to S. Baume, Jews Gaufredy with father d'
Ambruc sub-priour of the covent at S. Maximin, and two Capuchin fathers: where
it was thought fit that Jews the Priest should exorcise Louyse, and to that
end father Michaelis granted unto him all his power and authority. Whereupon
Verrine made Louyse to cry very loud, and began a prayer full of zelousnesse
and devotion, desiring Christ Jesus to take compassion on Jews: And he
pronounced this prayer so passionately, and with such affection, that he made
many men's hearts to throb and melt with compassion: yet some others did break
off this prayer, and said, that it was not fit to suffer Verrine to make such
prayers. Notwithstanding after these interruptions were blown over, Verrine
propounded certain interrogatories unto The Devils interrogatories unto the
Magician*
Jews, saying: Primo, Whether God be omnipotent or no? to which Jews
answered, That he was omnipotent. Secundo he demanded of him, Whither the
Church has power and authority to command Devils? Jews answered, that the
Church had such power. Tertio he asked him, Whither Devils may be enforced to
utter a truth. Jews answered that they might. Quarto he demanded, Whither the
oaths which are taken by the Devil, with all the conditious and solemnities
requisite unto the same be of validity or no? To which Jews answered, that
they were of validity.

The Devils inference upon the Magician.
Then said Verrine to the fathers that were present. Mark well with me what he
has here granted. And so he bade Jews to exorcise him, which accordingly
Jews performs the office of an Exorcist, which was according to the
prediction mentioned in the page 265.
he did. But not being able to read, and being altogether unacquainted with
matters of Exorcismes, at every word he asked of father Michaelis, must I say
thus and thus: to which the said father answered, yes; and bad him to proceed.

Here is to be observed, that the fathers, Michaelis and the rest questioning
with him of the truth of the fact, whither he were indeed a Magician or no,
with other interrogatories upon that point, in steed of inuocating the name of
God, he bad all the Devils of hell to fetch him, if it were true: which he often
repeated to all the questions that were propounded unto him, and made show as
though he wept, yet as experience taught us, and as Beelzebub himself did
advertise us, he did not shed a tear. About the end of this exorcisme, Verrine
exhorted Jews to renounce all Magic, and to turn unto his God, and to this
purpose laid before him many pregnant motives and inducements.

It befell, as the said Jews was exorcising Magdalene, Beelzebub and Verrine
laugh at the Magician, for that he was become an Exorcist.
Beelzebub and Verrine began both together to laugh a loud, saying, Who would
ever have thought that Jews would have exorcised Magdalene and Louyse? At the
Exorcismes that were said by Jews, and also when they were ended, Magdalene
shut her eyes, because she The fear that Magdalene had to look upon the
Magician.
would not see him, having him in detestation because he was a seducer, a
Magician, and a man so execrable, as indeed he proved.

The Devil reproves the Magician and tells him his wicked acts.
When Verrine had once laid him open, who he was, to wit, that he was a
Magician, that he had seduced Magdalene, that he was the Prince of them all,
and many other particulars touching the art of Magic, and the charms which he
gave as well to the house of S. Vrsula, as to many other persons and places, he
took his oath upon the blessed Sacrament, that all these things were most
true. Also Magdalene and the Devil do both accuse the Magician.
Magdalene confirmed the same by a double oath, and that upon the blessed
Sacrament also. After all this Verrine said, that they might do well to shut up
Jews in the place of penance, and that it might be locked fast upon him, with
a lock of iron, and that two Priests should lie and watch with him in the said
place of penance, and two should remain without that he might be safely kept
from making an escape.

The acts of the first of January being the feast of Circumcision. 1611.
THis day in the morning father Michaelis together with the two Capuchin
fathers, father d' Ambruc Sub-Priour of the coue^t of preaching Friars at S.
Maximin, and two other Priests M. Gaubert and M. de Rets, held a A counsel
held for the verification of the precedent acts, with the exclusion of the
fathers, the Exorcists and Confessors.
counsel at the Kings chamber, where it was concluded that father Romillon,
father Francis Billet, and father Francis Domptius the Dominican, who had
assisted these two possessed women since the beginning of Aduent, should be
excluded from the counsel, because the said father Michaelis meant to proceed
legally, and to that The two women that were possessed are separated that they
might be examined.
purpose had sequestered and examined severally the said women, that the verity
of this fact might be sifted and sound out, and that nothing but the pure truth
might be published.

The same day father Michaelis did minister the Communion to Louyse, and
Verrine against the commandment that was imposed upon him not to speak, began
to discourse and say, that God by revelation bad him make declaration of those
admirable discourses, which he must utter to those that were come purposely to
hear him.

The Dominican father was ^ little discontented because he was excluded from the
counsel, for he ^^ceaued that they did him wrong as suspecting him of
partiality.
The Dominican father who was the Exorcist demanded leave and license of father
Michaelis his superior to go home to his country, but not with that modesty
which is wont to be used to one of his rank: yet did he prostrate himself to
the feet of the said father, after the fashion of his Order, in the presence
of the Capuchin fathers, not without some appearance of spleen and anger. His
resolution was to get him home, because father Michaelis gave order that he
should not be present at the consultations, nor hear or examine that which
had been declared by Verrine: for his purpose was to examine and look into
these particulars himself, together with the above mentioned fathers. And this
was done by good advice and reason: for the said father was a party and wrote
all that Verrine had said during the whole time of Aduent, so that it stood not
with conueniency that he should be present at these examinations, that it might
be the more fairly carried and not obnoxious to any partiality or passion.

The audience of Magdalene.
The same day in the presence of the said father Michaelis the Capuchin
fathers, and the others above named, Magdalens desposition was heard, who, in
perfect sense and memory and in the presence of Jews Gaufridy desposed many
things against him touching her possession, seducement, and the like, described
at large in the acts that were gathered by father Michaelis from the eleventh
of January until almost the last of April. Furthermore, she showed the mark
which she had in her feet, which to outward appearance seemed to have lost
all sense, as experience made it clear when they made proof thereof, by
putting pinnes into them. Notwithstanding this deposition, Jews would by no
means make acknowledgement of his fault, but in a menacing sort he said, that
in time he doubted not but to have reason against those that had accused him,
and that he would never desire to stir alive from S. Baume, if he were not
found innocent.

The Magicians renouncing of Sorcery.
This evening father Michaelis did exorcise the two women that were possessed,
whereupon Jews, by the advice of some of his friends, renounced the art of
Magic, and at every renunciation Verrine answered, Anen: and in disclayming
all the scheduls Verrine likewise answered, Amen, and said unto him, Jews,
prepare thy soul, and God will give thee the light of his grace.

As father Michaelis in the exorcismes was saying these words, Qui inferni
triumphator fuit, Verrine replied, he shall triumph of hell again which is now
full of anguish and distraction; and when the Exorcist said, Quem ad imaginem
suam fecit, Verrine spoke and said, it was a goodly Image indeed before it was
defaced, but God does once again take his pencills and colors to repair and
make full those lineaments that are impared. After this Verrine spoke to Jews
and said Verrine would often say that the Magician was the lost of an infinite
number of souls, ^s Ad^m in times past had been.
Adam vbi es? Adam vbi es? Cry unto God from the bottom of thy heart, and he
will hear thee, pray unto him that thou may go where the quier of heaven
does sing Sanctus, Sanctus, and not where they curse father and mother, and the
everliving God himself. Then he said to Beelzebub this house is yet open, and
full of ruins, but if Jews will but lend the table of his heart to God, he is
so good a workman that he will depaint a lively portraicture upon the same.

After this father Francis the Dominican took the stole and demanded Astaroth
why he spoke not; whereunto Verrine answered, thou seek truth of him that
takes part with Lucifer, and not of him that takes part with God. Then did
Verine exhort Jews and endeavored to persuade him to be converted, inuiting
the Son of God to present his wounds unto his father: the Virgin Mary, to
show her breasts unto her Son: Peter and Magdalne, to obtain grace for Jews
by their tears, repentance, sorrows, and contritions.

Verrines exhortation to Jews.
We are here to note, that Verrine said to Jews, thou art like a desperately
sick man that lies at the point of death, who although he have the use of none
other of his members but of his tongue and ears only, yet if when the
Physician does ask him touching the cause and progress of his malady, and
he shall answer that he knows nothing, and that he has lost the use of
his memory, notwithstanding all this he may recover as long as his soul is in
conjunction with his That is to say there is no hope of men after they are dead.
body: for it suffices the Physician that the patient conceaueth himself to
have need of help, and permits that they minister unto him those remedies
that are fit for his recovery. So Jews, the Devils have taken away thy The
Magician told us, that if we did understand his condition we would be amazed
at it, for he had no memory. But in this he did cooperate with the Devil, and
gave his consent there unto, which being by the Devils oftentimes practiced
upon Magdalen they could never by any charms bring the same about (as shall be
seen hereafter) because she would never consent there-unto.
memory, but it is sufficient to recover thy health if thou will but be queath
the manage of thy self unto the true Physician of souls, who will
incontinently apply those medicaments unto thee, by the force whereof thou
shall easily recover.

The acts of the Second of January being Sunday.
THis day in the morning the Dominican father exorcised, whereupon Beelzebub
told them that he was bound by an oath which Jews had taken, but being
discharged and unbound he swore very solemnly, Beelzebub accuses Jews the
Magician.
that Louyse was really possessed, that Jews was the Prince of Magicians, and
that he himself had sucked upon him certain vndiscerneable marks; one in his
head, and another in his side: that Jews had bewitched Louyse, and that by a
charm of his, she was possessed. And this charm he gave unto her to cause
her to commit some soul crime against her God, but he of his mere grace had
preserved her. Verrine also confirmed the said oath of Beelzebub, and called
upon all sorts of creatures to take vengeance of Jews, if he were not
converted. Then he rendered the reason, why God would make use of him in the
discovery of Jews, because (said he) he had renounced all things that might
convert and discover him except the Devil. Then Verrine by the tongue and
consent of Louyse presented before God the father, the Louyse related unto us
that she understood well all that Verrine had prompted unto her, and did readily
cooperate and gave her assistance to all the prayers that were powered forth
for the conversion of the Magician.
wounds of his son, and said, if thou will thou can pardon Jews, and a
drop of thy Sons blood is able to appease thee. He further said, Mother of
God, restore unto this poor infirm wretch the use of his senses, and to this
blind man the light of his understanding: plunge thy self Jews into the
wounds of thy Redeemer, and he will receive thee into his protection.

Then he turned to the assembly and said, There are of you that shall see the
time of the persecution which shall be made by Touching Antichrist see the
Apology unto the doubts.
Antichrist, and many shall then suffer martyrdom.

Then he said, it is not so difficult a matter to purchase back the souls of
Cain, Pilate, Herod and Judas from hell, or the Devils themselves, who are too
well acquainted with the torments of that place, as to withdraw the soul of
Jews from his abominations whereunto it is so strongly glewed. The hardness
of the Magicians heart
Lucifer himself, and the whole rabble of Devils would not resist with so
settled and resolved obstinacy, if God were to call them to repentance, as this
Jews now does.

The advice for the separation of the women possessed.
The same day there was a consultation held, wherein father Michaelis made this
proposition, that his intendment was to exorcise Louyse, and Magdalen, that he
might have certain information whither they were really possessed or no: which
particular the Presidents and Counselors of the City of Aix were very
desirous to understand. Heere-upon it was concluded that they should be
separated, that Magdalene should remain in the Kings chamber, and Louyse in
another chamber, both of them attended by certain women appointed for that
purpose that they might not speak one to the other: that father Romillon,
father Francis Domptius, and father Francis Billet might not be present at the
consultation, nor at the examinations which should be taken of them, but should
only be admitted to the Exorcismes, that so all suspicion and doubt might be
removed, which some jealous brains might conceive of this fact.

The Exorcist changed.
The same day in the evening, father Paul, Priest of the doctrine who was
purposely come about this business, a man of extraordinary note, did exorcise,
in the beginning whereof Verrine spoke as if he had been Louyse her self,
Leuiathans answers.
saying; Exorcise me no more, for I am not possessed. Then the Exorcist
demanded Leuiathan what was become of Beelzebub, he answered that he was
entered into the body of Jews: To this the Exorcist replied: Why do not thou
get thee out of this body which is none of thine? Leuiathan answered, that he
would not go forth, because he was destin^ted thither for to torment her.
Then father Michaelis asked him, Quod tibi nomen: he answered, Leuiathan: Then
he demanded of him again; How many are there in her? There are of us (said he)
in every part of her body. Whereupon, asking him again, Why they did not get
them gone. He replied, we cannot go from hence until the schedules be
delivered. Then he was asked where these schedules were. He He said this
because he was put to silence upon the accusations against Jews, for a season.
answered that he would not tell them. Then Jews who was in a chamber hard by
was called for to come into the Church, and to renounce all the property and
right which he might pretend to have by those schedules; whither being come,
he made his renunciation accordingly. Then Leuiathan said, this renunciation
comes not from his heart. After all this, a Capuchin father began to exorcise
Jews: and when Verrine proffered him his assistance, and the means to do it,
the Capuchin father said, I have to do with thy master, Obmutesce maledicte.
Ha Michaelis (quoth Verrine) God has unloosed me, and do thou tie me up?
Then the Exorcist said again unto him, Obmutesce maledicte. But Verrine would
not hold his peace, and turning him to Jews he said, Whence arises it that
thou art not able to impose silence upon the Devils which are in the body of
Louyse, and yet have power to chain up those that are in the body of
Magdalene? As I am a Devil I cannot know thy inward thoughts and
apprehensions, but as I am here by Gods appointment, I do easily diue into
thy most reserved cogitations.

The Acts of the 3. of January.
THis day in the morning (after that Jews had been with father Michaelis in
his chamber, and made semblance to weep, although he played the hypocrite in
all this) Magdalene being much tormented with the Exorcisme, Verrine began to
speak in this sort:

Almighty God, why do thou not send an Angel, The Devils exclamation and
inuectiue against the obdurateness of the Magician.
or some famous Preacher to unfold these mysteries, but do thus make a
seely woman the instrument of thy glory? but it is enrolled in thy eternal
decrees, that thou will utterly confound the damned Art of Magic, by the
means of poor and dis-respected creatures. Make me to change states with the
Magician, and I will ass^re thee that I will repent me of my sins: for if I
might obtain this grace at thy hands, I do not say that I will prostrate my
self only at thy feet, but would also humble my self to the lowest depth of
the pit of Hell, and pray thus unto thee: Good God, erect a ladder from the
bottom of Hell, which may reach unto the Heavens, and let all the steps be
framed of the sharpest razors, and I will with all my heart pass up and down
upon the same, ascending and descending til the day of doom shall aproach: all
which I would esteem as easy as to tread on flowers and Roses, and should
accept thereof as of a high and singular favor. This Magician Jews (O God)
has sometimes pronounced the words of consecration, and at other times not, he
plays the hypocrite and Pharisie, making iourneyes into Turkey and Flanders,
to visit the Synagogues and assemblies of Satan. It is not for me (good God)
to find fault with thy Majesty, yet I wonder why thou would permit such
prodigious villainies to be contrived and acted. Of a truth I see thou will
show hereby the vn-exhausted riches of thy bounty, as thou did in times
past to Peter and David. A wicked life and a good end do seldom follow one
the other: he that will die well, must live well.

Then he said unto S. Magdalene. Magdalene, thou had once thy body
possessed by Devils, but not after the manner that Magdalene here is
possessed. Thou were once a Courtizan, and were amorously inclined to keep
company with proper and handsome men, but at the last thou did fall in love
with the fairest among the sons of men, as this Magdalene now does.

The hypocrisy of the Magician.
Then Verrine said, Jews unto outward appearance seems to be a Saint, but
inwardly he is full of all impiety: he pretends abstinence from flesh, yet
does he glut himself with the flesh of Infants.

Here is to be noted that Beelzebub also witnessed the same at an Exorcisme:
wherein it was demanded of him what the reason was, that during the space of
nine or ten days, that Jews remained at S. Baume, taking his meals with the
religious persons there, he ever left his meat upon his trencher and would
eat nothing: to which he answered, sporting and gibing at him, Tush, he
little regards your pottage and eggs, he feeds upon good flesh, the bodies
of Infants, which are inuisibly sent unto him from the synagogue.

This is very obseruable, for he made repetition diverse times of the same.
Moreover Verrine said Louyse shall not live long to enjoy the glory and good
of this action: for The death of Louyse.
she shall die soon after the Church has approved of these acts.

You ask to have signs showed unto you of her possession: some would have me
speak Greek, others Spanish, and many ask questions of me in Latin; but I
tell you this work is very far distant from the admittance of any curiosity.
I have foretold you many things already happened, as that Louyse should be
examined, and Magdalene converted, and do you yet with the Pharisees hunt
after signs and wonders?

Then he said, all the conuentions of Sorcerers are in an uproar, and Hell it
self is in confusion, seeing that the conversion of their Prince Jews
Gaufridy is so closely pressed: they are more distracted then the Kingdom of
France would be, if her most Christian King should become a Sarazen, or then
the Church would be, if the Pope should prove an Heretic.

He further said, God will root out this cursed race, and will fill up the
seats of the Angels that fell, because the day of judgment is now at hand,
and Touching Antichrist, see the doubts after the Epistle to the Reader.
Antichrist is already borne of a Jewish woman that was got with child by an
Incubus. God will now prepare his soldiers for the field, and the Devil his:
Magicians shall be the forerunners and Prophets of Antichrist.

Two Capuchin fathers go to Marseille.
This day about three of the clock in the afternoon the two Capuchin fathers
departed to go to Marseille, which journey they undertook both by the advice
of father Michaelis, and of their own voluntary desire, to inform themselves
of the life and manners of Jews Gaufridy, and to search his chamber and
books, if peradventure amongst them any schedules or characters of Magic
might there be found.

The same day in the evening whiles father Michaelis was exorcising, Beelzebub
cried out, see, see, the Witches are carried inuisibly.
witches, that are come to visit their Prince Jews: to which Verrine said,
their Prince called for them, but God muzleth up the wolf that comes to
devour the sheep. It is the dogs duty to obey his shepherd, and to bark and
give notice unto him of the wolfes coming, and Verrine barketh like a dog.
thereupon he presently fell a barking like a dog, which he did at sundry
other times when the Magicians and witches came to S. Baume inuisibly. Then he
said, will you not suffer me to talk, who am an instrument in the discovery
of these witches? And Beelzebub being asked what they were that were lately come
thither, and from whence they came, he answered I am bound to silence.
Whereunto Verrine said, do not wonder that he speaks not, it is by reason of
your unbelief; would you have God come down from heaven and lead you up and
down by the hand. You have the Prince of Magic in your hands, will not this
satisfy you? But you are so blind you will believe nothing. then he cried with
a loud voice, Magicians and witches, God confound the whole rout of you: what
seek you here in this Church? this is not a place for your cursed Synagogue:
but I see your The superior Devils do tie and bind up those that are
inferior and in subordination unto them, as amongst men the stronger binds
him that is weaker, and makes him to hold his peace. So amongst living
creatures, one by the instinct of nature, does master another.
project is to check the Devil and keep him from speaking, and thou accursed
Magician, the ringleader of this rabble; God confound thee thou stinking Goat.
Then he took his oath that the Devils in Magdalene were bound, and could not
speak, and that he was free from the same, and therefore (said he) you ought
to listen unto me who am of a contrary faction unto them. Upon this he was
bid to discover the ambushments of the Devil: whereunto Verrine said, since
you will needs have me to express and explain unto you what I formerly had
said, listen unto me. It is the pleasure of God, that all men know what I have
said this morning, and not the confessors of Louyse only: for God will now
make demonstration of his exceeding bounty. The truth is Magdalene is not
thoroughly converted, but is perpetually vexed with the Incubi, who commit a
thousand impurities with her. It is true We were yet in indifferency, and were
at that time making inquiry after these things.
Michaelis that God will be offended with thee, unless thou take some order
that this be redressed: and do not think that I speak it for her behoof, or
for the sake of her here, whom I now possess: for if she be not possessed,
why do you exorcise her, were it not better to send her back into the
kitchen? She would be contented with such a place, as she was formerly before
she came hither. What think you, why does not Magdalene harken now unto me:
The reason is, because I speak the truth and she is not yet thoroughly
converted: she obeys not her superiors, and confesses her sins with
niceness and affectation like a Player. Magdalene you must not confess them
so, but you are to reveal them unto the Priest with much penitency and
compunction. Then Verrine was commanded to speak lower; for he cried as loud
as possibly the forces of a woman could give assistance thereunto. Unto which
Verrine answered, when I speak low you despise me, and when I talk aloude you
put me to silence. Sodom, never were such abominations spoken by thee; nor in
the time of the flood did there ever happen so strange a fact as this is, yet
were they drowned in the waters, and burned with the fire. Was it ever heard of
before, that the Devil should come to reprehend sinners? You know there is a
The difference of Devils.
difference to have a Devil in the body, and to have a Devil in the soul, or
to have him in the body for the conservation of the soul. Afterward when some
or other had told him that he was to obey the Church as the spouse of God, he
answered that this spouse also was to humble her self before her husband. God
goes about to enlighten you with the brightness of his grace, yet do you ever
cry unto me Verrine By this often reproving of the Devil they gave intimation
unto him that they did not believe him.
obmutesce. I tell you I will speak, but it shall be for the glory of God. Did
I ever bid you worship Verrine? no, I ever told you that I was a damned Devil.
If I have spoken evil, reprove me of this evil; but good God (said he)
command me to speak Hebrew, or to do some other prodigious and amazefull act,
for these poor blind caitiffes are yet calling upon me for a sign. But what
did you Lord to those that asked a sign of you: you could have given them
signs from heaven which their curiosity did itch after, but you would not
satisfy their brain-sicke fancies herein, because they wanted faith, which
should be in men.

Michaelis, the young sucking Infants which they have eaten, and others which
they have strangled, and dug up from graves to make pies withal, cry loud
for vengeance before God, for crimes so punishable, and full of execration. Yet
are not these accursed Magicians contented, but will pluck God from his
Throne: they worship a The adoration of a Goat in their Synagogues.
Goat, and sacrifice unto him every day. What? Think ye not that God is
exceedingly incensed by these audacious prouocations? At their tables and
meals they use no knives, because they will not pare off their imperfections:
they use no salt, because they hate the virtue of wisdom, they have no Olives
nor oil, because they love nothing but crudities and cruelties. In this very
Baume do they keep their Sabbaths: in this very Baume do they devour man^
flesh: in this very Baume do they belch forth inconceivable blasphemies
against the sacred Trinity, the Sacraments, the mother of God, and all the
Saints in Paradise. Has not God then inst occasion to be incensed against
them? The Turk with his unbelief; the Jews with their expectation of the
Messiah, the Heretics with their adorations of the bastardly figments and
conceptions of their own brains, are not to be held in such detestation as
these Magicians here: for they do day by day renounce God, and there passes
not a minute wherein they crucify him not. I do further affirm, that if this
which has been pronounced and published in S. Baume had been declared at
Geneua, they would have shaken off the chains and ^etters of their obstinacy:
yet do the children of the Church keep the Magician from me, and will not
suffer me to speak unto him. O Michaelis, the Magician is now in thy
custody, have a curious and quick regard over him, for he does yet put
Magdalene to shrewd plunges. After this Jews was sent for from his chamber to
come unto the Church, and as he entered Verrine barketh against Jews.
Verrine did bark and bay wondrous like a dog, and said, Marvel not that I
thus bark, for I see the woolfe. Then he spoke to Jews and said, thou art a
Magician, thou art an execrable Sorcerer, I lay it here before thee, that if
thou be not speedily converted thou The prediction that Jews should be burnt,
and the two women exorcised at Aix, as it afterward happened.
shall be burned: and these two women here must be exorcised before the
Parliament at Aix. If Jews be not converted within eight days, I tell you
here before hand, and do call to witness the blessed mother of God, the
Seraphins, Martyrs, Virgins, Saints, and as many as be of you, that He was
degraded by the Bishop of Marseille, who was also deputed a Commissary at the
hearing of his cause.
he shall be delivered up into the hands of the governor of Marseille, and
then let them speak whither Louyse were possessed or no.

Here is to be observed, that the Capuchin fathers found not any thing in the
chamber of Jews that might any ways concern Magic, and this search
displeased many at Marseille, and presently it was bruted abroad through all
the city, that father Michaelis was the author of all this.

You must further note, that the Magicians and Witces which came inuisibly into
S. Baume left very vile and offensive savors behind them, and cast, now upon
one, and now upon another certain powders and oils once upon father Francis
Billet, and twice upon father Anthony Boilletot, who found himself benoynted
over the lips, and when he asked Jews what the meaning thereof might be,
he only laughed at the same. They also threw such kind of stuff upon sister
Catherine, who was co-adiutour of the company of S. Vrsula, so that she was a
long time grievously sick upon the same.

The prediction of the execution and death of the Magicia^ ratified by a
solemn oath which prediction the Devil gave as a sign*
Besides all this, Verrine took his oath on Gods behalf, the Creator of
heaven and earth, and on the behalf of the blessed mother of God, and of
Angels, Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, Doctors, Confessors, Virgins and
Widows, and on the behalf of the whole Church triumphant and militant, and to
the irreparable confusion of all hell, that except Jews Gaufridy be converted
he should be taken, bound, and burnt. And added, that if ever oath were in
force and validity, it was this which he had taken: and therefore (said he)
do not ask further for any signs, and so inuocated the wrath of God upon
himself if it were not true. He further said, that if he would be converted,
there should no harm betide unto him; but it was more probable that he should
be punished.

The acts of the 4. of January.
This day, during the time of Mass which Louyse heard, Verrine cried Lord,
suffer me to speak Spanish or Greek, for they The difficulty which the
fathers made of the truth hereof.
are ever demanding signs of me: or permit this Sub-Prior who is so full of
doubts and incredulity to be blind of an eye, or this father who is a Capuchin
to fall presently lame, or command fire from heaven, so they shall have signs
enough. Then he said, if you make a doubt of the wisdom and discretion of
your God, you were best to help him with your advice. They demand signs, and
say, that whatsoever is done or spoken, proceeds only from Louyse,
notwithstanding they suffer her to receive the Communion, who has so many
times called for the wrath of God to fall upon her. I would say thus, if she be
not possessed (as some would have it) she is worse then Lucifer, and deceaueth
the Church of God by unfolding so many propositions that are wrapped up in
admiration and astonishment: as that Solomon is damned, and Antichrist borne.
She were worthy to be taken and burnt, or that God should open the womb of
the earth to swallow her up alive, if she should be guilty of a practice so
full of insolency and boldness. Then Verrine spoke to Louyse and said.

Poor wretch look well to thy self, alas, who will defend thee? Thou art but
a simple woman, and do put thy self in hazard of thy life, if thou say that
thou have in all these discourses spoken no heresy. But I tell you that there
was never seen a thing like unto this which you now behold. What say thou
Louyse? speak thou nothing? Thou must be apprehended and burnt in steed of
the Magician. O miserable blindness! it is no wonder if heretics believe not,
since you your selves after my relations of so many admirable things, and after
the book which is already written, do thus stagger in your belief? Michaelis
thou know well whither Louyse spoke this or no, for thou art privy to all
her confessions.

Then he said, take heed good Christians, for every one that thinks himself
to be in the bosom of the Church shall not be saved, neither shall all those
that be in religious orders enter into the kingdom of heaven: and added, I
protest before thee, O Lord, that I have faithfully discharged thy commission.
See you not that Beelzebub is contrary unto me, and I to him? Come, come,
accursed The prediction that the Magician should be enlarged upon supposition
of his innocence: which was verified the 14. and 15. of January.
Magician, thou will be said to be innocent, and then shall they suffer thee to
depart.

The acts of the 5. of January.
Upon this day was Magdalene exorcised by the Dominican father, whereupon
These departures were very sensible, as well by the blast which brake forth
from her mouth as by their names which in their issuing ^orth they gave
themselves.
there went out of the body of Magdalene two and twenty Devils, being commanded
thereunto by the Prince that was within: yet so as they were to return thither
again after a certain space. And in their issuing forth one after the other
they made a rusling and noise, every one calling himself by his own name, as
Agrotier, Perdiguier, and so of the rest as they are afterward set down in the
following acts of the month of January. Then Astaroth said in the latin
tongue that Beelzebub, Leuiathan and Carreau, were entered into the body of
Jews, saying: Beelzebub est in intellectu, Leuiathan in voluntate, Carreau in
cord.

The acts of the 6. of January.
Upon this day was Magdalene exorcised by father Paul Priest of the Christian
doctrine: whereupon Beelzebub said, as long as Magicians are partisans with us,
we do never use to possess them, at the least not visibly, but Magicians are
not possessed.
when they begin to apostate from us and relinquish our Synagogue, then we do
begin to torment them, and if I had leave to tyrannize upon the body of
Magdalen, and to let out my rage against her at the full, I would handle her in
such an impetuous manner, that she should never depart from hence with her
life. And when he was bid to point forth the Magician that had bewitched
Magdalene, he answered, he is not far from hence: and added, I am bound.

After dinner was Louyse exorcised by father Francis Domptius the Dominican:
whereupon Verrine said, you will not yet believe, but at the end and
Catastrophe of this history, which is not yet perfected, you will give credence
thereunto: God has reserved to himself an illustrious manner of working, by
which in conclusion he will get the upper hand. They are to This is to be seen.
go to Marseille and to Auignon before the Vicelegate, and there it shall be
seen whether the witchcraft of Louyse be imaginary only, and builded upon a
coniecturall conceit (as it was given out at S. Baume) and whether the scope
whereunto she does address her actions, be ambition or no. The schedules
also must be restored, otherwise these two cannot be freed. Then one of the
company said, thou art not to press that too far: whereunto Verrine suddenly
replied without being questioned thereof, call to mind the miracle of
Theophilus and There were schedules rendered to Theophilus the Magician, and to
S. Basil for an other Magician, as is set down at large in their lives.
Basil, it could not indeed stand with expediency to press this, if no man
should have notice where they were, but it is well known where these are, and
in whose custody they lie. I tell you God is now more angry then he was in the
time of the Ninevites, for the air is infected with their malice, and the
earth can no longer bury in silence the death of so many children which they
have devoured: they please their appetites with the relish of this delicate
flesh which does cost them nothing.

The same day in the evening was Magdalene exorcised by Mr. Paul, whereupon
Beelzebub being demanded whither the Devil did torment Magicians or no? He made
answer that they did not, except when they were converted, or when they were
in the way to conversion: but whenever such conuersions should happen, they
might well be filed in the list and catalogue of Miracles. There be an hundred
and an hundred that are dead, and yet but one only Parisian that in visiting
of Lazarus was converted, and three days after he dyed. And being asked
touching the witchcraft of Louyse, he answered, that it was two years since
she had these charms upon her, and that she had on her body enchantments,
marks, ligatures and ointments.

The acts of the 7. of January.
THis day before the Communion Verrine played many prankes full of resistance
and insolency, saying, Louyse, thou art lunatic as they report of thee: thou
art foolish, thou do counterfeit and use much iugling: do thou think to
put a trick upon the whole world? Then he added, what, do madd women receive
the Communion? Then he spoke to father Michaelis, and said, Michaelis command
me, Being in a Church of his jurisdiction.
for I am as much tied to obedience unto thee, as is Louyse.

Verrines complaint unto God.
The same day Verrine disputed with God, as was collected by his speeches
saying, Great God, they are not content to hear thy Embassage from me, send
unto them a blessed Angel: bid Gabriel, Raphael, or Michael, or else Rafael,
who was Adams good Angel, to go in this errand, that they may bring back and
convert this third Adam. God answered him, I will not send my Angels, for if
he whom I should send should speak unto them in an invisible form, they
would say that he were a Devil: if in a humane and visible shape they would
cauil that he were a man. Then said Verrine, send unto them the mother of thy
Son: God answered, that this mission would not be available, no not if I
should send my Son again amongst them, for if he should come down from
heaven visibly, they would again crucify him. Whereunto Verrine answered,
send then unto them some famous preacher. God replied, No, it is my will that
this employment should be undertaken by thee. Lord, said Verrine, they will not
believe me, but do ever ask for signs. God answered, leave that to me, I
will provide them signs sufficient to create a belief in them.

Then Verrine applying his speech unto the time, which was the day of the
Kings, said to those that were present. Every one must make enquiry after the
child Jesus in the company of the three Kings, who represent unto you your
three faculties: for the memory offers the mirrhe of contrition by calling
your sins unto remembrance: the understanding presents incense by
contemplating and thinking upon the blessings of God: and the will gives the
gold of charity, but the star of faith must guide you and go before you, for
good works without faith, are barren and ineffectual.

Here is to be observed, that all the time that Jews Gaufridy remained at S.
Baume, which was nine or ten days, they read certain chapters of the Bible
while they sat at dinner and supper, according to the custom of the Order of
Preaching Friars, and by mere chance lighted upon the The prophecy of
Ezechiel accidentally lighted on and read.
Prophecy of Ezechiel, where the chapters that were read for the space of nine
or ten days (being a thing chancefull and not premeditated) did all point
out the conversion of a sinner, and laid down the threatenings against those
that should be obstinate, and the mercy unto those that should prove penitent,
to so good purpose, and so expressed to the life that we were all amazed at the
same, and thought of no other thing while we sat at meat. Notwithstanding
this, and all other exhortations, which sometimes one father, and sometimes
another gave unto the said Jews; yet were they not of any force to mollify
and soften him, the chapters that were read were continued from the 18. to the
40.

The Acts of the 8. of January.
THis day Jews Gaufridy after dinner departed from S. Baume to return to
Marseille: the These Canons did allege that Jews was a Priest appertaining to
the Dioce^^e of the Bishop of Marseille; to whom we answered, that he was come
thither not upon command but by advice.
Bishop of which place had sent four of his Canons to seek him out, who came
to S. Baume upon Friday being the seventh of that month, in the evening. Then
Beelzebub triumphed, thinking that he had gained the better of the cause,
because the Magician was suffered to depart as innocent, and the precedent Acts
were in a manner condemned, so that Verrine for a season was put to silence:
and every one expected to see the censure which father Michaelis, and the
fathers that were with him would pass upon this fact, that they might inform
the Court of Parliament at Aix of the truth thereof, as Monsieur du Vair the
first President, and the rest of the Council did desire: so that father
Domptius the Dominican and Exorcist in the time of Aduent was commanded to
surrender all the papers which he had written; which he denied to do,
conceiving that father Michaelis would either tear or burn the^, in so much
as they were constrained to force open his chamber door, to get into their
hands all the Acts that were past even to this day, Inquisition into the verity
of the writings.
and all for the stricter examination of the cause. The said father being thus
incensed was commanded to his chamber for certain hours, and was afterward
provoked by the mockes and taunts of some of the said fathers, who made a jest
of that which he had written, and told him that there was nothing contained in
those writings but fables and falsehoods. They also were ever contradicting him
in many particulars, and hoped by some trick and device of theirs to cause the
said Acts to be abolished in the Synod of the Right Reverend father the Bishop
of Marseille, and in the mean time to give it out, that all was mere gullery
and cheating: but this devise of theirs took not, as shall appear hereafter,
although that Jews, together with some that were dealt withal by those above
named, did not long after go to Jews the Magician went away to Auignon with
some others to make declaration of his innocence, but he was remitted back
again.
Auignon, and to Aix, to declare and make intimation of his innocence,
affirming that the whole body of this fact was merely practice and foolery.

The same day the said father Domptius went to Auignon, although he gave out
that he would go to Marseille with the fathers aforesaid, that he might from
thence return to his country of Flanders; where being come, he communicated
all this business with the Reverend father the Chaplain unto the most
Reverend the Archbishop of Auignon: where all his allegations and reasons which
he could enforce for the clearing up of the truth of these acts, were heard at
large, but they remitted him to Father Domptius sent back unto his superior.
father Michaelis inquisitor of the faith in all the Legateship of Auignon,
being willing to put off from themselves the prosecution and examination of
this business. Whereupon father Domptius returned to Aix, and entered into the
same communication which Monsieur Garandeau Vicar general to the most Reverend
the Archbishop of Aix, and afterward deputed for a commissary in the cause of
Jews the Magician, as Monsieur Thoron the counselor also was; but the said
Monsieur Garandeau sent him back to father Michaelis as belonging unto him who
was his Superior, and unto whom he was bound to render all obedience. Then the
said father Domptius the Exorcist returned to S. Baume, and humbly submitted
himself to whatsoever should be determined by the said father Michaelis, as
Inquisitor of the faith and his superior.

All these Acts being thoroughly examined, and the two women found to be
possessed, the Court was then certified of the whole; and father Michaelis
contrary to the opinion of many men gave back the Acts unto father Domptius to
dispose them into order and method against the end of the month of January.
Yet was there prosecution made of the same for the more ample verification of
these things from the eleventh of the said month until about the end of
April, as shall afterward appear.

The end of the first part.
THE ACTS THAT WERE COLLECTED AND DIGESTED INTO ORDER BY FAther Michaelis
Priour of the Covent Royal of S. Maximin, and of S. Baume; who came thither
after Christmas, in the year 1611. Returning from Preaching his Aduent Sermons
in the town of Aix in Province.
The Acts of the 11. of January. 1611.
AFter we had read the Acts that were formerly taken by father Francis
Domptius, and were verified by many eyewitnesses, men fearing God, and worthy
to be believed, who had ever been in presence and had an eye upon the two
women that were possessed: we then proceeded unto the Exorcismes and
continuation of administering the Sacrament, and for the more ample verification
of possession by wicked spirits, we narrowly sifted and pryed into the words
and gestures which they used. Upon the eleventh day of January after Mass was
said, Magdalene was exorcised, and Beelzebub being charged to come forth;
answered: Upon the day of the exaltation of the holy Cross last past, at the
Exorcisme performed at Aix in the Chapel of the doctrine, thou holding the
blessed Sacrament in thy hand (speaking to father This was a Priest of the
Doctrine, Confessor in ordinary to the sisters of S. Vrsula and particularly to
Magdalene since her possession: A man godly and learned, and at this present
Superior in the house of the Priests of the Doctrine in the city of Aix in
Province, who did Exorcise Magdalene in his Church.
Francis Billet who did Exorcise) by virtue of the same, and by the power of
the holy Cross, as also by the Virgin Mary's interposing her self by her
entreaties, there issued forth out of this body 6660 Devils, very privately and
without noise, who are not returned back unto this place, so that now there
are of us still remaining seven Princes, and 100* inferior Devils within and
without. And being asked when and how these Devils came out of her, he would
answer nothing thereunto, but only that they issued forth by the powerful
prayers of Mary, Magdalene, Dominicke, and Francis. Whilst the Exorcismes were
pronouncing, he drew back and was ever flying away, in so much that Magdalene
was saine to be stopped and held fast by maine force.

At the second Exorcisme in the evening, Beelzebub made answer unto nothing,
only he seemed sad and composed the face of Magdalene to melancholinesse.
Whereupon Verrine said, Beelzebub, I guess at the cause of thy sadness, it is
because there are four Magicians with many others as well men as women at
Marseille, at Aix and else where, in the high way to conversion. Then the
Exorcist admonished Magdalene to renounce the Devil, and all the schedules
which she had made unto him, which she did in very ample manner, saying: I
Magdalene of Demandoul do renounce She named all the wicked spirits in their
order as readily as any one could read them in a book.
Lucifer, Beelzebub, Leuiathan, Asmodee, Balberith, Astaroth, Carreau, and all
the Devils of hell, together with all those that live in the air, in the
water, and in the earth: and all those which are in ye bodies of such as are
possessed. I do also renounce all the schedules which I have made unto them,
and do prostrate my self at the feet of my Redeemer Christ Jesus, putting my
self under his protection, and humbly craving pardon for my enormous
transgressions: and for the better attainement hereof, I do implore the This
was her usual prayer when she was among the sisters of her Order which she
said by heart.
aid of the glorious mother of God, Queen of all the Angels of S Michal, and
the Angels of Joseph, and all the Patriarchs, of S. Peter, and all the
Apostles and Evangelists, of S. Steph^n and all the Martyrs, of S. Gregory and
all the Doctors, of S. Martin and all Bishops and Confessors, of S. Anthony and
all Monks and Hermites, of S. Dominicke, and S. Francis, and all Friars, of S.
Ursula and all virgins, of S. Monica, and all widows, of the glorious S.
Magdalene and all penitent sinners; promising unto God by the assistance of his
grace, never to adhere more or to give my consent unto the Devil. Beelzebub
strangely shakes Magdalane.
Whilst she made these renunciations, Beelzebub did toss and wreath her body
after a strange manner, the agitation whereof was such, that it made her
tremble over all her body: nevertheless she did resoluedly continue on her
abiuration although her voice trembled by reason of this extraordinary shaking.
Then Verrine by the mouth of Louyse said, Beelzebub, thou have now good cause to
be sad; for Magdalene has from her heart renounced thee and all the rest of
us.

The Acts of the 13. of January being the day of the octaue of Epiphany, 1611
for upon the day before, which was the 12. Beelzebub spoke nothing, Verrine
telling us that he was bound by the Magician.
THe 13. day about seven a clock at night, when Beelzebub was pressed and
urged to speak, at the beginning of the Exorcismes, he took Magdalene by the
throat as if he would have strangled her. And this endured a long time, until
he was commanded to get him down and to leave her.

After the Exorcisme, Magdalene being retired unto her chamber, and all of us
keeping her company (because it was not yet time to withdraw our selves,)
Beelzebub, by the tongue of Magdalene; as being now unloosed, (for he had bin
tied only during the time of Exorcisme) said that he would now speak. This
was said after the Exorcismes were past.
I my self (said he) am he that tempted Adam, and Beelzebub vaunteth that he
had tempted Adam, and Christ Jesus.
Asmodee taking on him the face of a hansome woman, did with sweet and sugered
speeches steal into Eve by his temptations, and perceauing that she began to
fluctuate, and was yet but a Nouice in the world, he was encouraged to enforce
and double his temptations and so at length remained victorious. I am he (said
Beelzebub) that tempted Christ Jesus in the wilderness with the two first
temptations: at the third which was the strongest to wit, to cause him to fall
down and worship me, I took Leuiathan for my coadiutor, but not being able to
gain upon him, we had a strong conjecture and suspicion that he was the
Messiah, whereas before we only esteemed of him as of a great and perfect
Prophet, for although some called him Christ, yet did they speak it either
doubtfully, or flatteringly. But we began to doubt no longer of him when he
once prayed for his enemies, after they had at my instigation (said Beelzebub)
so blasphemously reviled him, whom also I animated, to cast him down headlong
upon the stones as a blasphemer. I was on the right side of the Cross, Asmodee
at the foot, and Leuiathan on the left side, but he overcame us all. The
distinct places, and Office of Devils.
Leuiathan is the Prince of Heretics, Asmodee of wantons, and I (said
Beelzebub) am the Prince of pride, yet did he overcome those three mighty
adversaries, the world, the flesh, and pride. They fastened the Cross with
cords, and in setting it up in the hole which was forced into the rock, by the
shaking and shogging of the same they opened again all his wounds, he was
nailed with Some Doctors are of opinion, that he was fastened with four nails.
three long nails, having one foot nailed over the other to augment the
greatness of his torment: and in crucifying him they turned the Cross and his
face toward the earth, to fit and fasten the nails on the other side. This
Cross (said he) was very high, of the height of the Cross which you have
below at the coming in unto Saint Baume, if you add the height of a foot
thereunto, and was two foot broader then that. The form of this Cross was
not made in the manner of a [T] but it had a beam of wood above, and the Jews
turning the Cross down on the other end did hoise up his legs above his
belly.

Of a truth (said he) your God has suffered more for you then you imagine.
After he was dead, he visited the fathers in Lymbo, and all hell trembled at
his arrival. Adam and Eve were the first that presented themselves unto him,
who came with great contrition, and heartily prayed him to pardon their sins
that had occasioned those manifold torments which he suffered. He delivered,
like a great King, all the souls as well of those that were in Lymbo, as of
those that were in Some schoolmen do hold, that he did not deliver all the
souls that were in Purgatory, but all those that were in Lymbo, otherwise
called Abraham's bosom.
Purgatory, but the bodies which he had raised did upon this deliverance dye
again. When Beelzebub had said this, upon the sudden he blew out the candle
which stood on the table, whereat we were somewhat abashed, for it was night:
and crying with a loud voice, he said, Lodouice veni, veni, for the Magician
was indeed come, as Magdalene who saw him when he came, recited unto us. And
Beelzebub said to Magdalene, thou have not seen him since he hid himself
behind the bed, when thou would have done him some outrage, but he went away
as he entered in, and was carried from hence through the chimney.

After this we went to the Church to say Matines as our manner is, which being
ended, father Romillon advertised us that Beelzebub played strange horse-play in
the chamber, and would not suffer Magdalene to confess her self, nor to
kneel upon the Earth. Then father Michaelis flung toward her chamber, and
there did threaten him that he should be brought into the house of holy
penance, and causing it to be done accordingly Beelzebub cried, that he would
rather be there all night long, then suffer her to be confessed. Yet at the
presence of the blessed Sacrament which was showed unto him, and by the
holiness of the place, he was so dispirited and his forces so far spent,
that she confessed her self in that very place to father Michaelis with great
contrition and devotion to the singular comfort of her soul: and performed
diverse actions of humility and submission to all those that were there present,
especially to father Romillon whom she had resisted in her chamber, and so
remained reposedly, and in good quiet that night till about an hour after
midnight: at which time Jews the Magician came again unto her as she
afterward auowed, and cast a caracter upon her head to trouble her imagination,
memory, and other faculties of her soul, that they might stand her in no steed
against him in the accusations of the crimes wherewith he was burdened.

The Acts of the 14. of January. 1611.
THis morning at the Exorcismes, Beelzebub made all the body of Magdalene to
swell, and caused her The horrible gestures of Beelzebub in the body of
Magdalene.
visage to be exceeding red, so that she cast about strange and diabolical
looks, having her eyes sparkling and fiery, her lips open, her neck swollen
like a toade: sometimes he was ready to strangle her, and sometimes tumbled
her on the ground, sometimes he made her laugh, and sometimes he made her cry.
Being exorcised, and asked wherefore the night before, when Magdalene was
brought to the holy Penitence he cried and repeated it diverse times, that she
was not to have absolution after her confession, because she had committed a
sacrilege, he would not make answer thereunto until his pains were
augmented by a new coniuration. And then he answered, that he had said it to
make her fall into despair, by suggesting this scruple unto her, that he had
caused her to enter hastily into the holy penitence, so that she forgot to put
off her shoes as the manner is.

After this Verrine speaking by the mouth of Louyse, said: the last Evening,
when at the time of Exorcismes you heard a great cry above Great cries heard on
the top of the Church.
upon the Church, it was a great number of Magicians that came thither; some
because they believed not that Magdalene was converted, others to listen what
was said, others to spread abroad their charms and so to deceive her, others
to see a thing so worthy of admiration, that Verrine an inferior Devil should
brave Beelzebub who was his superior. Then Verrine began to bark like a
hunting dog, saying: that the Wolves were come again, thereby meaning the
Magicians whom he saw carried thither by the Devils.

Then said Verrine, The world is turned vpside down, for the Devils do now
labor to preserve men, and to plead for them as their Advocates and Proctors:
so that it is now no wonder, if God, the Angels, and the Saints do succor and
give assistance unto them: And added, that this was like the time of
Antichrist, when Nations should rise against Nations, so do now the Devils
bandy themselves, against Devils.

Then he inueighed against Magicians and reprehended them for their great folly
to combine and oppose themselves against God: Then he turned to Beelzebub and
said: I am not ignorant that thou Beelzebub with thy companions have determined
to torment and beat me grievously when I am once departed out of this body,
but I regard it not as long as I do my duty, and for the time to come, let it
hap as hap will. But see my brave Princes, the Princes of Tharasque was a
monstrous Dragon that devoured men in Tharascon in Province.
Tharasques (for so he called the Sorcerers) you have now no more force then a
fly, or a pismire, although you were of the Seraphins and my self but of the
Thrones, and thou Beelzebub were. feign to entreat me to side with thee, or at
the least that I would give thee my two companions Gresill, and Sonneillon to
aid thee, in soliciting the Magicians to hold out, but I refused thee, for I
here take part with God.

At the second Exorcisme at Evening Asmodee by the commandment of Beelzebub
(who was the chief in her body) did shake and tumble Magdalene after a The
filthy gestures caused by Asmodee.
beastly and odious manner, that he might shame her, and so bring her back
unto him, by persuading her to avoid the shame and imputation of these things
which were done in the sight and presence of men. And he continued these
courses above 15. days, so that in conclusion Magdalene utterly refused to go
to Exorcismes, when there were any strangers by. In the mean time Verrine
reproched Beelzebub, that he was now driven to his last shifts, and that the
Magicians and Witches did nothing but run in and out, to hinder the working
of God: which yet they were very unable to bring to pass.

Then he said, there are at Marseille, and elsewhere, many persons of good
rank and place, that go to Mass, and do nevertheless traficke with the
Devil: yet if they will be converted, God is not desirous they should be
punished or burnt, and does therefore force the Devils to carry them here to
S. Baume, that they might here understand our discourses: And then he added.
O Six Knights came from Marseille to lead with them the Magician, whom they
favored and gave countenance unto, as their special friend.
you that are come from Marseille (we silence your names for your credits sake)
to bring back the Magician, and to give out that he is a holy and innocent
man, retire your selves, retire your selves you shall see the end. The
silke-worme does but now begin to weaue the materials, but the tapistry that
must be made thereof, is not yet finished.

The Acts of the 15. and 16. of January, being Saturday and Sunday.
Upon the Saturday, which was the day wherein the friends and favorers of
Jews, did lead him to Marseille that he might there justify and clear
himself, all was in an uproar at Saint Baume. Verrine did nothing but cry as
loud as Louyses forces would permit, that the Prince of Magicians was like to
be declared guiltless: saying, O my Lord of Marseille, why have you licensed
these men to carry Jews away with them? you do not rightly understand the
business, but do offend through ignorance. There were also many men on this
day tempted to distemperatnesse, and much impatiency, for the Devil had been
sowing his tares amongst those that were at S. Baume, although through the
providence and grace of God, they were quickly choked.

The Sunday morning, Beelzebub spoke not, except when the Exorcist did reckon up
all the parts and members of her that was possessed, saying, A capite, a collo,
ab oculis, a naribus, ab arterys, a pulmone, a spatulis, a cord, etc.

Whereupon Beelzebub said (expressing a sensible gesture in every part of the
body, just when it came to be named, as stamping with the feet, when they
were named, and lifting up the knees, when they were pronounced, and so of the
rest) There are charms in every part of her, he that wants any, let him come
to Palud, for she has them in abundance.

At the same Exorcisme Verrine cried, and took on very terribly, when the
Exorcist set his hand on Louyses head, saying, take of this hand (which he
repeated diverse times) you should torture rebels, such as Beelzebub is, and not
me. And added, I only am tormented, and not my two companions Gresill and
Sonneillon.

Being exorcised, and adjured, to speak, why he was tormented, he said, that
the last night he was exceedingly importuned by Lucifer, to take his part,
which he Out of his commission we might easily conceive him to be a true
Devil, when he was left to his own nature; the judgment of God permitting
this to happen, least otherwise men might mistake, and believe him to be no
Devil.
had promised to do. He had also tempted Louyse to pray no more for Magdalene,
and had made her fall into a mortal sin by procuring her consent; he also
had made Louyse to say, that one of the fathers was a proud fellow: and she
had deceived her Confessor, with a confession which himself counterfeited,
and was not made by Louyse: for all which delinquencies (said he) Dominicke my
adversary has procured from God, that I should receive due chastisement.

Being commanded by Exorcismes to swear as abouesaid, he answered, with all
my heart, I will take mine oath, for Dominicke has also obtained this favor
from God. Then the Exorcist commanded him to put both his hands upon the words
of the consecration of the Chalice, and presented unto him the Canon of the
Mass in folio. Louyse who was altogether unlearned, did nevertheless put both
her hands upon the said words. Then did the Exorcist command him again to put
them upon the second prayer, which the Priest had said before the Communion,
which he accordingly did, and withal added, what art thou yet satisfied? and
so beginning his oath he said.

I swear unto thee by the power of the Father, by the wisdom of the Son,
and by the goodness of the holy Ghost, according to the intention of the
Church triumphant and militant, and according to thy meaning, and the meaning
of all these here, without reservation of any sinister intention whatsoever,
that what I have now said is true, to wit, etc. repeating that which he had
before delivered.

The same day at the Evening Exorcismes Beelzebub did shake Magdalene, as he
was accustomed, always drawing back her head, when the Exorcist would make
the sign of the Cross; and snatching the book of Exorcismes out of the
Exorcists hands, he threw it to the ground, and cried, get you gone, and open
the door for Romillon, for he would come in; which indeed they found to be
true.

They try the Devils, whether they would contradict themselves.
Being asked, which of them two was the greater and of most authority, himself
or Verrine, he answered, It is a frivolous question, and sauoureth of nothing
but of impertinency, and is not worth an answer.

When the Exorcist was naming all the parts of her body, as is already
declared, mentioning the reins, the Devil did strangely shake and stir the
same, saying: That the day before Blanch a Witch of Marseille, had laid a
charm made of gold and silver, and other ingredients, upon Magdalen's reins,
and had cast another through a trunk upon her eyes, that upon whomsoever
Magdalene should look, he should appear to her to be the Magician Jews.
Charms cast into the eyes of Magdalene. Saint Clement in his recognitions
recites the like of his mother, who thought, that she had ever Simon Magus
before her eyes.
And Magdalen being at her good times questioned upon the same, confessed, that
it was the greatest torment unto her that could be, to have that object and
apparition of Jews ever before her eyes, when any one came in her sight,
although it were her Confessor, or the Priest at Mass. But this charm
wrought not on her above 8. days, through the assistance of God and by the
efficacy of her frequent receiving of the Communion, which they ministered unto
her every day: for this is the sovereign remedy to escape, or to take away the
force of charms, as the Devils themselves in the virtue of Exorcismes would
not stick to confess: and did further affirm, that the Priests which did
celebrate the Communion every day, could not be charmed.

The same day Verrine said, The difference of the knowledge of God.
we understand and know God better then you, but in love unto him, I must
confess you do out-strippe us; but if you knew God as well as we, you would
be fond of him. We tempt every body, and albeit they thereby fall into mortal
sin, yet are not we punished for the same, if we exceed not our limits, or
the express commandment of God, intimated unto us by his Angels; because it
is in their own choice whether they will sin, or no; but we are sure to pay
for it, when we are the cause that they are exorcised, and stir up rebellion
in them: The accidental pains of the Devils.
and these pains are accidental, and do endure but for a season, as for an
hour, or a day, etc.

Being asked, whether he had borne the name of Verrine from the beginning, he
From whence the names of Devils have their original. Tertullian says, Ibi
nomen, vbi pignus.
answered that the Devils have no names, for they know one another perfectly
well, but they then take a name upon them, when they enter into a body; and it
is for distinctions sake: they do also change their names as they please, when
as they enter into other bodies. To conclude (said he) I am a spirit of the
air, and therefore less malicious then those that are lower in hell: the most
malicious of us all is Lucifer, who although he be Lucifer chained up in hell.
chained up in hell, yet has he aduertisements from all the quarters of the
Earth, and commands and gives directions unto others.

Being demanded, how Lucifer could understand all the occurences of things if
he be thus chained up, he began to laugh, and said, you are deuoid of sense,
and ordinary apprehension: does not a King that abides in his Palace, know
whatsoever passes in his kingdom, by means of Ambassadors, messengers, and
Posts? So the Devils go to hell, (for they are there very speedily) and take
instructions from Lucifer, who is more knowing, and of greater command then
them all.

The Acts of the 17. of Ianaary, which was Monday, being the Feast of S.
Anthony.
WHiles Mass was saying, there grew a great contestation between Beelzebub,
and Verrine, Beelzebub did intellectually and by an intrinsicke conference with
Verrine, make impression in his understanding standing to desire him to go with
his associates to Marseille, and to lend him his helping hand to harden the
Magicians and Witches, that were now at a stand, and very shreudly shaken in
their former resolutions, because their Prince was detected and named. Unto
whom Verrine audibly made answer, that he would not go; saying, that he had
sworn allegiance unto God, and did not therefore fear the pains which they
threatened him withal: that he might go thither himself, if he had any fancy
thereunto: and that since he would needs boast his greatness and command, he
should do well to try his forces. But as for me, and my companions (said he)
God has hired us yesterday morning, as a man will hire a laboring man to
dress and trim his Vineyard: so that thou come to late to hire us to thy
service: thou were lazy and did slip thy time, I do not mean to work at
thy request: for when I have industriously wrought for thee, what reward can
thou give me but the pains of hell? thou have no other thing to bestow. But
See the Apology unto the 10. doubt after the Epistle to the Reader.
God has promised unto me See the Apology unto the 10. doubt after the Epistle
to the Reader.
an asswagement and lessening of my pains, and therefore I will labor for him
in this business: tempt not me nor my companions any more. O what brave
Princes you are, that do neither defend nor govern your people any better! It
is very obseruable, that Verrine being the night before tempted in the same
nature, took on, and plained himself like a child, saying: They will force me
to go to Marseille to strengthen the Magician, God will punish me, if I do it.
And after some distances he would often repeat these words, no, no: so that it
seemed, that God had restored some part of his God binds and vnbindeth the
Devils, how and when it pleases him: yet he does this but at times, permitting
them sometimes to do whatsoever their natural power can accomplish; at other
times he weakneth this power of theirs, as seems good unto him. Examples
hereof are in the 1. of Job in the 7. and 20. of the Apocalypse, and elsewhere.
former force to Beelzebub, that he might labor Verrine, and almost constrain
him to his pleasure: and he did once in a manner consent unto him (as we have
formerly observed) for the which he was well beaten.

After Mass Beelzebub, being departed from the body of Magdalene, as it seemed
to go to Marseille for the above named purposes, the Exorcist demanded, which
of the Devils did then bear sway in her body. One of them answered, that it
was Balberith. And being asked of what order he was, he made very dainty to
utter it, yet at last he spoke these words. I am constrained by God upon the
intercessions of the Virgin Mary, of Magdalene, of Michael, and of Francis, to
declare this, and other things of the like nature unto you.

1. Beelzebub was Prince of the Seraphins, and next unto Lucifer: for all the
Princes, that is to say all the chief of the nine quiers of Angels are fallen,
and of the quire of Seraphins there fell the three first, to wit, Lucifer,
Beelzebub, and Leuiathan, who did all revolt, but the fourth who was Michael,
was the first that resisted Lucifer, and all the rest of those good Angels
followed him: so Michael the chiefest of the Angels.
that now he is the cheifest amongst them all. Lucifer when Christ descended
into hell, was there chained up, where he commands all, and every one of
them knows how to traficke in his own trade.

What the temptations of Devils are, and who are their adversaries in heaven.
Beelzebub tempts men with pride: And as John Baptist holds Lucifers place
in Paradise, because he was the greatest amongst men, and had obtained this
great favor by his singular humility, opposite unto the pride of Lucifer: so
Beelzebub has Frauncis for his adversary in heaven, who was father and founder
of the Friars minorites, and a great example of humility.

2. Leuiathan, is a Prince of the same order, and is the ringleader of the
Heretics, tempting men with sins, that are directly repugnant unto faith, he
has Peter the Apostle, who is Vicar of Christ Jesus, and chief Bishop in the
Church, for his adversary: unto whom the promise was made, Portae inferi non
praeualebunt.

3. Asmodee is of the same order, he continues a Seraphin to this day, that
is, he burns with the desire to tempt men with his sin of luxuriousness,
and is the Prince of wantons. John Baptist is his adversary in heaven, who
lived and died a perfect Virgin.

4. Balberith. Judge. 9.
Balberith is Prince of the Cherubins, he tempts men to commit homicides,
and to be quarrelsome, contentious and blasphemous. His enemy in heaven is
Barnabas the Apostle, because of his great modesty.

5. Astaroth Prince of the Thrones, is always desirous to sit idle and be at
ease: he tempts men with idleness and sloth. Bartholomew the Apostle is
his enemy in heaven, who prayed to God, a hundred times a day, and a hundred
times a night, kneeling in great humility upon the earth. He did also vanquish
that idol Astaroth.

6. Verrine is also one of the Thrones, and next in place unto Astaroth, and
tempts men with impatience. His adversary in heaven is Dominick your father,
who was singularly patient in all injuries and adversities.

7. Gr^ssib is the third in the order of Thrones, and tempts men with
impurity and uncleanness, and his adversary in heaven is Bernard, whose
conversation was unblameable and full of purity.

8. Sonneillon is the fourth in the order of Thrones, and tempts men with
hatred against their enemies. His adversary in heaven is Stephen, who prayed
for his enemies.

9. Carreau Prince of Powers, tempts men with hardness of heart, his
adversaries in heaven are the two Vincents, the ou^ a Martyr, the other
surnamed Ferrier, of the order of preaching Friars, whose hearts were full of
tenderness and softness. And this Devil is ever about Magdalene, laying the
nets of his temptations to make her obstinate.

10. Carniueau is also a Prince of Powers, and does tempt men to obscenitie and
shamelessness. His adversary in heaven is John the Evangelist, who was a virgin.

11. Oeillet is a Prince of Dominations: he tempts men to break the vow of
poverty. His adversary in heaven is Martin, who gave half his cloak to a
beggar.

12. Rosier is the second in the order of Dominations, and by his sweet and
sugered words, he tempts men to fall in love. His adversary in heaven is
Basil, who would not listen to amorous and enchanting language.

13. Verrier is Prince of Principalities and tempts men against the vow of
obedience, and makes the neck stiff and hard as iron, and incapable to
stoop under the yoke of obedience. His adversary in heaven is Bernard a great
friend of the Virgin's, and indeed an imitator of her in her obedience. Fiat
mihi, etc.

14. Belias Prince of the order of Virtues tempts men with arrogance. His
adversary is Francis de Paul for his great and doue-like humility. He also
tempts gentle-women to pranke up themselves with new fangled attires, to make
wantons of their children, and to prattle unto them whiles Mass is saying, and
so to divert them from the service of God.

15. Oliuier Prince of the Archangels tempts men with cruelty and
mercilesnesse toward the poor. His adversary in heaven is Laurence, Qui
dispersit and dedit pauperibus.

16. Iuuart is Prince of Angels, but he is in another body, and has not his
aboade here.

This evening Balberith was coniured by the virtue of exorcismes to name all
the Devils which were in the body of Magdalene, who answered, I will name the
chief of them, but not the whole rabble who are here in great number, and are
as petty lackies who deserve not to be named. Besides the twelve which I have
already named to be in this body, there are also,

Carton, Arangier, Bladier, Baal, Agrotier, Raher, Coustelier, Perdiguier, the
two Planchers, Potier, Stone-strong, Hard-hart, Stop-mouth, Fire-stone. There
you have seven and twenty of them: and adding unto them the three which are in
Louyse, they make up the number of thirty. I will reckon up no more.

Being coniured to say what their temptations were, and what Saints were their
adversaries, he constrainedly made answer. Observe the order which he here
keeps in numbering of them in the same place and rank as when he first
delivered them.
Carton does tempt men with vanity and pride. His adversary is James the
Hermit, who held all the vanities pomp and preferment of the world in
misprision.

Arangier does tempt men with pleasures. His adversary is Sebastion, who did
shun the allurements of earthly contentations, and lived in great continency.

Bladier was the ninth in the order of Cherubins: he tempts men against
their vocation, and makes them weary of Inspirations and Confessions. His
adversary is Joseph the husband of Mary, who was very constant in his vocation
sweetly reposing himself in good inspirations, and was very diligent in his
charge without grudging at the same.

Baal was the 50. in the order of Thrones. He tempts men to commit murder.
His adversary is Raymond of Capua, confessor unto Catherine of Sienna, who was
of your order, upon whom we could never gain or fasten any of our purposes,
for he loved every body with all his heart.

Agrotier tempts men with a thirst of honor. He is of the order of
dominations, and his adversary is Jerome, who contemned all the honors of the
world.

Raher was the third Arch-angell. He tempts men to hardness of heart as
Carreau does: his adversary is Vincent Ferrier, who continually remained
penitent, and was of your order.

Coustelier was of the order of Virtues: he tempts men with contentions,
wranglings and making of processes. His adversary is Peter the Martyr one of
your order also, who was of an admirable sweet and clement disposition, and
frankly forgave all injuries.

Perdiguier was of the order of Powers: he tempts men also with impurity, for
one cannot be every where with those of his troop. His adversary is Bennet for
his great purity.

Plancher was of the order of Archangels; he tempts men with disobedience.
His adversary is James that was of your order, who in writing left the letter
(O) imperfect thereby to show his obedience.

Potier is the second in the order of Cherubins: he hardneth men's hearts that
they should not pray to God nor meditate upon his mercies. His adversary is
Victor the Martyr who is ever praying or meditating.

Stone-strong was the eight in the order of Thrones: he tempts men with the
difficulties and molestations which they must meet withal in the attainement
of virtues, especially of humility. His adversary is John Chrysostom, which
ever practiced himself in all sorts of virtues.

Hard-hart is the 15. in the order of Archangels: he impeacheth men from
lifting up their hearts unto God. His adversary is William of the order of
Augustine, who even at his time of meals did ever lift up his heart unto God.

Stop-mouth is the second in the order of Angels, he tempts men with
frivolous and impertinent speeches, breeding a disgust in men that would speak
of God, and endeavoring to interrupt the current of all virtuous language. His
adversary is Cyprian the Martyr and Doctor, who was ever talking and meditating
upon God.

Plancher is the 15. in the order of Powers, who together with the other
Plancher, the order of Archangels does tempt men to do good works for
sinister and reserved intentions. His adversary is Mark^ the Evangelist, whose
intention in all things was ever upright and pure.

Fire-stone is the 20. of the order of virtues: he tempts men to choler and
anger. His adversary is Alexus, who practiced his patience in the house of his
father by his meekenes, and by the sufferance of those insolences which his
servants offered unto him.

Beelzebub in his discourse to the other Devils which were with him in the body
of Magdalene, named the two familiar spirits of Jews the Magician, to wit
Candelier and Ferrier.

The Acts of the 18. of January being Tewsday.
AS soon as the two that were possessed had kneeled upon the ground before the
Altar at S Baume, Beelzebub turning toward Louyse, said unto Verrine, Behold
our learned Preacher, that does so much boast of his sufficiency in making of
sermons. Whereunto Verrine replied, Verrine denies that he is a preacher. See
the 1. doubt after the Epistle to the reader.
Thou lie, I never said that I made sermons, or that I was a Preacher. Go to
thou cursed liar, remember that I ever maintained, that I was sent from God to
publish and disclose a truth, and to dismaske thy knavery. Did not thou
(said Beelzebub) affirm that God has promised Paradise unto thee? Thou lie
(answered Verrine) I never said so, only I did auow thus much, that God by The
absolute power of God.
his absolute and boundless power has granted unto me diminution of my
torments. Then he said to Magdalene, be of good cheer, for God has hired thee
and the three faculties of thy soul, to be employed about his service. No
(said Beelzebub) she is hired by me. Verrine answered, thou lie, and shall
not gain that for which thou now pretendest. And if it were not for fear of
Michaelis, master of this place, I would lay open such a throat, as the whole
frame of this house should tremble. Thou bear Magdalene in hand that thou will cure her, I pray thee, take thou no thought for her health, for she is
sufficiently provided of good Physicians of her own, let her (a Gods name)
believe her Confessors.

It was observed by some, that she used a particular kind of gesture and
motion with the finger of her hand, on which she did wear a ring of silver;
and thereupon Verrine said, Take A charmed ring.
away that ring from her for it is charmed: but when they endeavored to pluck
it from her finger, they were not able, by reason that her finger was swollen
so big, that they were feign to cut it asunder with a pair of sizers. And we
found that in the midst of the ring within side, there was engraven the head
of an Owl in a circle, and right opposite against it, there was engraven the
name of Jesus: which was cut in pieces and cast into the fire.

After dinner, it was thought fit, to take advantage of the time, and to purge
the soul of Magdalene, from those leprosies and pollutions, where-withall it
was tainted, and by this means to delude Beelzebub and his adherents. Whereupon
the Friars together with the fathers of the doctrine came privately into
Magdalens chamber, having in their company an ancient Matrone of S. Vrsula's
order, called sister Catherine of France, and another that was an associate or
coadiutor there. And as we exhorted her to name all the witches which she had
formerly seen in their Synagogue, the Devil spoke unto her, when she was
opening her mouth to reveal them unto us, and said, If thou offer to prate of
this, I will strangle thee. Yet for all this, she began to speak, where-upon
Magdalens throat seized on by the Devil.
the Devil came up about the bigness of a toade, and seized her throat in so
terrible a manner, that he was like to choke her, in so much as she lost her
speech, and turned up the white of her eyes, as if she should instantly have
died. But herself remembering to make the sign of the Cross, and the Exorcist
saying that part of the Gospel In principio erat verbum, and the whole
assembly addressing themselves to prayers, the Devil at last was forced to
quit her, after the space of a quarter or half a quarter of an hour; and then
he would return to rack and torture her: which The tortures which Magdalen
suffered.
cruel handling endured the space of the three weeks, wherein the examination
of these things was to pass under the censure of the fathers. When she came
again to herself she followed on her discourse, as if she had felt no hurt,
and had received no interruption. But when the Magician saw her resolution to
stand in that steady course of repentance, he sent unto her many Sorcerers and
Witches, which were sensible unto her and not unto us, who came to cast their
charms upon her, that she might loose her memory or wits: they came in at the
chimney as Magdalene reported; and when the charm had seized her, she remained
a long time, as if she had been in a trance, or were half dead. But this
being also blown away by the power of Exorcismes, she was then asked, what
was the cause of these trances: whereunto she made answer, you shall perceive
how this comes unto me, when as I open my mouth. It is the Charms cast into
Magdalene which she reuealeth.
Devil that causes this in me, to force me to take those charms, which
they blow into me through a cane; which you might observe by my sneezing and
coughing, as though there were something sticking in my throat which I would
feign rid my self of. All this happened again presently after that she was
questioned touching another confederacy so that father Peter Fournez an ancient
grave man, and Vicar of S. Baume being close unto her, and seeing her to begin
to gape, he put his hand over her mouth, and the charm was seen to fall
visibly upon the apron of her that was possessed, which father Michaelis took
upon his knife, and showed it to all that were there present, to their great
astonishment and admiration. The charm appeared to be a glutinous kind of
matter, as it were a mingle of honey and pitch.

When all the fathers that were there present had seen this, and knew for a
certainty that these were realities and not shows, they determined to furnish
the house with Either to beat up and down in the air with them, or to defend
themselves against such attempters.
swords and halbards to defend themselves against these wicked assaylants. And
the same accident happening again not long after, a valiant gentleman called
Monsieur Gombert kept close to the chimney with a sword in his hand, ever
beating and thrusting into it, and others betook them to their halberds,
striking and laying about them over all the chamber. But upon the sudden
Magdalene cried out, Alack poor Mary, what make thou here? and made an
outcry like unto a woman that sees one man murdering another, beating her
thighs with her hands, and plucking her self by the hair. When this was
passed over, she was asked the reason of her outcry, who made answer, that a
companion of hers whom she loved the best of all the Synagogue (for she was of
a very gentle and courteous disposition) called Mary of Paris came into her
chamber with a servant of hers named Cecile, to bring her a loue-letter from
the Magician, which she refused to receive. And they being fearful to return
through the chimney, were carried up and down the chamber by the Devils,
skipping and flinging about for fear of being wounded. Mary (said she) was
stricken over the breast with a halbard, and also hurt on the left side, and
Cecile was wounded in the back, and I fear me, Mary is dead. Being asked why
they had not broken through the leaves of the O the goodness of God that will
not so much as suffer the Devil to force through a casement of paper. What
ought the christian to conceive of his will which is of an infinite resistance
when he says, Nolo.
window which were made of paper: she answered, that the Devil has no power
to break or make a forcible passage through any thing, without the permission
and consent of the master of the house; but if there be a passage, or if the
windows stand open, then indeed he has a device to make the witches pass
through, provided that the hole through which they are to pass be of that
capacity and bigness that a reasonable great cat may get in and out through
the same.

Upon Sun set, we heard through the window a The doleful cry of one giving
up the ghost.
lamentable voice of a woman that seemed to be ready to give up the ghost: and
as we thought, it came from an adjoining mountain just over against S. Baume,
these lamentations continued for a long season, so that we called for Magdalene
to understand of her what the matter was: who when she came to the window,
she said, look, look, do not you see Jews the Magician that holds Mary
upon his knee to comfort her? For she is ready to dye, and her father and
mother with much other company are very busy about her.

About nine of the clock at night, the fathers with certain women there
present did see in the air great store of Torches seen in the air.
torches and candles burning very bright, and carried in manner of Procession
toward Marseille.

The acts of the 19. of January.
THis morning was Beelzebub exorcised, and diverse times questioned, and charged
to tell who that creature was which the day before did so lamentably bemone her
self. In conclusion, being constrained to answer, he said, that it was a
young woman which was wounded: whereupon it was demanded of him in what part of
the body she had received this wound; unto which, after many refusals, he made
answer that it was about the heart: then they asked him whether the wound were
mortal or no: at which question he began to laugh, and told them that she was
already dead. Being demanded where she dyed; he answered, in yonder adjoining
hill that is opposite unto S. Baume. Being asked, what time she dyed; he
answered, about eight of the clock at night. Being questioned where they had
buried her, he made answer, that she was cast The sea the grave for
Sorcerers.
into the sea behind the Abbey of S. Victor at Marseille, where all the
Magicians and Witches were assembled at her burial. Being asked of whence
this young woman was, he answered, that she was a Parisian, and her fathers
name was Henry Alhponsus, a gentleman dwelling near the Louure upon the left
hand. Being asked whether she were damned, he laughed and said, I believe she
is so. Being asked if any other had received hurt, he replied that the
chamber-maide of the same Mary, whose name was Cicile was hurt in the back, but
the wound was not mortal. After Beelzebub had delivered all this, he came
forth through the mouth of her that was possessed, and in his issuing forth he
made a noys^ much like unto a belch saying these words, he is departed. When
this was ended, the Exorcist began to adjure the Devil that did then govern
in the body of Magdalene. Then did one of the Devils begin to neigh like a
horse, and presently added, this is Leuiathan whom you hear. Then he was
demanded, who it was that issued forth of her body: he made answer, that it
was Beelzebub. Being asked, if he would swear and auow that which Beelzebub had
said, he answered that he would, and to that purpose had received commission
and leave from him to do it: so causing him to put both the hands of Magdalen
upon the holy Gospel, he swore thus.

I swear according to God and the truth, and according to the Churches
intention and yours without reservation of any secret, sinister, or contrary
meaning to my self, that all which Beelzebub has said is certainly true.

Then he was again questioned and adjured to tell, whether any other besides
them, which Beelzebub spoke of, were hurt or no. After many refusals and
impositions of a thousand degrees of pains, and by as many Martyrs as ever
suffered since S. Stephens time, he answered that one Briget of Marseille had
some days since received a hurt on her right side, but was now recovered of
the same. Also a woman of Carpentras was wounded on her left side, but he made
dainty to tell her name, saying, that she dwelt nearer to them then Paris: but
they imploring the aid and assistance of the sacred Virgin, S. Magdalene and
of the Angels especially of S. Michael, and having shut up Magdalene within the
holy Penitence, and put the holy Pix upon her head after much adiuration and
charging of him, at last he spoke disdainefully, and said, she is called
Cecile of Monts: whereupon we presently dispatched away a messenger thither to
enquire the truth thereof, but some were of opinion that there should no
enquiry be made after these things, for fear least tho Devil should accuse
some body wrongfully, and so bring many innocents into danger.

After dinner about two of the clock in the afternoon Magdalene was
questioned touching the manner and fashion which they held in their Sabbath,
who answered, Since my conversion there is a Sabbath held every day, but
before, it was kept but three times in the week, beginning at eleven of the
clock at night, and continuing till three of the clock after midnight,
sometimes more, sometimes less: the alteration of the place is day by day
appointed by the Prince of the Synagogue, and the witches are gathered together
by the sound of the Cornet which is winded by a Devil. And this found does
tingle and ring in the ears and understandings of Sorcerers in what part of
the world soever they be: then the Sorcerers by the power of a certain
ointment which they use are carried in the air and brought close up to the
Prince of Sorcerers, who is supported in the air by Devils in the midway, and
passing by him they bow unto him and make him reverence, and so are hurried to
the Synagogue at the place designed: where being assembled, First the hagges
and witches, who are people of a sordid and base condition, and whose trade and
custom is to murder infants, and to bring them to the Sabbath, after they
have been buried in their grave, are the first that come to adore the Prince of
the Synagogue who is Lucifers lieftenant, and he that now holds that place is
Jews Gaufridy: then they adore the Princess of the Synagogue who is a woman
placed at his right hand. Next they go and worship the Devil who is seated in
a Throne like a Prince. In the second place come the Sorcerers and Sorceresses,
who are people of a middle condition, whose office is to bewitch and spread
abroad charms, and these perform the same kind of adoration with the former,
kneeling upon the ground, but not prostrating themselves as do the other;
although they kiss the hands and feet of the Devil as the first likewise do.
In the third place come the Magicians who are Gentlemen and people of a higher
rank: their office is to blaspheme God as much as they can, and are possessed
with a madness like unto the raging of a mad dog; these are full of a
diabolical hatred, fretting and fuming when they cannot pluck the Deity in
pieces, especially the precious humanity of Christ Jesus. Their duty also is to
renounce the sacred Trinity, their Baptism and all inspirations which God may
infuse into them, as also all the Sacraments, Preachings, Prayers, Confessions,
and whatsoever else God might use as the means and instruments of their
salvation. Every one of these have their servants or chambermaids to disperse
abroad their charms: for at every Sabbath the Prince of the Synagogue (upon
the suggestion of the Devil who roundeth him in the ear) commands and
appoints what charms every one shall have to throw about the next day, which
every one performs in his own person, except the Magicians who leave the
execution hereof to their servants and chambermaides.

The banquet of the Synagogue.
This being performed, in the second place they provide a banquet, setting
three tables according to the three diversities of the people above named. They
that have the charge of bread, do bring in bread made of corn which inuisibly
they pilfer and steal from diverse places. The drink which they have is
Malmsey, to provoke and prepare the flesh to luxurious wantonness: and this
liquor is brought by certain deputed for that purpose from sellers whence they
steal the same. The meat they ordinarily eat is the flesh of young children,
which they cook and make ready in the Synagogue, sometimes bringing them
thither alive by stealing them from those houses where they have opportunity to
come. They have no use of knives at table for fear least they should be laid
a cross, and emblematically to show that they must not cut off the foreskin of
their damnable customs and habits: and it may be also to avoid the
massacring one onother in the Sabbath by reason of some enmity or hatred. They
have also no salt, which figureth out wisdom and understanding; neither know
they the use of olives or oil which represent mercy.

The songs used in the Sabbath.
When this is done, the Magicians and those that can read, sing certain
Psalms as they do in the Church, especially Laudate Dominum de Coelis:
Confitemini domino quoniam bonus, and the Canticle, Benedicite, transferring
all to the praise of Lucifer and the Devils: And the Hagges and Sorcerers do
houle and vary their hellish cries high and low counterfaiting a kind of
villainous music. They also dance at the sound of Viols and other
instruments, which are brought thither by those that were skild to play upon
them.

The abominable sensuality practiced in the Sabbaths.
Finally, they committed uncleanness one with another: upon Sundaies they
pollute themselves by their filthy copulation with Devils, that are Succubi and
Incubi: Upon Thursdayes they contaminate themselves with Sodomy: Upon
Saturdaies they do prostitute themselves to abominable bestiality: upon other
days they use the ordinary course which nature prompteth unto them. When this
is finished, about three of the clock after midnight every one is carried to
his own home, and those that are servants do carry the Prince and the
Princess in State, some supporting the body, others the feet, and the rest the
head. Upon Wednesdaies and Frydaies, their Sabbathes of blasphemies and revenge
are held, where they do nothing but blaspheme God and the Saints, and by all
the contriuances of their brain they study to take vengeance of their enemies.

Magdalene also said, that all Magicians, Sorcerers, etc. are ordinarily marked
in three places, upon the brain, upon the heart, and upon the reins, and
sometimes in other parts; but commonly the marks of the Prince and Princess
are more inward that they may not be found.

She further said, that that accursed Magician Jews instigated thereunto by
the outragiousnesse which reigned in him, and which might parallel that of
Lucifer, O prodigious and unheard of impiety, but this accursed Magician
deceived himself, for he could not consecrate.

Saint Thomas says that those who crucified Christ Jesus, could not be said to
sacrifice, although in their action Christ Jesus was the host and oblation,
because their intention was not in their off^ring to present this their action
unto God, for they did this out of pure malice. 3. page q. 47. art: 4. ad 2.


did first invent the saying of Mass at the Sabbaths, and did really
consecrate and present the sacrifice to Lucifer, and in the distribution of the
consecrated bread every one trampled it under his feet, and then they cast it
unto dogs, which the hagges and witches brought with them from their granges.

She said that upon a certain day the Magician commanded a great Mastiffe to
be brought to eat the consecrated bread which he made up into a lump to be
devoured by him: but the dog being brought before the blessed Sacrament, he as
it were kneeled with his hinder feet, and closed his two fore feet together,
bowing down his head as if he had worshipped the same; in so much as they
could not beat him from thence, neither with blows of staves, nor stones:
whereupon many of them fell a weeping, so that it was ordained, that from that
time forward they should bring no more dogs to these assemblies.

She also related, that the said Magician did sprinkle the consecrated wine
upon all the company, just like the Priest when he deals about the hallowed
water, at which time every one cries, Sanguis eius super nos and filios
nostros.

She further said, that one of the hansomest fellows in all that troop crying
upon a time as high as possibly he could, Sanguis eius, etc. a rock, under
which he stood, brake in pieces at the top, so that a stone thereof fell upon
his head, and did shrewdly cut him: But he continuing his cry, it thundered so
terribly in the air, and the rattling of the thunder was so fearfully
intermingled with flakes of fire, that they were all amazed at it. But he still
persisting in his blasphemous cry, Sanguis eius, etc. was hurried away in the
air, ever keeping the same cry, so that at the last he was carried out of the
sight of all the spectators, and never afterward appeared: whereupon many of
them were converted.

The Acts of the 20. of January.
AS Magdalene was confessing her self in the morning in her chamber, Beelzebub
cried out diverse times, and endeavored to interrupt the confession, and would
by no means permit that they should give absolution unto her; saying aloud,
that he had rather be in hell then suffer it, and that this absolution did
burn him more then the fire of Hell did, which he also sundry times repeated
when the said Magdalene went to confession.

He also said, some days before, that he had rather be shut up in Hell then
enter into the Church of S. Baume, especially into the place of Penitence,
where the Sorcerers had no power to spread and cast abroad their charms and
enchantments: whereunto Verrine added, that none were to enter thither but such
as were in the state of grace, and those were to go in barefooted. It
happened toward the evening at the time wherein Magdalene was accustomed to
come to S. Baume to be exorcised, they found her stiff as a statue of marble
in all her limbs, and very dull and drowsy, so that they were forced to carry
her between four to the Church, where she remained a good space at the foot
of the high Altar, and could not be brought to her self, till they carried
her to the place of the blessed Penitence, applying and laying the holy Pix
upon her face, whereupon she came to her self and went forth to be exorcised.

This evening at the second Exorcisme, Beelzebub was sullen and would not speak
a word: whereupon Verrine said; he does this to make you leave your exorcising;
for he fears lest being enforced to speak, the Magicians who are oftentimes
carried hither by Devils, should revolt from him and be converted, as diverse
of them have already done.

The Acts of the 21. of January.
AT the evening Exorcismes Beelzebub was questioned whether he were in the body
of Magdalene or no: who answered that he was. Being asked why he together with
his companions left not that body, and being many times adjured to make his
answer unto the same, he would say nothing thereunto. Yet after that the
Priests had powered forth their prayers before God, and had laid many grievous
pains upon him, he made answer in a great rage: Have not I told thee that
the obstinacy of Jews the Magician was the cause hereof, and that we would
never depart from hence, until he be converted, or dead, or else punished by
justice? being asked what the reason was that this Magician was so hardened in
his sin, and had such a cauterized conscience, shut against all good
admonitions, and what advantage he did conceive would redound from hence unto
him; he would make no answer a long time, till at last by increasing the
degrees of his punishments unto the number of days that S. Magdalene had
remained in the place of her penance, he answered, It proceeds from the
hatred he bears unto God, and because he would still live in his
licentiousness, without the check and control of his conscience.

Being asked if any Sorcerers or witches had been hurt the day before after
dinner, when the charms that were usually thrown against Magdalene were
dispersed, he made answer, that there were two hurt and they were called
Rousse and Marine. Being demanded in what place they had their abode, he
answered, In the City where the Prince of the Turks remains: for the Prince
of the Magicians commands all those of France, Spain and England (where
their number is greater) as also those of Turkey, his power reaches unto them
also.

This being said, Beelzebub and Leuiathan did very sensibly depart from her as
they used to do.

The Acts of the 22. of January being Saturday.
AFter dinner Beelzebub committed many outrages in the chamber, dancing and
singing, and within a while he ran suddenly, and having opened the door,
he made Magdalene to run very nimbly toward the great gate of S. Baume, but
she was presently followed and taken.

Afterward Beelzebub being exorcised with the stole, to make answer why he had
so done, at length replied, that the Magician Jews and his lieftenant stayed
for her at the fountain, to the end they might transport her together with
themselves, if she would yield consent thereunto, pretending they would give
her a charm to that purpose: And this happened three or four several times.

At night after the Exorcismes, Beelzebub fell to his old tricks, by reason
whereof they were enforced to bring her into the holy house of Penance, where
being once settled, she fell so soundly a sleep, that she seemed for a while to
be dead, but in the end the holy Host being applied unto her, she awoke and
was again exorcised.

The acts of the 23. day of January being Sunday.
AT the morning Exorcisme Beelzebub being often adjured and not willing to
answer, yet at length (and surely we have often tried it, that long patience
with perseverance in prayer ouercomes the wicked spirits, and that as well at
Confession, as at the time of Exorcismes and the Communion) after we had
imposed as many degrees of punishments on him as there were Masses said that
day in the Catholic Church, (it was then about eleven before noone) he
answered By my pride I despise as much as I can your exorcismes, and in what I
can do obey the Magician, who commands me in the name of Lucifer my Master.

Being put to the question why they delayed to go forth before the Magician
were either converted or dead: he answered, if we go forth, who is it that
would induce him to conversion, or make his designs manifest? Verrine added,
we are indeed confined hither by enchantment, but God has turned it to the
advancement of his glory, and the conversion of Magicians.

Beelzebub being again adjured to leave Magdalene, and to go and torment the
Magician corporally, fell a laughing, and answered, sure a likely matter that I
should go and torment him, Magicians not possessed.
sithence we never torment or possess Magicians, for they are ours already;
and for the body we care not much, so we possess the soul: but being
possessed of the body and not of the soul, (as it falls out in this case)
we desire rather to remain in hell, where we feel only our ordinary
punishment, then here where we suffer daily addition to our usual torments.
Notwithstanding having hope to gain a soul to hell, we care not what torture
we undergo.

Whiles the Exorcist was reading his Exorcisme entitled Luciferiana not
marking the rubrique which directed him to the pronouncing of certain words in
the ear of the possessed with a low voice, and passing beyond it in the same
tenor of sound, Beelzebub cried out, thou should have spoken that in her
ear, and it being looked into, it was indeed found to be so. Being demanded
to what end the day before after dinner, so many charms were in Magdalens
mouth, he set himself to laugh saying, It is to very good purpose. Afterward
being often adjured and having grievous punishments imposed on him for the
speaking of the truth, to what end he threw so many powders and liquors upon
her, he answered, what mean you by powders and liquors. I understand it not,
unfold it to me. I mean (quoth the Exorcist) charms and enchantments, then
he replied, it was to provoke her to the love of one who was not far from
thence, for she loves the Magician no more but rather hates him. And it is to
be observed, that a certain person came thither within a while after, who
confessed that he had been extremely affected in that kind, and did penance
for it.

The acts of the 24. of January being Monday.
AFter this Magdalene complained that since midnight she had been vexed with
visions, as namely, that the Magicians liuetenant had brought her letters from
the Magician himself, written in characters of gold to incense her to love the
Magician, as she had done in former times, which she refused to read. After
that a young maid of Paris her familiar friend and ancient acquaintance at the
Synagogue, brought her from the same Magician a fair picture of our Lady,
which she had brought from Paris for Magdalene to behold, and to pray unto,
for the love of the Magician: but she utterly refused once to look on it as
knowing, that this were to yield consent to the suggestion of the Devil, upon
this occasion Beelzebub was adjured to tell the place where the meeting had been
held the night before. He answered, that it was kept at the holy pillar in the
cleft of the rock of S. Baume, where were assembled all the Magicians of
Province, of Dophine and Languedoc, to consult what course they should take for
the regaining of Magdalene, and at last it was concluded that a charm should
be made her of hot spices, as Peper, Cinnamon, Ginger and the like, to inflame
her to lust: and it was indeed found to be true, as both Magdalen her self
confessed and those who watched with her observed, where we may note that
Verrine affirmed, that the matter or stuff of charms works nothing, but that
there are three Devils bound, as it were, or fettered to every charm, which
according as occasion presents, work, for the effecting of his intention who
made it: and further, we may observe that enchantments or charms are given for
two respects, either for the vexation of the body, as are Palsies, choliques,
turning of the guts, deafness, and the like, and these God permits sometimes
to be inflicted upon the just (as he did upon Job) serving for merits and
satisfaction for their sins, and in that case we must arm our selves with
patience, as he that lay sick of the palsy at the poole of Bethesda, and pray
to God either for deliverance or patience: and these mischiefs which merely
concern the body, are common to all, even to young infants in their cradles
when they are newly baptized. Other charms are spread to move men's passions,
as ambition, hatred, revenge, carnal lust, and to set men headlong after
these affections; and when a christian perceaueth that those passions are
beyond measure, irregular and altogether extraordinary he ought to fear, lest
they be wrought by charms and enchantments, and in such cases he ought to
have recourse to the use of his free will, and the invocation of Gods grace, by
means of which (as S. Paul speaks) he is enabled to do what he does. And
this second kind also may seize upon good men, for their trial and the
increase of their merit, as it befell S. Paul, to whom was sent the Angel of
Satan to buffet him with the sting of the flesh, Notwithstanding, the assaults
of the Devil upon just men, have always proved ineffectual, Superiors not
to be bewitched.
and the Devils themselves have confessed, that their charms have no power
upon Presidents, or Judges, or Bishops, or Generals of Orders, which we have
tried by experience, for almost all the Nunns of S. Vrsulaes order in the
city of Aix were bewitched by the cunning of the Magician, who desired ^o
dissolve that society, excepting their Abbess named Cassandra, and the
Abbess of the convent of Marsrelles named Catherine of France. Moreover
themselves have coufessed and Verrine by name, that since in Languedoc they
have often assayed to bewitch father Michaelis, and that to death within two
days, which notwithstanding they were not able to perform, by reason he was a
Superior, and the Magician himself confessed being in prison, and conferring
with the Capuchins, the one a Guardian in the city of Aix called father Celsus,
and the other his compagnion (who did him that charitable favor as to lie with
him in prison and exhort him to conversion) that being at S. Baume. he often
set his Devils a work to break father Michaelis and father Romillons neck,
but they could not effect it, because they were Superiors.

They have also made it known in their exorcismes that the true The remedy
against incha^tments.
remedy to avoid enchantments is, the frequenting of the Sacraments, and that
the Priests which offer worthelie every day, can hardly be enchanted.

The evening following, whiles they were at service in the Quier, the Clarke of
S. Baume named John Palouse of the age of 21. years came into the Quier, like
a man affrighted The noise of the witches plainly heard.
affirming that news was brought that the witches were heard crying below in
S. Baumes wood: where-upon the Priour Sebastian Michaelis went down and
hearing the noise, caused the Vicar of S. Baume Peter Fornez to be sent for,
and Friar Anthony Boilletot companion to the said Michaelis, and some others
who plainly heard diverse voices of men and women and children, who seemed to be
in number about an hundred, and cried loud as if they had been singing the
black sance, and this hubub lasted a long time, which confirms the truth of
that opinion that holds that witches keep their assemblies in woods and
forests,

The acts of the 25. of January being Tewsday.
Beelzebub being demanded and adjured in the exorcisme to tell why the day
before he had cast powder in the eyes, and hands, and mouth of Magdalen: he
answered, that they The damnable industriousnesse of Sorcerers to divert
Magdalen.
were three Magicians, the one cast powder in her eyes, that she might no more
know those who came unto her, the second in her mouth, that she might not be
able to speak, the third upon her hands, thereby to incite her to unchaste
touchinges, and another powder was cast upon her to make her loathsome to those
who attended her, which indeed came to pass; and another made of the hair and
the urine of a certain person, with whom they tempted her.

Being demanded touching the Magicians who came thither the night before, to
what purpose their coming was: he answered with great skorne, no, no; as who
would say, he would not answer. And continuing in his obstinary, Verrine
asked him, unhappy creature why answerest thou not? it is a matter of
importance which is demanded of thee, Beelzebub replied, tell it thy self.
Verrine answered I know it as well as thou unhappy creature. Take the goune and
the cap and exorcise me, and I will tell it, which was as much as if he had
said, he had no commission to do it. Then Beelzebub held his peace, and being
diverse times adjured, at length he spoke in the ear of the Priest as unwilling
to be heard. The Synagogue adored the picture of Magdalene as of a Princess,
which was set in the same place where her self was wont to sit in the
Synagogue, and al reverence was performed to her supposed presence, as if she
had been really present all which was done to move her to return unto them,
considering the honor which they did her picture. Farther it was confessed
that every night they held a meeting about S. Baumes church to that purpose,
and every night she was enchanted to hinder her from confessing and the
exercise of those virtues which were enjoined her, and to draw her to the
hatred of them, and to cause in her a wearisomnesse of praying unto God and
speaking of him, together with a delight to be talking of the Devil.

Being demanded what company there was in that assembly, he answered, they came
together from many quarters, as Paris, Lions, Marseilles, Turkey.

Being demanded how it came to pass that he trembled not, nor made any ado
during the exorcisme (as he had wont to do formarly ever since he was first
exorcised) he began to make it very dainty, and after many shifts and much
resistance, and many punishments imposed upon him, being enforced he at length
made answer, My pride it was to dissemble the torments I suffered, and in so
saying, he feched a deep sigh turning his neck and scratching his head.

Afterward going out of the Church, and being followed by company, would you
know (faith he) where the Synagogue was held? Behold the place and upon that
bench sat the Prince, having by his side the image of that miserable woman
which all the Sorcerers adored.

Being demanded whether or no they conceived it not to be a great madness to
adore a mortal and corruptible creature, carrying nothing but dirt and
excrement within her, who must shortly also die when it pleased God, he
there-upon turned aside his face and answered nothing.

The Acts of the 26. of January, being Wednesday.
AFter many outcries made as well by Verrine as Beelzebub during the holy Mass
celebrated by father Anthony Billetot, they cried and said, we will get us
from hence, we had rather be in hell then in this body. Then did Verrine fall
a blowing, giving us to understand that he was in an hoate place, and cried
out upon the pronouncing of the word (hell) in the exorcisme and said, hold thy
tongue, speak not that word, cursed are they that now are or hereafter shall
be in hell. Thou tellest us that in hell death is everlasting, hold thy tongue,
we know that well enough, we I say, who are accursed as are all those who
seek after it.

Beelzebub being demanded what charms had been cast upon Magdalene the day
before, answered, that Another charm cast upon Magdalen and why.
one was cast into her right ear to make her hate the word of God and not to
harken unto it; another into her left ear, to make her impatient of correction
and exhortation: the third into her mouth, to make her out of love with the
holy eucharist, the mercy and the goodness of God.

Being demanded if any other were given her to other ends, after many denials
he was adjured in the behalf of Magdalene, and by the merits of her patience
and penance, whereupon he answered, that the charm also tended to hinder her
from the discovering of their ingling and from the receiving of grace by the
Sacrament, and to make her unable to resist them.

Verrine being put to the question in these words, Cur miser vt soleb as non
contremiscis? he answered, I am a poor ignorant idiot which understand not
latin. Then said Beelzebub, sir, you understand it not, because you will not,
know you not what Contremiscis means: it is, why tremble you not? I have
interpreted it, now speak. Well quoth he, I see he plays the counterfeit,
Scobillon who is the least of the Devils in hell understands that latin.
Verrine replied, answer thou who art more learned then I, I give thee leave to
speak. Beelzebub answered with some indignation, Behold here the pride that is
amongst wicked spirits.
true sir, it is fit indeed that I should obey you.

The Acts of the 27. of January being Thursday
AT the very entrance of the Exorcisme the wicked spirits which possessed the
body of Magdalene having cunningly dissembled their fear two days before,
began now to tremble strangely, manifesting that outwardly which inwardly they
suffered, and Beelzebub being adjured to speak, which of the Saints were the
greatest adversaries to the Synagogue of the Magicians, refused to answer a
long time, but after sundry punishments inflicted on him for his often
refusals, at length he answered, that they were specially two, namely The
Saints that are adversaries unto the Synagogue of witches.
Cyprian and Gregory Nazianzen. Cyprian, by reason that he had been a
Magician laboring to seduce Justin: and Gregory who persecuted the Magicians
in his Country, and wrote an history of Cyprian the Magician: but (said he) of
those kind of people there are many more now adays, then were in those times.

He had raged and stormed against S. Chrysostom.
Afterward Verrine being demanded and adjured to tell, wherefore he had been
so bitter against S. Chrysostom (it fell out then to be his holiday) he
answered, that there were other adversaries of the Magicians, as This Aegidius
whiles he lived gave himself to the Devil, that he might be a skilful
Physician. He was a Portugese, and his history was made by father Sampaye of
Portugal olso. we wondered that an illiterate woman could relate such an
history that is almost unknown unto all men: and came not forth in print, bnt a
while since, and was written and published in latin by a Portugese, after it
had lain a long time obscurely among the manuscrips of our Library.
Aegidius of your order, (who was himself a Magician) and Theophilus, but
above all Peter the Apostle, who incountred Simon the first Magician in the
Church, yet for mine own particular, my special adversaries are Dominicus,
Sebastianus, and Chrysostom (but above all Dominicus) by reason of their great
patience.

Verrine did scarce ever refuse to answer at the Exorcismes.
Being adjured to tell wherefore he said, that he had tempted Eve, and what
garment she wore: he answered, a garment of innocence, all made of one piece
by a master-worke-man, and innocence (quoth he) has no need of covering.

Being demanded wherefore the day before Beelzebub was mute; he answered in
latin, erat ligatus.

Being demanded wherefore Beelzebub suffered himself to be bound by a Magician,
sithence he was Princeps daemoniorum: he answered, the one bestows a dinner
upon the other, and the other again a supper upon him, as much to say, that by
the power of Lucifer the Magician bound Beelzebub, but otherwise Beelzebub
mastered him.

Being demanded how it came to pass that himself was never bound by the
Magician, he answered, because he cannot bind me being here on Gods behalf.

Toward the evening Magdalene fell a singing and dancing, and playing many
tricks in the chamber, so that they threatened to carry her to the holy house of
Penance, which being done, Beelzebub made her sleep so soundly, as if she had
been dead for the space of three or four hours. At last after many Prayers,
Psalms, Letanies and Exorcismes, fetching a deep sigh she began to awake,
affirming that the Magician had again enchanted her, and would have strangled
her, and indeed she was like to die at that instant, feeling herself
extremely perplexed, yet recommending her self to God, the Devils power
ceased, and how beit the night before whiles they held their assembly, the The
diligence of the Magicians to divert Magdalene
Magician had presented himself unto her upon his knee, with an haltar about
his neck, praying her to return unto him, not to discover him and the other
Magicians, and in her presence had adored her statue all gilded over, drawing
blood out of the hands of the Witches with rasors, and saying unto her, behold
what honor we would do your person, considering we do so much to your
picture, yet would she by no means yield her consent, but remained
victorious. O that we were so careful, and would take so much pains for the
converting and the saving of souls as these Magicians do to pervert and
destroy them, for they watched every night during the month of January, to
recover to themselves this poor soul! Magdalene added that the Magician
seeing her continue in her constancy, cried out, saying to the whole company,
is there any here present that would die for her, and presently there
presented himself a young man, declaring that himself was ready for that
purpose, whom the Magician twice stabbed with a poniard: yet would she by no
means yield her consent. Now whether this History were acted truly and
indeed, or only in imagination, yet was it surely for her a very great
temptation.

The Acts of the 28. of January being Friday.
AT the morning Exorcisme Verrine began to cry out against those who
voluntarily offend God, giving themselves to the Devil of their own accord. O
Beelzebub (quoth he) thou always gainest some one or other, and registrest him
in thy books. And as the Exorcist made mention of the pains of hell, Verrine
cried out upon there damnable state, who rather choose the pains of hell then
the joys of heaven: O Beelzebub, thou art eased of much pain which the
Magician Jews bears for thee. For we must understand that Beelzebub being
commanded by the Magician to torment Magdalen in all sorts that might be, to
the end to constrain her to resume her former course of magic, or at least
wise to make her mad and sottish: his answer was, that the Exorcist would then
impose so much punishment on him as he should not be able to endure it: the
Magician replied, that he would undergo the third part of the torments which
were imposed on him, and oftentimes has Beelzebub spoken to father Michaelis
when he imposed punishments on him, impose them on the Magician who is the
cause of that which I do, and oftentimes they have confessed in their
Exorcismes that the Magician suffered inwardly so great tortures, that he would
willingly have taken his bed upon it, had it not been for fear of discovering
himself, and yet notwithstanding was he every day more obstinate then other.

During the Mass father Michaelis came from the Cloister to the Church, the
door of the cloister being shut, at which Beelzebub cried out, behold father
Michaelis is come, and instantly the said father opened the door and entered
into the Church to the astonishment of all the beholders.

The same morning Beelzebub discovered another piece of business as strange as
the former. The day before being the 27. of January, there came thither two men
of Marseilles, and one of them desired to hear news of his wife, who rising
very early in the morning, A woman that was lost, and sought after, and the
place where she was abiding.
took leave of him upon Innocents day, and returned not since, who received
answer of father Michaelis, that it became him not in that holy place to
demand such curiosities of Devils, but he should rather recommend both
himself and his wife unto God, who would not fail to help him. As soon as
they were once entered the Church, Beelzebub began to cry out, turning himself
toward the husband, and saying, you have well sought your wife, she walks
through the clouds in the air, and was here two or three days since in
company of some others, and there-with-all coming near him, he touched him,
saying again, you have well sought your wife? have you not? There were present
at this action father Francis Billet, and father Peter Fournez Vicar of S.
Baume, and a good company besides.

This being done, the said men came to father Michaelis to certify him of that
which passed to whom he answered, I did indeed make a doubt thereof before, for
about 10. or 12. days since, the father of the lost woman being come to the
same place to seek her, the possessed said that she had seen her with some
other witches upon the hill over against S. Baume, and moreover that she had
The said fellow and father of this child, said that he had indeed a daughter
called Margaret that died two years ago.
strangled two years since a daughter of her own named Margarite, of the age
of two years a fair child, and that she did this at the instance of the
Magician, who told her that he longed to eat of her childs flesh; whereupon
she was taken out of her grave by the rest of the witches and carried to the
assembly, O bloody tyranny of the Devil and his under officers, more cruel
then that of Pharaoh! and O the miserable estate of them who put their necks
under his yoke. The woman that was possessed said farther, that this woman was
lifted up in the air thereby, to be the better enabled with her companions to
cast enchantments against her, which because she would not do, fearing to
receive hurt as the rest did, the Devil broke her neck and cast her into a
valley between two hills. And indeed since that time she has not been found.
The two men which sought after this woman were honest Citizens of Marseilles,
whose names the Parliament of Aix noted in their process against the Magician.

The acts of the 29. of January being Saturday.
AT the morning Exorcisme Beelzebub was very insolent, not suffering Magdalene a
long time to kneel before the altar, and when the exorcist would have enforced
her, she knocked him on the shinnes with her feet; and when he would hold her
hands, she scratched him till the blood came, which was a clear argument that
the Devil had gained more footing in her the night past. Afterward Magdalene
turned her self toward the Church door looking earnestly upon the hill over
against it, and being demanded why she did so; she answered, that it was the
place where the Magician Jews offered sacrifice to Lucifer, which he
performed on Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday.

About two of the clock in the afternoon, father Michaelis, and father Francis
Billet, and father Anthony Boilletot discoursing with Magdalene being then in
her sound and perfect judgment, about the Princes of the 9. companies of
Angels, whether or no she had not heard Verrine say, that he was a Prince of
the Thrones, (which they demanded thereby to understand what any of the Devils
which haunted Magdalene, and were Verines opposits would answer thereunto)
upon the sudden, Magdalene ratled in the throat, and Astaroth mounted into
her tongue, neighing as it had bin a feirce horse, and saying, here am I
Astaroth, the Prince of Thrones, and not Verrine who is but a base companion.

Being demanded why Verrine spoke not Latin, sithence he was a spirit, he
answered it is for reasons which I could now declare: but one day you shall see
Verrine to be Verrine.

Astaroth being retired and Magdalene returned to her self, she demanded in
writing the names of those Saints which were opposits to the wicked Spirits
that possessed her, that she might call upon them for help, for when we called
upon them, she perceived that the Devils stirred and vexed themselves:
Beelzebub said she possesses the brain, Asmodeus the reins, Carreau the
heart, and in like sort others whom she named, and as we discoursed upon the
reason and cause of there opposition, whether it proceeded from the holding of
there place in Paradise, or for the contrariety of their virtues to the others
vices, which they exercised most, father Michaelis arguing, that it could not
be the former cause, in as much as Saint Bartholomew was the Saint contrary to
Astaroth, who was but of the order of Thrones, and Saint Francis to Beelzebub,
who was of the order of Seraphins; whereupon Astaroth instantly mounted up
into her tongue again, and said: Bartholomew is mine opposite, because he
defaced the Idol of Astaroth, and since that time he has always opposed
himself against me. And being about to retire, now says he, I will make
Magdalene feel my fury, and there with she began to rage and foame, being
wholly plunged as it were and swallowed up in the torments which she suffered,
but it lasted not long, Astaroth being threatened with an hundred thousand
degrees of punishments, if he withdrew not himself, for that is it which they
most fear, daemones credunt and contremiscunt. And it is Notable instructions
for Priests, to hinder the working of charms.
surely worth the observing, that the like punishments may also be imposed on
Magicians, who have spread abroad their enchantments, which we well understood,
because the Devils desired that the punishment which was imposed on them, might
be turned over upon the Magician as being the principal author of that
Tragedy, which it behooues Priests cheifely to remember, it being of good use
in dispossessing, my meaning is that Experience teaches that Sorcerers being
menaced or beaten do make the charms to cease.
after the invocation of Gods assistance, the true remedy to stop the
enchantment is to impose greiuous and fresh punishments upon the author of the
mischeife.

Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.
Experience teaches us out of the Confessions of the wicked spirits
themselves, that never yet any Exorcist imposed any degree of punishment on
them, but the dew execution thereof followed upon the same by Gods just
judgment, who has said to his Church dedi vobis potestatem, calcandi supra
serpents and supra daemonia.

The same day after Euen-song, Beelzebub being demanded how it came to pass
that the Magician being at Saint Baume, for the space of 10. days (whether he
was called by Father Michaelis sent for him thither to purge himself from
those public defamations, which the Devils with open throat daily proclaimed
against him. And the two good Capuchin fathers, into whose familiarity he had
won himself the better to cover his villianies, did bear him company. He
remained with us 10. days, until there came some persons, and carried him
from thence in great scorn. We caused him to exorcise both the one and the
other, of those that were possessed: and thereupon the Devils began to sport at
it saying, who would ever have thought that thou should exorcise us?
Afterward he pretended as though he could not read, and entreated father
Michaelis to read the Exorcismes for him.
father Michaelis) became so pale, that thereupon father Anthony Boilletot
exhorted him to repentance: he answered, that it was by reason he had touched
him to the quick in his conscience, having at that time many inspirations.

Being demanded why the Magician so often opened the window of the refectorie
where he abode, and that in the midst of Winter he answered, because that
sometimes their assembly is held above on the top of the house, and then he
had commerce with the Witches, calling upon the Devils for favor and saying:
Diabolos venite in adintorium meum; being reproved for his in congruitie of
speech, he answered that he reported the words of the Magician, in the same
sort as he pronounced them, for he can not speak Latin, said he.

Being demanded wherefore he went so often to the garden next the refectorie,
he answered, that all the while he stayed at Saint Baume: the assembly of
Witches was always held the nearest they could to the place where he was, to
the end they might the more easily have conference with him.

Being demanded whence it came to pass, that eating with us in the refectorie,
he left upon his trencher all the meat that was given him, he answered
smiling, is he a man fit to seed upon your fish? he eats of the flesh of
pies, which we bring him from the assembly invisible.

Being demanded why he walked so often with his head hanging down: he
answered, that he then walked with the witches.

Being demanded wherefore he being enjoined to lie all night in the holy
house, could not abide there but a little while: he answered, that it was
because the assembly could not be held there, which he must of necessity be
present at.

At night at the second exorcisme Beelzebub being demanded and adjured to tell
how it came to pass, that so great a number of Princes were in the body of
Magdalene: he answered, she is a Princess and deserves well to be honored
of Princes.

Being demanded whether the punishments imposed on the Magician were not of
force to bring him to some grievous disease or to death: he answered, yes for
that he suffered from the head to the foot, as if he had been in a continual
fire. Magdalene reported unto us, that in deflouring of women in the Synagogue,
he had this end and scope, to be the father of Antichrist. But the Devils made
him to understand his ignorance of the Scriptures.
Notwithstanding out of his great obstinacy, he had demanded whether he could
not live till the coming of Antichrist to assist him, and to whet his rage and
malice against Jesus Christ. To which I answered (said he) that he could not,
it being only in Gods power to effect that; nevertheless he should comfort
himself in this, that he did as great injuries to Jesus Christ, as Antichrist
himself should be able to do and greater too; but Antichrist cannot be
begotten by thee as thou desire (said he) for he shall be borne of a Jewish
woman, and conceived far enough from hence.

Being demanded whether the pains he endured softened his heart: he answered
that they rather hardened him the more, and that he would be well content to
endure all the pains of the damned upon condition, he might regaine
Magdalene. There is extant an example hereof in the hardness of Pharaos heart,
among the plagues which God sent upon him.

The Devil first blinds them, and then (when they are thus hoodwinkt) he
scoffeth at them.
Being demanded whether his pains should be grievous after his death: he
answered, if he be damned, his punishment shall be more heavy then that of
Lucifer, for with more malice and less respect has he been injurious Because
he had profaned the holy Host.
to Jesus Christ.

The acts of the 30. of January being Septuagesima Sunday.
IN the morning Magdalene being willing to present her self for confession (as
she was wont) to father Michaelis, Beelzebub would not suffer her to kneel,
but ran diverse times toward the Church door; yet at length the forenamed
father imposing on him very grievous punishments, if he suffered her not to
confess. He replied, impose all these punishments on the Magician, who
commanded me to do it, and command him also to forbear me, if I shall suffer
her to confess. Which when the said father had performed in the virtue of Gods
name, and the blood of Jesus Christ, Magdalene returned to her self, and being
in her sound and perfect sense made her confession.

After this at the Mass of father Francis Billet he comted great outrages,
plucking the Priest by his cope, and taking hold of him, he also cried aloud
and hindered his devotion.

Being exorcised after the Mass, and adjured to yield the reason of his
unusual outrage, he answered upon Sunday the Magician endeavors to do the
greatest injury he can to Jesus Christ. He came to me this morning and said,
in despite of God I will use my greatest rage in the Church this day, do thou
the same at the Mass of thine Exorcist. He has confessed to day (said he) at
Parish church in Marseille.
Acoules, and cast forth gentle soft cries as he was taking the confessions;
and being demanded by the women whose confessions he took, why he did so: he
answered that he found himself somewhat ill, but in very deed his greatest
torments were the punishments imposed on him by the Priest. Being adjured
diverse times in the name of God, to show the means how the Magician might be
enforced to render back Magdalens obligations, he would answer nothing,
remaining as it were dumb: at last after many grievous punishments imposed, he
answered, that they should never be rendered, unless that he were either
converted or punished by justice, or dead of a natural death, and yet (said
he) after death they cannot be restored neither, being buried deep in the
earth.

Being demanded why he had not rendered them when he was commanded by father
Michaelis, being Priour of the place, and Inquisitour of the faith, he
answered, that Jews was not subject to him, but to his Bishop.

Being adjured and commanded to go to Marseille, and to bring the writings
thither: he answered, that it could not be done without the consent of the
Magician, who had them in keeping. And further added, that in vain men seek
after those kind of writings, for before they can come to the houses where
they are, the Devils convey them some-where else: What become of Magicians when
they are either hurt or slain.
in vain also (quoth he) do they search after those who are either slain or
wounded, for they cast the dead carkases either into the sea, or into some
river near adjoining: and for such as are hurt, if the wound be not deadly,
they know how to cover and heal it with an ointment, notwithstanding they
remain sick; and when the wound is deadly, they convey away the witches
some-where else, and in this fashion many women are made away, if heed were
taken of it.

The torments of Magdalen.
At night at the entrance of the Exorcismes, Beelzebub began to torment
Magdalene in fearful manner, causing her to tremble every joint, and making
her head to tumble, some-while backwards, and again suddenly forward, even to
her belly, beating the earth with both her hands, in so much as they were
enforced to put a cushion upon the ground for her to beat upon, notwithstanding
she still vexed her self, and this continued for the space of above half an
hour. Being adjured to tell why he tormented her so terribly, he answered,
that it was because she had submitted her self to her superior. Afterward
Beelzebub himself was sorely tormented, in so much that he cried out aloud for
very pain: and being demanded why he did so, he answered, that the Angel
Michael and Cleare-sight the guard Angel of the Exorcist, and Fortitude the
guardian of Magdalene tormented him, and added force to the flames in which he
fried, because some days since he had hindered Magdalene from her
confessions, and had made her insufferable to her superior, and all that
resorted unto her, whereof although he had received express prohibition from
God, yet did he rather desire to obey the Magician then the Almighty.

Being demanded wherefore the night before the wicked spirits would have
choked father Francis Billet: he answered, because he prayed, and strongly
assisted Magdalene against us. Not long after Magdalene craved pardon of
Louyse, for those malicious wrongs whereby she had offended her, and so
reconciled her self unto her, whereat the Devils began to cry out, We have
spunne a Reconciliation does frustrate ye ^tte^pts of the Devil. The hate
which the one did bear unto the other was so great, that they could not endure
to be near one another: so that we were const^med to exorcise them a part for
a certain season.
webb to catch this fly, tempting her to hate Louyse, but she has now broken
the webb, and we have lost our labor. The same afternoon Beelzebub and his
companions expressed a great rage, whiles Magdalen demanded pardon of father
Romillon for her stubbornness and obstinacy against him.

The acts of the 31. of January being Monday.
AT the morning Exorcisme, Beelzebub did marvel lously torment Magdalene, making
her to The great tortures which Magdalene endured, and the reason why.
bow her head down wards, rubbing the earth within, but not striking it
against the ground. He continued ^he said motions by the space of an hour,
during the Exorcismes, and the like she did with her hands. Then the woman
that was possessed began to complain, and Beelzebub told her, it was to
accomplish her punishments. Afterward taking her by the throat, he would have
strangled her, but having an hundred thousand degrees of punishments imposed on
him, if he forsook not his hold, he let go his gripe, and mounted into her
tongue.

Being adjured to tell why he tormented her so vehemently, after many refusals,
he answered, it is to gain that from her by torments, which cannot be
compassed by other means: and besides, the chief of the Magicians commands me
to do so, who is here present in the Church, but not to be seen of you: he
now presents to Magdalene so filthy a thing, that she is forced to turn her
eyes aside, yea even at this instant he commands us to torment her yet more
grievously. And turning himself to the Magician, he said, what will thou that
I do? Her body is so weakened already, as she can endure no more. A while after
he got him up again into her throat, but having inuocated the name of Jesus
Christ, and the assistance of the holy Virgin, and imposed as many degrees of
punishment on Beelzebub and the Magician, as there are Angels in heaven.
Beelzebub forsook his hold, but said, lo here the Magician who mocketh at
Michaelis and the Exorcist for that they see him not.

After this Beelzebub began to blow and to show by manifest tokens that
himself was sorely tormented; being adjured to tell why. It is Fortitude
(quoth he) Magdalens good Angel, who torments both me and my companions,
because we tempted her to indeuotion and blasphemy.

Being demanded whether those Sorcerers and Witches which Magdalene named in
the afternoon the day before, were such indeed: he answered yes, and swore
upon the book of Exorcismes, reserving to himself no sinister or secret
intention, to their utter confusion and damnation.

Being The Angel^ who are gardians unto men, are of an inferior degree of
Angels, and are commanded and sent by their superior Angels.
adjured to tell and to name the good Angel, of Friar Peter Fournez Vicar of S.
Baume: he answered, he is called the Vision of God, and is the thousandth of
the order of Virtues.

Being demanded if they knew one another, both the good and the bad, he set
himself to laugh, and said, I believe it well, we were all created together.
Being adjured to name the good Angel of father Michaelis, he answered: he
has three, his good Angel from his nativity is the hundredth of the Powers,
and is called Iesia; as he is Inquisitor he has an Arch-angell, which is the
2000. of the same Order: as Superior and Prelate of the rest, he has for his
guardian the hundredth of the order of Throes. The Angel of father Friar
Anthony Boilletot is the 15. of th'Arch-angels, and is called Simplicity. The
Angel of father Romillon, is the 4000. of the Arch^angels, called
Burning-inflammation. The Angel of father Francis Billet is the 4001. of the
Arch angels named Cleere-sight. Magdalene being demanded if she patiently
endured all those pains, answered yes, and that she suffered all in hope of
the remission of her sins: and told us that the same day after dinner Jews
the Magician according to his wont came unto her, together with diverse others,
telling her that he was exceedingly tormented, notwithstanding he willingly
endured all those torments for her sake, howbeit she refused him.

At evening during the time of the second Exorcisme Beelzebub tormented her that
was possessed in like manner as he had done in the morning, affirming that the
Magician was there present, and enjoined him to do as he did; and as if he had
compassion on her, he said, she can endure no more, if this last but one half
hour, all this tragedy will be ended.

Being demanded in what state the Magician then was: he answered with
indignation, go look, he is tormented in all his body, particularly in his
head, his reins and his heart, and yet not visibly before men, but secretly in
his chamber from 10. at night until the morning, and would keep his bed were
it not for fear of discovering his grief. Then said Verrine, the Magicians
are worse then Devils, for the Devils adore God, and tremble, specially when
the possessed receive the Communion, hiding and retiring themselves, or getting
under the tongue to let their Mr. pass over; and if God should create a
thousand hell's, the Magician were worthy of more punishment then they all
could inflict upon him.

Being demanded by what means he might be convinced to be the man: by this
means (quoth he) if he be apprehended and imprisoned by the Bishop of
Marseille, you shall find that he is marked on the head with the mark The
marks which witches have upon them.
of the Devil, as Priests and religious persons carry shaven crowns for the
mark of Jesus Christ. Then said he, there is one come hither under the
pretense of devotion, but indeed to see Magdalene, with whom he is sottishly
fallen in love since her possession, yet at length it may be out of It fell out
so indeed about 3. moueths after.
despite, he will be drawn to accuse the Magician.

The Acts of the first of February, being Tewsday.
Beelzebub at the morning Exorcisme, tormented Magdalene in the same fashion as
he had done the day before, saying, This is enough to make an end of thee; and
being adjured, he said, that he was commanded to do so, and that the Magician
was there present, and so tormented her still more vehemently, by reason
whereof they brought him into the holy house where Beelzebub uttered these
speeches: Thou say, that I must go fetch the writings, I go, and there with
all he issued out of her body very sensibly. In the mean season Magdalene
renounced the Devil and all writings made unto him after her wonted manner,
Beelzebub was observed upon his return to bring the writings to the Magician,
requyring him to ratify them a new for the farther hardening of her to be of
the Devils side, and to resist the inspirations of God.

At the evening Exorcismes Beelzebub continued to torment Magdalene, and a little
after he said, What will thou? I can torment her no more, for she wants
strength; if she had as much strength as the maid of Aix, I would work more
powerfully upon her, and as we understood it, he talked to the Magician: but in
the God permitted these extraordinary tortures which endured until the
Magician was upon the last of April burned, that Magdalene might be truly
converted, who had escaped from a great gulf of voluptuousness and sins. To
break therefore these evil habits, which long custom had made familiar unto
her, she needed great mortifications, and that which was said of the
Canaanitish woman, may well be said of her. Male a daemonio vexatur.
mean time he ceased not to torture her, casting her somewhiles down to the
ground upon her belly, and sometimes again upon her back, and that with great
violence; and after that he took her three or four times by the winde-pipe
to choke her, but by the strength of the prayers of those which were present,
and specially of those words, Et verbum caro factum est, he forsook his hold.

After this Beelzebub by the hand of the maid opened the iron door of the holy
house saying, get in quickly: we understood thereby that he let in the Magician
to ratify (as he had said) the writings brought from Marseille, and then
issued forth, as if he had crept through the hole of the iron gate, crying and
saying, within there it is too hot, and they which abide there, burn; for the
heat is too great to abide it any long time.

The acts of the 2. of February being Wednesday and the Purification of our
Lady.
AT the morning Exorcisme Beelzebub continued his wonted outrages, laughing,
dancing and singing loue-songs thereby to profane the holiday according to his
wont, yet did he not torment Magdalene in that high degree as he had done the
days before, saying that Jews was then hindered from being present by reason
that he heard diverse confessions at Marseille, being taken up with business
there all the morning.

At the Euen-song as they were singing Magnificat, and being come to that
verset He made this outcry, because he was occasioned to remember his fall.
Deposuit potentes de sede, he began to cry aloud, and to grunt and showed
himself much moved as he had done to the former part of the Euen-song the day
before, yet all this day was Magdalene quiet.

Being demanded and adjured to tell whether or no we had enclosed the Magician,
when we shut the door of the holy house the last night, and opened it not
afterward, he answered, go look. Being demanded whether he would swear that
he was not there: he answered, I will neither swear that he is there, nor that
he is not there.

Being adjured with punishments imposed, he answered, he indeed entered, but he
came presently forth again. After this Magdalen fully renounced the Devils,
and all the powers of hell, imploring the mercy of Jesus Christ, and calling
upon the Saints in manner as we have formerly declared.

The acts of the 3. of February being Thursday.
AT the morning Exorcisme Beelzebub sharply tormented Magdalene, as he had done
the days before.

Being demanded whether the Magician Jews were shut into the holy house: he
answered, he is so far from that, that behold him there, pointing with his
finger to the middle of the Church, he is there (quoth he) with his
liuetenant, they entered indeed but fearing to be taken, they made no stay, but
pronounced whiles they abode there these speeches: I renounce God, and ratify
the writings made unto Lucifer, and all that I have promised and sworn unto
him. Being commanded to swear upon the third prayer of the Canon, which the
Priest says after the Communion, without any more ado he laid his hand on the
book, and swore with the conditions required. adding farther, I swear that we
will not go forth hence till the Magician Jews be either converted or dead,
for by this means God will root out all the Synagogue of Magicians and witches,
such is his will, and so he has revealed it unto us.

Being demanded if he would swear by the words of the Consecration of the
blood, he presently put his hands upon those words, saying, I Beelzebub swear
in the name of the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, that it is Gods
pleasure, we should not depart from the possession of this body, until
Lodouicus Prince of the Magicians be either converted or dead, as well for the
rooting out of his Synagogue, as for the confusion of Lucifer, and this I
swear according to your meaning and the intention of the Church triumphant and
militant, without any sinister reservation whatsoever.

Being demanded whether the Magician knew the will of God in that behalf, or
understood what had then been sworn: he answered laughing, yes, for he is
even now here present, but skornes all that has been said, affirming that he
will live a Magician in despite of God.

The Exorcist being about to impose punishments on him, why (said he) should
you impose punishments on me since I obey you: impose it on the Magician who
would hinder me from obeying, and command him not to beat me for obeying, and
likewise command his liuetenant the same, who beats me in his absence, and so
it was done accordingly.

Being demanded how it came to pass that all yesterday Magdalene was quiet. It
was (quoth he) because the Magician could not be present, being The day of the
Purification was the feast of the Church of Acoules at Marseille.
taken up in the morning (it being the holiday of his Church) with confessions,
and at night with the Priests of his Church, but as for me God has prevailed
against me, and Fortitude the good Angel of this Maid was the instrument of
the victory.

The Acts of the fourth of February, being Friday.
AT the Evening Exorcisme (for at that in the Morning, there was no new thing
delivered) Beelzebub was adjured to name the good Angel of father He is one of
the ancients, in the Covent at Saint Maximin.
Friar Honor Lion (who was newly come thither) and turning toward him he
said: his good Angel is called Agilitie; and (quoth he) if thou were so
nimble to serve God and to observe his Commandments, thou would be a brave
fellow.

Being demanded wherefore that Evening he committed so many outrages, laughing
and playing of tricks: It is (quoth he) because this day which is Friday, Jews
has offered great injury to the Consecrated host in despite of Christ's
passion, of which this day is a commemoration: he farther added, that This
prediction fell out afterward to be true.
all the Nuns of Saint Vrsula should be delivered, either from the Devils
which possessed them (there being five of them possessed) or from their
enchantments, but that Magdalene should not be delivered till the whole
process of the Magician was ended: but yet she should not be so tormented as
now she was.

Being adjured to tell with whom he talked that afternoon: for he answered
some body, and yet we perceived not the voice of any that talked with him, he
replied that it was with Fortitudo the good Angel of Magdalene, and after many
refusals and punishments imposed on him, he answered farther that he had
revealed unto him from God, that the Almighty had decreed that the Magician
should be discovered with all his Accomplices if they repented not; and that all
his Synagogue should be dissolved, and that by one of these three means: This
happened at Aix many days together in the Archbishops Chapel when they said
Mass: for he then would cry as loud as he could, that he renounced Christ
and his passion in the name of Jews Gaufridy Prince of Magicians. Many heard
the same, and some Judges of the Court were there also. See the Acts of the 1.
day of March.
either that Beelzebub when the Magician was at Aix, should cry alowde by the
mouth of Magdalene in the presence of an honorable company, and some Judges of
the Parliament, giving them to understand that Jews Gaufridy was prince of the
Magicians; and he would be so loud, that they should be very deaf if they
heard him not. Or if he escaped from them, that then whiles the forenamed Jews
was saying Mass at Acoules in Marseille, when he should turn himself to the
people, and should say orate fratres, Beelzebub by his mouth would cry alowd;
Jews Gaufridy Priest of Acoules in Marseille is the chief of the Magicians.
Or lastly, Beelzebub going forth of Magdalene, would take upon him the shape of
a man (because that function belongs not to women) and going up into the pulpit
would preach publicly in the Church of Acoules, where the said Gaufridy
abode, that Jews Priest of Acoules was the Prince of Magicians, and would
withal lay open all his knaueries and enchantments, which he had practiced
since the time he first took that profession upon him. Being demanded when
that would come to pass, he answered The fact, not the time revealed.
that it was only revealed to him.

He farther said and swore, that Fortitudo holding a sword in his hand, forbad
him on Gods behalf to tempt Magdalene any more to unchaste behavior by making
the enchantment to work in her for that purpose: and in this (said he) I
could not resist the will of God intimated unto me by The good Angel is
assisting unto Magdalene.
Fortitudo, and howbeit the Magician has solicited me to do so, threatening me
in the name of his Master Lucifer, yet I answered him that I could not and that
God hindered me, telling him farther that if he knew that which was revealed
unto me it would astonish him, yet did I not tell him that which I knew,
though now I have uttered it being forced by the virtue of Exorcismes.

He farther said and swore upon the Canon of the Mass, laying his hands (being
first commanded thereunto) upon the prayer made after the offering (howbeit the
The trial of the Devil.
Exorcist showed him another to try what he would do) that the last night as
the Magician was saying Mass to the assembly of the Witches, Magdalene looked
on, but was not able to move her self or to cry out that her assistants might
take notice of it: And he brought and presented unto her the consecrated host
to receive it at his hand, which she refused to do or any way to yield consent
unto it, and as the said Magician continued instantly to importune her, she A
vision in the holy Host.
saw within the Host a little infant, marvelous fair, shining and casting
forth very pleasant beams and saying unto her, I will not my daughter that
thou receive me from the hands of mine enemies, but only from the hands of my
servants; with which she was exceedingly comforted and strengthened. This did
Beelzebub when he went out of her, report to the Magician and to his adherents,
who saw not the miracle, which as soon as they heard they began to weep,
foreseeing their ruin: notwithstanding they came again to Magdalene and
prayed her to receive the Host, in as much as she was converted, and that it
might be she had some vision, which was but an illusion, yet she still refused
it, and though the devil opened her mouth by force, yet had not the Magician
the power to put the Host into it. But after that she had long resisted, at
length the foresaid child shut her lips. We must not consent or give way unto
the Devil in the least thing that is: so that if he come and demand but a rush
of us, we are not to give it unto him.
After this the Magician desired an hair of her head, which she refused to
give; knowing that that were to do homage to the Devil if any thing were given
him: after that again he demanded half an hair, which when she refused to
do, he then caused her to suffer grievous punishments, in so much as she
rested not all that night, nor five days after during the Exorcismes; which
notwithstanding she endured with great patience, for the love of God, and the
remission of her sins.

The assistants who watched with her all the night, witnessed that she lay
still as one in a dream not able to speak so much as one word, and Magdalene
her self confessed that it was all true which has bin delivered of the Host.

The Acts of the 5. of February being Saturday.
AT the morning Exorcisme there being a Friar of the order of S Francis come
thither, and bringing with him some Relics which Another trial of the Devil.
a Cardinal had given him at Rome, he laid them softly and secretly on
Magdalenes back, at which the Devil began to cry out that they should take
that away, for it burned him

Being adjured to tell what it was: he answered there are two things which I
specially fear, the wood of the Cross, and a bone of S. Lawrence, the others
I fear not much, and it was indeed found to be true which he had said.

The same day after dinner father Michaelis with his companion father Friar
Anthony Boilletot, parted from S. Baume to go to S. Maximin, and from thence
to Aix to preach there the Lent following; and being arrived at Aix, he went
presently to salute Monsieur du Vair chief President of the court of
Parliament, giving him to understand what had passed at S. Baume from the first
of January 1611. to the fifth of February, touching the trial whether those two
maids (of whom there was so much talk in all the Country) were indeed
possessed or not, and upon trial he found that they were in very truth
possessed, and to that purpose he had discovered three real tokens in
Magdalene: the first that she was truly possessed, as appeared by sundry
undoubted effects: the second, that being of the age of nineteen years, she
was found to be d^floured, as her self confessed: the third, that she had the
marks of the Devil upon her body, which were deprived of sense and feeling,
as himself had discovered at S. Baume: and that besides this the wicked
spirits which possessed both Louyse and Magdalene, protested that all this
happened by the enchantments of one Jews Gaufridy chief of the Magicians and
dwelling at Marseille. Which as soon as the forenamed President understood, he
thought good to send for the two maids to Aix, The arriual of the two women
that were possessed at Aix.
who arrived there the 16. of the same month of February.

The acts of the 17. day of February, being Thursday and the day after
Ashwednesday.
THis day after dinner Monsieur du Vair chief President, came to the
Archbishops palace where Magdalene was; there being also come thither
Garandeau Vicar to the Lord Archbishop of Aix, and some others, and began to
put Magdalene to certain interrogatories, assuring her she should find
favor and escape unpunished, if she would tell the truth how matters had
passed from the beginning to the end. And as she began to relate how the
Magician first seduced her, the The signs of Magdalens possession and her
marks.
Devil caught her by the winde-pipe within, thereby not suffering her to
speak, and making as if he meant to choke her, he made her eyes to turn in
her head, and this lasted a pretty while. At which the said President and the
other beholders much merueiled. After certain Exorcismes the Devil left his
hold, and Magdalene went on with her discourse, which being ended she showed
the mark of the Devil in her foot, and the said President thrusting a pin
into it up to the very head, Magdalene felt nothing neither did any blood issue
forth, but at the thrusting in of the pin they might easily perceive a noise
as it had been the pearcing of parchment. He saw besides this another evident
proof, which was that Beelzebub held himself in the former part of her head,
making there a continual motion, and heauing up that part in such sort that a
man laying his hand on it might easily perceive it. And Beelzebub being
commanded by the Exorcist (who was for that time father Michaelis) to leave her
by the space of one Miserere, he presently left her, issuing sensibly out of
her mouth, and thereupon instantly the motion of her head ceased, as the said
President found by laying his hand on the place. The time prefixed being
expired, he returned again, making a great noise in token of his repossession,
where-upon he presently felt the motion again as before. The same passages
played Leuiathan who held the hinder part of the head, and if they were
commanded to leave her for the space of three Misererees, they exactly observed
their time; and this was every day tried by the iniunction of the Exorcist,
when any personages of note came thither to see her. And besides this, The
witness of Physicians and Surgeons.
Monsieur Fonteine Doctor of Physic and the Kings professor, made the same
experiment and found it to be true the 19. of February. The like did the other
Physicians of the same city, namely Merindol and Grassi Doctors and
professors in Physic, together with Monsieur Bon^temps a skillful Surgeon and
Anatomist of the same city, all judging it to be a matter above the ordinary
course of nature.

The Acts of the 18. and 19. of February being the Friday and Saturday.
THe said Monsieur Fonteine being come thither to make trial of that which we
have spoken of upon the possessed, wore a goune that he had and said, if thou
be Beelzebub I am the Curat of a village not far from hence, and am come to
exorcise thee. Then answered He speaks unto Monsieur ^onteine the Physician.
Beelzebub (for the maid had never seen him nor known him in all her life) if
thou be a Priest take thy stole and show me thy shaven crown; but thou art
of the number of them which Cure when they can, and when they can not they give
over.

At the Mass the Priest having forgotten to put wine in the Chalice, Beelzebub
cried out, Will thou say Mass without Mass. Where-upon the Priest looking
into it, put wine in his Chalice.

The same day Beelzebub played his old tricks, and father Romillons servant
being about to bind Magdalene with the tippet, Beelzebub struck him saying, Is
it for thee to bind me? Where-upon the Priest himself took it and bound him
without any resistance. In the mean time, whiles the The Commissioners that
were deputed to fetch the Magician.
Commissioners Seguiran and Rabasse the Kings Advocate parted from Aix to
Marseille to fetch the Magician: Beelzebub and the other Devils ceased not to
cry and howl, not suffering Magdalene to confess or communicate.

The Acts of the 20. of February being Sunday.
THe Magician being that day come and clapped up in prison about ten of the
clock at night, there was heard the skriching of a great Owl from the top of
the prison tower, and many dogs howled about the prison.

The Acts of the 22. 23. and 24. of February
Beelzebub being demanded at the exorcisme where the Magician was, and what he
then did; he answered; he is now no longer in the dungeon, yet is he very sad:
and so he was indeed found: for Monsieur Seguiran one of the Commissioners gave
order to set him at large with the rest of the prisoners. And Sequiran coming
to the Archbishops Palace after dinner, Beelzebub told-him all that he had
done Beelzebub recites things that were acted in remote places.
at Marseille, whereat he was exceedingly astonished: as first that Jews
freely and of his own accord rendered himself unto him, as it had been an
innocent lamb: and that the Lady Liberta and other gentle-women became
suitors unto him in the behalf of Jews, affirming that he was a very honest
man, and alleging other such matter to the like purpose. He farther said, that
having advertised Jews of the Commissioners coming thither. Jews answered,
what should I do? shall I go any where from hence? Where-unto he answered,
that it behooved him to take heed to that, for by this means he would make
himself guilty. Yea, but said the Magician, they will put me to the rack.
Beelzebub answered, I will take order that thou shall have no feeling of that.
Then the Magician replied, it may be so, but yet many dye therewith. Beelzebub
reioyned, what is that to the purpose, if thou employ thy life in the service
of so great See the impudence of Devils.
a Lord as Lucifer, who has done so much for thee? Heere-upon the Magician was
silent, and resolved to do as Beelzebub persuaded him. After this day the
wicked spirits began to put Magdalene to the rack, turning and wresting her
arms and legs, lifting her up on high, and laying on her many tortures three
or four times a day. And this spectacle some of the Presidents and
Counselors, as well of the one Court as of the other, stood by, and looked on
diverse times, hearing him say withal, Thou will cause Jews to be put to the
rack, it is good reason then that I put thee to the rack, and at the Exorcismes
he made her to cry so loud and so long, that they feared least she had broken
a vain.

The Acts of the 25. of February being Friday.
Beelzebub being at the Exorcisme adjured to tell whence he came the day
before, being Thursday, and the 24. of February, when as he had left the posses
sed woman for a time: he answered, from visiting our Mr. Jews, who is in
prison very sad.

Being adjured to tell what conference he had with him there: He answered, he
dealt with me to hide the marks of his body, and to turn them inward: as also
those of Magdalene that they might not serve as testimonies against him, which
I promised him to do.

Being demanded whether it was in his power to do it: he answered, yes, and
that he would do it to make men believe that such marks were but imaginary.
And further, I have promised (quoth he) to free him from prison within these
eight days. We have found by experience that this was a fallacy, for it is
true indeed The Devil is a cousener and deceives even those that he calls
his. Yet here it was no deceit, but an impotency and want of ability: ^od gave
hinderance here unto by his good Angel, because the Magicians marks might be
found out.
that he departed out of prison eight days after he was committed, but it was
to bring him to the Palace there to confront him with Magdalene, and afterward
to search for his marks.

The Acts of the 26. of February being Saturday.
ABout four of the clock in the afternoon the Physicians Founteine and
Grassi, together with B^ntemps the Surgeon and Anatomist found again the
motion in the Another trial made by the Physitian^.
forenamed parts of Magdalens head, as if it had been Frogs moving in the
inside but Beelzebub being once departed out of her, they found the beating of
the brain to cease, and to be in her as in other men. And having felt her
pulse in both arms, and found that it beat equally without any alteration,
they thereupon concluded, that the foresaid motion was not natural, but
arysing rather from voluntary then natural spirits.

At the same time Asmodeus the cheiftaine of Luxury began to move Magdalene to
wanton and unchaste actions, as he had often done at S. Baume, thereby to bring
her to shame. After this the said Physicians and Surgeons caused her sometimes
to walk, and then to sit and to make repression of those motions as much as
she could, but she being then in her right senses answered, that she could not
by any means hinder it, nor could they themselves withstand or remedy this
same whence they inferred that by the course of nature this could not be.

A notable and sensible effect of the blessed Sacrament.
It is obseruable, that every day during the holy Mass the Devil assaulted
her extremely in all the parts of her body, and it was marvelous to the
beholders to see, that when she had once received the holy Communion,
presently those motions ceased, and there followed a great calm as well in her
soul as in her body.

The same day one of the Devils, who called himself Carton, cried and howled
saying, that he was beaten and burned.

Being adjured to yield the reason why, he only answered, it is that accursed
Fortitude the good Angel of Magdalene which beats me often repeating,
Accursed The Devil well swinged by the good Angel.
Fortitude let me alone, and this lasted by the space of an hour.

The acts of the 27. of February being Sunday.
FAther Francis Billet saying Mass, and being come to his memento, Beelzebub
cried out four times, Why He felt the virtue of the prayer, for he cannot
understand or divine the secrets of the heart.
prayest thou for Magdalene? And when Mass was ended, the Priest assured us
that he then prayed for her. Afterward the Devil would not suffer her to set
her knee on the ground. And as they forced her to do it, Beelzebub said, no, it
is not yet time: but as soon as the Priest had ended the last words of the
Consecration, presently he made her kneel saying, lo there.

After dinner the marks of the woman that was possessed were searched which
she had in her feet, in her reins and right over against her heart, and they
were all found to be void of sense. Then said Beelzebub, I labored to make them
sensible, but God has hindered me, After this the Devils put Magdalene to the
rack very sorely by the space of a quarter of a hour, in the presence Diverse
men of quality present at Magdalenes tortures.
of Monsieur Thoron Counselor in the Court of Parliament, and deputed for a
commissioner in this business, and Monsieur Garandeau Vicar general unto the
most reverend the Archbishop of Aix, and also one of the deputed
Commissioners, there being withal present Thomassin the Advocate general in
the Court of accounts and de Calas of the Kings Counsel in the Parliaments of
Aix.

Concerning the foresaid Witness of the Magicians marks.
marks it is worth the marking, that Monsiour Simeonis, an honest man and a
wife, well known in that City, who managed all the affairs of the
Archbishop, told father Michaelis, that after the marks were found upon the
Magician, he went to see him, being of his acquaintance since his youth, who
in a familiar manner assured and told him, I shall but mock the world in
coming thither, for I have a spirit at my command who can free me from all
men living and cover my marks. And he demanding how they were then found. The
Magician answered, Gods finger is in it.

The acts of the first of March being Tewsday, until Sunday.
FRom that day until the 15. of the same month, during the holy Mass,
Beelzebub began to make his This is the accomplishment of Verrins prediction,
who foretoldat S. Baume that Beelzebub himself should discover the Magician in
a Church, in the presence of Judges and Counselors of the Parliament, and
should cry so loud, that they should be very dease who heard it not. And that
if after all this they did not execute Justice upon him, God would use two
other means in the city of Marseille. See the Acts of the 4. of February
above written.
renouncements in behalf of the Magician, as Jews had given him commission to
do, thereby to assure his obstinacy and fastness to him. But having in charge
to do it inwardly, God intended to manifest his malice by the ministry of
Fortitude, and therefore caused them to make them outwardly with as loud a
voice as the maid could cry, in so much as it was doubted, least she had
broken a vain, terrifying all the beholders, and driving away some who were
the more fearful.

He cried saying, I renounce Paradise in the behalf of Jews Gaufridy. I
renounce the Trinity, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, in the behalf
of Jews Gaufridy. I renounce the Eucharist, all holy Inspirations, all the
members of Jesus Christ (naming them all from the head to the feet, and
particularly renouncing every particular member) all the Masses and Prayers
which were said for him, and any thing that might serve as a means for his
salvation. After this he added I renounce the Virgin Mary, I renounce Michael,
Gabriel, Raphael, Vriel, Fortitude, and all the Quiers of Angels. Peter and all
the Apostles. Lawrence and all the Martyrs. Gregory and all the Doctors.
Lazarus and all the Bishops. Dominique and Francis with all the Confessors and
Votaries. Mary Magdalene and all Penitents. Martha and all Virgins, all
Instructions and Sermons, adding to every one, In the behalf of Jews. Lastly
he concluded, with the It is to be noted, that these 4. had on this day said
Mass in the Chapel of the Arch bishops Palace at Aix for his conversion.
Masses of Michaelis, Romillon, Francis Billet, and Anthony Boilletot.

And when the Chalice was elevated, he cried out sundry times, Lord, I
renounce thee and thy blood, and let the blood of the Just one fall upon me in
the behalf of Jews Gaufridy.

The Devils knowledge of things absent.
There was at that present an Heretic walking in the hall which ioynes upon
the Chapel of the Palace, whom his brother being a Catholic, had brought
thither to behold these strange sights, but he durst not enter the Chapel.
Then Beelzebub cried, make that Heretic come in, whereat the bystanders were
much astonished. Then said the brother of the Heretic who was there present,
he speaks truth, for my brother who is an Heretic walks in the hall.

Jews the Magician brought into the Chapel.
Thus continued he all the days following, during which time the Magician
Jews was brought to the Chapel, to the end he might understand the
renouncements which Beelzebub made on his behalf. And as Jews beheld Magdalene
thus tormented of the Devil, Beelzebub turning himself toward him, said, Come
hither my friend, and see if I do not torment her as much as thou desire. At
this passage was present Monsieur Thoron Counselor of the Court of
Parliament, and Commissioner in this business, with diverse others. This
hapened on Saturday after Mass.

They were saine to keeps the Chapel door shut, because of the throng of
people.
The same Saturday after dinner, the Magician was again brought to speak with
Magdalene face to face, who still maintained stoutly and stiffly all that she
had before delivered against him.

The marks found by the Physicians upon the Magician.
This done at evening he was visited by the three Physicians Founteine
Merindol and Crassy, and two Surgeons Bontemps and Pronet: and having
stripped him in the presence of Thoron and Garandeau, the forenamed
Commissioners, they found him in a shameful and odious fashion, whereat they
were ashamed themselves, and turned their faces aside. Afterward being
blindfolded they searched him with needles, and when they touched the sensible
parts, he cried saying, You hurt me; and when he cried not, they thurst in
the needle up to the head without any appearance of sense. By which means they
found upon his body three marks, where-upon having his eyes vnmufled, and
being re-apparelled, he thought that they had found no marks on his body, and
so returned very merry to the prison: but two days after being advertised of
the relation which the forenamed Physicians and Surgeons had made, he was much
dismayed at it, The frivolous question of the Magician.
and would needs move a question, whether the Devil had power to mark a
Christian without his consent. Then said father Michaelis to Monsieur Thoron,
if this man were in Auignion he should be burnt to morrow next, for such marks
do plainly convince him, and they are never found but upon Magicians. For God
permits not that his children who are members of the mystical body of Jesus
Christ, should bear the mark of his enemy, but he marks them inwardly by
the holy Ghost, and the character of Baptism, and outwardly in the forehead by
the chrisme and the sign of the Cross, and by this mark he distinguishes
the elect from the reprobate in the 7. of the Revelation. And as it is said in
the same book, he will not suffer his elect to carry the mark of the beast,
some being willing to dispute upon the point, alleged that God permitted Satan
to strike Job in all his body. To which the said father answered, there is
great difference betwixt a blow or a stripe, and a mark; the blow is given for
correction, the mark in token of subjection: the slaves of Turkey carry their
masters mark in their forehead, burnt with an hot iron, but it is another
matter when their masters whip them till the blood come. S. Antony and other
holy men have been beaten by Devils as Job was: but you shall never find that
the Devil stamped marks upon their bodies, the stripes cease, but the marks
remain, and if that could be, the Devil would mark the Pope himself and all
the Judges, and who is that father of a family who would suffer his sheep or
bull to carry another man's mark? and so the question was at an end.

Magdalenes accusation and stoutnesse against the Magician.
The self same Saturday at the confronting of the one against the other.
Magdalene said unto the Magician, Thou can not deny four things: first thou
can not but remember how thou did abuse my body, and take away my
virginity at my fathers house in Marseille. Secondly, how thou did lead me
to the Synagogue, and with thine own hand did baptize me in the name of
the Devil, and anoint me with their execrable Chrisome, causing me to renounce
God, and my portion in Paradise, and to make all other renounciations which
they use to do in Synagogues. Thou did also stamp the Devils marks upon
me, which I still carry in my body. Thirdly, thou have given me an Magdalene
did afterward make relation of this unto us, for we were not present at their
confrontments, but the commissiaries have the acts of these things in their
hands.
Agnus Dei, and a peach charmed. Fourthly, how thou have sent the Devils unto
me, which do now possess me, because I would enter into the order of S.
Vrsula. To these accusations, Jews the Magician made answer, that they were
all false, and that he would take his oath in the name of God, the Virgin, and
S. John Baptist that it was most maliciously untrue. Then said Magdalene, I
understand you well. This is the oath of the Synagogue, where, by God the
Father, you mean Lucifer: by the Son, Beelzebub: by the holy Ghost,
Leui^ithan: O damned villain. By the Mother of God, thou meanest the mother of
Antichrist, and thou call the Devil, who is the forerunner of Antichrist
Saint John Baptist. Whereupon the said Magician remained much confounded.

And for the more ample demonstration of his villainy. It is to be noted that in
an Exorcisme performed at Saint Baume within the holy Penitence Beelzebub said,
that this Magician was more swollen with rancor and malice against Christ Jesus
then themselves were: for they did abhor and hold in detestation, the more
then deuellish inventions which he daily devised: he also made certain
accursed memorialls to help the remembrance of those that were in the
Synagogue, that they might more abundantly and readily blaspheme, and do
villainy to Christ Jesus, especially during the time that he lived upon the
Earth. But (said he) he has cousened himself, for we have deceived him in the
schedule which he has made unto us, wherein it is couenanted, that after the
term of 24. years he was to be ours, and we were to carry him away body and
soul: but we have so cunningly changed the number of years that there are
but two years remaining. It is 14. years ago since he was first a Magician,
and now we have reduced the schedule to sixteen years. It is to be observed
that Magdalene did upon this occasion tell us that she had understood by him,
that at the first he was but a sorcerer, but the Synagogue seeing that he had a
practicke head, and did perform the deuillish acts that were enjoined him to
their content and liking, as also because he was a great inuenter of new
d^uice^, thereby to advance the kingdom of Satan, they made him a Magician,
and at last they made choice of him for their Prince.

The difference betwixt the heart of a Catholic and the heart of a Magician.
When God does not operate all is endarkned; but when he begins to put his
operations in act, every thing thereby receaueth life and light, as appears
in the work of the Creation. Genesis 1. Now by reason of this participation of
Magicians with Lucifer, they are not only possessed with obstinacy and
blindness, but also with a diabolical rage, which we have formerly touched.
In the whole course and current of the Magicians obstinacy we have observed:
that as the true Christian has a true sympathy with the heart of Christ Jesus,
and therefore his heart is humble, charitable, patient, etc. So the Magicians
have in their heart a participation of the obstinacy of Lucifer, unto whom they
have dedicated themselves: but this is not by any infusion, for that were
impossible, but by adhering and consenting to the ceaseless batteries and
temptations of the Devil, by which they are endarkned and removed from the
beam of grace.

The Acts of the 6. of March being Sunday.
AS well at the Exorcismes as at all the Masses which were said this day in the
Chapel of the Archbishops Palace, Beelzebub did not cease to make diverse
renunciations in the name and behalf of Jews Gaufridy, as we have formerly
noted upon the first of March: but now he used more vehemence and cried so
loud that Magdalene grew hoarse, so that her words could hardly be understood,
yet did the Devil still go on with that impeatuous course of speaking.

The same day Beelzebub made recital of the conference he had with Jews in
prison, after that he was searched whether he had any marks upon him, or no,
saying unto him, if thy marks be found betake thy self presently to renounce
God, and all other things as before, and bequeath thy self wholly to the
service of Lucifer. Unto whom Jews made answer, Why if the marks be found. I
do not possitiuely affirm this, said Beelzebub, but I say and demand, if such a
thing should happen, would thou endeavor thy self to renounce God as
formerly thou have done? To which the Magician replied, I will renounce him for
ever, and will for ever serve Lucifer. It is worth observation, that when as at
sundry times he recited unto us things of the like nature tending to the
dismasking and opening of the Magician, and we would ask him, why he made
detection of these things that did so much prejudice his confederate and
servant, he made answer, I am constrained thereunto by your Exorcismes: when I
am with him I make show of great friendship, O wretched Magicians! can you have
any affiance in Devils? pu^ your trust in your good God, Quia fidelis Dominus
in omnibus verbis suis, and sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.
and seem ready to do for him whatsoever he will command me, but when I am
here with you I betray him and make a mock of him. Know you not that there are
Traitors amongst men, and that there is no sin which a man may commit that is
not more amply residing in Devils, or at the least committed by their
instigations and suggestions? If men be Traitors we devils are so too^ if men
be proud, we go beyond them also in pride and arrogance.

The Acts of the 7. of March being Monday.
Beelzebub still continuing to make the renunciations aforesaid at the time of
Mass, Magdalene grew hoarse more and more, so that she could scarsly speak a
word. Upon this there came in by chance a certain honest Priest an Almner unto
a Bishop, unto whom Beelzebub turned himself, and said: behold a The Vestments
of Priests.
true Priest, who goes in good clothes, and is not like one of these poor
snakes ill fauouredly attired and al to be tattered: nay, which is more he has
crowns in his purse. All which was found to be true, the said Priest
confessing that he had indeed certain crowns about him. So that it appears
that the gaudy and soft rayments of Priests is pleasing to Beelzebub, who is
wonderously contented to see silks and veluets worn by Priests in their own
clothes which they usually wear: but he cannot endure to see them worn in
the Priestly vestments that belong unto the Altar.

The Acts of the 8. and 9. of March being Tewsday and Wednesday.
Upon these two days Beelzebub at the time of Mass did make Magdalene to skud
and run up and down the Chapel from one end to the other, although The
strange manner of Magdalens running upon her knees.
she were upon her knees, laughing and making mouths, which was very
wonderful to behold. At the Gospel, Beelzebub held her in, and began to make
his accustomed renunciations as before said, crying and making repetition of
them in behalf of Jews Gaufridy. And Monsieur Perrin a Burgess of Marseille
chancing to come into the Chapel, he disclosed unto him This woman was
bewitched by the Magician, concerning which, there is mention made in the
sentence given against the said Magician.
that his wife was beset and environed with a dreadful troop of Devils.

Upon Wednesday about four of the clock in the after noone, there came a
certain man of Marseille into the chamber where Magdalene remained of purpose
to see her. At which very time all the Devils which were in Magdalens body were
It is the manner which some have welobserued to be usual among Devils, that
they hate others that come upon their ground and possessions: which proceeds
from their pride and envy.
in an uproar against the Magician, and did endeavor to express their rage by
crying and making a noise as Magdalene reported, who affirmed that she
strugled with all her forces to hinder them from making this outcry, so that
her face became extremely red there-with-all, as the Reverend father Celsus,
Guardian of the Capuchin fathers at Aix, and another Friar his companion
together, with many others who heard this report, did rightly observe.

A charm given by the Magician.
At the morning Exorcisme father Francis the Capuchin being assisted by father
Lawrence of the same order, did adjure Beelzebub by the power of God, to
disclose what the nature of that strange sickness was, wherewith father Angel
the Capuchin was for the space of four years so grievously tormented. After
much renitency and imposition of punishments, he answered, that he was charmed
at Marseille, when he sat at supper in the house of Monsieur de Greau, where
Jews Gaufridy and Magdalene, were also present, where the said Jews caused
the charm to be put in the said fathers glass by the invisible assistance of
Devils, which was compounded of many powders, and of the bones of young
children which they had eaten in their Sabbaths. And the said charm did invade
his whole body, so that he is not yet able to help himself, and has no
Devils in his body, but without. Also one named Cordon sell sick, and lay bound
in his body, to the end that a charm which the Magician gave him, out of
ha^^ed that he had been reproved by him, when he preached at Marseille and
lodged in his house, about his over much familiarity with women, might have the
better operation.

It is a note very obseruable, that this day there was a new charm cast upon
Magdalene to breed in her a loathing of eating flesh, fish, or eggs, and of
drinking wine, to the end that by dis-seasoning and distempering her, she
might die for hunger, or at the least make retraction of her depositions
against the Magician. And Ye that are sinners consider seriously how grievous
the punishments are unto which your sins make you liable.
the truth is, that as soon as she to show her obedience did offer to taste
the least bitt of those things, the Devil presently pulled her from the table,
and The horrible and rude handling used by the Devils toward Magdalene.
racked her in a horrible manner, wresting backward her legs and arms, and
making her bones to crack and grate one against the other, and making her
fingers crook sundry ways, which endured sometimes for the space of half an
hour, sometimes a quarter of an hour, and sometimes an hour. And this
terrible handling continued till the end of April, at what time the Magician
fessed the fact. There also came much people of the best note in the city of
Aix, at the time when Magdalene used to dine and sup purposely to see this
spectacle.

One day after dinner a Lady brought her some drage powder, and some Syrope to
give her to drink, but the Devil would never permit her, shutting up her
teeth and saying, All these things are too too nourishing.

The Acts of the 10. of March being Thursday.
Upon this day Magdalene reported to us, that about midnight last past, she
being not able to take her rest, walked up and down in her chamber, and upon
the sudden found her self circled and ringed in by a troop of Devils, who all
persuaded her to return unto them. Upon her refusal, they bad her call to
remembrance, whether the day before being the wednesday in mid-lent, she and
some others had not bequeathed half their hearts unto the Devil, and the
other half to the Prince of Magicians, and whether she had not done the like
by her body? Which she did remember by this accident, although formerly she
had not thought upon the same: but having many times renounced all these
Diabolical donations, the Devils presently vanished away.

At the morning Exorcisme Beelzebub cried with a loud voice, the Devil take all
Magicians, who are the cause of these so unsupportable torments which I endure:
for we might easily perceive that he was grievously tormented by his puffing,
and fuming, and turmoyling himself, as if he had been in a hot boiling
caldron. Then taking Magdalene by the throat, as his manner was, making show
as if he would strangle her, father Anthony Boilletot The Devils have no power
to bite consecrated fingers.
did put two of his consecrated fingers upon her throat, where-upon Beelzebub
cried, the Devil take these consecrated fingers that do put me to this pain.

Here is to be noted, and experience it self does clear it up unto us, that
when a Priest does put his consecrated fingers in the mouths of those that are
possessed, and betwixt their teeth, the Devils dare not byte them, and are at a
stand, as an horse checked with a bit, crying and saying, Put other fingers
here, and thou shall see how we will use them. This experience ought to put
the Ministers of Heretics with all their adherents to utter shame and
confusion.

The Acts of the 11. and 12. of March being Friday and Saturday.
THe Magician Jews did upon Friday entreat Monsieur Garandeau, and Monsieur
Thoron, two of the Comissaries to send unto him Monsieur Gombert Priest of
Nostre Dame de Grace, and of the congregation of the Oratory, that he might
confess himself unto him, having at that time some glimpse and dawning of
that divine light, although Men's conuersions from those faults that are
enormous, do ord^narily go by degrees and succession, as has been
experienced in the conversion of Magdalene, which at length was perfected up
and approved by the marks that departed from her. A demonstration or
external emblem hereof is in the blind man in S. Mark chap. 8. upon whom
Christ Jesus laid his hands two several times, and so at first he began to see
imperfectly, afterward his sight became more perfect.
afterward there could no great sign of contrition be perceived in him.

The same Friday after dinner, a certain gentleman publicly known to be an
Heretic through all the city of Aix, came unto Magdalen and said unto her,
Wench take away all these Crosses that thou have about thee, and thou will
presently be delivered, for all is nothing but He conceited that it was nothing
but imagination, not having been much conversant with her that was possessed.
The Devils that were in the bodies of some harmless and innocent sisters of
S. Vrsula, upon their being Exorcised did say, we will depart from hence in
time, but we are already provided of a body to enter into it at our pleasure.
Yet would we not judge this to be meant de indiuiduo.
imaginatio^s: for my part I could wish that all the Devils which are in thy
body might enter and take possession of me, this was thought to be a very rash
speech.

Upon Saturday Monsieur Garandeau did question Magdalene, what those red
pimples were which were found upon the reins and shoulders of Jews. She
answered, I know the^ well, for every Wednesday and Friday in the month of
March, the Magicians are marked by Devils with a piece of hot iron in contempt
of the wounds of Christ Jesus. In discoursing thus, the Devil who ever since
Thursday was silent, and had withdrawn himself, leapes up into her tongue and
said furiously, thou make a discovery of me.

Being asked who it was that spoke: she answered, It was Balberith, who in
Scripture is called Baalberith. Judge. 9.

The Acts of the 13. 14. 15. and 16. of March being Sunday, Monday, Tewsday and
Wednesday.
DVring these four days there happened no new occurrents, but only certain
strange gestures, and some renunciations as upon former days.

The Acts of the 17. and 18. day of March being Thursday and Friday.
THe Thursday at night, because the Sexton of the Cathedral Church at Aix
called S. Savior, which is joining upon the Archbishops house, had reported
unto Monsieur Garandean, that in the Chapel which is called the Chapel of S.
Savior, and is the most private place of all the Church, and the most charily
kept, there was a Reliquary locked with a key, where there were many bones
decently and reverently ranked, and no man knew what it was, but that there was
a likelihood that it might be the Relics of Saints, the said Garandeau was of
opinion to have her that was possessed to be brought thither, and to exorcise
her in that very place, to see the countenance and the portment of the Devil.
Being come thither, they took two skulls, one of a lesser size and another
greater, and applied them one after the other unto her that was possessed:
where-upon she wagged her head from one side to the other, and could not stand
quiet, but ever said, take this away.

The Devil being many times exorcised to tell what Relics these were. He
answered, with some renitency: they are the Relics of Bishops: would to God
that I were as holy as they, yet are they at deadly send and enmity with me. He
that spoke this was Beelzebub. Then he cried. I can endure this no longer, I
must get me gone, and so he departed as he was accustomed. And when the
Priests that were there present, had given thanks unto God, saying. Te Deum
and the prayer to the blessed Trinity, Monsieur Garandeau began again to
Exorcise, and applied unto her the said skulls, whereupon she turned her head
here and there, as she had formerly done, saying, Touch me not, I do very
s^fficiently feel the virtue that is in them.

Being asked who it was that spoke, the Devil answered, I am Oscillon that do
now speak, for Beelzebub is gone to give the Magician advise to weep (because
it was commonly said, that Magicians do never weep) and Magdalene being
questioned concerning the same, when the Priests had left Exorcising, she
confessed, that when Magicians or Sorcerers would weep, they put the two
fingers next the thumb upon the two temples of their head, and then they fall
a weeping presently, but not from apprehension of grief as others do, albeit
they see themselves in danger of death, but coldly and forcedly, so that you
shall scarsly see their tears to descend lower then their cheeks.

Father Celsus, Guardian of the covent of the Capuchins at Aix, being together
with his companion, advertised hereof, The great charity of two Capuchin
fathers.
who did converse in prison with the Magician, and kept him company all the
time of Lent until his death, remaining with him at night to comfort him and
to exhort him to repent, that so he might dis-engage himself from those wicked
spirits, which should come to visit him for further confirmation of his
obstinacy, which they did with great charity and mortification. God so blessing
them that they did not loose their pains, but were the instruments of the
acknowledgment which he made of his sins, and of the confessions and
depositions which he afterward set down: these two charitable fathers (I say)
having had information hereof, did forbid him to put his fingers upon the said
places, where-upon his weeping left him.

But returning to our former purpose, Oscillon was adjured to tell whose these
two skulls were: where-upon he answered, thou together with thy Relics shall
not know this, only thus much I will give you to understand, that they unto
whom these skulls did formerly belong, did master the Devils better then all
you; look and you shall find others also. Then they applied again unto her
the lesser skull of the two, where-upon he said: In the Acts of the Apostles
the 19. chapter. The handkerchifes of Saint Paul being applied unto those that
were possessed, did chase away evil spirits.
this is the head of an Archbishop who is my Arch. enemy: and so the Devil
retired himself and would speak no further. Magdalene being demanded what she
felt in her body when the skulls were applied unto her, she answered that she
felt as it were a great flame of fire in her body, and that she heard the
Devils speak within her, that the lesser skull did sometimes appertain unto
one that was a great enemy of Oscillon, and the most mortal foe that Beelzebub
had: so growing very late every man retired himself to his own home.

The next day which was Friday at the morning Exorcisme performed in the Chapel
belonging to the Archbishop, Beelzebub was adjured, who without making any
great resistance, after the application of the two skulls which they had
purposely brought thither, said thus. The greater skul is Raymonds Bishop of
Arles: The Devils are oftentimes constrained to reveal the bodies and relics
of Saints: as appears by the Ecclesiastical histories, concerning the bodies
of those notable Saints John and Paul whom Julian the Apostata had caused
secretly to be hid: as he also ^ndeauoured to silence the memorial of their
Martyrdom. But they were known by an undeceivable mark, which is by the
miracles that were wrought by them: which do bear a more assured witness of
them when they are dead, then when they are alive: as was seen in the person
of Christ Jesus: for in men's life time they are not always inevitable
arguments of predestin^tion. Mat. 7.1. Cor. 13. but they are certain tokens of
the same after their death. And by this point shall Antichrist be discovered,
even by his own that shall believe in him.
the lesser is Anthonies, Bishop of Aix. I wonder (said he) you did not also
bring the head of Charles: whereupon, they afterward looking among the said
bones did indeed find another head.

The said Monsieur Garandeau Vicar general of the Arch-bishopricke, commanded
a Priest of the Church called Master Claude Meffredy to bring a skul from the
Churchyard, which being applied as the former Beelzebub laughed at it, and
suddenly issued forth being called (as it seemed) by the Magician as he was
wont.

The Devil being again Exorcised, Oscillon came sorth and said; This is the
skull of one that is damned, whom we burn and fry in Hell: but these heads of
Anthony and Raymond do burn me more grievously then the fire in Hell, and so
he wreathed her head from one side to another, shaking it and causing it
neither to stand nor to lie still, as long as those two skulls were upon her,
and said: these skulls ought to be had in as much veneration, and deserve
as well to be inchased in gold, as those that are below in the vestry of Saint
Savior; And he chollerickly added, the Sabbath could not be kept here in her
chamber for fear of ^hese two skulls. For the truth is, these two skulls were
brought and laid all night in Magdalenes chamber.

The Acts of the 19. 20. 21. 22. and 23. of March, being Saturday, Sunday,
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday.
DVring these five days there happened no new passage: only the Sunday after
dinner as Magdalene was walking in the gallery which was joining upon her
chamber, there came unto her a Magician called John Baptista, who with a pin
did prick the finger which is next to the little finger, and took some blood
from her and presently vanished. At that time Father Francis Billet, and Friar
Anthony Boilletot did walk in the said gallery, and Magdalene stood at the
window looking down into the base court and leaning with her hand upon the
window: as soon as the thrust was given she went unto the said fathers, and
showed them the blood which still dropped from her finger, and they saw three
dropps of blood upon the window. And being astonished herewithall, they
acquainted Monsieur Thoron the Commissary and Monsieur Grassy a Physician, who
were in the Hall, with this accident. This blood was drawn from her to make a
charm therewithal against her, because her love to the Magician grew cold:
which charm did work the next day so vehemently, that it caused her to leap
and skipp with great violence, so that four men could not hold her in: and
being gotten up upon an high place, if she had not been by fine force taken
from thence, she had been in danger to have fallen and hurt her self. Also,
the said charm did breed great pains in her inward parts, so that she
oftentimes fell into a swoune: which did thenmore especially happen, when any
mention of this charm was made unto her.

After dinner the singing men and Musicians of S. Savior came to solace and
refresh the poor possessed woman: and as they were singing a strain of
Music, the Devil was sore vexed, and tormented her all the time of the singing,
with extraordinary violence. Besides, the said charm took away from her her
appetite to eat, and being commanded by father Romillon to eat upon pain of
disobedience, and in despite of the D^uell, she obeyed the same, and was
presently racked by the Devils, as she had been before when she would offer to
taste any fish or wine, for they wrested her arms and legs backward, and
lifted them up on high in a very strange manner.

The Acts of the 24 25. and 26. of March, being Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
ON Thursday was Magdalene in token of her humility and obedience commanded to
sweep the Chapel: which when she accordingly performed, the Devil made her
cast the besome on the ground, and then tortured her, as he had done the day
before. For God had permitted him to redouble her torments every day twice,
that she might mortify her self, and give satisfaction for her sins.

The next day in the morning about 7. of the clock, she was desirous in token
of her obedience, to sweep the Church: but the Devil being impatient to see
this her humility, did grunt and grumble, crying, the Devil take him that is
the cause of this, and so she began to be at quiet, and remained very well
comforted.

On these three days, whenever the blessed Sacrament was tendered unto
Magdalene, the Devil would draw back her head, and make her so have the
Hickcough which continued for a long season, until the Exorcismes and patience
of the Priest did master him: and then she remained in good comfort.

The Saturday which was the Vigil or Eve of Palme-Sunday, father Michaelis
would have confessed Magdalene in the Chapel, but the Devil would none,
running and skipping from one corner of the Church unto the other.

Then did the said father Exorcise him, and adjured him to tell his name, who
answered, An excellent dialogue between one of the fathers and the Devil.
I am Carreau, that harden men's hearts, and am commanded to make her heart hard
as steel, that she may not this day confess her self or communicate. Then
did the said father r^ply, Cursed spirit, art thou not ashamed to resist thy
God and thy Creator? To which he answered with a small complaining womanish
voice, I remember indeed that God has created me, and then he presently after
sent me to hell. And deservedly (said the father) because after, so great a
blessing, thou would by defection fall from him. As if this miserable,
obstinate and blind spirit should say, that there was good cause of their
revolt, so to excuse and make good his sin.
Carreau said, we were at such ease, and were such goodly creatures, that we
would not be in subjection unto man. But since (said the father) such is the
pleasure of God, Why then resistest thou? Carreau answered, When a Captain
leads a band of Soldiers, they do all follow him, and do not you obey your
Kings when they command you? Then (said the father) True, but it must be
according to our high Sovereigns intention, and the obedience which we owe
unto him; Lucifer did not create thee. I grant it (said Carreau) but let a man
all days of his life treasure up a multitude of impieties for the wrath of God
to take vengeance on, yet does he ever find mercy and He returns to his
first speech where he complains of God.
we committed but one sin, and were forth with damned. God (answered the
father) does observe that men are full of ignorance and frailty, but your
offense was founded upon mere malice. But (said Carreau) they return to their
vomit, and do more transgress then we that are Devils. Then (said father
Michaelis) Come hither, when the soul is divorced from the body, it is as pure
a spirit as are your selves, does God ever take pity upon them then? To which
the Devil answered. He does not, and so presently held his peace, and
Magdalene had liberty to confess her self, and receive the Communion.

The Acts from the 27. of March being Palm Sunday, till Good-fryday being the
1. of April,
Upon Sunday at morning Mass, there came a wicked spirit sent from the
Magician, and entered into the body of Magdalene, his name was Aurey, and he
said that he was the sixth in the order of Seraphins, who laughingly and in
ieasting manner told them, that he would not leave her tongue until he had
executed his commission. Being adjured to tell why he laughed so immoderatly:
because (said he) yesterday about 12. of the clock, it is just 15. years ago
since Jews gave himself unto the Devil, and to day this very hour it is so
long ago since he made unto us his first schedule written with his blood,
drawing the same from the fingar of his left hand where the veins of his heart
do lie.

This being done, he began to make his renunciations in the name of Jews, as
has formerly been declared, crying aloud so that he was heard a great way
off: and when they applied unto her back a cross of gold, he said, take away
this, there is a cross behind me, and touched one of the nails of the feet
in the said cross. After dinner there was a man brought to Marseille who was
much doubted to be possessed. And as soon as he entered into the chamber, the
Devils that were in Magdalene began to bussell a little, and at last fell a
bellowing, one of them saying, this man has 15. Devils within him, and a
legion that watch him without: if he be not looked unto, he will within these
15. days be utterly undone. He was possessed upon the feast of S. Michael
1610 they that govern and are the chief within are two, Garanier and Sandrie.

It is to be noted, and we have had experiment of the same, that the Devils who
are in diverse bodies cannot endure to be together; if they do, they Like unto
sundry thieves that are possessed with diverse towers, every one standing upon
his own guard: or like two dogs snarling one against the other, when they
both are gnavving of a bone.
grumble one against the other, and seem to be ready to devour one another,
like wolves and hogs. Hence was it, that we were forced to separate Magdalene
and Louyse, which proceeded from their pride and malice.

Upon holy Monday in the morning Magdalene was shrewdly tempted to deny
Confession unto her own Confessor father Francis Billet, and this temptation
continued from the morning till eleven of the clock, when the Diuell-being
overcome by the patience and perseverance of the said Priest, did give over his
assault, and she acknowledging her fault, confessed her self unto the said
father, although she had before protested that she would more willingly
confess her self to any other.

Where by the way we may note, that to change our Confessors is many times a
temptation of the Devil. About this time, he of Marseille that was possessed
was brought unto the chapel, where-upon the Devils that were in Magdalene began
to bellow so hideously that they were forced to constrain him to go out of
the Chapel. Herein the Devil behaueth himself like unto a tyrant, who
cannot endure to have a great Lord dwell near him: so high is his heart
swollen with malice and arrogance.

After dinner Beelzebub made Magdalene take a knife and set it against her
breast, tempting her to kill her self with her own hand. When the knife was
taken away, he caused her to lay hold on her own throat, and would have
strangled her, if they had not hindered him.

About two of the clock in the afternoon Beelzebub cried so hideously, that
father Michaelis and his companion heard it into their lodging, which was on
the other side of the Archbishops house a great way off: which when they
heard, they ran thither, and being adjured by the said father to tell what
the reason of this so terrible an outcry was: he answered, I cannot but be
mad that Magdalene does thus surrender up and make Behold the consummation and
perfection of true contrition, abneget semetipsum.
resignation of her own will.

Upon this day Monsier Thoron the Commissary did relate unto us, that the
Saturday last past being Palme-Sunday eve, the court, as their manner is, went
in visitation of the prisoners, where Jews Gaufridy to excuse himself said
unto them, that he did give himself wholly to the Devil, if he were not
innocent, which is agreeable unto that which Aurey said on Palme-Sunday when he
laughed, and was so merry that the Magician had given himself unto the Devil.
Then the said Monsieur Thoron said unto him Speak not after this manner, for
hereby you do but settle and confirm your sin with greater assurednes. Upon
holy Tewsday in the morning Carreau whose employment is to harden men's hearts,
did withhold Magdalen from confession, so that the combat continued till
twelve a clock against him, and when the Exorcist did impose more punish^ents
upon him, he said he was a torturer and a hangman, but in conclusion they
remained with the victory against Satan.

Upon holy Wednesday in the morning Monsieur de Segoyer one of the Counselors
of the King seeing the strange gestures and torments which Magdalene, according
to her custom, did suffer during the time of Mass, he being on his knees did
p^^uatly and apart power out his prayers to God in behalf of her that, was
possessed, which he did very heartily and with much affection. Then Beelzebub
turned himself toward him and said, Pray for thy self and let her alone.
Whereat this Counselor was much abashed, for he prayed with great silence.

On this day Magdalene was asked by the two above named charitable Capuchin
fathers (who took the pains to remain all night in prison with the Oculos
suos statuerunt declinare in terram.
Magician, to see if they could convert him) what the reason was that the
Magician did so often fix his eyes upon the ground when they spoke unto him.
Where-unto she answered, a Magician may be known by his eyes when he looks
fixedly upon the earth, and cannot endure to settle his eyes upon those that
look upon him. They are also known (said she) when they stoop down to the
ground and take up a straw, for then they ask advice of the Devil, and do
homage unto him by bowing for this straw. Which being once observed by the said
Capuchin fathers, they found that the Magicians custom was to do so.

Upon holy Thursday the Devils did torment and vex themselves during the time
of Exorcismes, tossing the woman that was possessed here and there to her
great disquiet. After the Communion was ended, she presently sound ease.

The Acts of the first and second of April being holy Friday and Saturday.
Upon Holy Friday a day fit and apt for remission of sins.
holy Friday in the morning the Magician, by divine grace and the particular
influence of that celestial light, began to confess his sin to the two
Capuchin Fathers who had watched with him in prison, after they had all the
time of the Lent by many persuasions diligently exhorted him there-unto,
saying, that he who had as upon that day forgiven those that had crucified
him, would take pity upon him, that had handled him a thousand-fold more
strangely and ignominiously, so that the Magician was determinatly bent to make
confession of his witch craft unto Justice, as afterward he accordingly
performed. This Cross is the instrument, and this death of Christ Jesus is the
efficient cause of the remission of all our sins, be they never so enormous
or numberless.

As Magdalene was hearing the Passion sermon at a window of the Archbishops
house, otherwise called the Chapter House, father Michaelis who was at that
time the preacher did inueigh against Magicia^s, whereupon Beelzebub began to
say aloud, there is no small number of them in the city of Aix, and afterward
added, there is a Friar in this assembly that is fallen a sleep, and indeed
they found that one of those, who was wont to watch with the said Magician in
prison, did at that time slumber a little being sat amongst the people.

Upon holy Saturday Magdalene, in token of her humility and obedience, took
the besome to sweep ^he chamber, whereat the Devil grumbled and cried very
fiercely. And when the Confessor would have confessed her, Beelzebub did so dull
her and make her sleepie, that she remained without motion just as a pillar of
brass. And after many Exorcismes, Prayers and Impositions of punishments she
came to her self, and Beelzebub departed from her. Whilst the Exorcisme yet
continued he returned again, and thrust a pinn in Magdalenes ear, which
caused much pain and anguish unto her, she crying and pointing to the said
pin, but they could not pluck it forth with their fingers, and were forced to
have little pincers to draw it forth by maine strength.

Beelzebub being adjured to tell what his purpose was in bringing the said pin
thither. He answered, I have taken the same from under the heart of the
Magician, and it was put there to shut up his heart and make it obstinate, for
it is charmed and enchanted. And I have put it into the ear of this Dragon
Tharasque is a monsterous Dragon that devoured men at Tharascon ^n Province,
and afterward was s^^ne by S. Martha.
Tharasque (for so he called Magdalene) to hinder her from hearing the word of
God, and all wholesome instructions.

The Acts of the third of April being Sunday and Easter Day.
Upon Easter day, Beelzebub at the time of Mass did in a restless manner vex
and torment himself, casting himself on the ground crying and offering to go
out of the Chapel, and at the last he slipped out indeed. That night at supper
Beelzebub did nothing but grumble, and father Francis Billet said unto him, Why
do thou snarle thus? Can thou not let the poor woman suppe in quiet? Then
he answered, I have a secret to tell thee whether I will, or no. In the
morning when I did so turmoyle my self at Mass, the reason was, because that
O notable Miracle being performed upon the blessed day of Easter at the time of
holy Mass, and by the virtue of the worthy receiving of the body of Christ
Jesus: al being wrought by the power of God, who is alone able to enlifen that
which is dead, the Devil having no power to quicken the least branch of a tree,
after it is once withered up and dried. Thus does God by his bounty and
Omnipotency take from us the stamp of the Devil, which is sin, and in steed
thereof sets upon us the scale of his grace by quickening and putting life
into our souls. These are notable hansels and tokens of Easter day.
Fortitude did lay his command upon me, offering to force me to take off my
marks from Magdalene, which I was constrained to do presently after the
Communion. Question her, whether she did not suffer great anguish and pain in
every part about her, upon which these marks were branded, when I took them
off from her: which the woman confessed, but did not then know any reason of
the same: the places also where these marks remained were searched, which then
had sense and feeling, and were able then to yield blood, whereas before they
were deaded up and made insensible, and not a drop of blood would fall from
them, but would rattle and make a noise like parchment, when it is pierced with
a knife.

Magdalene further said, since my conversion I was much agreeued with my self
to have the Devils marks still stamped upon me, but I dared not to pray unto
God for the abolishment of them, although he then knew, and has since granted
my desire.

Beelzebub being again adjured did deliver that Fortitude had revealed unto
him, that this was obtained by the prayers of the blessed Virgin, S. John
Baptist, S. Michael, S. Peter and S. Paul, and they that did execute this
commandment were Fortitude and Clearesight. He further said, that God had
extended this singular favor toward her, to take away the opinion of some,
who conceived that Magdalene was not yet thoroughly converted, and to give
assurance unto her that she was no longer in the Devils claws, that so she
might with courage and resolution persist in that, which was so well begun.

The Acts of Easter-Monday being the 4. of April.
AT the morning exorcismes the Chapel was locked up by reason of the prease of
people that flocked thither. And Friar Anthony Boilletot the companion of
father Michaelis coming toward the Chapel, Beelzebub cried, Open the door,
For Antony they say Tony.
for behold Tony would come in (for so he called the said father after the rude
manner of the pesants in the country of Province) and just as he said, so it
was. And there being put unto his back de ligno crucis, Beelzebub cried out and
said, I do wonderfully fear and tremble at this, and being adjured to tell
why, he said, It was part of the wood that touched the back of Christ Jesus.

The Acts of Easter-Tewsday being the 5. of April.
MOnsieur Garandeau Vicar general died this day in the morning, and Beelzebub
whilst Mass was saying, spoke aloud these words, Garandean is dead: I was at
his death to try whether I could gain him, and labored to stagger his faith,
but I could do no good upon him: he is now in the hands of the Almighty. A
good honest woman who was there present, having heard what he had spoken,
said, I make no doubt but he is now in Paradise: where-unto the Devil said,
Soft Meaning that men do not go so presently to Paradise.
and fair, soft and fair. It is to be remembered that all this while Magdalene
was racked and exceedingly tormented.

The Acts of Wednesday being the 6. of April.
AS the Father who was Guardian of the Capuchins was searching after a mark in
one of Magdalenes feet, Beelzebub gave him a box on the ear, where-upon being
exorcised and adjured, he was constrained with great submission and sorrow to
ask him forgiveness.

At the evening Exorcisme Beelzebub said, that on Easter day at 4. of the clock
in the morning, he went to hell to crave counsel of Lucifer, what he should
do with Jews, who already began to shake and prove irresolute: he told him
that he was to persuade Jews to recant, that so he might have his life saved,
otherwise he was but a dead man, and bid him sit upon his tongue and speak for
him, because (said he) he is a very dotterell (which is a foolish kind of
bird) stopping and stammering at every word. But in other things Beelzebub was
to make him as meek as a lamb, that men might have a good opinion of him.

The Acts of Thursday being the 7. of April.
FAther Romillon was of opinion, that it was fit to cut close Magdalens hair,
because she took such delight in the yellow and golden color of the same.
Whereat Beelzebub was exceeding angry, and tormented her without intermission
all the time of the Exorcismes, making her to plunge with her head down to the
ground, and by a continual forced motion to bow it arch-wise, sometimes
forward and sometimes backward, and constrained her to beat her face with her
first saying, I will teach thee to cut thy hair, for if I loose this hold,
where shall I next betake my self?

The next ensueing time about midnight, the Devils did forceably cause her to
tumble and leap, that so they might get her out of the chamber, where they
that watched with her, did lie: but it was perceived by father Francis Billet,
who caused her to return. Yet when he was departed to take his rest, the
Devils would have carried her through the chimney, and she was found with her
head against the wall of the chimney, as though she had been by violence
lifted up thither. But Fortitudo her good Angel did wi^hstand these their
attempts.

The Acts of the 8. and 9. of April, being Friday and Saturday.
EVer since good Friday the Devils did torture Magdalene beyond ordinary,
because that day about no one, the Synagogue that was held at Marseille had
decreed, that she should die through the vnsufferablenes of her torments. And
that this was true, Beelzebub took his oath with all the circumstances and
ceremonies belonging there-unto, and without reservation of any malicious
meaning what-so-euer, as experience it self has since declared. For at the
beginning of dinner they tortured her half an hour, and so again at the end
of dinner; and in the middle they did ever disquiet her with continual plunges
of her head toward the ground. And at supper they tortured her after the same
manner for the space of an hour, wreathing her arms and legs backward, and
making a general dislocation of all the parts of her body: they did also make
her bones to crack and clatter one against the other, and did displace her
bowels and turned them topsie turuy (as she her self afterward reported) so
that the sound of these unnatural motions was easily heard. When these
tortures were ended, then did they cast her into a dead sleep or lethargy, so
that she seemed stark dead: and when she came to her self, and for obedience
sake offered to eat her supper, they caused these strange motions of her head
toward the ground to be put in practice as before. The same was likewise done
after the two Exorcismes every day, making her to cast her head toward the
ground forward and backward, with which violent agitations, her face became as
read as a coal of fire. In this fashion continued these torments till our
departure from Aix, which was the five and twentieth of April.

On Saturday the ninth of April, they caused her jaws to wag by extraordinary
and unnatural motions, as Monsieur Fonteine, a learned and skillful Physician,
who was there present did observe. The same day Beelzebub at the Exorcismes
took his oath that he and his companions were to be constrained to issue
forth as soon as ever the schedules were delivered.

The same day the Lo. Archbishop of Aix his Almner did bring a certain
instrument of glass made triangle wise, and none of the assembly did
understand for what purpose that instrument served.

Where-upon Beelzebub being asked what it was, he readily made answer, It is an
optic glass to make a man see that which is not: which saying of his was
found agreeable unto truth, for it caused men to see Woods, Castles and Arches
in the air of all manner of colors and other things of the like nature.

The Acts of the 10. of April being Sunday.
Beelzebub did take on and yell very hideously at these Exorcismes, and being
adjured to tell the reason thereof, he said, Fortitudo and Cleare-sight do
beat me by the power of the prayers of your Lady Mary, because, having had
warning from God not to touch Magdalene the night past, I plucked three hairs
from her head, which she had diverse times refused to give me. My purpose
herein was to lead her on to desperation, and to persuade her, that God had
abandoned her since he suffered me to have power over her. They did also beat
me, because I would not suffer her last night to take her refection, that I
might weary the patience of the Fathers which governed her, and so at last get
the upper hand of them. Being charged to return those three hairs, he
answered, I can not do it, for I have given them unto Magicians to make a
charm thereof, which for some malicious purpose is already cast against the
Exorcists.

The Acts of the 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. and 16. of April, till the 17. and 18.
day being Sunday and Monday.
THe said torments did still continue on, at dinners and suppers daily
increasing more and more, which made the poor woman to cry so loud, that her
voice was heard a great way off, and did affright those that heard the same.
Beelzebub also vexed her inwardly by strong batteries and temptations of
despair (as sh^e her self reported unto us) suggesting unto her that she had
never made a perfect confession, or that her confessions were spyced and
intermingled with much hypocrisy and dissemblance, egging her on to cast her
self out at the window as she stood there, or to stabb her self with a knife
when she was alone. The night before he would have had her burn her self, and
when she would not consent unto it, he cast her against the fire, where she
was found lying in a sound with her head close against the fire.

Ever at the Exorcismes the gestures and torments did continue, but as soon as
she had received the blessed Sacrament these motions and gestures did forthwith
cease to the admiration of all men. Upon Friday he tortured her in the Chapel
it self, but when the blessed Sacrament was presented unto her, and upon the
^eceauing of the same, the wicked spirits did presently leave her. At which
time Monsieur d' Opede one of the Kings Counselors, and three gentlemen
Heretics, together with many Catholics were there present.

Upon Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tewesday, and Wednesday she was tortured
Observe here good Christian, by these fore passed events, and by those
accidents that do now happen, and shall hereafter follow, what extraordinary
torments God by his just judgments imposes upon those that have transgressed
against him. For when he would seat this distressed sinner in the state of
grace, he loaded her patience with many pains that did draw near unto the
torments of hell, and that by the ministry of her cruel enemies the Devils,
and without compassion unto the outward man^ Secundum mensu^am delicti, etc.
four several times with strong and extreme to^ments, as well in the chapel
as in her chamber.

The Acts of the 18. of April being Monday.
THere was a certain young man of the age of two and twenty years, being a
native of the city of Geneua called David Meyrot, the son of Peter and Susan
Manteliere, who presented himself before father Michaelis as Inquisitor of the
faith, that he might be received into the bosom of the Church. As he came
into the Chapel, the Devil said unto him, beware how thou be converted, stick
close to thy Religion, and leave me not, for thou art of our side: this
language did occasion in him a more settled confirmation to return unto the
Church, then before, because she had never seen him, neither did she know the
cause of his coming. Being upon his knees before father Michaelis, he was
asked whether he did abjure and renounce with all his heart, and as long as he
should live the Heresies of Luther, Calvin, and all other Heretics, the Devil
cried, O, not for so long a time. And as the said father continued on to ask
him whether he believed the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, the
Devil cried, Do not say the Roman Church: and being full of fretting and
fuming at what was done, he violently would pluck her by the hair, whilst
the man was making his recantation. When he had made profession of his faith,
Monsieur Merindol a Physician and the Kings Professor, for the joy he took of
the gaining in this new convert, prayed unto God to send him his grace to live
and dye in this faith. Whereupon the Devil rose up in a great fury and cried,
Merindol, if I come at thee I will mischief thee; and so running toward him,
he was held in by those that were present, which might be some ten in number.
Then said the Devil, if Beelzebub were here he would cry and be more
outragiouslie furious then I am, Being asked where Beelzebub was, he answered;
He is gone forth in a great chase at the time of the Exorcisme, because she
that is possessed was commanded to prick his name with a pin, and in
contempt to tread it under her foot: which disgrace Beelzebub could in no wise
endure. Belias also is issued forth, fearing lest he might be so served also,
because his name was known.

The Acts of the 19. of April being Tuesday.
AT these Exorcismes the Devil brought up a new fashion of torments, making
Magdalene to leap when she was upon her knees, and as she was kneeling he
caused her to give great iumpes, so that she broke the stool which was under
her knees, although they had laid two cloakes upon the same. His meaning was to
have broken her legs, as he afterward declared: for Lucifer did ever feed
them with new experiments.

The Acts of the 20. of April being Wednesday.
Beelzebub being asked and adjured to tell whether Magdalene were truly
converted, or no, (for some made a doubt thereof) he answered that she was,
and that Verrine and he did iumpe and agree in this: You may easily believe it
(said he) since by the commandment of God I have taken away those marks that
were upon her, which is a great miracle, and an infallible argument of her
conversion.

Being adjured to tell whether the Magician were converted, or no, he answered:
Not very soundly.

Being adjured to tell whether he would surrender up the scheduls, or no, he
said: Yesterday by reason of an act of humility and obedience that Magdalene
had performed, Fortitudo did advertise me from God, that if the Magician were
converted he should surrender them himself: if not, then Beelzebub should be
constrained to present them openly in the face of the Court both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and then all Charms and poss^ssions should have an
end. Then they applied a Relic unto the back of Magdalene, whereupon he
cried; Take her away from me, for she is an enemy unto the Synagogue. Being
adjured to explain the meaning here of, he answered. The Synagogue has three
great enemies, Magdalene, for her repentance, Catherine of Sienna, for her
charity toward her neighbors, and Catherine of Boulongne, for her purity
and great humility. And the Relics do belong unto this last.

The Acts of the 21. of April being Thursday.
Upon this day Magdalene was seven sundry times tormented very cruelly both in
the Chapel and in her chamber: and at supper time she had some rest. But
presently after supper Leuiathan came and said: Beelzebub and I cannot be here,
for we are busied at the prison. Then he said, Mistress, since you have not
been made much of all supper time, we will now bestow the ^^ck upon you: and
incontinently four Devils, who^ she visibly saw, did give her the rack for
the ^pace of three quarters of an hour, after such a cruel manner, that three
men, who kept her from falling, were all in a bath with sweating and laboring
about her, so that they could endure the toil thereof no longer. That which
most disquieted her (as she afterward told us) was the It is a great light of
God when corpor^l torments a^e not so much ^stee^^d as internal temptations.
vehement temptations wherewith they did inwardly assault her, which always
happened when she was not corporally tormented: so that she was incessantly
assaulted either within or without.

The Acts of the 22. of April being Friday.
AFter dinner there was an assembly held to proceed legally against Beelzebub,
and to command him and his companions to avoid, or else to give in the reasons
o^ their refusals. But as this decree was ready to be pronounced, Beelzebub came
forth of the body and fled away, (as he had oftentimes formerly done at these
assemblies) for he would not answer but hid himself, and seldom caused those
accustomed motions in her brain, but rather for the most part absented
himself from thence altogether: and when she made signs that he was there,
he would presently thereupon depart from her. In this assembly was Monsieur
Joseph Pelicot, Provost of the Cathedral Church of S. Savior at Aix, Vicar
general in the Archbishopric of Aix, and in this business Vicar surrogate to
the Bishop of Marseille, because the prisoner was a Priest belonging unto that
Sea. There was also father Michaelis as Inquisitor of the faith, father
Laurence Prouincial of the Capuchins, father Celsus Guardian of the Covent of
the Capuchins at Aix with his companion; father John la Tour, Corrector of
Minime Friars at Aix, who had been employed to hear the prisoners confession,
and to labor as much as possibly he could his conversion; father John Francis
a Minime Friar, who did exorcise in this assembly; father Romillon, Superior
of the Priests of the Doctrine; father Francis Billet Priest of the said
Doctrine, the ordinary Confessor and Exorcist of this woman that was
possessed; Master Maifredy, Almner to the Archbishop of Aix; Master Jews
Frank, Sexton of S. Savior; father Francis Domptius, Doctor in Divinity of
the Order of preaching Friars, with father Anthony Boilletot of the same Order.
Louyse being brought before them, Verrine in the Exorcisme was asked where
Beelzebub was; he answered, that he stood close to Jews Gaufridy his right
ear, who was there present. Father John Francis being exorcising, commanded
Verrine to declare by external and visible gestures the manner of the
Seraphins adoration of God, who answered; How is it possible for me to show it,
for they have no bodies? Being again commanded unto it, he forcibly stretched
forth both his arms, and moved with them as birds use to wag their wings when
they fly, making expression by sundry gestures of some great and inward
affection, as one that did mightily long for something: in which action he bore
himself strait and stedie.

Being commanded to reveal the adoration used by Cherubins, he stretched out
his arms as before, but not with so great vehemency. Being commanded to show
the adoration used by Thrones, he cast himself with incredible swiftnes flat
upon the ground, and stretched out his arms as wide as possibly he could.

The Acts of the 23. of April being Saturday.
Upon this day the Masses which were celebrated through the whole city of Aix,
for the conversion of the Magician, were ended: for Monsieur Pelicot, Provost
and Vicar general aforesaid, had commanded through all the Parish Churches,
Priories and other like places of Religion in the city of Aix, that upon the
Thursday all the Priests should sing the Holy Ghost, upon the Friday half the
Priests should sing the Conversion of S. Paul, and the other half the
Conversion of S. Magdalene: upon the Saturday all should sing the Hymn of our
Lady: by the power and efficacy of all which, and through Gods assistance,
Jews Gaufridy the Magician was found in better case touching his conversion.

The Monday following being the 25. of April, father Michaelis departed from
Aix with the rest of his companions, having received directions from the most
reverend the General of his Order, to be present at the public Synod held at
Paris the feast of Pentecost then next ensuing. Whither being come, he
received advertisement, that the said prisoner was burned at Aix the last day
of April by virtue of the Arrest, which was pronounced against him. The tenor
whereof here ensues.

THE ARREST OF THE COURT OF PARLIAment of Prouence, giving sentence of death
against Master Jews Gaufridy.
IT has pleased the Court to examine and search into the criminal process
and other proceedings, made by the authority of the said Court, at the
instance and procurement of the Kings Attorney General Complainant, in the
case and crime of Rape, Seducement, Blasphemy, Magic, Witchcraft, and the
like abominations, against Master Lewe^ Gaufridy, originally descended from
Beau vezer lez Colmats, Priest, and beneficed in the Church of Acoules in the
City of Marseille, defendant and prisoner in the prison that belongs unto
the Palace.

The verbal process of the proofs and arguments is, that Magdalene of
Demandoulz, otherwise of Pallud, one of the Sisters of the Company of S
Vrsula, was possessed, and held to be really possessed by wicked spirits, that
were known and observed to have remained within her at S. Baume, from the
first of January last past till the fifth of February, by Friar Sebastian
Michaelis Doctor of Divinity, Vicar general of the reformed Congregation of
preaching Friars, and Prior of the Covent Royal at S Maximin: which attestation
was formallie, and duly confirmed by diverse other Fathers, bearing date the
20. of the said month.

The decree of the Court containing the granting out of a Commission to Master
Anthony Seguiran Counselor in the said Court, to take informations which might
concern the fact of the said Accusation, and to attach the said Gaufridy and
commit him to the prison of the Palace: upon the 19. of the said month.

The Informations and Inq^isitions taken by the said Commissarie, and the
verbal Process of the apprehension and commitment of the said Gaufridy.

Another decree of the said Court, which contains a Commission granted forth
unto Master Anthony Thoron a Counselor likewise in the said Court, to hear
the said Magdalene of Pallud, and to take particular information of the proofs
and principal allegations given in by the Attorney general; and himself,
together with Monsieur Garandeau Vicar unto the Archbishop of Aix, to indite
the said Gaufridy: upon the 28. of the said month.

The hearing, deposition, and confessions of the said Magdalene touching the
said rape, seducement, and subornation of her to practice those impieties which
belong to Magic: as also touching the contract and promises made unto the
wicked Spirits, besides many other abominations, mentioned in the verbal
Indictment of the 21 of the said month.

Another Libell of Informations taken by the said Commissarie the 23. of the
said month.

The attestation of Master Anthony Merindol Doctor of Physic and the Kings
Professor in the University of the city of Aix, touching the strange and
extraordinary gestures and passages that happened unto the person of the said
Magdalene of Pallud, during the time that he had her in cure, and before the
manifestation of her possession: upon the 24. of the said month.

The report made by the appointment of the said Commissaries, and given into
the Court b^ Maste^ James Fonteine, Jews Grassy, and the said Merindol Doctors
and pro^esso^s of P^ysicke, and Peter Bontemps Surgeon and professed Anatomist in
the said University, touching the quality and nature of those extraordinary
motions, which at set times and pauses did affect the head and brain of the
said Magdalene of Pallud, and what might be the cause of them: as also touching
the nature, causes, and reasons of those marks in her body, which made the
place deuoid of the sense of feeling where they were, and which were also
showed by her: as also touching her virginity and her being defloured: upon
the 26. and 27. of the said moves, and the 5. of March last past. The
Interrogatories and Answers of the said Gaufridy upon the 26. of February, and
the 4. of March last.

Another decree of the said Court, that the said Master Anthony Thoron, who was
formerly deputed to be Commissarie, should take the full view and information
of the said Indictment: upon the 4. of March.

The verbal Process of the confronting and personal contestation between
the said Magdalene of Pallud, and Gaufridy above named: upon the 5. of the said
month.

The report of the marks found upon the body of the said Gaufridy: following
the instructions and directions of the said Magdalene, upon the 8 of the said
month of March.

The publication of the said report, with the confronting of him, with the said
Physicians and Surgeons, deputed and commanded thereunto by the said
Commissioners.

There re-examination and confronting of other witnesses, upon the 8. of March.

Another Libell of Informations taken in the city of Marseille: upon the
fifth, sixth, and seventh of April last past.

The hearing of Mistress Victoire de Courbier, said and pretended to have been
bewitched by the said Gaufridy, by reason of the crasinesse and indisposition
of her understanding, as also because of her disordinate and scandalous
affection to the said Gaufridy: upon the sixth of April.

The second Interrogatories made unto the said Gaufridy touching the truth of
the said Information, which contained his confession, that he had bewitched
the said Victoire by breathing upon her: the twelfth and sixteenth of the said
month of April.

The verbal Process of the voluntary confessions made by the said Gaufridy,
touching other facts and crimes laid unto his charge, the 14. and 15. of the
said month.

The retractations of the said Gaufridy, the fifteenth day of April aforesaid,
in the afternoon.

The letters of the Bishop of Marseille to Master Joseph Pellicot, Provost of
the Metropolitan Church of the city of Aix, and also Vicar unto the
Archbishop of Aix, that in his name, authority and place, he should proceed
iudicially against the said Gaufridy, belonging unto his Diocese, in such
ample and full manner as the Bishop himself might do if he were there
present in his own person: upon the 17. of the said month.

The deputation of a Proctor made by the said Gaufridy before the said Provost,
who by virtue of the foresaid letter was his Ordinary, that so prosecution
might be made for the restitution of those Schedules, which are above
mentioned, in the informations there contained.

The order of the said Counselor and Commissarie, and of the said Master
Pellicot, as well by virtue of his place of being Vicar to the said Bishop of
Marseille, as also by reason of his being Vicar unto the Archbishop of Aix:
that the said Magdalene of Pallud should be re-examined concerning her
allegations and depositions, and should be again confronted with the said
Gaufridy.

Diverse other new confessions made and respectively repeated by him the 22. and
23. of April, conformable unto the former.

Another report of the foresaid Doctors of Physic and Surgeons touching the
abolishment and taking away of the marks of the said Magdalene of Pallud; with
the re-establishment and confirmation of the manner of them, laid open in the
former report of the 23. of March. The verbal process of the interruptions
and extraordinary accidents which happened unto the said Magdalene during the
time of her confession: the tortures and torments which she suffered, and the
words which proceeded from her: Besides the matters contained in the
Interrogatories and answers, the proof and witness of the abol^shment of the
marks, the re-establishment and confirmation of the same, on Easter day, and
the Feasts following, during the celebration of the blessed Mass. The
judgment of these objects, and the conclusions of the Kings Attorney general
thereupon: the day of hearing of the said Gaufridy in the Chamber, and the
report of the Commissarie deputed for the same.

Whereupon it was published: That the Court has and does declare the said
Jews Gaufridy attainted, guilty, and convicted of the cases and crimes
aforesaid, where with-all he has been burdened: and to make some amends and
reparation for the same, the said Court has and does condemn him to be
delivered up into the hands of the Executioner for matters capital, and to be
led through, all the usual streets and quarters of the city of Aix, and
before the great gate of the Metropolitan Church of S. Savior to perform
this penance, that is, to go thither bare-headed, and barefooted, with a
link burning in his hand, and a rope about his neck, and upon his knees to
ask forgiveness of God, the King, and Justice. Which being performed he is to
be brought to the place of Preaching in the said town, and there to be burnt
alive in a pile of wood, (which shall be prepared for that purpose) until his
body and bones be consumed and turned to ashes, which are also afterward to be
scattered and cast into the wind, and all his goods and every parcel thereof
to be seized upon and confiscated to the King. And before he be executed, he
shall be tortured and put upon the rack both after the ordinary and
extraordinary manner, to force from his mouth the true detection of his
accomplices.

Nevertheless, before he have the said execution of death performed upon him,
he shall be given up into the hands of the Bishop of Marseille, his Diocesan,
or in his absence, into the hands of any other Prelate of quality besitting
the same, to be degraded from his Orders, according to the accustomed manner in
such cases provided.

Given in the Parliament of Prouence residing at Aix, and published at the
bar of Justice, and to the said Gaufridy in the Palace-prison: who at the
same time was put to the rack both after the usual, and extraordinary
manner, the Commissaries that were deputed unto the same being there present.
And about five of the clock in the afternoon he was put to death, being first
degraded by the L. Bishop of Marseille his Diocesan in the Church of preaching
Friars at Aix, in the presence of the said Commissaries, following the form
and tenor of this present Arrest, the last of April. 1611. Signed MALIVERNY.

IN the month of July, father Michaelis was advertised by letters from father
Romillon, and father Francis Billet, who had been both Exorcists unto
Magdalen, as also from the Guardian of the covent of Capuchin fathers at Aix,
and of another of the Capuchins; wherein they declared diverse admirable
occurrences, which by the permission of God did befall Louyse and Magdalene,
since his departure from them. And also, that the very same day upon which the
Magician was burnt, sister Margaret Burle, a very honest woman, and of the
company of S. Vrsula was delivered from three Devils, and from the charms
which she had in her body. After certain days, there was another woman, and
after her there was also another freed from the like slavery, who had been
formerly possessed by the force of charms and witchcraft. Moreover, that two
Devils, to wit, Gresil and Sonneillon had quite left the body of Louyse, so
that there remained none behind but Verrine, who said, that the end of the
History was not yet come. Also, that Magdalene had been for many days
together deprived of her sight and hearing, and could not eat: nevertheless,
by reason of the good hap which again befell unto her on that In like manner
upon the blessed feast of Easter, the marks of the Devil were perfectly taken
from her as the tokens and hansell of her conversion.
blessed feast of Whitsuntide, she has recovered all again, and is moreover
delivered of the Devil Asmodeus and two other Devils, and that afterward she
was no more troubled with those Incubi that were wont to haunt her: that
Beelzebub did still possess her, and had strangely forced her tongue down into
her throat, tormenting her more and more with his accustomed ra^kings and
tortures: that by reason of the letters which were written, she was now
delivered from all her torments, and that she held Beelzebub bound and chained
up in her body by the permission of God, and that when he would entreat her to
give him license to go forth of her body but for a quarter of an hour only,
that he might set some stay touching his Sabbaths and meetings, she would by no
means allow him so to do.

It was further advertised in these letters, that Magdalene had a vision of the
state of Jews Gaufridy, how he was continually tormented in hell, with more
extremity then ever was Indas. And that this vision was the cause that she
became an unfeigned penitentiary: for she would go along to the wood with the
poor women of Carpentras (whether she was fled) barefooted, and would gather
bundels of sticks, and would sell them in the market place, and would give the
money that did arise from hence unto the poor, besides that which she daily
sent to be given at the porch of the great Church. Moreover, that she made
great reckoning of any act of humility and patience, and wa^ afflicted and
disfauoured by those that were nearest of her blood, by reason that she thus
debased her self.

They farther advertised, that Verrine began already to be wray the co^plices
and asfoclats in Magic by their names and sur-names: and amongst others a
woman called Honoria that was blind of both her eyes, who being apprehended had
the marks found upon her, and was convicted of witchcraft and so burnt,
although she died with great contrition and sense of her sins.

Let us therefore pray unto God, that all may redound to his glory, and the
good of the Church, and to the utter ruin and desolation of the kingdom of
Satan. Amen.

THE CONCLUSION.
THe end and scope of this History (which is the discovery of a Magician by the
Devil, and his execution which followed there-upon) does clearly demonstrate
the vndoubtable truth contained in the same, since there was nothing in the
world more secret and incogitable then that the said Gaufridy was a Magician:
but contrariwise, he stood favored and well esteemed of, by gentlemen and
others of his own quality, the Devil infusing into him an insinuating and well
fashioned deportment of himself, with so winning a manner of conversation,
that he was wel-be-loued and well entertained by all men. But God would not
suffer such hypocrites to lurk in his Church undiscovered and unpunished, as
wretched Judas gave the first proof thereof; be it spoken without offense and
prejudice to S. Peter and the rest of the Apostles. God be blessed and praised
for ever, for all those miracles which he has been pleased in his good time to
work amongst us, for his glory, and the further instruction of his Church.
Amen.

The whole is submitted to the judgment of the Church.

THE APPROBATION.
WE the underwritten Doctors in the sacred faculty of Divinity at Paris, do
certify that we have fully and diligently suruayed and read this present
treatise, entitled, The admi^able History of the possession and conversion of
a penitent woman, seduced by a Magician. The collections whereof were gathered
by the reverend father Michaelis Doctor, Preacher, and Inquisitour of the
Catholic, Apostolic and Roman faith, established by our holy father the
Pope. In which treatise and collections we find nothing which is not
orthodox, and conformable unto the decrees and orders of our holy mother the
Church. Yea, we have therein observed many notable things, that may tend to
the great comfort and edification of all faithful Christians, as well
Temporal as Spiritual, and may induce and spur us on to repentance, and to
the practice of virtue.

From our Studies in Paris this present Tewsday the 10. of July in the year of
grace 1612. G Froger. Fr. P. Dum.

A DISCOVRSE OF SPIRITS, CONTAINING WHATSOEVER is necessary for the more full
understanding and resolution of the difficult Argument of Sorcerers.

WRITTEN AND COMPOSED BY the reverend Father Friar Sebastian Michaelis, Doctor
of Divinity, of the Order of Preaching Friars, and Prior of the Covent Royal
of S. Maximin in Prouence.

BY WISDOM ^ PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY ^
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Imprinted for William Aspley.

THE PREFACE.
FRiendly Reader, I do protest with Tertullian, that in the Argument of
Sorcery, (which is the subject of this discourse) I never was so far
transported with curiosity, as to plunge my self into an ouer-diligent
intelligence of the same: because it is a Science that serves for nothing but
to disseason and perplex my spirit, as being an enemy unto my soul, and
therefore the understanding thereof distasteful to me. The consideration
whereof is common to all those, who level their actions to godly purposes,
whereof that holy and ancient Father does draw a learned and general deduction
in these notable words. Tertul. lib. de anima.
Nos spiritualia nequitiae, non quidem socia Conscientia, sed inimica scientia
nouimus: nec invitatoria operatione, sed expugnatoria dominatione tractamus,
multiformem luem mentis humanae, Marc. 16.
totius erroris artificem, salutis pariter animaeque vastatorem. In which he
has spoken a certain truth: for what other thing can a man gain by this
unnecessary, yet dangerous knowledge, but a true plague of mankind, a palpable
blindness in all sorts of error, and last of all, an ir-recouerable slide and
downe-fall both of body and soul, into the pit of Hell? Notwithstanding the
Theorick and contemplation of these things is not unnecessary unto us that are
Clergymen, because we are expressly commanded by Christ Jesus, in the persons of
his Apostles, to cast out and chase away all wicked and unclean spirits by the
powerfulness of his name: for his pleasure is, that we should be in direct
opposition against Magicians, who do call upon them and woo them to appear
unto them by their softest and sweetest supplications. But we (as is already
said) Non inuitatoria operatione, sed expugnatoria dominatione ipsos tractamus.
So that the admirable effects which do continually flow from so high and
weighty a charge, may give full answer and solution to the objection of
Payn^^s, who were wont, by way of reproach, to ask the Primitive Christians,
wherein their knowledge of wicked spirits did excel and surmount other men's.
Unto whom the same good father Tertullian answers: Tertul. lib de Testim.
animae
that it was necessary that Christians should have a greater knowledge of
Devils, because (as experience did well witness) none but Christians had
authority and power to cast them out with violence and in despite of them. For
as a Lord, or Master who is ever laboring to tame his slave that is refractary
and rebellious against him, has occasion to know his peruersues more thoroughly
then other men: even so fares it with Christians in respect of unclean
spirits. Daemonia itaque affirmamus esse, inquit, sane quasinon and probemus,
qui ea soli de corpore exigimus. Hence we may make this deduction, that for
the readier way to dissipate and overthrow the kingdom of Satan, this kind
of Science is necessarily required in Churchmen: as the knowledge of Heresies
is necessary unto Catholic Doctors, that they may the better confute them,
Hierom. lib, 15. commen. in Esai. ad c. 47.
and those diseases that are pestilentiall must be understood by Physicians, if
they hope to expel them. I do here desire, that in a subject of this nature,
there might be a method observed in our manner of speaking, as the Stoics
anciently did in their discourses of the world, esteeming it as a great abuse
to call things that in themselves were odious and filthy, by honest names, or
things that were virtuous and honest, by filthy names: but instead thereof,
every thing was to be expressed by words and appellations apt and proper to
figure out the same. For virtuous actions were to be expressed by terms that
should breath and sound forth nothing but a decent and equal commendation, but
vicious and discommendable actions were to be set forth with such fit and
convenient epithetes, as might breed an ^orrour and detestation of their
filthiness. Neither do I desire this without just cause, since that the
malice of our times has mis-applied the names of things that are Sacred to
that which is base and ridiculous: and contrariwise, those things which are
stained with pollutions much unworthy of Christians, are many times graced with
goodly and glorious appellations. Hence it arises, that many have so far
ouer-shot themselves, that they hold those for barbarous and illiterate
fellows, who in speaking of the Devil do use the proper Greek name,
Diabolus, or the Hebrew name, Satan, or the word borrowed from the Latins,
Malignant, which signifies an adversary, a back-biter, and one repleat with
all maliciousness: names so proper and proportionable unto their nature, that
the holy Scripture does sundry times use the same: yet is the use thereof so
discontinued in these times that we find no mention of them in any Books.
Every one does contend to sound forth no other name then the goodly appellation
of Demon, Tertul. lib. de anima. Hierom. lib. 8. in Esai. ad cap. 27.
which signifies one learned and wise: and indeed Plato and other great
Philosophers and Poets have used it as a name of God, who knows all things,
as Tertullian observes: whereas instead thereof they might use plenty of names
very frequent in the Scriptures, and particularly recited by S. Jerome; such as
are the Devil, Satan, Beliall, the Aspe, the Basiliske, the roaring Lion, the
great Dragon, the Apostate, the Deceauer, and the like, which make a singular
expression of his bloody and malicious nature. I could also wish, that in our
French language, men should have the use of those names that would best befit
the ordure and infamy of the desperate condition of these blind and more then
beastly Sorcerers. For the term of Sorcerer signifies nothing else, but one
that casts lot, being drawn from the Latin word Sors, which is sometimes
taken in good part, Leuit. 15. Deuter. 1. Luc. 1. Act, 1. S. Thom. 2.29 95.
art. 8.
and may safely and religiously be used, as these passages of the Scripture
do clearly show unto us. Mittens super vtrumque hircum sortem. Cuius fors
exierit Domino offeres. Joshua forte terram diuidet, forte exiit vt incensum
poneret. Cecidit sors super Mathiam. So that there may yet be use of lots in
the administration of Ecclesiastical affairs, which are of most importance,
as S. Thomas after S. Augustine does notably observe. August. sermon. 2. in Psalm.
30.
Hereupon it is that I desire the imposition of some term, that should not
thus gild-ouer this abominable art, but as they that practice the same are the
most filthy and brutish creatures of the world, so should their appellation be
so odious, that it should import nothing but down right villainy, and should
strike an horror and detestation of them, into those that speak of them, or
hear them mentioned. And this was the opinion of Plato and the Stoics, Plat.
in Cratil.
when they would labor to prove that the first institution of names, did
signify according to the natures of things, and had not their imposition by
chance, which they also euince by experience. For (said Plato) when I say Me,
I draw in my voice toward my self, but when I say, Thee, I retort and let it
out against him unto whom I speak. And these subtle touches of Philosophy are
experienced to be true, not only in the Greek tongue, in which Plato wrote,
but also in the two other principal tongues the Hebrew and the Latin. S.
August. in Epist. 102. calls them Daemonicolas, (...). worshippers of Devils.
Upon the 96. Psalm. where he terms them worse then Idolaters.
If therefore these people had the stamp of these appeliations upon them, Men
enthralled unto Devils, the slaves of Satan: or as S. Augustine calls them,
Worshippers of Devils, or by such like terms as may best suit with their
natures, they should be expressed unto the world a great deal more naturally
and more unto the life, then by misterming them by the name of Sorcerers, which
is derived from the latin word Sortilegus: and by this means men would have
the malice and villainy of such kind of people in more horror. For if we
narrowly sift and look into them, it will be found, that there is no
appearance or remnant of goodness in them, but only they are good in their
natural essence, like unto Devils: and of a truth they are the most gross and
impure Idolaters that ever were or may be found, since that they worship the
Devil, and know him to be the Devil. Whereas when Idolaters did worship him,
they had ever an opinion that he was God. And therefore (says S. Augustine)
the ignorant people that are Idolaters, August. lib. 20. contr. Faust.
do not sin so grievously, as do your learned Philosophers: for the simple
people do not apprehend the spring and first original of these Idols, but
Philosophers do well know the head from whence they flow, which proceeded from
uncleanness and from the vices and inventions of men: so that without
comparison, the Christians who are more particularly acquainted with the will
of God, shall be in a far more damnable estate then the former.

After this discourse touching their names, I come now unto the fact. I am not
ignorant, that many have formerly traveled their spirits and pens in this
Argument of Sorcerers, so that I might quit this labor, and repute my self
unworthy to publish my gleanings after their baruest: yet may I justly use the
excuse of Lactantius Firmianus, who craving pardon in that he had undertaken
to write against the Gentiles in favor of Christian Religion, since that such
great and learned personages, as Justin, Origin, Tertullian and Arnobius had
formerly written of the same; I have done it (said he) as it were upon
constraint, and to give relish and contentment unto the variety of men's wills,
because we are bound to fit and accommodate our selves both to the learned and
unlearned, for the advancement of the common good. Some (said he) have written
against the Gentiles, merely from the grounds and authority of Scripture, in
which they give no satisfaction unto the Gentiles, in that they do repudiate
the same, but do only confirm the Christians and partly the Jews. Others
have argued the case, and grounded the judgment of their conceptions upon
natural reason, wherein those do find a main and an extraordinary
delinquency, who do sagely and soberly prefer the Scripture, before all other
humane reason whatsoever. But none (says he) did ever mingle both together in
any Author, which is it that now remains to be done. And thereupon
Lactantius concludes, that if he did make a hansome medlie or mingle of all
these diversities, he hoped to give contentment to every body, even down to
the Atheist. All which I apply unto my self for my lawful excuse. For some
have entreated of Sorcerers only by way of a bare collection of Histories, and
of the criminal proceedings against them, together with the relation of their
own auerments and confessions. Others have proceeded more scholastically, and
have not departed or swarued from the Commentaries which are made upon the 4.
books of the Sentences. A third sort, not rellishing this manner of
proceeding, have followed the steps and opinions of some ancient Paynim
Philosophers, as Mercurius, Proclus, Iamblicus, whom they do too much adhere
unto, even where they thwart the authority of the holy Scripture. Whereupon I
did apprehend, that there was yet left vntraced another way a great deal more
safe and lawful, and more apt for the course and scope of my studies, (who for
the glory of God, and relief of the Church against the opposition of heresies,
have for the space of 40. years given over the reading of all sorts of books,
but the holy Scriptures, and the fathers of the Church) to wit, that this
discourse should be drawn from the Scriptures, and from the reading of
ancient fathers: upon which we are to ground the principal foundation,
although other authors be alleged on the By, to add strength and
illustration thereunto. For touching the first, they do ^akedly report the
fact, but produce no proofs of the same. The second, do propound their
scholesticall resolutions of this point, but the niceness of these times will
not digest such fare. Tertul. lib. de testi. any. Tertul. lib. de nima.
As for those of the third sort, we will oppose against them by way of
admonition, that which Tertullian faith, Daemonem soli nouerunt Christiani, vel
quaecunque apud Dominum secta. And in another place he renders a reason of
this, saying, Cui veritas comperta sine Deo? cui Deus cognitus sine Christo?
cui Christus exploratus sine Spiritu Sancto? cui Spiritus Sanctus accommodatus
sine fidei Sacramento? By which Gradation he points out unto us, that no man
could ever exactly and without gross error know what belongs unto the
soul, or unto good and bad spirits (for he speaks of such in these
aboue-cited passages) unless he have drank of the water of Christ Jesus.
Philosophers (says he) have sometimes chanced upon the truth, yet was it never
without some mingle of error, or else they did draw and borrow it from the
Scripture, or it fared with them as with one that has lost himself in a maze
or labyrinth, who if after many crookings and distractions, he chance to light
upon the right way out, it is to be attributed to hap and not to election; for
they have no assurance and certainty in whatsoever they say or invent: and
therefore the Academicks do rather freely confess, that they have no certain
knowledge of any thing. August. lib 13. contr. Faust. Mani. cap. 15.
S. Augustine is just of Tertullians opinion: if Mercurius Trismegistus (says
he) or any other do deliver any thing that is good, it is not of authority
sufficient to teach us a wholesome doctrine, but it is only able to convince
and disprooue the Infidels. And as concerinng their sayings, that they are
agreeable unto truth, there is no less discrepancy and distance between their
authority and the authority of the Prophets, then there is between Devils and
Angels. For the Devils have sometimes spoken truth, yet are we not presently to
build a conclusion of Catholic doctrine upon the same. The question then in
hand is to be debated by that which is conformable to the holy Scriptures, and
which has been taught by the ancient fathers of the Church: which is the
only scope unto which I aim in this work, where we will also allege (when
there shall be a conueniency thereof) certain Philosophers (which for the most
part are already cited by S. Thomas) as far as we shall find them in
conformity and league with Scriptures and the fathers. And if any shall oppose
against them, tdey shall find themselves repelled and confuted by the ponderous
and weighty allegations of natural reason, to content and gain in, or
confound the Atheists, whose number is far greater then it should be,
although much inferior unto those (to my great grief I speak it) that do
symbolize and comply themselves to Sorcerers, and adhere unto them by an
infinite number of superstitions: in which foul crimes men of the best rank
do sundry times inbarke themselves. So that I may well say with Chrysostom,
that if it were as easy to execute justice upon the great ones, Chrysostom. hom.
2.11. Epist. ad Heb. hom. 10. in 1. Epist. ad Timoth.
as it is upon the baser sort, all the prisons would be presently stuffed with
Magicians and Sorcerers. And elsewhere does this good father with large
effusion of tears deplore the blindness of such people, where he says,
Lachrymis and gemitibus digna vaticinia, obseruationes genesis, signa,
ligaturae, diuinationes, incantationes, and caetera huiusmodi. Quae omnia magno
profecto scelere praesumuntur, denique iram prouocare consueuerunt, atque eo
magis, quo post ingentis be^euolentiae and insignis miserationis indicia,
postquam ille filium suum pro redimendis hominibus misit, haec nesario aufu
admittimus. To this purpose does S. Augustine prettily teach us, Aug. lib. de.
ciuit. Dei cap. 18.
that this is a thing which God permits, thereby to occasion us to fly into
the close embracements of Christ Jesus our Mediator, when we shall understand,
how shamelesly and brutishly the Devil does dragge us unto him, and worrieth
us as a famished Wolf does the harmeles sheep. Quanto quippe in haec ima
(inquit) potestatem daemonum maiorem videmus, tanto tenacius mediatori est
inhaerendum, per quem de imo ad summa contendimus. It remains that I should
also handle, whether those things, which are spoken of Sorcerers, do proceed
from dreams and illusions, or whether they are real and true. But fearing a
glut of words in this long Epistle, which may perhaps seem unto some more
wearisome then delightful, I have remitted and fitted that discourse to the
conclusion of this book, having ever before me that which S. Augustine wittily
observes, that a reader, when he sees the end of a book, or a chapter, is
as glad, as a passenger to see the sign of his Inn, where he is to repose
himself.

A DISCOVRSE OF SPIRITS, CONTAINING WHATSOEVER IS NECESsary for the more full
understanding and resolution of the difficult Argument of Sorcerers.
CHAP. I. Whither there be Spirits or no: There are four points to be observed
touching Spirits: that there are Spirits; what their nature is, from whence
they came; and the end why they are.
TOuching the first point; it is an ordinary method in all things which men
are desirous to comprehend, first to search into their causes: otherwise they
shall not want occasions to remain unresolved and doubtful, and their spirits
will not cease to be full of coffeehouse and perplexity. For this is the
nature of man, Lib. 1. Metaph. cap. 1.
especially when he sees unusual and extraordinary effects; as is clear by
the example of country people, set down and expressed by Aristotle; who when
they see an eclipse of the Sun or Moon, they are presently stricken with
admiration, like unto the Children of Israel, Exodus 16.
who wondered at the new food of Manna, and demanded what it was. And such
kinds of admiration (says Aristotle) have been the seed-plot, and head of all
Philosophy: for those spirits that had a touch of generousnes and industry,
did presently endeavor to comprehend the cause of those unusual events. The
like course of proceeding is here to be observed, and the rather, because it
seems so much the more admirable and incredible by how much the more distant
the knowledge and experience thereof is from the best and soundest part of men.
We are therefore to diue into the causes, which when we once shall steddily
comprehend, it will easily bow and incline our understandings to the belief of
those things, and make us conceive them not only to be possible, but of a more
ordinary frequencie then has hitherto bin believed. And in regard that
Spirits are the cause of these events; we are first to know, whither there are
Spirits, or no. There are three sorts of men that have denied Spirits: the
first are Philosophers; the second are the Sadduces, and the third are
Atheists. Touching Aristotle the prince of Philosophers, Lib. 8, Physic.
he is of opinion, that there is one supreme cause not tied to the pressure
and encumbrance of a body: Lib. 12. Metaph. text* 48.
And he sets down 47. Spirits subordinate to that supreme cause, according to
the number of motions, which he observed in the celestial Orbs of heaven,
thinking with himself that those heavenly bodies could not so ordinately move,
unless they were animated and quickened thereunto by some Spirits of life. Now
whither he had stolen this out of the holy Scripture, (or at the least had
borrowed it from his Master Plato, who might take it from thence) because it is
said in Ezekiel, Ezech. 1.
speaking of the celestial bodies, which are there called wheels, Spiritus
vitae erat in rotis; or whether he had invented the same by the collections
which his experience had made from his frequent observing of them, I cannot
tell; but surely he said truth, except where he seems by exclusion to shut
out the rest, as if there were no more then those that he recited. Wherein he
might consider, S. Thom. lib. 2. cont. gent. c. 92
that if those Spirits were necessary for the uniform and incessant motions
of the Spheres, and by a consequent for the service of man, Qui est quodammodo
finis omnium, much more is it convenient, that this first and supreme cause,
whom he calls the alone Prince of all things, Lib. 2. Metaph. and lib. 2. de
anima.
should be waited on with an infinite number of them, for his own use and
service. Whereunto agrees that of Daniel, who teaches us, that Dan. 7.
Millia millium ministrabant ei* and decies centena millia assistebant ei:
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. Whereof David gives the natural reason, saying, Psalm. 102.
Ministrieius vt faciant voluntatem eius: and this does tacitly agree with the
saying of Ezechiel: Spiritus vitae erat in rotis. Ezech. 10. S. Thomas.
Mercurius Trismegistus, as S. Thomas recites him, does determinately deny
that there are good Spirits, except those who wheel about the heavens: And in
this he agrees with Aristotle, although he was a better Divine then the
other, because he yields, that God did make and create them, which Aristotle
seemed to deny, who frames to himself an eternity even of thistles and
butter-flyes: S. Thom. 1. p. q. 115. art. 5. Psell lib. de energia Daemonum, c.
14.
but touching the number of Spirits they are both of one opinion. Aristotle
does deny that there are wicked Spirits; whose authority Physicians did follow
and adhere unto, as Psellus witnesses, intending those that were not
Christians, or which had apostated from the true Religion. This sort of men
does ordinarily fall into two gross errors; the one against the immortality
of the soul, as it is recited in the 2. of Wisdom, saying, Sap. 2.
that the soul does altogether resemble the flame that is nourished from the
lamp: the other is against Spirits; for when they are showed the effects
wrought really by the Devil in the bodies of those he does possess, they do
adiudge of it more meanly then Aristotle did, and affirm, that these
incongruities do happen through the indisposition and depraved temper of
humors and vital spirits. And thus as they do by the immortality of the
soul, so here also they change an immortal and incorruptible spirit into a
spirit more earthly: and which they would have to be quintessented from the
temperament of natural qualities, which indeed is nothing else but a blast or
smoke. Hence it is that S. Augustine does to this purpose fitly allege the
history of a Physician, August. epist. 100. ad Euodium.
who, says he, was constrained to confess the immortality of souls by a
vision which he had when he lay asleep, wherein he saw, although the
casements of his eyes were shut up; and heard, although his sense of hearing
was tied up and possessed by sleep, his good Angel speaking unto him, and
making him to consider, that his soul of it self without the aid or service
of the body, or any of the organs thereof, did see and hear. And this is the
reason why such kind of people do rely and lean too much upon Philosophy,
and causes in nature. The Sadduces also may be ranked with them, Act. 23.
Matthew. 23.
because they also deny Spirits as it is recited in the Acts of the Apostles:
from thence they fall into another inconvenience, and that is, to deny the
immortality of the soul: whereupon it follows of necessity, that they must
deny the resurrection of the body; Just. Apolog. 2. haectria vnico medio probat.
which three points are common unto Atheists, and all those that deny Spirits.
Others there are, that are not so frontlesse and gross in their opinions, as
the former, but grant, that as there are good Spirits, (for the motion of the
heaven does force from them that confession, in that so good and necessary a
work cannot proceed but from a good agent) so there are also bad Spirits, and
yt from them many actions of villainy and naughtiness do proceed. Of these
Porphiry makes mention in Epistola ad Anebuntem, cited by S. Thomas, S. Thom.
lib. 3. contr. gent. cap. 107. and 108. and August. lib. 10. de Ciuitat. cap.
11. and Eusebius. lib. 5. de praeparat. Euang. cap. 6.
saying, that these are the Masters of Sorcerers, and of all that use
witchcraft, and that they never direct any man in a course of goodness, but
give all passage and furtherance unto those, who have any propension to do
mischief. Plato also and his sect do grant that there is a great number of
Spirits, whose residence is in the highest region of the air, as birds have
their abiding place in the low and middle region, and fishes in the water: but
they do here intermingle many absurdities, as we will declare hereafter. To
conclude, none have ever perfectly known the nature of Spirits, but those that
have received and understood the holy Scripture. Now against Philosophers and
Painims we have experience: Tertull. de prescript. heretic. Helias in Thisbi
dictione Qua rain. S. Thom. cont. Gent. lib. 3. cap. 104.105.
against the Saduces who are heretics amongst the Jews (as Tertullian says)
we have the five books of Moses which they themselves admit: and for
Catholics and Christians, we have the consent of all the holy Scriptures,
both of the old and new Testament. S. Thomas in his third book against the
Gentiles does solidly and learnedly dispute against all the arguments of the
Philosophers, who affirmed, that when any prodigy in nature did happen, it was
to be attributed to the influence of celestial bodies, which are able to bring
forth many things that are hidden and buried from our knowledge. It is true
(says he) that nature is able to do much, yet notwithstanding it is bounded
in and limited so strongly, that for the most part it is tied to the production
of one manner of effects, either from the property of the efficient cause, or
from the impotency or unaptness of the matter which has no capacity but to
bring forth one thing: as the Sun, and all the heavens cannot in the sapp of
a vine shape up or bring forth any other thing but grapes, nor from an apple
tree any thing but apples. Mercurius Trismegist. in Asclepio.
Whereupon it must be granted, that there are many effects which are against
and above the power of nature: as Oracles which were nothing else but statues
that did speak and give resolution unto those doubts that were propounded unto
them, and did unfold many things that were absent, hidden, and to come: as also
that some men have suddenly, Lactan. lib. inst. and Aug. lib. de ciuit,. 6.
and without any study or pains taking therein, spoken Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, Syriac, Chaldey, and all other languages, citing sentences of Poets and
Orators, although they never were conversant in them or in any other kind of
literature: that Oxen and Asses should speak, and other prodigious accidents
should happen, against the power and course of nature; that a vestall Virgin,
being suspected of light behavior and wantonness, should in witness of her
chastity carry up and down before the Romansa sure full of water. Claudia also
upon the same occasion did draw a great ship after her with her girdle, and
Actius Naeuius did with a rasor cut a whet-stone in pieces.

It has been found true by experience, and mention is made of the fame in the
laws of the 12. Tables, that a certain Island did fleet up and down from one
place to another. It is also known by observation, that they who practice such
things as these, do use certain words, characters, prayers, protestations, and
other manners of behavior, which cannot without folly and vanity be presented
unto any, but unto substances that have understanding and reason. From whence
he draws this conclusion, that it is evident that al these prodigies do
proceed from Spirits, and therefore there are Spirits. And if the authority of
the Scripture may here take place (which they may admit of at the least as any
other History) it is impossible to conceive, that the course of the Sun
should be stayed, and that the heaven should go backward in the time of Joshua,
and Es^chias by any natural force or power. Arist. lib. 8. Phys. and lib. de
Coelo and Mundo.
For Aristotle himself faith, that this is impossible even for Intelligences
themselves, to wheel back the heaven, as it is impossible for the soul to
issue forth of the body at pleasure, Vide August. lib. 8 de ciuit. cap. 23.
or not to enlifen and actuate the body, whiles it remains in it, because
there is a necessity in nature that compels the same. Therefore it is
plain, that those events proceed from some thing else then from the motion of
the heavens: and it must necessarily be granted, that prodigies ought not to be
appropriated to the motion of the heavens, but to some other secret causes,
which stand involued with much ambiguity and mistiness. Mercurius Trismegistus
would indeed have answered that argument touching Oracles, in saying, that it
was true that God did create as many Spirits as are in nature, yet it was the
art of men to make the Oracles to speak, by sitting thereunto certain
influences of the heavens: for (says he) such statues might be so aptly
accomodated to certain aspects of the heavens, as that they might speak,
divine, and foretell, and might strike men with diseases, and heal them
again, and might in brief work miracles. But it fares here with him, as it
does with Plutarch, Plutarch. lib. de taciturn. oracul.
who endeavoring to give a reason why Oracles did cease to do those wonders,
which they were wont, (letting slip the true reason, which was the coming of
Christ Jesus in the flesh, by whom the kingdom of Satan was utterly ruined) he
makes a book exprespresly to show the reason of their cessation and silence:
but he falls so short in his discourse, that he alleges no reasons but
such, whose insufficiency and weakness may be easily confuted, nay which is
more, the most of them are ridiculous, and unworthy of so great a Philosopher:
in so much as he is driven to say, that they were nourished by exhalations
drawn up from the earth, which when they ceased and were exhausted, those
Oracles were famished, and dyed for want of their accustomed sustenance. In the
same maze wandereth Trismegistus, when he would yield a reason of their
overthrow: for it may be easily demanded of him, first, why men in these times
may not do the like (as those of former ages have done) by the same
observations of the heavens, since now they are more skilled in their motions,
then formerly they have been: and when now our modern Astrologers have
convicted both Aristotle and Ptolomy of many errors. Again, how may it be
possible that the cause should be of less excellency then the effect, and if a
man (as he affirms) can by his indust^y make such oracles, it will in sound
Philosophy be necessarily inferred, that he may also produce and work the
same things in another man. And if it be replied, that there must be a
concurrence of the heavens influence unto such a work, I answer, Why may not
the like influence as well happen unto a man, as unto a statue of wood? Nay,
why should it not rather agree unto him, as being more capable of reason,
speech, and all other actions, then a statue? Since then it was never known
that a man was an oracle, we may conclude, that this reason is most
insufficient; for it is certain that in all ages there have been some, who
would not have desired a better purchase, then by this means to be esteemed
Gods, wherein they retain a remnant of that poison, wherewith the
Serpentinfected our first parents, telling them, Erit is sicut Dij;; and
Gregory, Genes. 3. Gregor. Nazian. orat 1. 2. in Julian Apostat.
Nazianzene allegeth a number of examples, as of Arist^ur, Empedo^^mus, and
Trophonias, who hid themselves under ground, that they might be esteemed Gods,
Empedocles also cast himself headlong into the sulphurous mountain of
Sicily, which perpetually vomited (...) ^lakes of fire: and Julian the Apostate
was incited with the same (...) and did so burn with the cogitation of the
same, that he would have drowned himself in a great river. Aristotle
himself, who labored to give a reason in nature for all things, could not
comprehend the (...) and satisfying cause of the ebb and flow of the Sea
Eurip^^, now called Negrepont, where with he was so vexed, that he threw
himself violently into the same, Just. Mart. orat paraenetic. ad gentes.
Arist. Prob. sect. 30.
crying, Because Aristotle cannot contain this Sea, this Sea shall contain
Aristotle (as Justin Martyr writes of him.) Hence it is that he studied to
render a natural reason for those memorably strange accidents in man, which
cannot be attributed to any cause, but either to God or Spirits; and therefore
he affirmed that the Sibills and those excellent Emperors and great
Philosophers were disaffected by a melancholic humor, through which they
spoke and did many strange things. In which words he seems to prevent the
argument, which might be objected against this his assertion, touching
Demoniaks and possessed, Tertull. lib. de testimonio animae.
which is a clear and irresistable experience against all the Philosophers of
the world: for it is infallible that before Aristotle's time there was
possession, since Solomon himself did teach men exorcismes to cast out Dinels
from men's bodies, as Iosophus and others do wituesse. Joseph. lib. antiquit.
How then can all this be attributed to a melancholic humor? But will
Aristotle dare to auow that this gross and earthy humor is more excellent in
a man, then his understanding and reason? Now if reason can by no means
whatsoever discover those things which it has never learned, nor speak any
other language, then that which for a long time it has been used unto; nor
divine of future events, nor allege or interpret sentences, which it has
never conceived, how is it possible that this muddy and gross humor should
be so cleared as to do all these things? especially when they are the proper
effects that flow from reason. And if a man should require from them the cause,
why such an humor should comprehend that which is far remote from us, both
by distance of place and time, rather then reason, they could make no answer
thereunto. To which may be added that they are things which do as usually
happen unto those that are of a different complexion, 1. Corinthians. 5.
as unto melancholic men. For it is probable that the Corinthian fornicatour
who was possessed with a Devil, was of no melancholic and lupmish
constitution, but rather of a more pleasant and iouiall behavior: which is not
barely coniecturall, 1. Corinthians. 15.
because S. Paul reprooueth the Corinthians for that they laughed and were
merry with him, before he was possessed; which may make us to conceive, that he
was witty and pleasant, as also all the Epicures were who were wont to say,
Comedamus and bibamus cras enim moriemur, and post mortem nulla volupt as. In
like manner were Alexander and Hymen^us possessed, who were much like unto the
former. Marc. 4.
Moreover, it were a ridiculous thing to say, that when the Devils were cast
out of an humane body, and entered into the swine, the melancholy of the man
did descend into the hogs; so that it does fully appear, that these
experie^ces aforesaid are sufficiently powerful to confute all Philosophers,
that there are Spirits who do secretly converse with men, and do many times
visibly appear unto them: which Aristotle could not deny to have happened unto
Socrates Platoes master who from his infancy had a Spirit that did at times
appear unto him: as Tertullian has observed, Tertul. lib. de anima.
lib. de anima. in these words, Socratem Puerum, adhuc Spiritus demoniclus
inuenit. Let us now come to the Saduces, D. Genebard. in Chronol.
of the which sect there is yet a great multitude of Jews in Constantinople,
and in the kingdom of Persia, where almost all the Jews do adhere to their
opinion. It is strange in them, that they should deny Spirits* when in the five
books of Moses, which they only admit of as the sacred writ, there is nothing
more common then the mention of Spirits, and there is more spoken of that
argument, in those books then in the whole Scripture besides. We will anon
yield the reason why Moses did not mention their creation or fall, although in
the beginning as it were of his book, Genesis 3.
he brings in the Serpent, speaking and discoursing with such craftiness
and cunning, as that he made a conquest upon the understanding, and persuades
the will both of the woman and the man. Now there is nothing more discerneable,
then that this was no unreasonable beast, that spoke from his own brain and
apprehension, because nothing is more disproportionable and auerse from beasts
then speech and reason: Hereupon it is that Orators do properly term them
Animalia muta, because speech is the expresser and interpreter of inward
reason, and can proceed from no cause but from thence. But put the case they
should be so stupide as to say that in those times beasts could speak, as
Plutarch seems to intimate in his book which is entitled, That beasts are
not deuoide of reason, and as some gross capacities conceive of Aesops fables,
and the like, S. Basil. in Examer.
being it may be drawn to believe it from S. Basils opinion, who holds that
before the temptation the Serpent had feet, and did go upon his legs as other
four footed beasts use to do, and that as soon as it was told him supra a
pectus tuum gradieris, the use of feet was taken away from him and all his
kind, because that curse did descend down to all posterity and succession: as
it is said, Inter semen tuum, and semen illius. But where do we find, I
pray, that God says unto the Serpent, thou shall speak no more, but shall be
mute and utterly deprived of discourse and reason? which he might in reason
have said, since it was not the outward form and shape of the Serpent that
beguiled our first fathers, but the reasons that he alleged, and the promises
which he made unto them. But touching this the Scripture speaks nothing, for
besides the ridiculousnesse of such a conceit, it would breed a manifest
repugnancy in the Scripture, which says that God created living creatures, but
he afterward made man after his own image and likeness, which similitude
lies only in this point, that he framed him with the indowment and use of
reason, whereby he might direct himself and every other thing, as God does
guide and govern all things by his wisdom and providence. And this is it (as
S. Augustine has notably observed) which is presently there added, vt praesit
piscibus maris, August. lib. 5. de Gent. ad tit. cap. 12.
and volatilibus coeli, and uniuersis animantibus quae mouentur super terram.
It must needs therefore be an intellectual substance, that made the Serpent to
speak, for it was neither man nor woman, because there were none but Adam and
Eve, as the text says, Erunt autem ambo nudi. Moreover there is mention made
of a Cherubin, who was appointed to keep the door of Paradise, for fear
least man should return back again, and should eat of the fruit of life; and
in his hand he held a bright flaming sword, to strike a terror into man, if
he should be so presumptuous. This could not be a man, as we have declared,
and must therefore be a Spirit. There is also frequent mention made of the
Angels of God, who appeared unto men, as unto Abraham, Lot, Jacob and others,
foretelling them of things, which was beyond the compass of man's knowledge, as
that an old barren woman should conceive; that Sodom and Gomorra should be
destroyed, and the like. As also that the people of Israel should be led
through the wilderness by a cloud, and by a pillar of fire: there could no
other reason be given hereof, but that they were Spirits sent as guides by God
unto them. Praesedet te (said God to Moses) Angelus meus: and Moses replied
saying, Nisi tu ipse praecedas nos, so that it appears that these spirits
were the messengers of God. Exodus 13.23. 33.
The ex perience also of those that are possessed, is a sufficient argument to
confute the Saduces. Iansen. lib. concord. Euang.
Here upon it came (says Iansenius) that Christ Jesus did permit the Devils
in his time to invade not only men, but swine also, for conviction (says he)
of the error of the Saduces, whom Christ Jesus was saine to train up by such
rutourage, as knowing, that if a man did once apprehend there were Spirits, he
would forthwith believe that there is another world, where they make their
abode, and from thence would easily be induced to admit the immortality of the
soul, and the resurrection of the body. Whereas contrariwise, he who does not
believe that there are Spirits, can hardly conceive that there is another
world, Acts 23.
or that the soul is immortal, or that it is possible for God himself to
call men unto him by resurrection from the dead. Hereupon S. Luke reciting the
principal errors of the Saduces, does join these three points together.

Concerning Christians and Catholics, besides the above named books, Theodor.
lib. 5 in Epitom. divine. decret. Act. 6.
they have S. Stephen in the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Paul in the 3. to the
Galathians, to witness that the Law was given to Moses and the people by the
ministry of Angels: that God has appointed good Angels to guard us from the
perrills of this world, and from the attempts of wicked Spirits against us, in
the 90. Psalm. Moreover, ad Gal, 3.
that they aid and succor us so far as to combat for us: Dan. 10.
none (said an Angel to Daniel) did aid me in the people of Isreal's
deliverance but Michael Prince of this people; and that the number of them is
exceeding great, does clearly appear by the history of Helizeus when he opened
the eyes of his disciple, 4. Reg. 6.
and made him see the great multitude of Angels, at what time he was afraid of
the huge army of the Assirians. Plures (says he) nobiscum sunt qua^ cum illis.
Genesis 32.
The same spoke Jacob who saw himself circled in with an heavenly army when
he stood in fear of his brother Esau; Castra (inquit) Dei sunt haec. Their
office is to praise God incessantly, as Esaias and Ezechiel do declare, the one
speaking of Seraphins, the other of Cherubins. Esai. 6. Ezech. 1. ad These. 4.
Marc. 13.
He that shall ^ound the trumpet to raise the dead shall be an Arch angel,
and presently there shall come a great troop of Angels to collect and gather
in the elect from all quarters of the world, and to assemble them in one place.
Touching wicked Spirits, it is declared in the history of Achab, 3. Reg. 22. 2.
Paralip. 18. 2. Reg. 24.
that a spirit did offer himself to be a spirit of lies: and Satan tempted
David to number his people in the pride of his heart, and did much mischief in
Egypt, as being there the hangman of God, Psalm. 77.
Immissiones (says David) per Angelos malos. God also frequently forbids in
the law to sacrifice unto Devils, which he would not do but that there were
Devils. Job. 1.2
It was the Devil that did afflict Job in his body, goods, children and
servants: Matthew 4.
It was he that dared to tempt Christ Jesus, and did exact adoration from him
as if he were a God: it is he, that by his commandment and by the prayers of
the Apostles has been so often cast out from men's bodies; and for conclusion,
(for the places that may here be brought are numberless) God will say at the
last day to the reprobate: Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est
Diabolo and Angelis eius. Being then ascertained that there are Spirits both
good and bad as well from the grounds of natural reason, as from invincible
experiences, and especially from the authority of the holy Scripture, we are in
the next place to know whether they have bodies, or no.

CHAP. II. Whether Spirits have bodies.
THis question bears with it more difficulty then any other, either in
Philosophy or Divinity next after the question of the Divine nature: first,
because Spirits do approach nearer unto the nature of God then any other
creature: as also, because it is impossible to see or comprehend them but only
by their effects; as by the print of the foot which is left in the sand we
know that a man has passed that way, yet have we not a possibility to conceive
of his virtue, knowledge, force, beauty, or constitution thereby: and hence it
arises, that so many ingenuous Spirits as have labored in this argument have
almost all of them missed their scope, August. lib. de orig. animae.
and run into some error. For if (as Saint Augustine teaches) it be one of
the most difficult things in the world to know the essence of the soul, which
Aristotle also touches in his first book of the soul, Arist. lib.1. de anima.
where he recites an infinity of opinions together with their several
mistakes, and exorbitances from the truth, much more shall this argument of
Spirits be encumbered with many difficulties, since there is no man who has not
daily experience of the nature of souls even in their very dreams. Which
makes me say with Saint Thomas of Aquin, S. Thom. lib. 3. contra Gent. cap 45.
ex commentatore comment 63. and lib. 3. de anima.
that Themistius the Philosopher has more grossly over shot himself in this
point then any others. For he did not only teach it for a truth, that in this
mortal life we might attain unto the full and complete knowledge of Angels,
but also that this kind of knowledge was more facile then any other, by reason
of their constancy and natural stabilitie, whereby it comes to pass, that
they are not so obnoxious unto change, as all other elementary bodies are.
Against this Saint Thomas does learnedly oppose himself, laying down
demonstratiuely, that whatsoever knowledge a man might attain unto in this
mortal life (for after this life our knowledge shall, without comparison be
far more excellent by the contemplation of that great Myrrour that
comprehends all things) it does all necessarily proceed and flow from the
outward senses and in the intermission of their working, Imaginatio non
transcendit continuum.
a man does afterward apprehend a conception of that which was offered and
imprinted into his sense; The truth of this may be observed in a man that is
blind and deaf from his nativity, who has no knowledge of any thing
whatsoever. Since then Spirits have no bodies, they cannot be seen by the eye
nor received into any external sense: and thereupon it arises, that a man
cannot form them in his imagination, unless it be because we see them dimly
by their effects: Saint Augustine himself confesses, that it is one of the
hardest questions in the world; and is not ashamed to use these words: Fateor
excedere vires intentionis meae, Aug lib. 3. de Trinit. cap. 10. Arist. lib. 2.
Metaph.
and Aristotle as it were to prevent Themistius, does declare that this
obscurity does not proceed from Spirits, but from the imbecility both of our
senses and understanding, which as he prettily notes, resembles the eye of an
Oule that cannot endure the brightness of the Sun, although it be the most
conspicuous thing that is. Hence it is that as many as have labored to
discover the intricacy of these subtilties do resemble those that by a
mathematical demonstration would prove, quadraturam circuii: for being not
able to reach unto it, they have an infinity of false hypotheses and
suppositions. Among these the two Arabicke Philosophers may be numbered, Aben
Rois (whom some by corruption of speech call Auerrois) and Aben Pace, whose
opinions are largely confuted by Saint Thomas. S. Thom. li. 3. cont. gent.
^cap. 41. 42. 45. Aristot. li. 8. Phyc. and li. 12. Metaph.
But to come to those who have drawn nearer unto the truth, Aristotle does
affirm and prove, that those few Spirits whom he had knowledge of, were
certainly free from any Mass or pressure of bodies, and were substances
separated and abstracted from all composition of elements: for he well knew
that a corporeal form ought to be proportioned unto the body wherein it does
act and produce motion. If then the Intelligences who move the heavens were
corporeal, it must needs be, that their bodies should be proportionable unto
the quantity of the heavenly bodies, which is so great that it comprehends
and compasses in all the world, and as touching the outward superficies it is
contained in no place. If then these Spirits should be fashioned to such
greatness, they would be exceeding monstrous and hideous to look unto: which is
not to be conceited of these substances which are the most noble and excellent
of all others. They move then the heavens, as the reasonable soul does our
bodies, that is, merely by their will, which the body in his corporal motions
cannot possibly resist, if so be it be furnished with Organs proper for the
same, mouet voluntate non tactu: which manner of working is strange and
incomprehensible, because it is a spiritual kind of working and not a
corporal. Many other reasons are alleged by Aristotle, but because they are
drawn from natural Philosophy, and cannot easily be understood, but by those
that are well versed in the Maxims of that science, it shall be sufficient that
we have alleged these few. Plato seems to himself to have soared higher in
his Philosophy, but he is not without this errors: for having got the sight of
the holy Scriptures and taking the words according to the rigor of the letter,
he affirms that these excellent Spirits have a thin and subtle kind of
body, Psalm. 103.
made of fire or air; wherein he follows the Scriptures which seem to say
that they are made of wind, or of a flame of fire, and do always mention
their appearing to be clothed in such material shapes, as when they speak of
the Angel that conducted the people in the wilderness, Exodus 13.20.
it is said that he was as a pillar of fire unto them in the night, and as a
cloud in the day. Besides in the mountain of Sinay there were seen
lightnings, lamps and flames of fire, 1. Par. 18. 4. Reg. 2.
as also the two Cherubins of the Mercies seat resembled two young boys with
wings, and Helias, his taking up to heaven was by Horses of fire. But Plaeto
understood not, that it is an usual thing with the holy Scripture to set
before us the highest mysteries by metaphors borrowed from things that are more
vile, so they be more familiar unto us. In like manner are the four Elements,
the seven Planets, and that supreme heaven of all, where God and his Saints
do dwell blessed for evermore, Exodus 25. 26.
are represented unto us in the Mercies seat by artificial things: the seven
Planets by the seven Lamps, in the midst of whom one was more bright and
conspicuous then the rest, and that represented the Sun: the like may be said
of other things, as that in the garments of Auron the High Priest, Sap. 18. S.
Thom. 1.2. quaest. 102. art. 4. ^x probauss. Rabin. and Clement. Alexandr. lib.
5. strom.
there was representation made of the whole world, and a kind of expression of
the Majesty of God, as the wise man says, In vest Aaron erat descriptus orbis
terrarum. The linen breeches did betoken the earth, not only because the earth
brings forth flax and linen, but also because it is one of the worst
stuffes that is there described: the large girdle wherewithal the Priest did
engirt himself, represented the Ocean sea that compasses all the earth: the
coat of blew velvet with the little bells of pomegranets, the air which is of
the same color, and is the shopp where all thunders and lightnings are
hammered: the Rochet that was upon his shoulders beautified with all variety of
precious colors, the heaven, where all the Stars do like spangles beautify
that place: the twelve precious stones that were set into this garment, the
twelve signs of the Zodiac: the Miter upon his head, the highest heaven, and
the plate of gold in which the ineffable name of God was engraven, and which
was upon all the rest did represent the Mai^sty of God. In the like manner God
is shadowed out unto us with eyes, ears, and hands, that is to say, seeing,
hearing, and doing all things: which these Anthropomorphites not understanding,
did maintain; Cassian. collatio. 10. cap. 2.3.
(wherein they fell into Platoes error) that God had also a body, but how
monstrous a body must this be, since God himself is every where. They may as
well say, that he is a Lamb, a Lion, or a Bear, and the like, then which
borrowed speeches nothing is more frequent in Scripture. So that when Angels
are figured out with wings, and are said to be clothed with wind or fire, it
signifies nothing else unto us, but that they are swift and ready to execute
the will of God, as the Psalmist does explain it, speaking of Angels and
saying, Psalm. 102.
Potentes robore seu virtute ad audiendam vocem sermonum eius. The Ethnicks
also, having stolue the same from the Jewish antiquities (as Iosephas calls
them) that is to say from the holy Scripture, does set forth Mercury with
wings, and describe the wind in the shape of a man having wings, thereby to
express the swiftness and celerity which they conceived and saw in these
things. And Hamer when he would speak of Gods descent upon the earth (whom he
always calls Jupiter) he brings him down covered and wrapped in a cloud:
Exodus 33.
which he stole from the books of Moses where God is always said to come
down in a cloud, Descendebat columna nubis ad ostium Tabernaculi, and as King
David says, Psalm. 17.
Descendit dominus and caligo sub pedibus eius. The wind also is figured out
to be a man with wings which is drawn from that place, Qui ambulas super
pennas ventorum. And that we may more fully understand the Majesty and
antiquity of the holy Scripture, from whence the opinions of Plato had their
first ground and original, and which the most famous Philosophers and Divines
have followed in part, as we will by and by demonstrate, it is expedient to
observe breefely that which the ancients have more largely expressed unto us,
especially Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Alexand. in Strom. Origin. cont. Celsum.
Eusebius. de praepar. Euang. Tertul. de praescrip. and in Apologet. Chrysostom:
Hom. de Ascensione Heliae.
Origin, Eusebius, and Tertullian: and that is, that whatsoever Poets and
Philosophers whether they were Greeks or Latins have truly and excellently
left unto posterity, they have stolen or borrowed the same from the customs of
the people of Israel. S. Chrysostom commends the invention of Poets, in
describing the son drawn in a burning Chariot by four horses running at
full speed: this is not a mere fable says he, if it be rightly understood:
because the Sun in Greek is called Helios. For finding that Helias was
carried to heaven in a fiery Chariot drawn with four horses, they applied this
unto the Sun, conceiting that the Scripture spoke metaphorically, and by
Helias meant Helion, that is the Sun. 1. Paral. 28. Aback. 3.
The Cherubins also are said to be drawn in a Chariot, and Abacuc calls them
the horses of God, saying: Qui ascendis super equos tuos; This the Poets would
express when they say, that the heavens are wheeled and rolled about by
Angels, as if they were drawn by swift horses. Moreover, whereas the Jews had
within their Temple two manner of Oracles, the one vocal, the other mute and
without a voice: the first was when God spoke out of the middle of the
Tabernacle to Moses, the other when from the precious stones of the high
Priests Ephod, Number. 3.
their beamed forth a certain splendour that betokned good fortune, 1. Regum.
30.
which is mentioned in the 1. of Kings. The Gentiles herein endeavored to
imitate the Jews, and had also two manner of Oracles, the one which spoke and
was called Oraculum Dodoneum, the other which spoke not, and was called
Oraculum Hammonium: which word Oracle signifies in the Hebrew nothing else,
but a place of speaking, and where answers are commonly given, for it is
called Debir: in Greek it may be called (...), Hieron. sub fin. lib. in Epist.
ad Ephesians.
in Latin Loquuterium, as Saint Jerome has observed. And as it is commanded
in the Law that they should offer cakes unto God in their sacrifices, but that
no sacrifice should be without salt, so does Pliny also note of the Gentiles,
omnibus sacrificijs adhiberi solitam molam salsam, Ovid. in Fast. lib. 1.
which is also witnessed by Ovid: Ante deos homini quod conciliare valebat far
erat, and puri lucida mica salis. Hence have the customs of the Gentiles there
beginning, and this Plato has more excellently and accurately followed then
any other: whereupon he gained the surname of Divine being commonly styled
Diuinus Plato. We are not then to wonder though Plato do affirm that Angels
have bodies of fire or air, since that the Scripture does so clearly and
frequently make repetition of the same: and it may be that he understood those
speeches according to the sense and meaning of the Scripture, that is to say
metaphorically, because either they are not so gross and heavy as humane
bodies which endure weariness in their motion, or rather, because they are
like birds or clouds in the air, or else because they appear to men in such
forms and fashions. For if it be lawful for Moses to say that God is a
fire: Deus noster (inquit) ignis consumens est, because he was thus represented
unto him in the bush and upon the mountain, why may it not be lawful for us
to say that Spirits are made of air or fire, because in their apparitions they
ever take an airie or a fiery body upon them? And thus we are to understand S.
Augustine, August. lib. 3. de Trinit. B^rnard. in Cantic. Cant. and lib. de
considerat. ad Eugenium.
when he seems to affirm that spirits have bodies: and thus S Bernard also
is to be interpreted, that is, that spirits are then said to have bodies, when
they would appear unto us: for they can have no other meaning, since our eye
has no proportion with spiritual substances. It may well be, that some have
thus spoken of them, thereby to intimate that spirits are not pure qualities,
but essences subsisting of themselves: which makes much against the error of
the Sadduces, who reduced all the apparitions recited in the five books of
Moses, to the imaginations and fancies of men; whereas indeed, Angels do
understand, confer, and direct men, managing, and governing Provinces and
kingdoms, and as our Savior says, they do always behold the face of God
the Father which is in heaven. Thus ought Tertullian to be understood when he
says, August. lib. de haeresib. haeres. 28. S. Thom lib. 10 cont. Gent. cap.
20. ait sic tenuisse; sed August. lib. de haeres. 50. and 86. conatur excusare.
Cassian. collat 10. c. 2, 3.4.
that God has a body, not that he has the least composition of matter, but
he is a body, that is to say, a thing really subsisting, accommodating his
manner of speaking to the weakness of ruder apprehensions, and it may be to
the understandings of certain. Anthropomorphites, who, as Cassianus says, by
reason of their great dullness and simplicity, could not conceive that any
thing could be reallie subsisting, unless it had a body, not being able, as
we are used to say, to judge further then their nose. Notwithstanding the
experience of the souls working, may be sufficient to sublime men's thoughts
from such earthie conceptions touching Spirits, since the soul does discourse
and work, although the body be fallen into a sound sleep. Adam, when he
sleeped very profoundly* saw God when he took from him one of his ribs
thereof to make the woman, and when the soul at the hour of death is divorced
from the body, it cannot be seen by any because it is a spirit, as Christ
himself upon such an occasion did say: Matthew 26.
Pater in manus tuas commendo spiritum meum, Joan. 19.
and afterward, and inclinate capite emisit spiritum. That we may use these
phrases of speaking in a good sense, it appears by that which we have
formerly said, for we cannot do amiss in using Scripture-phrases, if so be
they be taken according to the meaning of the Scripture, as Christ Jesus
himself declares in S. John, chap. 10. where he argues against the
Pharisees, who in those days stood nicely upon words, as we have many of that
captious b^ood amongst us in these times. Again, it is not to be conceived,
that so great and learned personages should be so ignorant as not to be
conversant in the texts of the new Testament, which do clearly declare that
they have no bodies. In the third place, they do for the most part express
and interpret themselves, as S. Atbanasius amongst the rest, Athanas. lib. de
communi essentia Patris and Filij.
who in his definition of Angels, does briefly say, Angelus est animal
rationale; but because the word ( Animal) does signify a bodily substance, he
does therefore afterward explane himself and say* Est autem expers materia.
Wherein although he seems to contradict himself, yet his meaning is, that
since the holy Scripture does style these spirits Animalia, in Exodus, Abac. 2.
and Abacuc; In medio duorum animalium, it is no absurdity to give unto them
the same appellations: but these places are to be understood metaphorically,
and then there can be no inference of bodily substance fastened upon them.
Didym. lib. 1 de Spiritu sancto.
Thus does Didymus, S. Ieromes Master, say, that an Angel can be but in one
place at one time: and lest any man should misconceiue him, as though he should
maintain them to be corporeal, because it is the property of a body to be
circumscribed in a place, he adds in that very passage, that they are not
properly environed or bounded in, by any place; thereby letting us understand,
that his meaning was not to attribute any bodily substance unto them. The like
may be observed out of S. Jerome, Hieron. lib. 1. comment. in epist. ad Ephesians.
ad cap. ^.
who says with Saint Paul, that Angels and souls do bow their knees before
God; yet are we not here (says he) to conceive, that they have their members
and dimensions like unto us.

Before we descend to the proofs out of Scriptures, we shall do well to
examine, whether the opinion of those that take the Scripture Phrase according
to the rigor of the letter, may be defended. S. Thomas dispureth against it,
S. Thom. cont. Gent. vbi supr.
and says that it cannot be defended. For first, if they had bodies made of
air (as Apuleius dreamed) they could not be immortal, but would in the end
fall into corruption, as we do: because whatsoever is compounded of
elementarie qualities, must of necessity be framed of contrary and repugnant
natures, which in the end by their perpetual opposition and fight do ruin one
the other; and this truth is beyond exception. Secondly, the air is a body,
which the Philosophers term homogeneall, that is, whose least part is of the
same nature and condition with the whole, as every drop of water is water, as
well as whole rivers or the sea: from whence this absurdity would follow their
opinion, that the whole body of the air must be one immense Angelical
substance. Thirdly, the men bers of a living body, must have several organes
fit for the performance of those functions, whereunto nature does ordain them,
which cannot be true of the air: and if they were made of air, they may the^
be dissolved and melted into water as the clouds are, they should also be hot
and moist like unto the air; as if they were composed of fire, then must they
burn. All which absurdities do evidently show, that they are said to be
airie only, because they abide for the most part in the air. And therefore
Saint Paul writing unto the Ephesians, who were great Philosophers, and much
addicted unto Magic, (as S. Jerome observes) gives them to understand,
Hieron. in Epist. ^d Ephesians. in prologo.
that this opinion was not repugnant unto Christianity, but that they were to
hold it for a truth, that there are a great number of Spirits in the airie
region, against whom they were to combat: insinuating thereby, that they may in
this sense be called airie, if thereby we mean that they are Spirits,
without flesh and bones. Non est nobis (says he) colluctatio aduersus carnem
and sanguinem, Ephesians. 6.
sed aduersus principes and potestates aeris huius: Ephesians. 6.
he also calls them, Spiritalia nequitiae in coelestibus. We may safely
(says that Father) call them airie or heavenly, but we must always suppose
them to be Spirits. Luke 8. Psalm. 8.
In this sense do the Hebrews call birds the fowls of the heaven and of the
air, and men are by them styled terrestrial: not that birds have bodies of
air, or men of earth, but because they do inhabit in the air and dwell upon
the earth. For conclusion of this point, let us hearken what the holy
Scriptures say; and for the old Testament, King David calls them Spirits
where he faith, Psalm. 103.
Qui facis angelos tuos spiritus: as if he should have said, Lord thou have
ordained that those whom we call Angels, should be Spirits* Now there is a
contradiction and Antithesis between a body and a spirit, so that the
consequence by negation does necessarily follow one upon the other: as if such
a thing be a body, it will be negatiuely inferred, then is it not a spirit;
and contrariwise if it be a spirit, then is it not a body: which conclusion
Christ himself makes unto his Apostles, when after his resurrection they
conceived him to be a spirit: Luke 24.
Touch me (said he) and look what I am (being risen with my true body) for a
spirit has neither flesh nor bones, as you see I have. So that this were
sufficient to prove, that a spirit has no body, although there should be no
other place or text to strengthen the same. And lest we should fall into the
opinions of certain Stoics, who maintained diversities of kinds in Angels,
and that some had bodies, and others had not, S. Paul does direct us unto this
general Maxim, which is without exception, when he pronounces this
sentence: Heb. 1.
Omnes sunt administratorij spiritus; and in another place he says, that
amongst Gods creatures there are some visible, and some invisible, such as are
Thrones, Dominations, Principalities, and Powers: for confirmation whereof we
may add that, which we have already alleged out of the Epistle unto the
Ephesians, where there is an opposition expressed between the things that
appertain to flesh and blood, and the things that belong unto the spirit.
Touching Devils, they are also called Spirits; but to put a difference between
the good and them, there is ever subioyned some restriction; as in the history
of Achab, 3. Reg. 22.
one of them speaks in this manner: Ero spiritus mendax in ore prophetarum.
Matthew. 12.
Christ Jesus often calls them unclean spirits, or the Devils angels;
conformable whereunto S. Paul terms them the angels of Satan, 2. Cor. 12.
which must be understood to proceed from their imitation, not from their
creation. But it may be objected, that they have a body, Tertul. de carne
Christi.
and are tied so really unto the same, that Abraham washed their feet, they
took Lot by the arm, and by strong hand drew him forth out of Sodom; and
Jacob wrestled a whole day with them. It is true indeed, they are supported
sometimes by a body, for otherwise they could not be seen, because of
themselves (as S. Paul says) they are invisible: yet we are not to detract
from the authority of Scriptures, that do clearly teach us that they have no
bodies of their own: for we must affirm with Tertullian: Tertul. de carne
Christi.
Habere corpora peregrina sed non sua: They have bodies (says he) which they
borrow, but have none in their own nature. We know that a Spirit did appear
unto our grandmother Eve in the form of a Serpent: yet was there never any of
so blunt and earthy an apprehension, that would affirm that this body of a
Serpent was the body of an Angel. We are then to say, that this body was
framed of one of the four elements, not of fire, for it would burn: nor of
water, for such a body would easily fleet away and be dissolved: nor of earth,
for that would remain sollid unto the view, and should afterward also be
found: it must therefore necessarily be framed of air, both because Spirits
have their places of abode from above, the good Spirits dwelling in heaven, and
the bad in the air, as also for that this element does easily take the
impression of all colors and forms: as we see what great variety of colors
are in the rainebow, and what diversities of shapes and semblances bearing the
forms of Dragons, Serpents, and the like, are represented unto us in the
clouds. And these forms are dissolved into that from whence they were exhaled
and drawn, Tertul. lib. de carne Christ.
faith Tertullian: Eadem ratione species illa intercepta est, qua and edita
fuerat, si non fuit initium visibile, nec finis. By which it appears that the
Dove, that descended from heaven and lighted upon Christ Jesus, Matthew. 3.
was fashioned of air, and not of earth: for it is said, Descendit spiritus
sanctus corporali specie sicut columba in ipsum. The like may be said of the
fiery tongues, that sat upon the Apostles at the feast of Whitsontide: Act. 2.
Factus est repent de coelo sonus tanquam aduenientis spiritus vehementis. So
that it is clear that these apparances are framed of air, as the cloud out of
which God the Father spoke to his Son in his transfiguration, which vanished
into air, as did Moses also, whose body in that apparition was composed of
the same element: and whiles the Apostles eyes were fixed on these objects it
vanished, and they saw none but Christ Jesus alone. So when the Angel appeared
to Manoah the father of Samson, Iudic. 13.
he mounted up into heaven in a flame of fire, and in his ascent was visibly
seen of him: but by little and little Manoah and his wife lost the sight of
him, because his body began to dissolve into the first matter whereof it was
framed. Thus did the Angel that accompanied Tobias in his journey, It is now
time (said he) for me to return to him that sent me; and presently he
vanished from them. And for addition unto the truth hereof, some allege
experience, saying, that if a man should cut such airie bodies, it would fare
with them as it does with the Sunbeame, which does run together, and
presently unite it self, without any sign of such separation: which very well
agrees with the nature of air, and is fit to confute the error of Psellus,
Psell. lib. 1. de energia Demon. c. 7. and 23.
who in the seventh chapter of his book, maintains that they have a natural
body, yet in the 23. chapter he grants, that such bodies being smit asunder,
do join again, as does the air when it is divided; whence he might easily
have collected, that these bodies must be made of air, and not proper unto
Angels. For touching the reason which he brings, that if they had not bodies,
they could not be tormented with fire, it is certain, that the divine
providence may easily bring to pass, that a body may really work upon a
spirit, and likewise the contrary: which no Christian can deny, to be by
divine providence wrought in the Sacrament of Baptism, where the water as the
instrument of the divine bounty, does really and truly wash and purge the
soul that is a spirit: and experience teaches us this truth in nature, for
imaginations, which are corporal things, do depresse the soul and make it
heavy even unto death, as Christ Jesus himself said. Besides, by this reason
we should say, that the souls of the damned being departed from this world,
are not cast into hellfire because they have no bodies, and must therefore be
impassible: And so we shall fall into their heresy, that maintain that the
souls lie sleeping till the day of judgment, which does directly oppose the
holy Scriptures; which show unto us, that the souls of good men return unto
God who has created them, to be at quiet in his hands and under his
protection; as S. Stephen says, Act. 7. Philip 3.
Domine suscipe spiritum meum: and S Paul wished for death to no other end, but
to be with Christ, Cupio, inquit, dissolui and esse cum Christo: which is
confirmed by S. John in the Revelation, Apocal. 14.
saying, Henceforth do the souls rest from their labors, for their good
works follow them; and death (says S. Paul) shall be a gain unto me: on the
other side they teach that the souls of the reprobate are tormented in the
flames of hell, as appears in the Gospel by the rich Glutton, and by the
saying of Saint John Baptist, who told the Pharisees, that the axe was already
applied unto the root of the tree, and every tree that brought not forth good
fruit, should be hewn down and cast into the fire. This S. Jude affirms
is already happened to the Sodomites, Iud. in Canonic.
as also to Chorah, Dathan, and Abiron with their accomplices, and that they went
quick down to hell.

But here may an objection be made, how Spirits are able to frame unto
themselves such bodies at their own pleasure? S. Augustine answers, that
Spirits by a certain agilitie and natural power can bring to pass whatsoever
may be done in nature: for they do perfectly know not only the effects of
nature, but the causes also; which proceeds from the refinednesse and
subtilitie of spirit, wherewith they are endowed: which they so well know how
to manage and apply, that whatsoever nature makes successively and at
leisure, they do the same in an instant. We see the air diverse times being
disposed thereunto by certain causes, is variously depainted with colors and
diverse semblances; and in the summer we sometimes see toades and frogs fall
with the rain, which proceeds from the corruption of the air, from whence
also butter-flyes and catterpillers, and the like vermin are engendered; all
which is produced from the successiue operations of nature. The like effects
may be produced by Spirits, by uniting of causes, whereupon the effects do
necessarily follow. Thus we read that the Devil took upon him the form of a
Serpent, which cannot be denied; as also that Pharaohs Magicians, by the
assistance of Satan, did make serpents and frogs appear before the people: and
surely they may in the like manner shape and counterfeit any other figure, yea
of a man himself, as is clear by the apparitions recited in the book of
Genesis. From whence we must draw this necessary conclusion, that it is
contrary both to natural reason, and to Scrip that Spirits should have bodies,
but that they are incorporeall and invisible. The resolution of all this
discourse may be had in the book entitled, De Ecclesiastic is dog matibus,
which is amongst the works of S. Augustine, where in the 11. chapter he says:
We believe that God is invisible and incorporeall, because he is every where,
and is present in all places, yet not bounded in by any place: but we believe
that intellectual substances are corporeal, because they are circumscribed in
a place, as the soul within the body: and hence it is that they are called
corporeal, because they are limited in their substances. It remains that we
endeavor to know when they were created, since Moses makes no mention of it;
and from whence it proceeds, that there is a difference betwixt Spirits, so
that some are good and some bad.

CHAP. III. Of the Creation, goodness, or maliciousness of Angels.
SAint Athanasius when he was to give his full resolution and opinion
concerning Spirits unto Prince Antiochus, Athanas. q. 1. ad Antioc. princip.
demands in the first place, whether Angels were created, or no; for Moses
makes no mention thereof in the first chap. of Genesis where he purposely
labors to magnify the power and goodness of God in the work of Creation.
And in good reason does he take his beginning from this question, since the
weightiest argument that Saduces and Atheists can allege for themselves is,
that Moses speaking of all the creatures of God, and of the heavens themselves
does yet make no mention of Angels: whereupon the ancients have endeavored to
give a satisfying resolution heereunto, as S. Chrysostom, S. Athanasius,
Chrysostom. homil. 2. in Gent. and homil. de iesunio, and genesis lect.
Theodoret and others. S. Chrysostom particularly in two passages does
determine this point. I know well (says he, speaking unto the people) that
you are accustomed to demand, why it is not said, In principio creauit Deus
Angelos and Archangelos, as well as it is written, In principio creauit Deus
coelum and terram, especially since Angels and Archangels are undoubtedly
compositions of more nobleness and purity then heaven or earth. You are to
know (says he) that the holy Scripture is nothing else but a letter missiue,
which God by his Ministers does send unto us: 2. Paral 21.
no less then when we read that Helias was sent from God unto Ioram king of
Israel with a letter missiue to reclaim him from his faults, and to instruct
him in the will of God. Now when a great Lord writes his letters missiue, he
does accommodate the style and matter of them unto the quality and capacity
of the person unto whom he does address them: for he must write to a Prince
after one fashion, and after another fashion unto a Philosopher, and in a
different manner from these, when he writes to his wife or to his children.
Now the first letter missiue, which God in his goodness sent unto man, was the
five books of Moses, which he directed to the people of Israel. This people
of Israel, unto whom the letter was addressed, was a rude and an ignorant
people, because they were newly infranchised from the slavery and servitude of
Egypt, where they had been for the space of 400 years very cruelly oppressed,
Exodus 1.
being all of them constrained to apply themselves to manual trades and
works, as to gather straw and clay, and to carry great baskets upon their
shoulders full of such stuff, whereof they were afterward to make bricks, and
then to carry them where the Cities and Pyramides of Egypt were a building:
and this they daily did, not having leisure to breath or to serve their God one
day, as may be easily seen in the beginning of Exodus so that whatsoever was
said of Joseph, may very appositly be applied unto this people: Diuertit ab
oneribus dorsum eius, Psalm. 80. Arist. Polit. lib. 5. Socrat. lib. 3. Hist
Eccles. cap. 10.
manus eius in cophino seruierunt. Which was the cause that they were a rude
nation, and altogether unacquainted with good literature. And this is the
peculiar slight of tyrants (as Aristotle writes in his Politics) who will not
permit their subjects to study and attain unto learning: which was the
practice of Julian the Apostata against the Christians. They were all then very
ignorant except Moses who was exempted from such rudeness, because he had his
education in the Kings Palace, Act. 6.
and was the adopted son of King Pharaoes daughter, and this S. Stephen well
observes, saying, Erat Moses doctus in omni scientia Aegyptiorum: for he had
skill in Astronomy, Geometry, and the Mathematics, but the rest of the people
were exceedingly ignorant, and could not conceive of any thing but what they
could see with their eyes, which is the ordinary fashion of illiterate people,
who are not able to eleuate their spirits higher then the earth, and laugh at
Philosophers when they dispute of the roundnesse of the Sun, of the height of
heaven, and of the sphericall form of the sea and earth: and hereupon it is
that Moses says to God, alas Lord, Exodus 3.
I assure my self that they will not believe that which I shall say unto them,
for when I shall speak of thee Lord, what fashion shall I hold in my discourse
to make thy Majesty known unto them, since their apprehensions do savor so
much of earth and dullness. But God answered him, it shall be sufficient for
thee to tell them, that he (who is) has spoken unto thee: for he would not
that he should speak unto them in a higher strain then of his being only,
which is a thing common and agreeable to the least creature of the world,
although if these words be understood by nature, not by participation, they
have a high and mysterious meaning: but this distinction was not mentioned unto
them, because he would fit his discourse to their understandings. And this is
the very opinion of S. Dydimus, who shows, that according to the diversity
of times and persons there came Prophets and others in the name of God: Dydimus
lib. 2 de Spiritu S.
some with the name of him that was Almighty, others with the name of him that
was replenished with all goodness, and others with the name of unappeasable
rigor and justice. And thus (says he) was Moses sent unto this rude people
with the name of him That is, for God would at that time exact nothing from
them, but that they should understand that the God of their fathers is, and was
not like the false Gods of Egypt, who indeed were not, because they had not so
much as an existence which is the least that any thing may have. In like manner
when Christ Jesus did address himself unto the seven Churches of Asia, Apoc.
2. 3.
he set down diverse attributes of his Majesty in the beginning of those
letters according to the diversity of persons. And S. Paul preaching at Athens
among the Philosophers did purposely decline to make particular mention of the
Trinity, but thought it sufficient to express unto them that there was a God
who created heaven and earth: Deus (inquit) qui fecit mundum, Act. 17.
and omniae quae in eo sunt coeli and terrae 'Dominus, non in manu factis
Templis habitat. S. Peter also in his first sermon to the Jews, does not at
the first cast plainly express that Christ Jesus was the true God, but
accommodating himself unto them he is contented, if at the first he may win
thus much upon their belief, that Christ Jesus was a holy and innocent man
sent from God, Act. 2.
Iesum (inquit) Nazarenum virum approbatum a Deo signis and virtutibus: but
afterward he speaks unto them in a higher strain, having once prepared them
for more divine instructions. And so here likewise in process of time did God
manifest unto this people, that there were Angels, and that they had their
creation from him, as we shall presently see. Which is also more expressly
unfolded in the new Testament, at what time men grew more familiar and better
acquainted with the secrets of God. This is S. Chrysostoms reason which is very
probable and fit to be admitted. Athanas. 41. ad Annoc. princip.
S. Athanasius yields another reason saying that this people was exceeding
ready to believe and admit plurality of Gods, which in process of time they
took from the superstitions of the Egyptians: which conceit being once grown
into an habit and custom, it did at length become almost natural unto them,
and brake out openly in the desert, Exodus 32. Deuteronomy. 6.
when they said^n the plural number, Hi sunt dij tui Israel quite eduxerunt de
terra Aegypti. And hereupon God took occasion to insist upon the explication
of this in the first commandment of the Law, (which says, Dominus Deus tuus
Deus vnus est) longer then upon all the rest of the commandments, Exodus 20.
because the people were so much inclined to this plurality of Gods, and had
then lately made and worshipped a Calfe. Which they may do well to observe,
who because it is afterward said, Thou shall not make any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven or in earth, do conceit that this is the second
commandment, and ask the cause why Curats do not so pronounce the same in
their service, not understanding that the Curate does pronounce but a short
summary of the commandments of God, and that this whereof they complain, is
not properly a commandment, but a more ample exposition of the first
commandment, against which the people had for a long time most transgressed.
Therefore does S. Athanasius well observe, that it was not safe to mention
Angels unto them, because they would presently have thought them Gods: which
Carpocrates, Basilides, and other disciples of Simon Magus also did, Iren. lib.
1. Tertul. de praescript. baeret.
as S. Ireneus and Tertullian have written. Whereunto we may add a third
reason drawn from the more modern divines, and that is, Jacob.
Christopolitanus Episcop. in Psalm. 81. Romans 10. Heb. 2.
that Christ Jesus was the end and scope of the law, who was to take upon him
the flesh of Adam, and not the nature of Angels as S. Paul notes, Finis legis
Christus and nusquam Angels apprehendit, sed semen Abrahae apprehendit. Since
then Christ Jesus was not to be the Redeemer of Spirits, but of men. Moses did
with good reason pass over Angels in silence, and bounded his discourse with
the mention of visible creatures, over whom man had dominion, that in
conclusion he might infer that man alone had the privilege to be made after
Gods image and likeness, that in the end he might be deifyed and made a
partner in the divine nature through Jesus Christ. By which he thought to lead
and conduct man the more easily unto the knowledge of the grace of God toward
him, since that he had more remembrance of him then of the Angels themselves,
who were justly passed over without mentioning, if we consider hou much our
humane nature was honored by the divine word: so that he who is God adored by
all, is a man as we are; being as absolutely man as I am, and being as truly
man, as he is truly God. And this is the conclusion which S. Paul makes
against the Jews when he speaks of Angels: Nusquam Angelos apprehendit, sed
semen Abrahae. It is also manifest that the old Testament makes no mention of
the sin of Lucifer and his adherents, but indirectly and by glances, as when
the haughty minded men are compared unto him, so in Esai the 14. chap. where
mention is made of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, Esaias. 14. Ezechiel. 18.
and in Ezechiel 18. where the King of Their is described, both of them being
marvelous proud and presumptuous against God; they are (says the Scripture)
like unto Lucifer. But of set purpose there is no relation made hereof except
it be incidentally, Matthew. 25.
and (as we say) per accidens. For Christ Jesus did pay no ransom for wicked
Spirits as he had done for men, but he has clearly declared himself, that
hell fire is from all eternity prepared Diabolo and Angelis eius. But although
Moses did not make direct mention of them, Genes. 1.
yet did he tacitly insinuate the same, when he says of the seven days,
that they followed one the other, and that the heavens went on in their course,
making day and night, evening and morning, which could not possibly be without
the ministry and help of Angels. Moreover when he concludes Igitur perfecti
sunt, coeli and terra and omnis ornatus eorum, Genes. 2.
by the perfect ornament of heaven he means Angels. For that excellent
ornament which adds such grace unto the heavens is their motion, without
which (as Aristotle himself well knew) the heaven could beam down no
influence upon the earth, as is intimated by S. John when he says, Apocal 10.
Iurauit per viuentem in secula quod non erit ampllus tempus. For if we should
say, behold a perfect man, this speech does import that he has a soul, and
that his body is disposed and fitted for those motions which are natural unto
man. Chrysostom homil. in Genes.
Whereupon S. Chrysostom admonishes that by this ornament we are not to
understand the light or stars only, but many other perfections, both of
higher and baser consideration. But because this manner of speaking is very
obscure, S. Athanasius, Theodoret in Epitom divine. decret. lib. 5.
Theodoret and S. Chrysostom move the question, whether the Scriptures do
directly say that the Angels were created by God or no: and their resolutions
are that they do so say. First King David makes us an express Psalm
touching the creation of the world, where he speaks generally of all
creatures, Spiritual, rational, sensible, terrestrial; as also those
creatures who have their being in the water and air in the 103. Psalm, Psalm.
103.
where he begins to speak of the Majesty of God in this manner,
Confessionem sieve maiestatem and decorem induisti, amictus lumine, siout
vestimento: next he speaks of the heavens saying, Thou have stretched them
our over us like a tent; then does he adioyne the Angels, Qui facis Angelos
tuos Spiritus, who make (says he) thy Angels Spirits. Where by the way we
may observe for our better information in this and the like places of
Scripture, that the Hebrews have but three tenses in their verbes, the
Praeter-perfect tense, the present, and future tense; and have not the use as
the Greeks and Latins have of the praeter-imperfect and praeterpluperfect
tenses, whence it arises that the present tense with the Hebrews may (as the
sentence will bear it) be translated by the praeterimperfect tense, as also
by the praeterperfect, and by the praeterpluperfect tense. And this is
practiced by the Hebrews in this very passage of Scripture, as if they should
say in latin, Quifaciebas Angelos Spiritus; that is to say, Lord in the time
of creation thou did make and fashion these Spirits, to be the messengers
and ministers of thy good pleasure. By which place David does not only show
that God created Angels, Hierom. in Epistol. ad Titum. S. Thom. 1. p. q 61. ap.
3. Psalm. 148.
but also, contrary to the opinion of the Greeks and Latins, that the Angels
were created, when God made heaven and earth, and not as some would say, many
thousands of years before: so that it is not chancefully done, that he first
made mention of the essence of God, and then of Angels, and last of all of
other creatures. The same method he observes in the 148. Psalm, where he
inuiteth all things to praise their Creator, and does not omit the Angels, but
places them in the first rank, laying, Laudate eum omnes Angeli eius, laudate
eum omnes virtutes eius, and concludes that God fashioned and created them as
he has done all other creatures; quoniam ipse dixit and facta sunt, ipse
mandauit, and creata sunt. The same order is observed by the three men that
were cast into the fiery furnace at Babylon, who in their thanksgiving do
inuit all the works of Gods hand to bless their Creator, and descending to
particulars* they bring in the Angels as the excellentest creatures of all,
harmoniously to sing and say, Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino, Dan. 3.
cantate and superexaltate eum in secula. Benedicite Angeli Domini, Domino;
Benedicite coeli Domino. Where it is very remarkable, (that we may not digress
from the argument in hand) against those, who conceit that the creation of
Angels was long before the creation of heaven, that therefore in this place and
some others, the heaven is said to be set after the Angels, thereby to figure
out unto us the transcendency of Angels above all other creatures: but why the
heavens should be mentioned and not the Angels, there can be no other probable
and literal reason rendered, then that which we have formerly alleged.
Chrysostom hom. de ieiunio. Genesi. lect. Joan. 1.
S. Chrysostom affirms that S. John made mention of the creation of Angels,
where he says, Omnia per ipsum facta sunt, and sine ipso factum est nihil. And
S. Paul does, as it were, comment upon this sentence of S. John, as having bin
rapt up to heaven after him, in his Epistle to the Colossians, Quoniam in ipso
condita sunt vniversa in coelis and in terra visibilia, Coloss. 1.
and inuisibilia, sieve Throni, sieve dominationes, sieve principatus, sieve
potestates, omnia per ipsum and in ipso creata sunt. And this does undoubtedly
confute all the Manicheans, Marcionists, and other sectaries and disciples of
Simon Magus. So that we may from hence conclude, that God did create all
Angels good at first, that is, perfect in all goodness both of nature and
grace: for whatsoever God made, he saw that it was passing good, as Moses
expresses it: and toward the end of his Books he gives a reason of the
same unto the people, saying, Dei perfecta sunt opera: Whereunto agrees the
wiseman, Genes. 2. Deuteronomy. 32.
who gives us to understand, that God made all things in number, weight and
measure, Sapient. 11. Joan 8. August. lib. 11. de ciuit. cap. 18.
in which the most captious can not find the least discord or blemish. And
Christ Jesus himself does assure us, that the Devil did not persist in the
truth, that is, in his first integrity wherein he was created: and that he
was once in heaven, but was fallen from thence like lightning. S. Peter and S.
Jude do give the reason of this fall, Iud. in canon. 2 Petri. 2.
because, say they, he sinned against God, which sin being folded up in the
pleates of malice and obstinacy, was without the proportion of remission and
pardon. The same meaning has Job in the 4. chapter, Job. 4.
In Angelis suis reperit pravitatem. And although there were no other text
suitable unto this purpose, then that which is alleged in Saint Matthew, Matthew.
25.
where Christ Jesus does foretell, that he will cast the Devil and his Angels
into hell fire, yet would this be an argument sufficient (as Theodoret well
infers) to prove that he was created in perfection and goodness,
Theodoret. lib. Epitom. divine decret.
but that from his own desire and malice he made choice of evil, by his
rebellion against God. Non est enim (says he) iusti Dei proprium eum punire
quinecessitate malus sit. And certainly it is repugnant unto the nature,
goodness and justice of God, who never condemns any, that do not through
malice deserve such punishment. Hence it is that S. Augustine does worthily
reprove Porphiry the Philosopher, because his assertion was, that there were a
kind of Spirits, who from their first nature were originally evil and
deceitful. This proceeded not from their nature (says he) but from their
will. It remains now, that we declare what manner of sin it was, whereof
they were convicted. August. lib. 14. de ciuit. cap. 3.
S. Augustine gives us the resolution hereof, saying, Since they are Spirits,
we are not to conceive, that they were fornicatours, drunkards, or addicted to
any of those gross vices, which have their sting in the flesh: but we are to
observe, that there are two sorts of sins; the first are spiritual, because
they are proper to spiritual substances, such as are pride, and envy: the
other are carnal, and proceed from the flesh. S. Augustine spoke not this of
his own head, August. lib de ciuit. 15.
but grounded it upon the Scripture, which specifying the sins that are
peculiar unto Satan, makes mention of these; Esaias. 14. Ezech. 18.
as Esaias and Ezechiel when they would exaggerate the great ouer-weening and
pride of the Kings of Babylon and Their, he makes a comparison betwixt Lucifer
and them. And our Savior when he saw his Apostles to be a little pussed up and
swollen in spirit, because at their words and commandment the Devils were cast
out, Rejoice not (says he) in this, Luc. 10.
for I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning: by which words he insinuated
thus much, that the down fall of the Devil proceeded from pride. S. Paul also
in his admonition unto Bishops that they should be humble, 1. Tim. 3. cap. 2
does charge the Bishop not to be pussed up with pride, least he should fall
into the same condemnation with the Devil. Touching the sin of envy, it is
also written Inuidia Diaboli mors intrauit in orbem terrarum. And the reason
why mention of mankind is made herein, is, to give us to understand, that the
Devil fell not into the sin of envy, till after the creation of man, and
that pride was his peculiar sin, for the which he was thrust out of heaven.
Now whether it were, that by reason of his great endowments of nature, he did
so far ouerballance his own worth, that he might conceit that he was able
to make himself an associate and partaker in the divine nature (which is the
highest degree whereunto an intellectual substance may aspire) and that by his
own natural and peculiar forces (as Esai and Exechiel do seem to imply) or
whether he would not acknowledge Christ Jesus the Mediator of men and Angels
for his head, which mystery might by revelation be proposed unto him, (as it
was afterward also unfolded unto Adam and all the fathers of the old
Testament) it is most certain that from his own will, and in the pride of his
heart, he rebelled against God, so that there was a battle fought in heaven,
after the manner that Spirits combat one against another, by a strong
renitency and resistance of the ones will against the others, even as we also
fight against them. But the good Angels would by no means adhere or favor
that damnable attempt, but resisted it with all their forces, accomplishing
that which is written of them. Psalm. 102.
Benedicite Domino omnes Angeli eius potentes virtute, qui facitis verbum eius,
ad audiendani vocem sermonum eius. Thus were the evil Spirits thrust out of
heaven for their pride, whereas the good Spirits were still made blessed in the
participation of the vision and presence of God. This did Christ signify unto
his Apostles, when out of pride they demanded of him, who among them should be
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven: he took a little child by the hand
saying, if you become not like unto this little child, Matthew. 18.
ye cannot enter into that kingdom: and beware how you offend one of these
little ones, for their Angels do always see the face of my Father which is in
heaven: whereby he gives to understand, that children by reason of their
natural humility are like unto Angels, which Angels by this means do see the
face of God. Since this great reuolte in heaven, there has ever been a
contrariety and war between the will's of good and bad spirits, and between
good and bad men also: as between Abel and Cain: Isaac and Ismael: Jacob and
Esau. And this is it which S. John speaks of in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 12.
Iudic. in Canonic.
that there was a great battle in heaven between Michael and his Angels, and
the Dragon with his Angels: and S. Jude brings in the same Michael, disputing
and chiding with Satan. Since therefore he is full of wickedness, and
altogether deprived of the grace of God, he can do nothing but what is naught,
and because he cannot wreake his malice upon the Saints in Paradise, he
conuerteth his fury against man, that is made after the image of God, and is
here seated upon the earth, that he may worship his Creator, and acknowledge
and serve him with his whole heart, that so he may at length participate of
that divine glory and felicity, which the Devil by reason of his pride is
utterly deprived of, as we have already alleged. And this is the next point,
which offers it self to consideration, in the ensueing chapter.

CHAP. IIII. The means which Devils have, to appear and come unto us; in what
part of the world they reside; how they are bound; and their sundry ways to
tempt men.
TOuching the means which Spirits have to perform this, the scripture
teaches us, Of the place or residence of wicked spirits.
that in their downe-fall from heaven, some remained in the middle region of
the air, which is darksome and obscure, because the Sunbeams pass through
the same without refraction of any solid body, which by repercussion might
double their force and light, and without which they shine not at all: as is
evidently seen in a cave, where there is no light at all perceived, but in the
place where the sunne-beame does fall. And although we had no other proof,
then that general rule of Saint Jerome, it might sufficiently euince the same:
for these are his very words; Omnium doctorum opinio est, quod aer iste,
Hieron. lib. 3. in Epist. ad Ephesians. ad cap. 6.
qui coelum and terram medius diuidens, inane appellatur, plenus sit contrarys
fortitudinibus. Since then there was never any Doctor of the Church, which made
scruple of the truth hereof, we must think that they had good warrant for the
same from the Scripture. They did no doubt consider, that our Lord in the
parable of the seed, did by the birds of heaven, which devoured the corn,
Luke 8.
understand and also interpret it to be the Devils, whom he calls the birds
of heaven, thereby meaning the air, according to the usual Hebrew phrase, and
agreeable unto our manner of speech also, who commonly say, the rain falls
from heaven, when the meaning is, from the air. For as S. Jerome has well
observed, all Philosophers do agree in their opinions, Hieron. vbi supra.
that the clouds (by the dissoluing of which the rain is engendered) are not
drawn up above two miles at the most from the earth, whereas the distance
betwixt heaven and earth is incomparably greater. And this is S. Paul's meaning,
when he tells the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.
that our fight is not chiefly against men, but against the princes of this
world, which are the wicked spirits, that have their abode above in high
places: and as himself explaneth all these authorities in the second chapter
of the same Epistle, by these high places he means the air: Secundum seculum
mundi huius (says he) secundum principem potestatis aeris huius, spiritus qui
nunc operaetur in filios diffidentiae. Iud. in canonic. 2. Pet. 2.
(Which is also declared by S. Jude in his Canonical epistle) showing that
these wicked spirits are abiding in that darksome air, and are there reserved
for the day of judgment, when they shall hear these words, Go ye cursed
into hell fire, which is from the beginning prepared for the Devil and his
angels. His words are these: Angelos qui non seruauerunt suum principatum, sed
dereliquerunt suum domicilium in indicium magni diei, vinculis aeternis sub
caligine reseruauit. And here may be fitly alleged that which is written in S.
Luke, Luke 8. Matthew. 8.
where it is related, that the Devils besought Christ Jesus, not to send them
out into the deep, but rather into the heard of swine: and they do likewise
complain unto our Savior, saying, Vt quid venisti ante tempus torquere nos?
As if they should have said, we are assured of our total and utter damnation,
but the time thereof is not yet come, for this shall be put in execution at
the last day of judgment, which being not yet present, thou may do well to
leave us in these parts, until that time approach. The like may be said of that
place in the Revelation, Apoc. 12.
Vah mari and terrae, quia descendit diabolus ad vos, habens iram magnam: and
it is again declared in the same book, that our adversary the devil was
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. And that we may resolve, what the
difference is between the devils that are in hell, and those whose abode is in
the air, although S. Jerome makes dainty to meddle with it, because he
conceived it to be from the matter, whereof he entreated, Hieron. lib. 3.
comment. in epist. ad Ephesians.
as also for that he feared (as himself excuses it) lest he should
trespass too far upon the readers patience, in dwelling so long upon this
argument; yet will we speak somewhat of the same, because this present
discourse does demand it. It is an infallible truth, that there are great
multitudes of wicked spirits, who abide in that gloomie region of the air, and
come also lower and nearer unto us, which God in his providence has and does
permit. First, because himself imployeth these his creatures, although it be
in base and servile offices; as a King or civil Justice are accustomed to
condemn certain malefactors not unto death, but unto the performance of some
work, which aduantageth these offenders nothing at all, but is only charged
with laboriousnesse and toil, and tends merely to the public good. Thus
were many in times past banished, or confined to some Isle or mountain, to
labor and dig in the Quarries of Marble, for the Princes profit and behoof,
and did ever carry their chains of iron on their feet, and had a good guard
to watch them. The like is done unto those that are slaves in the Galleys.
Secondly, for our exercise, Bernard. Hieron. Ioco citato. and August. contra
Faust. Manich.
as S. Bernard has it, and it is also the observation of S. Hierome, who
applies this unto the Iebusites, Philistines, and other barbarous people, that
by divine permission were left in the borders and skirts of the land of
promise, to exercise the people of ye Jews, who otherwise would have spurned
at Gods commandments: and these were the type and figure of those wicked
spirits, that Christ Jesus after his death and passion, was to leave in the
air, to exercise us in whatsoever is good and praiseworthy: as sand which of
it self is fruitless and barren, yet serves very fitly to scour and make
bright the vessels of gold or of silver, which are carefully looked unto in the
great house of a father of a family. Thus was Job exercised, and thus have all
good men been tried, as S. Paul witnesses of himself and says, Job 1. 2.
Cor. 12.
that he endured the buffetings of Satan: Ephesians. 6.
and does conclude in the Epistle above cited, where he mentions these
things, that Christ our Redeemer, does by the merits of his death and passion
lend unto us all, a complete armor, that so we may be the true champions of
God. The sword is the word of God (says he) the helmer, hope: the corslet,
charity: and the shield, 1. Pet. 5.
faith, as S. Peter says, Cuiresistite fortes in fide. To be brief, if we be
thus armed, the Devil shall have no power over us, August. lib. de natura and
gratia, cap. 58.
as S. Augustine observes. First, because as soon as we brandish these
spiritual weapons against him, he presently turns his back and flies from
us, which S. James also witnesses, Resistite (says he) Diabolo, James 4.
and fugiet a vobis. Secondly, because he can do no good upon those that do
resist him, and only gains on those that make no preparation to stand
against him, Non vincit nisi volentem. Being houering so near about us, they
have yet a curb and snaffle to restrain them, and that is Gods providence,
which either by the ministry of good Angels, or otherwise as it shall seem
good unto him, does hold in their rage and malice with so strong a hand, that
they have no power to do that which is within the compass of their natural
forces, Tertul. lib. de fuga in persecut.
and like slaves they are feign first to ask leave of God, before they dare
attempt any thing. Thus we see the Devil asked leave of God to afflict Job in
his person and goods; Job. 1.
and the Devils mentioned in the Gospel dared not to enter into the swine,
until they had gotten particular license from Christ Jesus, Matthew. 8.
as Tertullian shows at large. Of this curb S. Paul speaks, when he says,
1. Corinthians. 10.
Fidelis Deus qui non patietur vos tentari supra id quod potestis. He
permits Satan to do many things, but with such limitations, that those
assaults wherwithal he would force us, are never above our abilities of
resistance. We are not therefore to dispute, and ask the reason why God
afflicts one man more then another, and that by such diversities of
temptations, let it suffice that he knows, when a young man like unto David,
has both courage and force to encounter with the Giant Goliath, which attempt
would have crushed in pieces the strongest men in Israel, as flesh and blood
would have conceived. The Devil does thus try and exercise us, both out of
malice which he bears toward God, and out of envy which he carries unto
us; by which he does daily make full the measure of his punishments. For we
are to note, that those Devils, who after their creation offended most by their
pride, malice and ingratitude, were cast into the deepest dungeon of hell, and
are already tortured with all the extremity that may be; but they that did
not transgress in that height of wickedness, fell no lower then the air,
and do there acquire unto themselves new damnation, not in their deprivation of
the vision of God, for that is common to them all, but in the accession and
increase of pain in the pit of hell. And this the Doctors of S. Ieromes time
were wont to relate, Hieron lib. 1. comment. in Matthew. cap. 5.
saying, that if a Christian did resist the Devils temptations, he does not
only advantage himself thereby, but does do a good turn unto the Devil his
adversary, because by this means he is not punishable with so great
torments, as if he had overcome the Christian: whereas else he should be
plagued for the same, in that he was the cause of that sin. Hereupon it is
that the Devils were afraid to be sent into the deepes, Luke 8. The chain
wherewithal they are bound.
after they had a long time tempted and tormented the poor Jew. This
providence of God has in like sort withheld it self from casting them all
into the lowest bottom of the pit of hell, although they are tied up for the
most part in some quarter of the world: which is nothing else, but when God
commands them not to budge from a certain set place, and restrains their
workings elsewhere. And this ligation, or chaining up, is the greatest torment
unto them that may be^in regard that they are Spirits, and therefore of a
generous and active nature, fashioned with all free scope and liberty to work
in all places, which they have a mind unto. And therefore does Tertullian call
them quodammodo volucres, Tertul. lib. de anima, cap. de Somni^s.
because they are of a more excellent agilitie, then the swiftest bird when he
is upon his wing. So that we are to conceive, that by this restraint and
confinement they are as it were cooped up in a cage; and are not able to fly
up and down to execute their purposes, by reason of this compulsorie
detainment: but are infinitely vexed at this commandment which God imposes
upon the^. Thus must the passage in the book of Tobias be understood, Tob. 8.
where it is said, that Raphael took the Devil Asmodeus (which in Hebrew
signifies a banished man) and banished him into the desert of the upper
Egypt: and in like manner that passage in the Apocalypse is thus to be
interpreted, Apoc. 20.
where it is said that Satan was bound and loosed again: which imports
nothing but this, that all his power and actiuitie was for a time taken from
him by God, and was afterward restored unto him again. For in the last days
of the world he shall be untied, Apoc. 16. and 2. ad These. 2.
and shall have full permission given unto him to power forth all his rage and
venom upon the children of God, yea so far shall the authority of
Antichrist gain upon the world, as that they shall be able to work miracles,
as to make fire visibly to descend from heaven, and such like wonders,
described at large by S. John in the Revelation. Apoc. 20.
But the Devil is now tied up from doing of these things, although in his own
nature he be able to do as much mischief as he did in Jobs time, and as he
will do, when Antichrist shall be borne. He was confined and chained up by
the death and passion of Christ Jesus, from speaking any more by Oracles, as
appears by the Apocalypse, and as experience it self teaches us: but when
the end of the world shall approach, he shall speak unto men in a more
familiar manner, and shall appear unto them in a visible shape. All which
discourses are epitomized in a word by Saint Thomas, when he says, S. Thom. in
quaest. de potent. q. 6. art. 5. and August. lib. 10. de ciuit. cap. 8. vide
locum.
Daemones dicuntur ligari quando impediuntur agere, quae naturaliter possunt,
and solui, quando permittuntur. The Devil then having this permission, like a
subtle serpent, and one that well understands his grounds whereupon he
builds his attempts, he practices diverse and cunning slights to inueagle
and gain upon the sillines of men: which we may manifestly see in two visible
apparitions set down in the Scriptures, Their means to tempt and deceive us.
the one in the old, the other in the new Testament; and this ought to be
sufficient to inform our belief herein. It also plainly appears by the
experience which the good old father Anthonius Monachus had thereof, Athon. in
vita Anth.
whose history is written at large by Saint Athanasius for in that discourse it
seems, that this good man was selected by God himself, expressly to endure
the assaults of Satan both sensibly and visibly so that we may learn from him
what the subtilties of the Devil are, and what means we have to keep us from
his snares and ambushes. Touching the first visible apparition of Satan, which
is described in the third chap. of Genes. Genes. 3.
it thereby appears that he may take a visible body upon him, and so appear
unto men, not that it is in his power to take a body upon him when he
pleases, Chrysostom hom. 4. de Lazaro. August. lib. 2. de gene. ad litt. S.
Thom. 2.2. q. 165. art. 2. ad 2.
for the confusion and danger that might grow thereby would be exceeding great.
Repraesentaret enim se vxori tanquam maritus, seruo tanquam Dominus, religioso
tanquam Praelatus, poenitenti tanquam Confessarius, and sic nullus esset
securus, and tentaremur suprae id quod possemus, 1. Corinthians. 10. Et esset
contra prouidentiam Dei. He is therefore inhibited and restrained by the
omnipotency of God, as both S. Augustine, and S. Thomas do notably show: but
God does sometimes permit the same, partly to force a belief upon our
understandings, that there are wicked spirits, which practice nothing else then
how they may destroy us, and partly to inform us how foul and ugly these
unclean spirits be, since the time that they were chased from God, and took
arms against him. For now the Devil appears in a fearful and hideous shape,
as in the form of a Serpent, or some such deformed beast. And therefore in the
beginning of the Bible he is set forth unto us like a venomous snake, which is
agreeable unto the second reason, and in the beginning of the Gospel preached
by Christ Jesus, he is described to be one full of talk and prattling
(which-answereth the first reason) but he has no other end in this talk then
to snare us, and to break our necks. And from the abundance of his cunning,
his custom is to accommodate and fit himself unto the humor of those whom
he would circumuent; wherein he shows himself to be Gods ape, who does
descend unto our capacity and imperfection, and does practice that saying of
Paul: Omnia omnibus factus sum, 1. Cor. 9.
vt omnes lucrifacerem. Thus when the Devil comes unto a silly woman that
has little knowledge, but what by nature and sense is prompted to her, he will
straight begin to derogate from God, and to make it questionable whether those
things that are affirmed of him be true, or no. And because he knows that
this sex is very liquorous of honor and greatness, he will not stick to make
large promises unto them. And in the third place, beside the exquisite meats
and drinks, he further promises unto them all sensual and fleshly pleasures
whatsoever: all which temptations are easily discerned in the assaults which
he used, to tempt the first woman, Genes. 2. 2. Cor. 11.
who represents unto us all those that forget God and his blessings. For it
is a certain truth, that if he had applied himself unto Adam, he would have
labored his subversion by more covert and guilefull means then he used
toward the woman. And therefore S. Paul attributes the glory of this conquest
to have proceeded from a womanish simplicity, concluding in these words: Ne
sicut serpens seduxit Euam, ita seducantur sensus vestri a simplicitate quae
est in Christo Jesus. But when he was to tempt Christ Jesus, he took another
course, for without any derogation from God (because a man of a settled
understanding and faith does abhor such grossenes, and stops his ears
against it) he begins with that which seems to have no apparancie of
evil, but rather to have bin used by holy men, as Moses did by his prayer
change the blood of the river into water, and made the rock to gush forth with
fresh and wholesome streams, as it is written: Qui conuertit petram in stagna
aquarum, Psalm. 113.
for then the people were in great extremity for water. So he labored to
persuade Christ Jesus to make the stones bread, Matthew. 4.
when as it might seem he had need of sustenance, and was in the desert as
Moses was. Secondly, knowing that Christ Jesus was conversant in the holy
Scriptures, and would be most attentive unto them, he alleges diverse passages
from thence. And being able to do no good that way, he offers unto him the
Monarchy of the world; knowing, that science puffs up those that have no
charity, and makes them believe that they are able to sit at the stern, and
govern the whole world better then any other whatsoever. To conclude, he
resembles the Crocadiles of Egypt, who when they perceive a traveler near
unto Nilus, they begin to feign the voice of a man, weeping and taking on as if
they had great need of succor, and when the poor man shall simply make his
approach, he is suddenly devoured. S. Athanasius recites, that on a time the
Devil did thus plain himself, Athan. in vita Ant.
near unto the Cell of of that godly Father Antonius, who demanding him what
he was, he answered (when he saw that he was discovered) that he had just
cause to complain, for all the world did tax and burden him to be the author
of all the villainies that were done, although he were very innocent and free
from any such matter. And sometimes he would sing Psalms, the better to
insinuate himself unto him; but he stopped his ears against him, and would
take no heed what the Devil did sing, practicing that which is written, Psalm.
37.
Ego autem tanquam surdus non audiebam. At other times he presented himself
before him with great glory, transforming himself into an Angel of light;
but he shut his eyes, and would not gaze upon the beauty of Satan: so that
when he perceived that he could gain nothing by all these baits and
allurements, (for by his often prayers, weeping, and fasting, he had obtained
the gift which S. Paul calls discretio spiritum) he then came upon him with a
hideous noise to affright him, 1. Cor. 12.
sometimes appearing in the semblance of a Dragon, and sometimes in the shape
of some other dreadful beast: and then he would stand before him like a man,
but of such an enormous and vast size and stature, that he seemed greater then
any giant, and did touch the clouds with his head, although his feet stood
upon the ground. Then would he make a great noise as if the Cell had been
environed with horses, chariots, and armed men; but he ever recommended
himself unto God, and regarded not these collusions of the Devil, remembering
that which is written: Psalm. 19.
Hi in curribus, and hi in equis, nos autem in nomine Domini nostri
inuocabimus. The Devil forgot not to cast wedges of gold in his way by which
he was to pass, that so he might bait him with avarice, yet at the sign of
the cross (says S. Athanasius) they all presently vanished. He also appeared
unto him in the shape of a woman to tempt him unto the sin of the flesh; and
when by none of these means he could prevail against him, he then began to
exhort him to watch, Vide Aug. lib. 2 de ciuit. c 26.
and spend the whole night in prayers, to fast often, and to practice all other
spiritual exercises, that so he might either breed a disgust of these things
in him, as being persuaded thereunto by the enemy of nature, or at the least,
that he might seem to do something at his request: but this holy man, who
might well say with S. Paul, 2. Cor. 2.
non ignoramus astutias eius, did not for all that, disaccustome his holy
exercises, but rather increased his devotion, not because the Devil commanded
it, but because Christ Jesus taught it both by word and example: knowing well
that whatsoever the Devil says or does, it is for an ill purpose, Luc. 4.
and therefore by how much the louder he was in his confession, that Christ
Jesus was the Son of God, by so much the more did Christ check his speech,
and commanded him to silence. The last way which he used was in chiding him
for his austerity of life, showing unto him that this was a rigorous, strict
and burdensome way, and it would be a means to hasten his destruction being
one of Gods creatures, rather then to enable him for his service, and that it
was no sin to use the creatures of God freely with thanksgiving, so that there
were no excess or gormundizing in the same. Lastly, he threatened to beat him
and to kill him by breaking his neck. But he was readily answered, that since
he could not hurt the least sheep that Job had, Job. 1. Matthew. 8. Luc. 8.
nor enter into the heard of swine without leave, much less could he endamage
a man who is sheltered under the wing of Gods protection, and who has the
hairs of his head numbered, so that not one of them can fall to the ground
without the express will of God.

CHAP. V. That the Devils scope is to make himself to be worshipped as a God,
and to deceive men: The Devil chalengeth adoration.
that the Devil knows not things to come, neither can be penetrat^ or diue
into the secrets of man's heart.
WHen we would speak definitiuely of the Devil, and inquire into his nature,
we must ever call to mind those two sins which are peculiar unto Satan, and
that is, Pride and Envy: for from these two spiritual vices, all other effects
do stream forth as from two plentiful fountains. Therefore as at the first
he, Esa. 14.
together with his Angels did sin through pride, and would injuriously invade
God, and share with him in equality of glory, so does he still persist in this
peruersenes, and remains hardened through the great impenitency and
obduratnesse which swayeth in him, in so much that he does not yet forbear to
say in his heart, Similis ero altissimo. This he practiced from the beginning,
for if we behold what manner of conference he held with the woman, it is
easily seen, that he did drive all unto this head, that she would worship him
as a God. When a tyrant would by usurpation take upon him another man's
kingdom, he labors to eclipse the natural Prince, and to persuade all men
that himself ought to be received and acknowledged for their true sovereign:
so when Satan would persuade Eve, that God did grudge and envy them, and would
be very much grieved that they should be advanced unto that height, whereunto
their own excellency did carry them, the conclusion and inference that was to
be made thereupon, could imply nothing else but that they were to conceive
that this God was not the true God, because the true God like a true father will
strain his uttermost endeauours, to set his childrens fortunes high and in the
top of honor: and further, since he desired to be thought such a one as did
long for nothing more then their advancement, and seemed for that purpose to
appear, and to speak familiarly unto them, although he was of an invisible
nature, and of a substance more refined and excellent then theirs, yet did he
make show that he was willing to direct and guide them to the supreamest
felicity, even to be like unto God; from thence be might easily conclude that
he was the true God, and therefore as the true God was to be worshipped by
them. Neither was his purpose wholly frustrated, for many nations have since
conceived, that the Serpent, which spoke by the Serpent, was the true God:
insomuch as the Greeks have from hence drawn their etymology of Serpents,
Athan. in definicion. prici.
as S. Athanasius has well observed, for (says he) (...), that is to say, a
Serpent is so called from (...), that is to say, one that speaks, because it
was the Serpent that spoke to our first parents. For they had an opinion that
this speech was for the great benefit and good of mankind: which conceit was
not only intertayned by the Grecians, but passed for current through the whole
Roman Empire, after that an Oracle had told them that the plague which reigned
in Rome should have no end, Valor. Maxim. lib. 1.
until they had sent unto the God Aesculapius. The Ambassadors who were
purposely designed for this employment, being come unto the place which the
Oracle had pointed out unto them, found a great Serpent, which they took into
their ship and carried to Rome, where he remained for the space of three days.
And Valerius Maximus makes sober and serious mention of the same, as being a
matter that much conduced unto the worship of the Gods, and Ovid shameth not to
call it his God Cum cristis aureus altis
In Serpente Deus praenuncia sibila misit. Ovid. lib. Metamor.

Lucian has composed a treatise hereof, Lucian.
and affirms that the Oracles, which proceeded from the mouth of a certain
Serpent, lead up and down by a Magician called Alexander, were more divine,
and to be held in greater veneration then those that came from Priests, because
(says he) these came immediately from the very mouth of God. Nay, which is
more to be wondered, there were heretics in the primitive Church that affirmed
so much, and were persuaded that the Serpent which spoke unto Eve was a true
God: Epiph. lib 1. cont. ha^^^ses
and therefore their custom was to place a Serpent upon their Altar, unto whom
they offered their sacrifices, and hereupon were called Ophites, that is to
say, Serpentines, or people that adored Serpents. Of far greater probability
was the conceit of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and other Eastern nations, Vide
Brinium Iib. 8. natural. historiae. Lactan. in diuinis institutionibus.
who affirmed (as appears by the writings of Pherecides Syrus) that the great
God of heaven has chased away all the Devils from thence, whose captains name
was Ophianus, that is to say in latin Serpertinus: these Ophites have in this
(as Lactantius well answers the Idolaters) much abused themselves mistaking
black for white, and the Prince of Devils for the Prince of men who is God
alone. All this digression tends to no other end, then to declare that the
true intendment of that old Serpent the Devil, was, to make himself to be
adored as a God, which does clearly appear in the whole progress of those
temptations which he used against Christ Jesus: for the last assault he
reserved these words, which were indeed the very mark and scope whereunto he
leuelled all his temptations, Matthew. 4.
Si cadens adoraueris me. From hence it arises that he has caused Temples to
be built for him, Altars to be erected, feasts to be ordained, Priests to be
interteined, and Sacrifices to be presented unto him, because he sees that
God has ordained the same for his service; not (as S. Augustine well shows,
that he is pleased with the smell of the roast proceeding from these creatures
or the like, but because he is much delighted that the honors which are due
unto God should be mis-applyed unto him. Wherein he seedeth himself with a
fantastical show of contentment to see himself in appearance honored for a
God, although he be damned and tortured for evermore. Daemones non cadauerinis
nidoribus (says S. Augustine) sed diuinis honoribus gaudent. Aug. lib. 10. de
ciuit.
To maintain himself in this state and greatness, he could not devise a
readier way then to speak familiarly to men, and to tell them those things
which were secret and hidden; The Devil is ignorant of things to come Genes. 2.
and this he does by way of Oracles, the first whereof we may term the
Oracle of the Serpent speaking unto Eve. For what imports it whether he
entered into the body of a Serpent, or into a statue of marble? This hinders
not, but that a man may well say, that the first Oracle was, when he spoke
unto the first woman. And therefore does Tertullian justly place the first
woman in the first catalogue of heretics, Tertull. de praescrip. haeret.
because to speak so familiarly unto the Devil, was an apostasy. After the
stood, Oracles began to be more frequent, and had their original from the
posterity of Cham: whereupon it came that the most ancient Oracle which we
find in Authors is Oraculum Hammonium, as if we should say, Genebrar. in Chron.
Oraculum Chammonium: for the name of Cham is written in Hebrew with a strong
aspiration, and therefore our translatour rather makes it Cham then Ham,
although it be all one in sense, and the very name does sufficiently show that
the antiquity and original of Oracles after the flood came from Cham, who was
cursed of God, and of his father: and this invention of worshipping the Devil
was found out by him to build up the city of the Devil, as Cain had formerly
begun to oppugn the city of God built by Abel and continued until Noah. 4.
Reg. 1.
We also see in the Scripture that wicked Kings did send unto the Oracles of
the Gentiles, as unto Acharon and other places to have their doubts and
questions resolved and answered. Thus Satan has not forgotten his old wont,
but as he would at the first have invaded Gods honor, by predictions of
hidden and future things unto the first woman, Apperientur (says he) oculi
vestri and eritis sicut Dij scientes bonnm and malum, so now also would he
continue his cosenage amongst men who have a natural desire and curiosity to
know secret and future things, which they drew from Adams depraved nature, who
desired to become as God, knowing that the property of God is to diue into all
hidden events, especially to understand men's thoughts and things to come. The
Scripture teaches us these two points: the first in Jeremy, Ierem. 17.
Inscrutabile est cor hominis, and quis cognoscet illud? Ego Dominus probans
renes and corda. And for the second point Esaias says, Annunciate nobis quae
ventura sunt, and dicemus, quia dij estis vos. Esaias. 41.
So that if we shall more narrowly sist into the passages of histories, we
shall find that Oracles tended to no other end then to beget an admiration in
men, and to relish and give contentment unto that pride which naturally is
rooted in them. Yet the truth is, that the Devils never understood either the
one or the other of these points of knowing things hidden or to come: which we
will a little enlarge, that the curious of these times may know how much they
abuse themselves, in thinking that they are able to attain unto the knowledge
of these two things, either by a secret league or familiarity with the Devil,
or otherwise by superstitions and Magic. For the first, Divines have learnedly
labored in the same, grounding their discourses upon that sentence of Jeremy,
and upon the saying of S. Paul, Nemo scit quid sit in homine, 1. Cor. 2.
nisi spiritus hominis qui in ipso est: Psalm. 7.
and David also does often appropriat that unto God alone Scrutans corda and
renes Deus. So that man alone does by nature know what he thinks in his
heart, which no other substance can search into but God only. Dan. 2.
This is well verified in the history of Nabuchodonosox, who when he had
forgotten his dream, would have had his southsayers to divine what it was: but
it was told him that he demanded an impossibility. Sermo enim quem tu quaeris
res grauis est, neo reperietur quisquam qui indicet illum in conspectu Regis,
exceptis dijs quorum non est cum hominibus conuersatio. Where it is very
obseruable, that he had assembled not only Philosophers and Astrologers, but
Magicians also, as the text expressly declares: and although it be certain
that these Magicians had contracted secret familiarity with wicked spirits,
whom peradventure they might conceit to be Gods, yet do they set a distance*
and difference betwixt the Gods that do sometimes converse with men, and those
who hold no traffic or intercourse with them: nay they do confess that those
who familiarly converse with men, can by no means understand that which is
hidden in men's hearts: but in the end Daniel gave the resolution of it, saying,
Mysterium quod Rex interrogat, sapientes, magi, areoli, and aruspices nequeunt
indicare regi, sed Deus est in coelo reuelans mysteria, qui indicauit tibi
Nabuchodonosor quae ventura sunt nouissimis temporibus. Dydimus Saint Ieromes
master does of set purpose handle this point, proouing that the holy Ghost is
therefore the true God, because he enters into the chamber of the heart, and
opens the most secret cogitations there. And he gives the natural reason
of this, for the soul has no quantity or corporal dimensions, but is a pure
and spiritual substance, not bounded in by any limits whatsoever, but only by
that native pureness wherein it was created, so that it must needs follow, that
if any thing do penetrate this substance, it must be the very uncompounded
substance of the soul, or that quickening virtue which was able to put life
into the fame: so that there are but these two things absolutely simple and
without mixture in the soul. The Devil the^ can neither be the substance, nor
the life of the soul, and therefore cannot penetrate into it: but God it is
who gives this virtue of life unto the soul, and without whose concurrence
the essence and life of the same would presently be consumed to nothing, and be
as it was before the creation of it: whereupon Dydimus says, Dydim. lib. 2. de
Spirit. sanct.
Imparticipabilis Diabolus est non creator sed creatura subsistens, introiuit
ergo in cor Iudae, non secundum substantiam, sed secundum operationem, quia
introire in aliquem increatae est substantiae. Hereupon he concludes, Ios.
13.
that whereas we find that the Devil entered into the heart of Judas, it must
be understood of Judas his will: and whereas he is said to fill the heart of
Ananias, the meaning is, that he filled it with his suggestions of malice, of
auariciousnesse, and the like enormities: which can not enter into a man,
unless he set his heart open, and give consent to these temptations. And the
very word (to tempt) imports nothing else but an essay or trial of
something. Satan then does endeavor to inform himself of our goodness or
naughtiness, and if he may conjecture, that there are some feeds of goodness
in the heart, he imployeth all his forces to shake the same by those objects
and devises which he daily practices. Hieron. lib. 2. comment. in Matthew. ad
c. 15.
S. Jerome, Dydimus his scholar has learnedly opened this point, and as it
were commented upon that which his master obscurely delivered. They that
conceit (says he) that wicked thoughts proceed from the Devil, and not
rather from their own depraved will, are worthy to be sharply reproved: for
the Devil may suggest and occasion wicked thoughts in men, but cannot be the
author of them. He is indeed an Incendiary, and sets our flesh on fire with
burning sensuality, yet can he not reach the inward part of our heart, but
does conjecture of the same by the habit and behavior which he observes in
us: as when he sees a man gazing often upon a woman, and applying himself
wholly unto her, he presently from hence does surmise, that he begins to
commit adultery in his heart, whereupon he does forthwith minister unto him
occasion of encouragement, putting many fancies into his head, which when he
rejects not, but rather delights to entertain them still, of himself and
from his own freewill he sends them unto his soul. The Devil abuses those
that are made to believe, that he knows the secresies of the heart; he may
peradventure have some coniecturall knowledge, but because it is in the liberty
of man's freewill to abandon and give over such fancies when he pleases, the
Devil is often cousened of his aim, and proves a notorious liar. S. Augustine
has made a treatise of this very argument, entitled, August lib. de scientia
daemonum.
De scientia daemonum, where he largely handles the same, and concludes,
that they can no more foretell of things to come, then they are able to
discern the thoughts that are within us. Yet would the Devil seem to make
predictions of future accidents, 4. Reg. 1. and 1. Reg. 28.
by the answers of Oracles. The king Ochosias did purposely send messengers
unto them, to understand whether he should recover his sickness, or no: and
Saul did the like, that he might be informed, what should be the issue of the
battle which he was to fight against the Philistims, whereby they offended
against the express word of God, which says, Non aocedetis ad Magos, neque
ab^hariolis aliquid sciscitabimini. Leuit. 19.
And this was the occasion of their ruin, where we may observe, that it
ordinarily by Gods permission so falls out, that if the Devil (whether it be
personally by himself, or by any oracle of his, be it living or be it dead) do
foretell any good fortune, it seldom falls out to be true, but if he
foretell any mischance, it does assuredly prove to be so, because commonly
such misfortune is the punishment of this Apostasy. And this is easily
discerned in the history of Saul, and must remain unto us as a Maxim or
general rule, which is also the observation of S. Chrysostom, Athanas. q. 27.
ad Antioch. Princ.
Vide locum in fine huius capituli. Also S. Athanasius in his resolution of
this point to the Prince of Antioche, does soberly proceed in his discourse by
experiences. There be two things (says he) which neither the good nor the bad
Angels are able to understand, and they are, the secrets of the heart, and
things that are to come. It is true (says he) that sometimes Magicians (whom
I term the living oracles of the Devil) do foretell that which does
afterward happen, by the fore knowledge and revelations of Devils, but their
predictions are of events that are already happened in other places; as for
example, when they see it rain in India, and that the weather is fit and
likely to carry those clouds toward Egypt, he makes his oracles to foretell,
that it will very shortly rain in Egypt: so when he observes the abundance of
snow that lies upon hills, is melted, or begins to melt, he so resheweth
that Nilus or some such great river, will ouerflow their banks: so that he
tells nothing but what he sees, only this advantage he has, that by his
nimblenesse he pre^enteth the effects, which birds themselves might do, if
they were endued with natural reason: yea many times they do foretell things
in their flight from one climate to another; in so much as many Philosophers
have bin held in admiration, for their diuinations of those things: which they
observed by their knowledge of the nature of these birds. Therefore Saint
Athanasius does conclude. Resolve with your selves to do something, whereof
none can have the least conjecture, and then go unto the Devils Oracles, who
are the Magicians, and ask them if they can inform you of this which you have
determined to do, and you shall find them utterly ignorant, and unable to
satisfy you. Athanas. in vita Anthon.
Saint Athanasius had heard Anthonius Monachus discourse of this argument, and
it is probable, that he had most of his resolutions from him, as from one that
had the best experience hereof of any man in the world:for we find that he
here recites all most the very same sentences which he did formerly allege
in the discourse of Anthonies life: where he adds, that the Devils do no
more, then one that rides post and aduertiseth us of some things that are done
far from us; or as a Physician who by feeling a man's pulses, will show him
that he is likely to fall into a fever: or as a husbandman who seeing a
glutt and ouerflow of waters, will foretell a scarcity of corn to ensue: to
conclude (says he) they know whatsoever is already done, not what is to come:
yet from hence did Idolatry and all those new Gods of the heathen take their
beginning, and they were esteemed by the simple people to be the true Gods. And
this assertion which is so weighty, and of such importance, may be strengthened
both by Scripture, and by profane authors also: for the most famous Oracles
that ever were, did flourish in the time of Cyrus, in Affricke, Herod. in
initio. Esaias 23. 14. 45. Ierem. 23. Dan. 8. 10.
and in Greece, as Herodotus writes: in which times the Prophets Esaias,
Ezekiel, Daniel, and others had foretold diverse great mutations, which were to
befall the most renowned Nations of the world, as the Assyrians, the
Babylonians, the Grecians, and the Romans: yea they were so plain as to point
out the Grecians, and to call Cyrus by his proper name; the like did the
Sybilles also foreshowe. Now when the Devils were thus armed, they then began
to foretell that which they had stolen from the Revelation of Prophets, and to
deliver the great events of things. But if a man did offer to decline from
these paths, and did question them of less affairs, and of particular
businesses, whereof they could have no knowledge or conjecture, they did so
mince and perplexe their predictions with ambiguous speeches, that whatsoever
should happen, they would still have a hansome shift and evasion. Many grave
authors both amongst the Greeks and Latins, have handled this point, and
amongst the Latins, Lactant. lib. divine. institut. Hieron. lib. 12. comment. in
Esaiam. ad cap. 41.
we have many notable passages of Lactantius; and of S. Jerome, who has
descended unto some particulars herein; saying Apollo Delphicus and Loxias,
Deliusque, and Clarius, and caetera Idola, futurorum scientiam pollicentes,
reges potentissimos deceperunt: and he alleges many examples of their
ignorance: but (says he) if there were no other thing to discover their
weakness but this, that they could not foretell their own ruin upon the
coming of Christ Jesus in the flesh, it would sufficiently prove their
imbecility in the apprehension of things to come. It is reported, that a good
understanding man, who was desirous to try the blockishnesse of a Magician, or
Chiromantick, did show him his left hand, to have his fortune told him; and as
the Magician was attentively vewing the lineaments of his hand, he struck him
with his right hand a sound box on the ear saying unto him, if thou know
things that are to come, why do thou not first learn that which does
concern thy self? this says Saint Jerome of Oracles. Where by the way we may
see, how grossly they are abused, who make any compacts and bargains with
this unclean Spirit, upon promise to understand from them those events that
are afterward to follow: as also how grievously they offend, who address
themselves unto such kind of people, which is no less then to apply themselves
unto the Oracles themselves, as the Idolaters of former times did, since the
Devil is he that speaks both in the one and in the other: And this is that
fearful Apostasy from the faith, which is so frequently forbidden in the law
of God. Athanas. de vita Anthon.
But says this good father Anthonius, what good shall a man get in suffering
himself to be palpably cousened, and in stead of a Carkanet, to buy a
bracelet of cockles? especially since this is the way to estrange him from God,
and to make him sell his poor soul unto the Devil for mere lies and
gulleries. But put case, that he told us truth, yet should we not labor to
get this knowledge from the enemy of God and mankind, for fear he convey
poison into this honey, as he did unto our first parents. Hereupon it was that
our Savior commanded the Devil to hold his peace, Luke 4.
although he spoke pure truth. And albeit (says this good Monk Anthonius)
he should appear unto us full of splendor and brightness, as sometimes he
transformeth himself into an Angel of light, yet are we to shut our eyes, and
to turn aside our face from the light which proceeds from the Devil. The
history of Saul does declare, that he had done what lay in his power, to know
that which did so much import him, and had addressed himself unto God and unto
the Priests, Chrysostom. Homil. 8. in. 2. epist. ad Timoth.
and Prophets, till at the last when he saw, that God would make him no
answer, he went as at the last cast unto a witch, and that hastened on his
ruin. Let us learn then to make our address unto God, and if he do not aid
us forthwith, yet to hope still in him, and to wait his leisure with
patience: knowing that all does work together for our good: But we will
speak hereof more at large in the ensuing Chapter. There is another
observation which Saint Chrysostom notes, and suteth notably with this
argument, Nemo quum fallunt, attendit: sed solum si quid verum praedixerint,
aspicit. And again he says, Qui^ homo se dedit Diabolipotestati, Deus id
permittit accidere. Men take no heed unto their falsehoods, but do only look
to that which falls out to be true; but (says he) touching the misfortunes
which do fall upon them, God does justly permit them to happen, as the scourge
and punishment for their sin.

CHAP. VI. That Sorcerers are as detestable, and as much forbidden by the law
of God, as the very Oracles of the Heathen and their Idols were: that it is an
idle speech which is given out of Sorcerers, that Princes should take heed of
them: the diversities of customs, which the Sorcerers used in the old time:
all proved by the Scripture.
ALthough Pliny was of opinion, that Magic was really nothing, Sorcery a
grievous and abominable sin. Plin. lib. 30. nature. hist c. 1.
but merely a bare name without a thing, and was no more in nature then is a
Chim^ra: which he goes about to prove by the experience of Nero, who was so
hot in the pursuit of these curious Arts, that he did initiate and dedicate
himself unto this trade, and yet for all this he could never give satisfaction
unto himself in this kind, although he wanted neither wit nor will, much
less authority, riches, and the most knowing men in these Arts, that he could
get from all the quarters of the East. Yet ought we not to entertain this
opinion that Pliny has, no more then his blasphemous conceit of the Deity,
(for he affirms that there is no other God but the Sun) or his gibing at
the resurrection of the flesh, which he thinks a mere ridiculous fancy: for
in these two points he plays the part of an Atheist, as indeed he was; but
the rule in Logic does easily overthrow his collection, when from a
particular instance he would infer an universal proposition: for as we say,
Ex particularibus nihil concludi potest, and a particulari ad universal
conclusio nulla. We could also allow unto him the history of Julian the
Apostatate, who had as much authority, riches, wit, and as many masters as Nero
ever had, and a great deal of more will, but by the permission of God, he grew
more weary of the incertainty and barrennnesse thereof, then he was before
heated with the desire of knowing it. And this did rather happen unto them both
(that we may answer the objection of Pliny) because their maine drift and
design was, to abolish and annihilate the memory of Christ Jesus, and to
prove him a liar, in that he had said, Ecce ego vobiscum sum vsque ad
consummationem seculi. But thereupon to deny the effects of the Devil
practiced by his instruments the witches, it would savor of too much
rashness, especially since many authors so ancient and so renowned, are full
of them. Let it suffice to have alleged for confirmation hereof certain
passages out of Lactantius and Saint Augustine, who giving a reason of such
admirable effects, do attribute them to wicked Spirits. Philostrat. lib. 4.
We will only add that which Philostratus has written of a sorceresse, who
by her art did provide a sumptuous banquet for her lover Menippus: who being
sat at table with many others, and having a good appetit to taste of those
delicacies, upon the sudden all was taken away, and they were forced to rise
more hungry then they were before. But we will draw our proofs from the
Scripture, least some should with Pliny conceit this relation to be fabulous.
First Saint Paul makes mention of the Iamn^s, 2. Timoth. 3.
and Iambres, whose history is recited in the book of Exodus, that they
resisted Moses, and did work by Magic, whatsoever Moses could do by Divine
power: they changed their rods into serpents, and water into blood: Exodus 7.
and 8.
they also made frogs to come and cover the land of Egypt: yet at the third
plague (not at the third sign, as it is vulgarly received) they could not do
as Moses did before them: not because (as the Hebrews would allege) the
Devil cannot counterfeit any thing that is less then a barley corn, in regard
that those things that are least require (say they) greatest subtilty to shape
them, and therefore although the Magicians did make great snakes and frogs,
Rabbi, Leui, Ben. Gerson in cap. 8. Exodus
yet they could not bring lice upon the land of Egypt as Moses did; for this
opinion is not justifiable, because afterward they could not make great flies,
nor raise those hugh botches and tumors which were in the bodies of men,
neither could they make hail, or lightning to descend from heaven, or cause
the winds to blow and combat against themselves, which neuerth^lesse he did
in Jobs time: but the reason was, because at the third time, God tied up the
power of Satan, and restrained him from passing further, as he also inhibited
him in the like case to put Job to death, as he did his children. And this the
Magicians were forced to confess, saying, Digitus Dei est hic. From hence it
is apparent, that there are those who contract secret familiarity with the
Devil, and by this means work strange things, although for the most part
they are ordained unto wicked purposes. The Prophet David does take his
similitude from the charmer who by his art does charm serpents; Psalm. 57.
so that this is a truth not to be gaine-said, especially since God himself
does no less detest and prohibit such kind of men in his law, then he does
Idols and Oracles of the Devil. For when Satan saw that the people of God
did abhor his Oracles that were senseless, and framed by the hands of men,
he insinuated himself amongst them by another way more subtle then the
former, by speaking unto men, and making himself to be secretly adored by
them. This is it which is so strictly forbidden in Leuiticus, Leuitic. 19. and
20.
Non declinetis ad magos, nec ab Heriolis aliquid sciscitemini, ne polluamini
per eos. And he repeateth the same afterward, Anima quae declinauerit ad
magos and Hariolos, and fornicata fuerit cumeis, ponam faciem meam contra eam,
and interficiam eam de medio populi sui. Exodus 22.
Also it is said in Exodus, Maleficos non patieris viuere, where the Hebrew
word does particularly apply it self unto witches. Deuteronomy. 18.
And in Deutronomy God speaks thus unto his people. Quando ingressus fueris
terram quam Dominus Deus tuus dabit tibi, cave ne imitarivelis abominationes
illarum gentium, nec inueniatur in te qui lustret filium suum, aut filiam
ducens per ignem, a^t qui ariolos sciscitatur and obseruat somnia atque
auguria, net sit maleficus, nec incantator, neque qui Pythones consulat, nec
diuinos, and quaerat a mortuis veritatem. Omnia haec abominat^r Dominus, and
propter istiusmodi scelera delebit eos in introitu suo: perfectus eris and
a^sque macula cum Domino Deo tuo, gentes is it ae quarum possidetis terram,
augures and diuinos audiunt tu autem a Domino Deo tuo aliter institutus es. To
be breife, the Scripture does often speak of these people, in so much as
there is scarce a book in the whole Bible, where mention is not made of them.
Besides the passages already cited, those that are desirous may see. Number. 23.
Ios. 13. 1. Reg. 15. and 28. 2. Paral. 33. Esaias 47. and 44. Mich. 5. Na^um. 3.
In the new testament there is Simon Magus, Act. 8.13.16.19
Elimas the south-sayer, Barieu, and a woman who had a familiar Spirit, and did
foretell many things, by which means she brought in much gain unto her
masters. There is also mention made of the Ephesians, Hieron. prolog. in epist.
ad Ephesians.
who were exceedingly addicted to all kinds of curious arts, and these were
nothing else amongst the Ancients but the arts of Magic. but when they had
their understandings rectified by Saint Paul's instructions, they burned all
their books, that were valued at 50. thousand pieces of silver. When good King
Josias would reduce the religion of God into that first integrity, wherein it
formerly stood, thereby to appease the wrath of God against the people of the
Jews, he called a general Council in the temple at Jerusalem, 4. Reg. 2.3.
where amongst other things sit to be redressed, it was decreed, that all
sorcerers and witches should be put to death: which the good King accordingly
practiced. Pythones (says the text) and ariolos, and figuras idolorum, and
immunditias, and abominationes, quae fuerunt in terra Iudae and Jerusalem,
abstulit Josias, vt statueret verba legis. After his reign all good Princes
did the like, the law of God having expressly forbidden the use of the same.
As also in the Codices there are many laws religiously ordained by Christian
Emperors, as Constantius and others, against witchcraft and Mathematicians.
And how could they be wanting in this duty, since the Heathens themselves have
made the practice of them punishable. Cornelius Tacit.
Cornelius Tacitus does relate, that there was a law made in Room, by which
all Mathematicians and Magicians were banished from all Italy, as
excommunicated persons, and not worthy to live amongst honest men. Which law
was put in execution in the time of Christ Jesus, not without a mysterious and
Divine meaning: for as our Savior by his coming into the world, did drive
away and cast out the Devils, so his pleasure was, that their special
attendants and worshippers, should by earthly Princes be bannished out of
their Dominions: which action did belong unto the external seat of Justice.
Apuleius in vtraque Apolog.
Appollonius Thianeus a great Magician was cited to appear before the Emperor
Domitian, because he was a sorcerer; as was Apuleius also before the governor
of Affricke in the reign of Antonius Pius; and was feign to purge himself by
two Apologies which he made to clear this accusation, or else he had been put
to death. So that we must not imitate those of Geneua, (which is the
wellspring of all Atheism and diabolical adorations) where none is accused
or condemned to dye, unless he be convicted to have cast abroad some charm
hurtful unto man or beast, although they know him to b^long unto the Devils
Synagogue. It is certain, that the greatest exorbitancy in this sin is, that
they who practice the same, do apostate from the true religon of God, and adore
the Devil: which is clearly proved in the Scriptures, for they do not much
aggrauate this obliquity with any other great inforcement, then that they
commit idolatry, which is a sin directly against the Majesty of God, and not
against our neighbor. Thus in Exodus 22. a little after these words, Exodus 22.
Thou shall not suffer a witch to live, it is added, whosoever shall sacrifice
unto other Gods, but the true God, he shall be put to death. Leuitic. 18.
In the 18. of Leuiticus it is said, you shall not go to Magicians, neither
shall you ask questions of sorcerers, least you be defiled by them; and the
conclusion thereupon inferred is: I am thy Lord thy God. Whereupon it does
follow, that therefore this sin is so enormous, because it is dire^^ly
against the Majesty of God: the same may be noted in the following Chapter
also, Leuitic. 20.
which is the 20. The soul (says God) that shall go unto Magicians and
sorcerers, and shall commit fornication with them, I will set my face against
them, and will cut them off from among my people. It follows, sanctify your
selves therefore and be holy, for I am the Lord your God. In the 18. Chapter
of Deutronomy it is also said: Let there not be found among you that uses
witchcraft, or that asks counsel of charmers and south-sayers, for this was
the sin of the Gentiles, whom for these abominations I cast out from their
land, and placed you in their steed. As for thee thou have bin otherwise taught
by the Lord thy God. And then he adds, God will raise up a Prophet unto you,
who shall speak familiarly with you, not as I spoke in the mountain in fire:
but he shall be like unto one of you, and unto him shall you hearken. And
whosoever will not harken unto him, I will take vengeance upon him. It is well
worth the observation, that both by the letter of the text, a^ also by the
exposition which Saint Stephen in the Acts of the Apostles makes of the same,
by this Prophet is meant Christ Jesus. Act. 7.
All which does sufficiently declare that this impiety is against the Majesty
of God and particularly against the person of Christ Jesus our Savior and
Redeemer. For when from worshipping of an invisible substance, these kind of
people do adore the Devil, when he presents himself before them in a visible
form, it is manifest that in this he would rob the Son of God of his glory,
who made himself visible, that he might be visibly adored. When Samuel would
aggrauate the sin of rebellion and contempt, which Saul committed against the
Divine Majesty, he tells him, that this sin is like unto the sin of
Sorcerers and Magicians, he could not compare this disobedience and rebellion
to a greater sin, then that of Witches and Magicians. And the event declared
how odious it was: for when Saul had thus set at naught the commandment of
God, he was left unto himself, and could never after that receive any answer
either by Priests or by dreams, 1. Reg. 28.
and nocturnal revelations, or by Prophets. Yet for all this was he still King
of Israel, but when he once did seek unto a witch, he fell into the gulf of
all impiety, and was the next day slain with his children, so that none of
that stock did ever after raig^e or bear sway in Israel. And which Kings and
Princes should regardfully observe, it is said in the 4. of Kings 23. that good
King Josias having labored all he could to reduce true religion to that first
state and integrity wherein it stood, 4 Reg. 23.
yet was not God fully appeased with this people, but did afterward deliver
them up into the hands of the barbarous Babylonians, to be oppressed and in
slavery unto them: which happened by reason of his grandfather Manasses, who
did always intertaine Magicians and Witches in the kingdom of Israel, and
himself also was of that trade. Non est auersus (says the text) Dominus ab
ira furoris sui magni, quo iratus est furor eius contra Iudam propter
irritationes, quibus prouocauerat eu^ Manasses. The abominations of Manasses
are described in the 4. book of Kings the 21. Chapter, 4. Reg. 21.
amongst which there is mention made of his south-saying, and diuinations, and
how he had for that purpose a great number of Magicians and Sorcerers about
him, laboring to augment and add reputation unto that trade: by which
abominations, and by other his daily prouocations of God, he plucked down the
Viols of his wrath upon him. It is very obseruable, that God for this very
fault did sharply chastise the Kings of the earth, who were utterly
unacquainted with his law: Esaias 4.7.
as appears in Esaias, where God threatens to destroy the great City of
Babylon, and the whole Empire thereof, because (says he) of the great
multitude of Witches, that reign within thee, and of that flintinesse of heart
which hardneth thy Inchanters and Sorcerers. Ezechi. 28.
And in Ezechiel the King of Babylon is represented unto us standing in the
middle betwixt two ways, and by the Art of Magic disposing and placing of
arrows, to know what would befall unto him: but God threatens to punish him
grievously for the same. And here may we fitly speak unto Christian Princes,
and say with the Kingly Prophet David, Nunc reges intelligite, Psalm. 2.
erudimini qui iudicatis terram, ne quando irascatur Dominus and pereatis de
via insta. For there is no sin in the world, that does more transplant the
Crowns and Kingdoms of the Princes of the Earth, especially of christian
Princes, then to tolerate by any indulgence or conniuencie whatsoever, an
impiety so derogatory from God, and Christ his Son, and to let it spread in
the midst of the Church. Hence David concludes according to the Hebrew
phrase, K^sse the Son least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, Psalm.
2. Osculamini filium Ado^ate pure! Opposite against that damned custo^e of
Sorcer^^^, who k^sse the Devil in the likeness of a Goat, as shall
afterward be specified. 1 Corinthians. 6.
^hen his wrath shall suddenly burn. To kiss and to worship the Son, is to
adore Christ Jesus with all purity and sincerenesse of heart, who will have no
fellowship or alliance with Beliall as S. Paul teaches. We are not to imitate
those of Geneua before mentioned, but we are to execute the rigor and
extremity of justice upon those that are guilty of this crime, because it is
against the divine Majesty, and directly contrary to the first commandment of
the law, although it be true withal, that this art cannot be practiced
without the endam^agement of our neighbors, as shall hereafter appear by
their depositions. But the honor of God must take up the first consideration,
and we are not to inuert and misplace things, or as the common saying is, put
the cart before the horse. Yet it is not to be marvelled that the practice of
Geneua runs thus; for besides their rage in depressing as much as in them
lies the honor of God and his Saints (which was foretold in the Revelation,
that they should blaspheme God, Apoc. 13.
his tabernacle, the humanity of Christ Jesus, and them that dwelt in heaven,
they have the property that all Heretics naturally have, to love Magicians and
Sorcerers; as appears by the first H^retick Simon Magus, mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles, and by the rest that followed after him, as Irenaeus and
others do declare it. Iren. lib. 1.


The Turks (as I conceive) do not much esteem these Arts, but the Sarazens
did permit that men should teach this impiety publicly, about a thousand
years after Christ. Apoc. 13. The Dra^on is bound in the Apocalypse chap 20.
that is to say Lucifer.
And if Antichrist be to proceed from the ^urkes, whereof there is great
likelihood, then is their Monarchy pointed out unto us by Babylon and the
savage beast, that was to receive great power and strength from the great
Dragon, by virtue whereof he might work wonders, even to make fire to descend
from heaven: all which he should do through the power of the Devil, shadowed
out under the nature of the Dragon. Touching the means, which such kind of
people use in their witchcrafts, there can be no certain number set of them,
for they are infinite, and the Devil is so crafty and malicious withal, that
(as it is said of a naughty fellow) Habet mill technas, mill nocendi arts.
He inuenteth every day new devises, the more to please him, whom he most
desires to hold fast in his gripe: and seeing that some are delighted with one
thing, and some with another, he fitteth all according to their several
humors. And put case that these several manners of Charms be not hurtful
unto the body, yet do they defile and stain the soul of the Sorcerer,
because they are ever tied unto superstition, which is a kind of Idolatry.
Nevertheless, the Devil strives as much as he can, to practice those
charms which are hurtful unto men, as bloodshed and murder: but when he
meets with any (as sometimes he does) whose consciences are scrupulous to
commit murder, or otherwise to hurt men's persons, he then is contented to
apply himself unto them, that at the least he may gain unto him their
beguiled souls. And it is probable (since there are so many diversities of
them mentioned in the Hebrew Bible) that as the Devils in the Scriptures take
their denominations from the effects that are observed in them, so have the
Sorcerers their diversities of names from the diversities of effects and
charms, which they ordinarily practice. Thus the Magicians of Pharaoh, to make
their charms more powerful, besides the rods which they had in their hands,
to show themselves equal unto Moses, they also used (whether secretly or
openly it is not expressed) certain plates of red-hot iron, newly forged; and
their charms in the 7. chapter of Exodus are called by the word Lahatim, Ezod.
7.
which signifies, burning plates: and so is the flaming sword called which the
Cherubin brandished in his hand in the fourth chapter of Genesis; Genes. 4.
Rabby David Quimhi.
which is the particular observation of Rabby David Quimhi. And from hence we
may gather an excellent moral, since as S. Paul teaches us, the Magicians in
this history did represent Heretics, 2. Timoth. 3.
as Moses did shadow forth the Catholic Doctors. Moses did remain contented
with the rod which he held in his hand, and the catholic Doctor does shake the
rod of Gods word over those that do transgress against the same. The Heretic
likewise holds the rod of Gods word in his hand, but he cannot prevail with
it, except he also vnsheath that flaming sword, which betokens war, and
the effusion of blood. And it may well be, that they mingled the blood of men,
in the tempering and making of such swords: which is in these days practiced,
and has been usual in former times amongst the Theraphins. Vide Heliam
Leuitam in These b. Dictione Theraphm. Leuit. 19. and 20.
But let us descend to other passages. In the 19. and 20. chapters of Leuiticus
these Magicians are called by this word Aob, which signifies a pitcher, or a
barrel. And it might be, there were a kind of Sorcerers which did use such
vessels, as many do in these days, who cast certain names into a vessel or
basin full of water, to divine and presage of something. In the 18. of
Deuteronomy they are called Menahhesh, which imports as much as, Deuteron. 18.
to use Serpents, and it is probable enough, that they used Serpents in their
charms, as we have heretofore noted of the Romans, who did the like to rid
Rome of the plague. Aben Ezra does think, that it was nothing but certain
figures and characters of Serpents, which such people did use in their charms
and enchantments. King Manasses, 2. Paral. 33.
who was the greatest Sorcerer of the world, was accused to be Mecasheph,
which word is derived from a verb that signifies to paint, Rabby David Qu^mhi
in Naum Prophetam. Sanctes Pagnin. in Thesauro.
or by imbellishing the face with colors to attract and deceive men, which is
the property of wanton women, as Rabby David Quimhi says in his Comment upon
Nahum: and thereupon Aben Ezra, who together with Quimhi is quoted by Sanctes
Pagninus, and by Munsterus, Munsterus in L^xico.
does declare, that these are Sorcerers, who make a show that they transshape
things, and by this means do grossly abuse those men, whom they do blind
with their apparitions, and so make them believe they see that, which indeed
they do not see: like unto those loose and light women, who set a gloss of
whitenes upon their face, which is not indeed in their persons. There is
another word in the 3. of Michah, Mich. 3.
that also expresses these Magicians, and that is Quassam, which David Quimhi
(as is to be supposed, by the passages already alleged) does interpret to
signify all manner of Charms and Enchantments. Although then there be diverse
sorts of Charms invented by the Devil, as it may be conceived that the
superstitious use of these things took strength with time, and grew more
familiar, when once the spirit of man was tickled with the delight of them, yet
are we not to think, that these Diabolical Charms are endued with any
natural efficacy, or that wicked spirits are more delighted with one thing
then another, or allured by some special charm, to do whatsoever the
Sorcerer would have them: but it is to be attributed, by the third and general
reason, to the malice of the Devil, who in all things is Gods ape, as
Tertullian has it. Tertul. lib. de Baptis.
For he cunningly observes, that God makes choice from his pure and absolute
will of certain material substances, thereby to confirm and make effectual
his promises unto men: as are the bread and wine in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, and water in Baptism; yet have these outward elements no native
force in themselves, to declare that unto us, which God by his power works in
us: and hereupon the Devil makes a voluntary election of such things as he
thinks fittest, whereby as by signs he makes good those promises which he
offers unto men, and takes occasion to show the greatness of his forces.
And this is the resolution that is given by S. Augustine, Daemones (inquit)
alliciuntur herbis, non tanquam animalia cibis, sed tanquam spiritus signis. An
ass indeed is moved at the sight of Oats, and the sheep is greedy to browse
upon a tender twig which is set before him; but it is not so with Spirits, for
they have no need of any corporal substance for their necessity, but use
outward things, as signs and pledges, whereby they express their pleasure
unto men, who otherwise could have no advertisement of the same. For it is the
property both of reasonable and intellectual creatures, to declare their will
by external signs; and therefore we are not to conceive that it was the sound
of David's Harp that drove away the wicked spirit from Saul, or the gall of the
fish that made Asmodeus to run away; for he stands not in fear of any
corporal thing, in respect that it is corporal, yea it cannot imprint any
action into him, nor so much as touch him: yet when such material substances
are the instruments by which God works, and when virtuous people are
confirmed by faith, of Gods power herein, then is it effectual against the
Devil: and then must we do as we are commanded by S. Peter, cuiresistite
fortes in fide. It is certain that the Devil does sometimes observe the course
of the Moon in his workings, which is a corporal substance: and this is
plain in the fourth, and seventeenth Chapter of S. Matthew, Matthew. 4. and 17.
Hieron. in Matthew. and Chrysostom.
where mention is made of one that was lunatickly possessed; but herein (says
S. Jerome) he did secretly labor to desame Gods creature, and to make men
believe, either that it was the Devils creature, as the Manicheans conceited,
of many creatures that were very useful unto man, or else that it was to be
adored as a God, because of the great power it had over the bodies of men:
whereunto we may adioyne the saying of S. Augustine, August. lib. 21. de
ciuitat. S. Thom. 1. p. q. 115. art. 5.
that the devil, as one that is exceedingly cunning and wise (from whence also
he has his name) when he would apply natural causes one unto the other, for
his more easy and ready way, does observe the course of the Moon, which does
naturally give assistance and inclination to such effects, as have their
origin from lunacy. This experience teaches to be true in lunatic persons;
and therefore the best practiced Physicians do observe the same course, in the
cures which they undertake of this kind. As for bodily substances, he has no
use of them, but as they serve for signs to bind Sorcerers unto his Service:
as the outward elements in the Sacraments do serve for tokens of Gods good
pleasure in the use and institution of them: so that such signs are merely
voluntary, although they be the true images and representations of those,
against whom they would practice their Witchcrafts; Zonar. tom. 3.
as we read in Zonaras that certain lewd persons had made the very image of
Simon Prince of Bulgaria; and as soon as they had cut off the head of the said
Image, the Prince was insta^tly found dead. Upon the like occasion did King,
Jews cause a certain woman called Claudia, to be burned alive, because she
had made his resemblance in wax, and would have set it nearer and nearer unto
the fire, Genebrard. lib. 4. Chron.
that so as this Image in wax did melt away, so should he by little and little
languish and pine away, and at last die. And because this History does occasion
us to speak of women; let us see whether they are given to these arts as men
are.

CHAP. 7. Of Witches; and that women are more addicted to Witchcraft then men
are.
IF the Devil have power in a thing so execrable, to gain men unto his
service; it is no wonder if he have also ensnared and enticed women into his
nets, especially because he does first labor to win them, whom he knows to
be open unto persuasions, and more easy to be deceived, in regard of the
natural impotency and simplicity of their sex. 2. Corinthians. 11.
And this does S. Paul signify, when he says, Take heed you be not deceived
through the simplicity that proceeds from Christ Jesus. Thus did the Devil
tempt Eve, albeit she was then in her original integrity; and he did the
rather buckle up himself to give this onset, because he knew well how fit air
organ she was to draw the man to yield his consent unto her liking. And this
he practiced from the beginning, and has since still observed that this sex
has this property, to be exceedingly addicted unto something, be it good, or
be it bad: so that if a woman addict her self to well doing, she is more
seruent in it then a man; and so contrariwise, if she abandon her self to
evil, she is more obstinate to persist in the same then a man is: which is
well observed by S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. hom. 4. de fide Ann.
in these words: Contentiosum est (inquit) hoc animal and importunum ac
victoriae amans, sieve ad malum declinet, sieve ad bon^m. So that we may speak
of them as we speak of Angels in general, and say with the Divines, Cui
adhaerent, immobiliter adhaerent. And hereof all Histories are full: it shall
be sufficient amongst profane authors to allege one example set down in the
Roman histories. Macrina a noble Lady of Rome did resolve not to speak or
look upon any man living, until her husband Torquatus, who was sent abroad by
the Romans to subdue diverse Cities and Provinces, should return home unto her.
It so fell out that eleven years after, there was a wild or savage man brought
to Rome, who had but one eye in the middle of his brow, and was found in the
deserts of Egypt: which, when she understood by her chambermaid, she was
exceedingly moved with a violent desire to see this nouelty; nevertheless she
did command her longings so well, that she did not interrupt her first
resolution. And when upon a day this savage man passed by her house, and her
self was in the chamber, that looked out into the street by which he was to
pass, although she heard the noise and cries in the streets, as the fashion of
the common sort of people is when they see any strange spectacle, yet did she
so strongly repress her passions, that she would not so much as come unto the
window to see him, whereof she not long afterward died. It shall also be
sufficient to select from ecclesiastical histories that example which
Theodoret relates of the Matrons of Rome, Theodor. lib. histor.
who when they saw that their husbands the Senators and others, dared not to
intercede to the Emperor in favor of Liberius the Pope of Rome, whom he had
causelessly banished, for that he would not consent to the bringing in of
Heresy, they resolved among themselves to go unto the Court, where with their
cries and importunity, they never left until the Emperor had called back
their chief Pastor from banishment. The Scripture also is plentiful in these
examples. Judith and Hester will sufficiently exemplify the goodness of women
that love God; and Joseph's mistrisse with Iesabell will fully declare the
violence of those that abandon themselves to evil. And as we see by experience
even in these days, that sober and virtuous women, although in their nature
they are most propense unto compassion, yet they are they that cast the first
stones against Sorcerers, and cry louder then the rest to have them burnt: so
contrariwise, Sorceresses are more obstinate, and more addicted unto
witchcrafts, and do with less remorse of conscience plunge themselves into
the most execrable facts that may be, then men: so that it is certain that
women are employed to strangle children, and to carry and present them to the
Devil, and to make a kind of ointment of their grease; but Sorcerers and men
Witches do seldom or never dip their fingers in these bloody actions. Hence
is the reason grounded, why the first prohibition to practice witchcraft,
whereof mention is made in the Law of God was addressed to women and not to
men, Sanctes Pagninus in Thesauro.
as Sanctes Pagninus has well observed, saying; that whereas in the two and
twentieth chapter of Exodus, we have it in the plural number, Maleficos non
patieris viuere, it is in the fountain of the Hebrew expressed by the word
Mechashepha, 1. Reg. 2^.
which signifies a woman witch, and then the sense is thus: Thou shall not
suffer a Sorceresse to live, because (says he) it is a trade more ordinary
and usual unto women then unto men. And this appears by the history of Saul,
who when he had formerly put to death all manner of Magicians and Witches; yet
at the last, seeing himself forsaken of God for his iniquities, he resolved
to resort unto the Devil, and to that purpose he demanded his servants
whether there were any woman witch left or no: Look me out (says he) one that
has a Spirit that I may go unto her, and may by her procurement be
aduertized of what I desire to know. Where we are to observe that Saul did not
ask whether there were a man that was a witch, but whether there were any
woman witch: as if he should have said, that notwithstanding all that he had
done against them, it could not be but that there remained yet alive some woman
or other of this occupation: and in truth it is almost impossible to discover
them so easily as men. The conclusion was, Saul was not deceived in his
expectation, for his Courtiers, who do oftentimes make their repair unto such
people (as the custom of them is) did redily name one unto him, unto whom when
Saul came, she began to make her protestations that she was an honest woman,
and would for no good attempt such a thing, which was prohibited both by God
and the King: but being a little foothed up with fair promises, she quickly
made the Devil to attend this service: and therefore the Hebrews are not
contented to term them by appellations common unto them all, both men and
women, which we have particularly collected in the former Chapter, but would
mark them out by a peculiar attribute, which properly is to be understood of
women, as may be seen in Helias the Leuite in his Thisby, Helias Leuit. in
Thisby.
who reports according to the traditions of the Jews, that there are women
whom they call the Devils mothers, and term them by this word Lilith, which
is derived from another Hebrew word signifiing the night, because they use to
go secretly and in the night. And this have the Latins imitated or borrowed
from the Hebrews, calling them Striges or Lamiae, which signieth monsters and
stranges birds that use to go in the finight. And the said Helias further
says, that a great Lord having asked the question of the ancient fathers of
the Synagogue, how it chanced that young children that are but eight days old
were so often times found suddently dead, they answered him, that they were
Lilith who put them to death: which is the appellation of Sorceresses, for the
Hebrew word is of the feminine gender, as appears more plainly by the
participle and feminine adjective which is joined with the word Lilith, and
also because he says that they were Nashim, that is to say, women. And the
Jewish women are so fully persuaded of the truth thereof (for they are the most
superstitious women of the world) that they use to make four circles with
chalk, or with a cole on the outward parts of the chamber walls where they
use to lie, and upon every side or quarter of the chamber they make a circle,
writing in one of them the name of Adam, in the other the name of Eve, in the
third the word Huts, which signifies (without) and in the fourth the word
Lilith: as if they should have said (as I conceive it) Adam and Eve are the
first Parents and Progenitors of mankind, and therefore get you hence all
witchcrafts whatsoever. Within the chamber they write the names of the Angels,
whom they think to be protectors of their children: to wit, Senoy, Sansenoy,
and Samangueloph, saying that Lilith did teach the Jewish women to do this
before she died: where it is to be supposed, that this was the name of some
great Sorceresse, heretofore much renouned amongst them, whom therefore they
called Lilith, because she commonly went in the night: and it is probable she
taught her daughters or some others all the superstitions and art she had,
before her death; and afterward in process of time such kind of women were
called Lilith. Howsoever it be, this discourse of Helias the Leuite does
sufficiently declare the antiquity of Sorcerers, that go by night and
strangle young children, and he does there assure us, that these things are no
fables. Which relation would receive strength and accession of authority, if
we will allow that Jesus the son of Sirac did make that discourse, which
does at large mention all these things, and is attributed unto him in the
Hebrew book. We also find the word Lilith in the Scripture, and particularly
in the four and thirtieth of Esaias, Esaias 34.
which Saint Jerome translateth and thinks to be a Sorceresse. Thren. 4.
Ibi cubauit Lamia: whereby is meant such women as use to go in the night.
Again in the Lamentations of Jeremy he interprets this word Lilith to be a
Sorceresse, saying, Duris lib. 2. de rebus Lybicis.
Sed and Lamiae. Lamia (says Duris) was a woman, who was jealous that her
husband had begotten a child upon another woman, and thereupon in a great surie
she gave secret order to have the child strangled, and did the like by all
those whom she could get into her hands: and from her are such kind of women
by the Latins called Lamiae, whose custom was (as Jeremy has it) to show and
offer their breasts unto little children, thereby to still them, and to allure
them to come unto them, that so they might strangle them with greater secrecy.
Therefore when God threatens Babylon or Jerusalem, Esaias 34.
that witches should frequent thither, and show their teates; it is but to show
that such places should be left desolate, and utterly overthrown, because
desolate places are altogether frequented by witches, who come there to make
their assemblies, and are carried for the most part thither by the Devil, that
in such remote corners they might the more freely exercise the mysteries of
their abominations: like as thieves and murderers haunt such kind of
sollitude. Pliny lib. 25. hist. cap. 11. says that women do far exceed men
in this trade, and Quintilian in declamat. says, Latr^cinium in v^ro facilius,
veneficium in foemina. The other kind of Witches is not so execrable, because
there is no express bargain with Satan, but only a tacit agreement. And
against them S. Chrysostom homil. 13. in 1. ad Timotheum teaches us to
proceed in another fashion. Chrysostom. hom. 13. in 1. ad Timoth.
Si quis (inquit) ligatur as inanes, aut aliud quippiam eiusmodisciens and
prudens sequitur, praecepto atque imperio tantum arcendus est, sin vero ignarus
in ea inciderit, docendus est. That is to say, We are to inform the ignorant,
and to show unto them how foul the offense is, where men leave God to adhere
unto superstitions.

CHAP. VIII. An answer unto those that demand what danger there is in craving
the assistance and aid of the Devil.
IT is a general observation which is made of those that forget God, to fall
(if they do not return unto him speedily) into blindness of understanding,
and into an obduratnesse of heart, like unto that of Devils and the souls of
the damned. For as there is a sympathy and participation of good men with those
that are in Paradise; so that it may be said, that living in this world, they
have their conversation in heaven, so are there others, who differ very little
from the damned, Theodore. in haeretic. fabulis
insomuch (says Theodoret) as a man may truly say, that there are Devils in
hell better then they, because they exceed the Devils themselves in mischief
and malice. The Devils do at the least believe and tremble, Damones credunt
and contremiscunt: but these do neither believe nor fear the judgments to
come. Whereupon the wiseman says, that when a wicked man is come unto the
depth and bottom of sin, he scoffeth and makes a jest of all admonitions.
And to digress no further, the truth hereof is seen by the experience of
those, who have given their poor captive souls unto the Devil, and did
think that these things were merely fabulous, which did any way remember them
of eternal damnation. And what danger is there (say they) to command the
Devil? did not Christ Jesus himself the same? does not God sometimes use
them? and did not the Apostles also serve their turns with them, by commanding
them, as they thought good? Unto these we may propose the question, which
Saint Athanasius once did to Arrius, Athanas* in ^disputatione contra Arrium in
Niceno concilio
Si quis Sathanam adoret, rectene an male fecerit? Unto which Arrius replied,
although his understanding was dark and blind, Impius and sine Deo est neque
communem sensum habet, nec meretur hominis appellationem. So that by the very
confession of a limme of the Devil, we have four marks of him that adoreth
the Devil. First he is full of all impiety and wickedness: secondly, he is a
true Atheist: thirdly, he is deuoyd of common sense: and lastly, he is not
worthy the appellation of a man. In this Arrius spoke wonderously well, being
forced unto this confession by the truth, which overcomes all things. For if
our first parents fell into such labirynths, and are ever since styled
heretics, blind, senseless, brute beasts, although their simplicity and
ignorance was much abused, because they never heard talk of the cunning and
malice of Satan, how much more ought they to be called by such infamous
appellations, who at first dash give themselves over unto Satan and all his
works, Tertul. lib. 2. cont. Marcio.
although they are admonished by many passages of the holy Scripture, yea and
warned by the mouth of Christ Jesus, his Apostles, and all the Church to avoid
and resist Satan, and to make continual intercession to God, that they yield
not unto his temptations, because he is ever wakefull, and is fierce like a
roaring and famished Lion in the wilderness. But we live in so wretched an
age that although it were formerly said, happy is he that has not drunk of
the doctrine of Arrius, yet we are forced to wish the blinded men of our times
a conscience of that uprightness and sensiblenesse, as the conscience of that
accursed Arrius was. For let us see how deceitful and how full of lies their
sophistry is. How untrue is it that a man is to imitate God, and his Son
Christ Jesus in all things? It is a good note which a certain ancient father
has: In diuinis rebus quaedam sunt credenda, quaedam admiranda, quaedam vero
imitanda: as for example. When we find that Christ Jesus did of bread make his
body by his own might and authority, it is a work to be apprehended by
belief, not to be expressed by imitation: when he raised men from the dead,
this miracle is proposed unto us, only that we might admire his divine power,
so that if any one should labor to express so much, he is to be accounted
an usurper upon the glory of God, which is the very scope whereunto the Devil
does by his collusions lead poor blindfolded souls. By this means he
wrought our first parents destruction, persuading them as himself had already
practiced, to make themselves as God, well knowing that this was the true cause
of his expulsion out of Paradise, to make themselves as God, well knowing that
this was the true cause of his expulsion out of Paradise, for he had said in
his heart similis ero altissimo, and laid also this bait for the man and the
woman eritis sicut dij. Thus does he circumuent those, who would assume unto
themselves that authority, Coloss. 1.
which is peculiar unto God, not remembering that God is the author and creator
of all things visible and invisible, as S. Paul well shows, ex ipso, and per
ipsum, and in ipso sunt omnia, sieve quae in coelis sunt, sieve quae in terris
sunt, visibilia and inuisibilia, and in ipso flectitur omne genu coelestium,
terrestrium and infernorum. So that being the Creator of all things, he may use
and dispose of them as seems good unto him: and this he may do by the right
of creation which he has over all creatures: by which right he is adored with
a supreme and sovereign worship which is called, Latria, proper and peculiar
to him alone, Adorate Deum (says S. John) qui fecit coelum and terram, mare
and omnia, quae in ijs sunt: yet would our Luciferians (for so may those that
imitate Lucifer be called) be parellell unto God and share with him in this
worship, as if they had been his companions in the creation of visible and
inu^sible substances, yea they would use and dispose them to their behoof and
pleasure, without regard or consideration that God has appropriated diverse
things unto himself, which he would not have communicable unto men; as is his
glory, whereof he says, Gloriam meam alteri non dabo. Of the same nature and
condition is the knowledge of men's inward cogitations, the auengement upon our
enemies, the sovereign power which he has over all his creatures, in which
number are wicked spirits, which are sustained, and have their consistence by
his providence no less then the wicked men of this world have, who do here
mutiny and arm themselves against him. Another fault that is committed in
their sophistry, is their not apprehending that the rule or balance of all our
actions ought to be directed by the word of God, from which we are not to
decline neither to the right hand nor to the left, but the word of God does
strictly prohibit such traffic and familiarity with Satan: yea, it
commands that whosoever he be, that has recourse unto Magicians or
witches, upon what occasion soever, although he speak not directly unto the
Devil, yet is that person to be stoned to death without mercy. By which we
are taught that this is direct Idolatry, since in our extremities we leave God
to have redress and succor from his adversary, and to rely and have
confidence in him, acknowledging that whatsoever good betideth unto us
proceeds from the Devil, which is nothing else then worshipping him, and
making him practice that which in times past he said, Haec omnia tibi dabo, si
cadens adoraueris me. And this did open the gapp unto the ruin of Ochosias,
Saul, and many others who might as well have pleaded for themselves, as the
Athiest and Magicians of our times in this manner. What danger is there, if we
serve our turn with them at our need, since God himself does use them when
he pleases. The third fault is, that they are so far from doing as Christ
Jesus ^id, that they do clean contrary unto that which he practiced. For
Christ Jesus was so far from euocating and calling Devils unto him, that he
fortified and armed himself against their temptations by prayers and admirable
fasting: and when Satan appeared unto him unsent for, he thrust him back behind
him with hard language, saying, Vade retro Sathana, scriptum est, Dominum Deum
tuum adorabis, and illi soli seruies. And hereupon the Devil departed from
him, for he cannot endure to stay where he finds resistance; and therefore
Saint James glancing at this example of Christ Jesus, does thus lesson us,
Resistite Diabolo and fugiet a vobis: agreeable unto that of S. Peter,
Cuiresistite fortes in fide. Here we may see what we are commanded to do
after the example of Christ Jesus: we are bid to pray, and to fast that he
may not come unto us, and in case that he should present himself before us,
we are to resist him by faith, and to push him from us with all eagerness, as
S. Martin has done before us, who as Seuerus Sulpitius recites of him, when
he saw the Devil close by him he spoke, Quid hic astas cruenta bestia? And
this charge was laid upon man from the beginning of the world, to breed the
greater detestation of the Devil in him. God did make a covenant of enmity
between men and the Devil, saying, Inimicitias ponam inter te and mulierem,
inter semen tuum and semen illius: I will put mortal hatred (said God) between
the Serpent and the seed of the woman: for this great guider and ouerseer of
nature did well foreknow, that what fair pretext soever the Devil might
pretend, he hunted after nothing more then after man's destruction, as we have
already compared him unto the Crocodiles of Egypt, who do counterfaite the
voice of a man that they may devour him. So that a man had need to learn
wisdom of the dogs of Egypt, who knowing their guile and bloody
rauenousnesse, do not tarry long to drink of this river, Erasm. in Chiliad.
but if they are pressed thereunto by thirst, they give a lapp and away,
keeping on their course without long tarrying. Thus ought a man to avoid all
the temptations of Satan, and if at some times he have wicked thoughts
suggested unto him, he must by no means give way unto them, but continue on
his course, and disburthen his mind of such cogitations, otherwise if he
should give the least passage unto them, he will be in danger to be devoured:
for the Devil never goes any where but with a purpose to swallow up all that
lie fair for his mouth. And therefore our Lord who knew well his bloody malice
would by no means permit, that he should confess him to be the Son of God:
Luc. 4.
for he made not this confession (as S. Athanasius well noterh) for any good
purpose, but to lay some defamatory suspicion upon Christ Jesus, Athan. orat.
1. cont. Arrian.
and to abuse the world by this means. The fouth fault is, that men do not
mark what power Christ Jesus gave unto his Apostles and their successors over
Devils: at first, this power was given by God to bruise the Serpents head: and
to tread him under foot, as he had foretold, that the seed of the woman
should crush his venomous head: and the same does Christ Jesus say unto his
Apostles, Dedi vobis potestatem calcandi supra Serpents: which is also
witnessed by S. Paul, Deus autem conterat Sathanam sub pedibus vestris. In the
second place, this power was given unto the Church through the merits of the
precious death of Christ Jesus, with a charge to chase and drive him away.
Thirdly, this power was to be exercised in calling upon the name of Christ
Jesus, which two last points are comprehended in these words: In nomine meo
Daemonia eijcient. But Sorcerers and Magicians do not use to resist the Devil
and bruise his head, but they flatter him and call him unto them by a certain
bargain or agreement, which directly imports a subjection and dependancy:
and to be brief, they do first worship him before he will come unto them.
Again, in steed of repelling him, they come unto him for advise, aid, or
favor, whereas Christ Jesus would not so much as suffer him to speak: Origin.
in Numer.
and this is not (as Origin observes) to force the Devil, by invocation upon
the name of God, it rather argues a familiarity and intercourse which they
have together. So that if we do seriously consider all circumstances, they
do cross and go a contrary course unto Christ Jesus and the Apostles. It
cannot be gaine-said, but that sometimes they will make a semblance as if they
wept, although in truth it be nothing so. August. lib. 10. de ciuit. cap. 11.
S. Augustine recites the history of a certain Magician, who boasted much
what a command he had over Devils, saying, that when they were lasie to do
that he commanded them, he threatened to pull the heavens with such violence
that they should fall upon the earth, and thereupon the Devils would readily
execute what he had enjoined them, for fear least they should be bruised
between heaven and earth, as corn is bruised between two milstones. But who
sees not that this is the craft and counterfaite weeping of Crocodiles, that
is to say Diabolical fictions framed for deceit and cousonage? For first, it is
not the power of Angels to make the heaven descend and touch the earth, because
unto them (as S. Paul says) God has not subjected the round frame of the
world: Non enim (says he) Angelis suis subiecit Deus orbem. Nay it is so far
from being so, that it is not in the natural power of all wicked spirits that
are, to wheel about the orb of the Moon, which is the least of all the rest:
for as God has appropriated the natural operations of man's body unto a
reasonable soul, so that it is not in the power of an Angel to make this body
to live the life of plants, the life of beasts, or the life of man, although he
can enter at his pleasure into the same, as we see by experience in those that
are possessed: even so God has limited the passive power of the motions of the
heavens, unto certain Angels whom he has destinated thereunto, so that it is
a ridiculous thing to conceive, that Spirits may be bruised or crushed in
pieces. But they do herein take the advantage of men's simplicity and their
own craft, by infusing these fables into them, wherein they resemble naughty
servants that wait for an occasion to cut their masters throats. The fifth
error that blinds those Sorcerers is, because they have a conceit that the
Devil is very ready to do them service: but how is it possible that the
Devil should inuassall himself unto man, that is but a worm of the earth?
since that through the excessiiuenes of his pride which brooketh no equals, he
scorneth to be the servant of God, whom he knows to be his Creator. How can
he debase himself to be man's Lackey, when he did rather choose to relinquish
his portion in Paradise, and to burn everlastingly in hell fire, then he would
acknowledge Christ Jesus for his better. For when it was laid before him that
he should become man, the Devil said in his heart, no; before I will
acknowledge a man and a worm of the earth, I will first be damned: as that
devout and ancient father S. Bernard has well expressed it. He does indeed
make show of service unto man, but to this end, that he may be his master: for
if he be delighted corporally to possess a man, when he has gotten the
mastery of his body, how much more is he pleased when by his subtilties, and
by taking from him the knowledge of God, he gets possession of his soul?
For when he possesses the body, this affliction is many times the instrument
of salvation, as S. Paul says, Traedidi huiu smodi Sathanae, 1. Cor. 5.
vt spiritus eius saluus fiat. But when he possesses the soul, and
withdraws it from the grace of God, he is then the instrument of damnation.
And therefore the Scripture does ever figure out Satan unto us by things that
are both dangerous and dreadful unto men, as by a Serpent, by a Dragon, and by
a roaring Lion, for fear least we should say as Athiests do, that the Devil
is not so black as men do paint him: whereas contrariwise, he is so terrible
and so dangerous that all the comparisons of Centaures, dogs with three heads,
and the like monsters described unto us by Poets, fall far short of his
ugliness. If then any one should be familiar with such furious beasts, might
he not well be accounted mad and deprived of common sense? Yet Witches and
Magicians do ordinarily expose themselves to these things And this horridness
of Devils was declared unto Job, who had partly experimented the rage and
bloody malice of Satan: but he tried not all his forces, because God suffered
him not to do, all that he was willing to inflict upon Job. God then described
Satan unto him by the similitude of the most great and horrible monster of the
world called Behemoth. Hieron. aduersus vigilant. Job. 40.41.
This beast says God, is the most fearful and cruel monster of the world:
his body is armed as it were with iron, his flesh is harder then stone, so that
he cannot be crushed or hurt by the violent strokes of hammers, neither can
the sharpest lances enter into him, nor pierce him more then so many strawes:
if men should go about to strike him down with tumbling upon him great stones
from a rock, it would be but lost labor, and he would be no more enda^gered
thereby then if they threw balls of flax against him. God further speaks unto
Job of this monster: do thou think to put a hook into his nostrills as men
take fishes, or when he is before thee do thou conceive that he is affraide
of thee? Nunquid multiplicabit tibi preces, aut loquetur tibi mollia. Will he
behave himself like a dog that flattereth his master, and lies at his feet
for fear of being beaten; or if he come to some agreement with thee, do
thou imagine that he does it to any other end then to devour thee? Nunquid
feriet tecum pactum, and accipies eum quasi seruum sempiternum? Will thou play
with him as a bird, and tie a thread about his leg to keep him in, or to let
him fly at thy pleasure? Nunquid illudes ei quasi aui? Last of all God says,
Memento belli, nec vltra addas loqui: remember that he is a murderer from the
beginning, that he is thy arch-enemy, and does continually wage war against
thee. Do not hurt thy self by these foolish speeches, and by saying that thou
use him as thy servant, it is impossible: for he is to be mastered only by
faith, and not by covenant or agreement. He is a liar, and when he spieth his
advantage will deceive thee, and when against his promise he shall break thy
neck, before what Judge will thou bring in thy action, to have reparation of
the wrong he does thee. Another thing that offers it self unto
consideration is, that being a liar, and being not ashamed to lie manifestly to
Christ Jesus, in promising him that which he was not able to perform, Matthew.
4.
saying, Haec omnia tibi dabo: Men ought not to deceive themselves, and say,
that he would be ashamed to promise unto a man that which is not in his power
to compass, as not to be slain in battle, or to warrant and preserve him
from all dangers; Gregor. Nazian. orat. in Cyprian.
whereof we have an example in Gregory Nazianzen, who reports of S. Cyprian
that he became a Magician before he was a Christian, that he might enjoy a
young woman whom he loved: and although the Devil had promised him to satisfy
his desire, yet he was at last constrained by Gods commandment to confess
unto him, that he had promised him a thing which was not in his power to
perform, Athanas oration. 1. aduersus Arrian.
which was the ^ause of his conversion to the Christian religion. S. Athanasius
who was familiarly acquainted with Antonius Monachus, a second Job in the time
of the Gospel, does eloquently describe the sleights and subtleties of Satan.
He dissembleth and hides (says he) that which he is indeed, appearing in a
goodly shape, and gracing himself with some name of humor, which he shall
perceive to be most pleasing unto our honor. Wherein he resembles Pirates,
who when they espy any pretty children on the shore, they draw near unto them,
and flatter them, speaking as fair unto them as their fathers and mothers
possibly could; they show them apples, and cast unto them other toys, which
they conceive may please and stay these children: but when they have enticed
them a shipbord, they presently hoyse sail, and carry them far enough from
father or mother, selling them and making them slaves in a strange country as
long as they live. I would have all those, who have suffered themselves to be
thus abused by Satan, to remember well this discourse of so famous a man; and
with the prodigal child to return unto the house of their father, and by
some trick or other to make an escape from that bloody and mercliesse tyrant,
that sets before them nothing but husks to eat: that is, he promises
vain, frivolous, and unnecessary things, full of deceitfulness and cousonage.
But in case they will not return, then must that be put in execution, which is
set down in the law of God, in the 20. chapter of Exodus, that is, to put them
to an extraordinary death, which may strike a terror into others, and serve as
an example for all kind of people. This was religiously practiced in Auignon
in the year of grace 1582. by the diligence of father Florus Prouin, at that
time Inquisitour of the faith in those parts, unto whom I was an associate in
the said Inquisition, where there were 18. men and women executed, who were
convicted and very deservedly condemned, after they had by their own
depositions and mutual accusations one of another, given sufficient proof of
their guiltiness, as shall appear by the sentence pronounced against them;
the extract whereof ensues next after this following chapter, to the end that
every one may see how far these kind of men are separated from the knowledge
of God, and how justly they deserve to be burned. For conclusion and
resolution of this discourse, let us only mark that which Tertullian teaches
us, to wit, that neither Christ Jesus, nor his Apostles, nor any well deserving
sons of the Church, did ever call unto them wicked Spirits, but rather did
repel and drive them from them by the efficacy and power of Gods word. It
clearly appears in the Gospel that this was the practice of Christ Jesus:
Erat Jesus eijciens Daemonium; si in digito Dei eijcio Daemonia: so that
whatsoever Christ Jesus did in this behalf, he did it to this end to cast them
out, and to make them odious and abominable before men. And as it appears in
the ttenh of Matthew, the power that he gave unto his Apostles was only to
cast out Devils: for it is there said, that having chosen them for his
Apostles, he sent them forth with authority over unclean Spirits, but limited
and restrained unto this, to repel and cast them out. Dedit eis potestatem
(says the text) Spirituum immundorum, vt eijcerunt eos. And again after his
resurrection he sent them abroad unto all places of the world, and gave them
power over Devils, but with the abouenamed restriction, to cast them out,
saying, In nomine meo Daemonia eijcient. Read the Acts of the Apostles, and you
shall find that they did nothing else but cast out wicked Spirits, neither did
any man of worth in the Church of God ever exceed these limits, and those who
have trespassed in passing further, do show that they are aliens from the
Church of Christ Jesus, and are disciples in the school of Satan. And this is
it which Tertullian did well note, Nos non inuitatoria operatione, sed
e^^ugnatoria dominatione tractamus. And in another place, he witnesses, that
none but Christians could cast out Devils, insinuating thereby, that Painims
and Magicians had traffic and intercourse with wicked Spirits, but that
Christians never had to do with them, but according to the power which was
bequeathed unto them by Christ Jesus, to drive and cast them out. And for
further illustration hereof, see the passages that are cited in the beginning
of the Preface of this book.

CHAP. IX. Whether the Articles contained in the depositions of Sorcerers ought
to be taken as idely and dreamingly spoken, or whether they ought to be
received for truth.
THis question is as difficult as it is necessary, it is difficult because I
never, lighted upon any author ancient or modern, that has debated or
determined the same: it is necessary, because in this one point the very knot
of the difficulty lies, which we are now about to untie, that is to say,
whether that which Sorcerers do depose do happen unto them by dreams and
diabolical illusions, or whether they really practice the same. Hieron lib. de
scrip. Eccles.
Justin Martyr (as Saint Jerome reports) made a Treatise in his time touching
the nature and property of wicked Spirits: the which but that time has bin so
injurious unto us, as to snatch and as it were ravish it out of our hands,
would have ministered unto us (as we may easily conjecture by his other writings
that do yet remain unto posterity) very ample and clear resolutions of this
doubt, and would teach us, that what is commonly spoken of Witches, is not
fabulously given out, but assuredly verified to be true. For in his first
Apology which he made for the Christians, he is bold confidently and
resoluedly to affirm, that wicked Spirits have had carnal knowledge sometimes
with women and sometimes with men. And in his second Apology he says, that
Devils will seildome do what a man would have them, except it be with certain
conditions, as in Necromancy he will have a boy to be brought unto him, that
is young and tender of age. And in the 52. question which he proposes unto
Christians, he wishes all men to proceed warily and with all advised
circumspection in this argument of wicked Spirits and of Sorcerers. In which he
gives us to understand that we are not to go on inconsideratly in searching
after two things, which are very strange unto the simple people, and which we
now will recite out of him: (for we ought to embrace the advice of so great a
personage, 2. These. 2.
seeing Saint Paul himself does declare unto us, that the works of Satan
shall be set out with all signs and wonders, so that they shall exceed all
our natural forces) for resolution hereof we must here make a distinction,
which many not observing have run and plunged themselves into many errors.
The distinction is this: amongst all the effects that Satan does practice in
the behalf of those that owe their service unto him, there are two manners of
working: the first does happen unto them when they sleep; the second is
practiced also when they wake. Hereunto we might adioyne many sub-diuisions,
but it shall suffice hereafter to allege such as we shall adiudge necessary
for this purpose. Now that this happens after these two several ways, the
Scriptures in many passages does confirm it: for numbering up the works which
Satan practices for them, that have made an express covenant with him, they
do seildome fail of the one side to allege the observation of dreams, and of
the other side the abomination of charms; where we may observe, that
divination from dreams is ever practiced by sleeping, and charms when men are
awake. The first place that confirms the truth hereof may be taken from the
19. of Leuiticus, where it is said: Leuit. 19.
Non augurabimini nec obseruabitis somnia. Another place is in the second book
of the Chronicles the 33. Chapter, 2. Paralip. 33.
where it is said of King Manasses: Obseruabat somnia, sectabatur Auguria,
maleficis artibus inseruiebat, habebat autem secum Magos and incantatores,
multaque mala operatus est. There is another passage in the 27. Chapter of
Jeremy, Ierem. 27.
where God says unto his people: Vos ergo nolite audire Prophet as veslros,
and diuinos, and somniatores, and Augures, and maleficos. The fourth place is
in the tenth of Zachary, where it is said: Diuini viderunt mendacium, and
somniatores locuti sunt frustra. And this was the very practice of Balaam whose
custom was first heedfully to observe his dreams, Number. 22.
and when he was awake to make his charms, as you may see in the 22. Chapter
of Numbers. I am not ignorant, that some may here cauil and say, that those
dreams were of a different quality unto the dreams of the Sorcerers of our
times: notwithstanding it does sufficiently make for our purpose, if we declare
by Scripture, yt among the wicked and prohibited works, which Satan acts in
those that give themselves unto him, some are by way of dreams, and others are
done waking, and are really true. And although the natures of dreams may be
infinitely varied, (a thing incident to all dreams, whether they be divine,
Tertul. lib. de Anima cap. de somnijs.
natural, or diabolical, which is the full and complete division of dreams,
that Tertullian makes in his book of the soul in the Chapter de somnijs) yet
cannot these several qualities or diversities, make these dreams that they
should not be the real works of Satan, as in like manner the diversity of
them does not hinder them, to be divine or natural. This distinction does
prompt unto us another, and that is, that those things which are dreams to
some, are truths to others, and this is also common unto divine and natural
dreams, Judge. 7.
for there is no repugnancy that one man may really practice that, which
another man dreameth of himself: as in the book of Judges, we hear of a
soldier who dreamed that Gedeon came to assault and force their camp, and at
the same time, Gedeon did indeed come unto their camp, and did that which the
other dreamed. I do purposely let pass diverse other, whether they be divine,
natural, or diabolical, which are recited by Tertullian in the place above
alleged: let it suffice to relate one discourse out of Saint Augustine very
pregnant for the purpose now in hand: August. lib. 18. de Ciuitat Dei cap. 18.
where he makes mention of a certain man of his time, who was very desirous
to understand the meaning of a passage in Plato, that was very obscure unto
him, and to that purpose did oftentimes address himself unto a Philosopher,
and repared much unto his house to have his opinion concerning the same, but he
could never understand the interpretation of it. At the last, as this man was
up late in his study there came unto him, as he thought, this P^ilosopher and
began to speak unto him of the said passage, and in conclusion did so clearly
explain and unfold it, that he rested very fully satisfied. It chanced not
long after, that this Philosopher came again unto him, whereupon he demanded
him, why he would not give explication of the said passage at home in his own
house, but had rather interpret it in the house of another man. To which the
Philosopher replied, I did indeed dream that I had expounded this passage
unto you, but the truth is I never did. From hence Saint Augustine infers,
that the same thing which is a dream to one may be a truth to another: for
whiles the Philosopher was dreaming that he was expounding the said passage,
the other received waking the real words of that exposition. He also tells
of another, who having slept diverse days together, so that he could be waked
by no means that they could use unto him; he told his servants when he did
awake, that he dreamed that he was changed into an horse, and that he hid
prouender in a certain field which he described unto them, and it was indeed
found that such an accident had happened. Upon these two suppositions we
affirm, that those things which are reported of Sorcerers might be both
dreamed and done, and that which was a dream to one might be a truth to
another. And for the first, we are to attribute unto dreams, whatsoever is
written in the 26. distinction of the Decretals in cap. Episcopi, Distinct. 26.
cap. episc.
which is so often alleged by those that hold all witch-crafts whatsoever to
be nothing else but dreams, when as the particulars there recited are not
only false and fabulous, but repugnant unto Scripture, and impossible to
Satan, such as is the raising of Herodias to life: this opinion we ought to
have of the like sentences and authorities. In the second place we are to rank
all charms and wicked practices wrought by Sorcerers and Magicians, which the
holy Scripture, the Fathers, and a cloud of Histories do mention, as things
really put in execution. By which means we shall easily reconcile as well the
Scriptures, and the Fathers, as Histories also, which otherwise might seem to
cross and contrary one the other. As for example, John Baptista the Neapolitan
in his 2. book and 26. Chapter, reports that himself being curious to know
the truth of that which witches do depose, he so ordered the matter that he
beheld with his own eyes that which they did, and indeed having gotten the
consent of an old witch, he saw all their manner of proceeding through the
chinke of a doare, and beheld an old woman standing naked, and anointing her
self with a certain ointment, which when she had done she fell into such a
sound sleep, that she could not be awaked by the most violent stripes that
could be laid upon her. At the last being awaked, she affirmed that she had
passed over the seas, and had seen diverse strange sights which she recited in
his presence, and in the presence of diverse others who together with him came
to see the same. And when they showed unto her the marks of the stripes which
she had received when she was a sleep, she would believe nothing of these
things. Apuleius reports of himself, that being curious to see the fashions
of witches, he was brought by a chamber-maide to a secret place, where he
might behold them, and looking in like manner through the chinke of the chamber
door, he saw a naked witch besmearing of her self with an ointment which she
had, and while she was rubbing and anointing her self, she was transformed by
little and little (as seemed unto him) into an Oule, and at the last there
appeared wings upon her, and soon after she flew abroad through the window:
of which strange metamorphosis himself, as he said, was the spectator. These
two Histories reported by two men curious beyond ordinary to understand the
truth of these secrets, do well show that both the one and the other might be
true enough: for we ought not to give more credit to John Baptista the
Neapolitan then to Apuleius the Affrican, since Saint Augustine himself dared
not to affirm, that those strange things which Apuleius wrote were fables:
Apul. de Asino aureo.
he rather shows how these things may be done. We may therefore do well to
yield both to the one and the other, and not from a particular fact to infer
a general conclusion, as they do who attribute all these things unto dreams
only, which is against the rule in Logic, a particulari ad universal
consequentia nulla. There might also be mistakes and mistes in the eyes, as
Saint Augustine teaches in the book and Chapter before cited: where relating
the History of Iphigenia, August. de ciuitate lib. 18. cap. 18.
he says, that she was not really sacrificed as all the assembly did imagine,
but there was a stagge conveyed in steed of her, which by ye charms of the
Devil did appear unto the lookers on to be Iphigenia. It may also fall out,
that through the same impostures of the Devil, men may think they see the body
of a man, when it is nothing so, and having their eyes dazeled and disaffected,
they may mistake one thing for another. Clemens in recognitionib.
And hereof there are many relations in Saint Clement, which he recites in his
books of Recognitions, where he also describes sundry feats which he saw
Simon Magus to practice. Yet on the contrary part, it is not always true that
this happens through impostures and illusions, as the History of Hermotymus
w^ll witnesses, Tertul. lib. de anima cap. de Hermotymo.
who sundry times told his wife that in the time of his sleep he visited
diverse parts and quarters of the world, his soul for a time relinquishing his
body, and afterward returning home unto him, whereof he was verily persuaded.
His enemies would make trial of the truth hereof by cutting his throat, but as
Tertullian ieastingly says, his soul came not back again in time, so that
he never waked after. Now if this had been done by charms and delusions, he
had been in no danger to have died, because they should not have meddled with
his body, but with a seeming and supposititious body; but it being otherwise,
it appears that it was his own body. So that there are three manners of
proceeding; for either they sleep and dream, or they go thither really, or
the Devil puts himself in their place, and carries them some where else.
Thus may these sundry ways be all true, and such an accident may happen either
merely in a dream, or really and indeed; Caiet. in 2. m 2^. q. 95. art. 2.
or else the body which appears to lie asleep may prove a phantasme,
although it may so fall out, that sometimes it is the true body of him, whose
we think it to be. The difficulty then lies in the distinguishing and
discerning when such a thing really is acted, or when there is but an apparancy
of the same by dreams and impostures. August. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 18.
S. Augustine in that notable chapter above cited, does if we mark him well,
give us the resolution hereof: for he tells us, that in these cases there
are three remarkable rules, that present themselves unto our observations. The
first is, that you must judge of these things by the experience and reality
that ensues thereupon; as if a man would know, whether there were the true and
perfect reality of that which was represented in the sacrifice of Iphigenia,
the answer is, that there was not, but that there was another substance by a
diabolical art foysted into her place: for experience (says he) did
afterward declare that Iphigenia was found in another country far remote
from thence, whether she had been carried alive by the Devils, and lived a long
time after this accident. By the like experience he concludes, that the
companions of Diomedes were not turned into birds as was conceived, because,
the said birds did build their nests, and multiplied their kind as other birds
usually do. Now this propagation of their kind is a reality which gives
sufficient proof to conclude, that these men were carried into other places by
Devils, and these birds were cunningly and suddenly conveyed into their rooms:
neither could these birds be merely apparances, but they were truly as they
seemed, and the experience of the reality of their nature does blow away all
suspicions of illusion. Besides, the Devils impostures (as S. Thomas has
learnedly observed) can have no long time of subsistence, because they are not
real natures, D. Thom.
but only common accidents (as the Logicians term them) whose property is to
be easily changed by any natural alteration. This rule gives us to
understand, that what Moses did in Egypt and in the wilderness was not done
by illusion; Exodus 7.
for the fishes did die indeed in the river that was changed into blood, and
the Caterpillars and other vermin that spoiled the corn, the barley, the
vines, and trees of Egypt were truly that which they seemed to be. It also
declares that what the Devil wrought against Job was not seemingly done, Job.
2.
but really acted with a great deal of malice; witness the death of his
children and servants, and the downfall of the house upon them. This rule we
are to practice in the charms of Witches, and to see if there be any reality
in that which they give out they have done: which falling out so frequently
true, we are no longer to question the verity of the same. There is a reality
in their murdering of Infants; for it is confirmed by the report of their
parents, that the children which they said they had strangled, were found
strangled indeed, as they had themselves deposed. In like manner the dis
interring of their bodies was a truth, because their bones were not found lying
in their graves. There is a reality in the mark which they bear in their
bodies, the which of all other parts is leprous, and deuoid of sense, and which
can be found upon none but upon such as are said to be Witches. There is also
a reality in the piece of their garment, which in sign of homage they present
unto the Devil, and we have seen with our eyes, that such a like piece was
wanting in their garment, as they themselves had reported. There is a manifest
reality in the charms which they cast upon man and beast, making them dull and
almost dead, and by their words reviving and setting them in as good plight as
they were before; not (says Lactantius) that they can heal diseases, Lactan.
li. 2. diuinar. inst. cap. 16. Luc. 11. Luc. 13.
for this is not in the compass of the Devils power, although it be in their
natural power to infuse an infirmity into any part of a living body, as
appears in the history of the Demoniaek that was both dumb and deaf, and of
the woman that was crooked, so that she could not lift up her eyes to heaven;
and therefore by taking away this impediment they do not really cure a
disease, but withdraw the stop that hindered those operations of nature, God
sometimes permitting him by his just, though hidden judgment to do this,
although further then this he cannot pass, August. lib. 2. cont. aduersa
legis cap 12. and lib. 22. cont. Faust. cap. 72. and lib. de S. Virg. cap. 40.
and 42.
as S. Augustine often inserreth. So that it is apparent by the first rule,
that the confessions made by Sorcerers are not always dreams, but do
oftentimes contain facts that have been really practiced.

The second rule drawn both from S. Augustine, and from S. Thomas is, to
observe whether all that is spoken in this argument, does lie in the natural
power of the Devil. August. lib. 1. de ciuit. cap. 18.
This S. Augustine obscurely notes when in the history of Diomedes he says,
that this transmutation was by a secret substraction and conueying away of
their bodies, because it does transcend the natural power of Devils to change
one body into another according to their substance; and therefore it must needs
be that this collusion was by transporting and placing one body into the room
of another. S. Augustine would not yield unto the first, because as he had
already declared, it was above the natural power of the Devil: but he
grants the second, in regard that it is within the compass of his force and
working: Neque enim (says he) daemonibus iudicio dei permissis huiusmodi
praestigia difficilia esse possunt. And as he expresses it else where, the
Devil can do this when he will, and how he will, if so be that God does
expressly command him, or does leave him to his own nature: Quando volunt, and
quomodo volunt Deo vel iubente vel sinente. S. Thomas betaketh himself to this
rule when he says, D. Thom. 1. p. q. 114. art. 4. ad 2.
that if the Devil should busy himself in the resurrection of the dead. or
in any other supernatural workings, we must be strong that all these things
are mere illusions: for although God by his universal providence does employ
wicked Spirits upon many occasions, yet does he never use them in working of
miracles, which he reserueth unto himself, and to his, because Devils have no
capacity to receive such supernatural endowments. This rule did distinguish
the magical works of Simon Magus from those of S. Peter and the other
Apostles, Clemens in recognit. lib. 3. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 57.
as S. Clement, and S. Ireneu^ do witness: and this rule shall make the
works of Antichrist to be discerned from those of the Christians. And this
rule gave Saint Augustine occasion to say, that not only the admirable works
of the Devil comprehended in the old and new Testament were to be believed,
but also many other things were to be credited, which profane histories, and
Poets themselves do mention of them, and which were in former ages accounted
fables: although S. Augustine out of the great subtility of his spirit, and his
deep knowledge in holy Writ, would not venture to say that they were fables;
he rather shows that this might be true either really or in outward
appearance. For as Tertullian said: Tertul. lib. de anima.
Daemones, soli nouere Christiani. From whence could the Christians better know
this then from the Scriptures? Whereupon it follows, that none can truly and
iudicially determine this point, unless he be conversant in the holy
Scriptures, and in the ancient Fathers, from whence the true resolution hereof
may be drawn. S. Thom. p. q. 114. ar. 4.
To conclude this point touching the extent of the Devils natural power, and
how far it teaches, it is not my intendment to enlarge my discourse thereof
to the full; I will only say with Saint Thomas who had the soul of S.
Augustine, Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. Sacrae lib. 3. in Thoma.
as a man may say, doubled upon him, that it is in the Devils natural power to
do as much as the utmost strength of nature can reach unto: for he is able to
use those means which nature accustometh to serve her self withal, Vid.
Justin. q. 2^. ad Orthodox.
and applies one thing unto another, just as nature does: as when a man by
applying a torch unto char-coale does presently fire the same, which nature
would also produce but at more leisure: and this appears in the causes of
lightning, which are longer ere they produce their effect, whereas we shoot
off our Artillery suddenly and without premeditation. And this we are taught by
experience: for the Angels, who wheel about the heavens, by the application of
their motions unto these i^feriour elements, do cause natural things to be
produced, ever presupposing a matter and form whereupon to work, which were
immediately created by God himself. Hence it is that they are called both in
the Psalms and in the Gospel, Psalm. 32. Luc. 12.
Virtutes Coelorum: for without them the heavens would have no more efficacy
or power in the production of things, then the body has to work without a
soul; which S. Augustine well glanceth at in the third Book against Maximin
the Arrian, August. lib. 3. cont. Maxim. cap. 17.
the seventeenth chapter: So that those things which Sorcerers depose are
within the natural power of Satan; as may be seen in the whole frame of this
Book, especially in the Annotations upon the ensuing Sentence. Therefore it is
plain that the second rule does positiuely conclude that all these workings
are not merely dreams: and this is not repugnant to Scripture, Fathers, or
Histories, much less unto reason; and for further verification of this second
rule, observe that which is written in the book of Exodus, Exodus
where mention is made of Pharaohs Magicians, and also that which is set down
in the first three Chapters of the book of Job. Job. 1. 2. 5.


The third rule is grounded upon general causes and occurrences. S. Augustine
dared not to call these things fables, but amasseth and heapeth together
whatsoever had been formerly practiced, or remained in use in his time, in all
the quarters of the world. Some of those whom he questioned with, did tell him
what they had heard related unto them by very credible persons, others what
they had seen and found by their own experience. See S. Augustine in the 16.
17. and 18. chapters of the eighteenth book of the City of God. August lib.
18. de ciuit. cap. 16. 17. 18. Hippocrates lib. 2. de morbis, and lib. de
affection.
This generality gave occasion unto Hippocrates to speak divinely, of those
universal and national diseases, saying that a general plague cannot proceed
from ordinary causes in nature, but must be attributed to come from God, and
from invisible causes. The same may be said in this theme of Witches, which is
no less important. It is a wondrous thing, that the Witches of France and of
our times, should depose no more nor no less, then those of Germany, 60. or
80. years ago. And And whereas it may be said that they have been traded in
the books which have been written either in Latin or in the vulgar tongue, by
learned men, that have set down their behauiours agreeable unto the truth of
their own depositions: yet we shall find them to be mechanical persons, so
deuoid of all show of learning, that through the earthinesse of their
understandings, they rather seem to be beasts then men. Hence we may infer,
that this generality and conformity of the facts, does make a full declaration
of the truth thereof, if we will yield unto probabilities and reason: which is
another ground that we will propound to those that say, that there is a
repugnancy in reason against these things. For how can that which happens
upon a set day, as upon a Thursday, or the like, be said to be a dream? if
it were so, why might it not as well fall out upon some other day? yet is it
agreed upon at all hands, that these assemblies of Witches are never held but
upon Thursdaies: whereupon we demand, why rather on this day then upon any
other? Again, if it were but a dream, how chances it that so many people, in
such diversity of places, and dwelling in countries so remote one from another,
should in one and the self same time have all one kind of dream? Physicians
hold, that the diversities of meats, and their several quantities, do breed
and cause the variety we have in dreams: and is it likely that all those
persons, do at the same time use the same kinds of meats, and in the self
same quantity, that they thus iumpe and concur in dreams of the same chance
and nature? They further affirm, that the several complexions of men do also
beget a diversity in dreams: so that the sanguine man dreameth of pleasant
things: the melancholicke of sad accidents: the martialist of war: in like
manner, the dreams of young men are ordinarily different from the dreams of
old men; and the dreams of men do vary from those of women: Arist. lib. de
Some. Artemidor. de Somnior. interpretatione.
wherein I appeal to Aristotle, Artemidorus and others, who have made set
Treatises of this argument. Since then for the most part these kind of Witches
are different in complexion, age, sex, and sect, how happens it that they
should all dream? or if they do dream, whence arises it that they should
all dream the self same thing, without variation in any circumstance one from
another; and which is more, in the same day and hour? It will be said, that
the Devil is assuredly the cause hereof. Be it so, now you come near unto the
truth, since you grant that this does transcend the forces of man, and that it
must be attributed to the working of the Devil. Thereupon I demand, since that
it is by them decreed upon, that this is a true dream, because it is in the
Devils power to effect such a thing, why are they so precise to acknowledge a
reality in the fact, when it is also in the compass of the Devils power, to
accomplish the same? Besides experience confirms it, neither is it against
Scriptures, Fathers, or Histories: nay it is foreshowen unto us, that at the
end of the world, these things should be more frequent then ever they were
before; as we will afterward prove. But it is not probable, that such a
generality and conformity should be a dream foysted in by the Devil. Justin
Mart. q 40. Didym. lib. 1. de Some. Thom. 1. p. q.
For first, one Devil can work but in one place at one time, as Justin
Martyr, Didymus, and S. Thomas do declare. So that it cannot be one Devil
alone that is to labor this business, but they must be many, and their
number must equal the number of the Sorcerers and Witches that are to dream;
and then must they labor and run in and out, yea and tie themselves unto a
set day and hour; which is as strange as the reality of the fact. For why
should the Devil deny to do such a thing, but at a set time, and should tie
himself unto this day and hour, rather then to any other? It may happen that
the Devils advantage shall at that very time lie another way, and there may
some great occasion offer it self to tempt others in matters of a far more
execrable nature then these dreams are, so that they cannot attend this, and
then it must needs follow, that many of these Sorcerers cannot dream, because
their Devils are employed in more diabolical negotiations, and use therein
both their art and apprehension. Besides the Devil may stir the fantasy of
a man as appears by the temptations which he presents before us, Joan. 13.
Act. 5. S. Thom. 1. p. q. 111. art. 3. ad. 2. m
and as he practiced upon Judas, Anaenias, and Saphira, but he cannot use our
fantasies at his pleasure, and present unto them whatsoever he will, because
it is in our power to divert his working from them. For as S. Thomas says, he
cannot make an impression of colors into the fantasy of one that is borne
blind, neither can he make the sound of a voice in one that is naturally deaf
(which is beyond the power of nature her self) yet is he able to move the
fantasy, and to offer unto it, those objects which it has formerly received.
Now the fantasies of all these kinds of people are not in every respect alike,
neither are they at all times, and upon all occasions equally disposed; so that
it will be very improbable, to attribute this co^fluence of fantasies unto
dreams, yea it will be more incredible, then to affirm that these things are
palpablie and really practiced, considering what we have already alleged for
confirmation of the same. For there is no absurdity that can follow thereupon,
neither is it against the Scripture, Fathers, Histories, or reason. But
touching the first assertion, that they are but dreams, there are many
inconveniences that do unavoidably follow upon it, as we have in part
declared. One point remains unresolved, which may s^agger weak and unadvised
persons in reading the Fathers. Lodouicus Viues of Granada, who has commented
upon S. Angustines books of the City of God, when he undertakes to comment
upon that notable and learned chapter, which we have so often alleged, he
shows himself to be a very mean divine, as indeed he was, although he was
well seen in humane learning: and those who read his Commentaries will
perceive that he was (if I may so speak) rather an Idiot then a Divine. He
then seeing S. Augustine was clear of opinion, that these things are not
always fables, but might fall out indeed; as where Apuleius reports of
himself, that he was transformed into an Ass; that is to say, he was
covered with the likeness of that beast; he (I say) not being able to
comprehend this with Saint Augustine, does run into three g^osse faults:
First he accuses S. Augustine of ignorance, and says that he read not Lucian,
because he cared not for the Greek language. Secondly, that Apuleius had
drawn his discourse from Lucian, who says that he had made this of his own
head for sport and pastime. The third fault that he commits (which is the
absurdest of all) is, that whereas S. Augustines conclusion is, that these
things may either be fables, or practiced truths (which is the very
resolution of our discourse) Viues does oppose against this, and says, that it
cannot be but that all these things are merely imaginary and fabulous; and
alleges the authority of Pliny, that they are not to be held for true.
Touching his accusation, that S. Augustine was ignorant, and had not read the
works of Lucian; it cannot be made to appear that it is so: how many Greek
Authors can we cite both sacred and profane, Aug. lib. Conf.
whom Saint Augustine has fitly and to good purpose alleged? although it be
true, that he did naturally hate the Greek tongue, as himself confesses in
his books of Confessions, and did therefore the more apply himself unto
Latin. A Commentatour should not lightly burden his Author, whom he goes
about to explain, with ignorance, he should rather defend him in whatsoever
may admit of a defense. Touching the other imputation, that Apuleius had taken
his history from Lucian, it is so far from being true, that it rather
appears to the contrary. For Lucian says, that those things which he had
written were fables devised by himself: but Apuleius affirms confidently,
that what he had set down, was a certain truth: he goes further, and
reproves those, that conceive these things to be dreams, and says that such
do show themselves to be altogether unpracticed in affairs of of such secrecy
and importance. Apul. Apol. 1. and 2.
And if Apuleius had conceived that these things were imaginary only, why had
he not, when he was personally cited before the Governor of Afric for
witchcraft, and Magic, made a short resolution of this doubt in both his
Apologies, which he published to clear himself, and said, that it was but a
popular report and a very fable. But we see he does not so, but endeavors to
purge himself from the suspicion of being one of those that practiced these
things. Tertul. lib. de Anima. Augustine.
Touching the third; either Viues had not read, or at the least remembered not
the sentences of Tertullian and Saint Augustine, alleged in the Preface unto
this discourse: by the which it is euinced, that Paynims were blind and
ignorant in the knowledge of good and bad Spirits; yet does Viues prefer the
opinion of Pliny an Infidel and an Atheist, before Saint Augustines, who was
the most celebrious and learned Doctor of the Church of God. Certainly if
Viues had continued this fashion down to his last Commentaries, where Saint
Augustine does largely prove, that there shall be a general resurrection in
the same flesh and bones; Viues might as well have said that this was not to
be credited, because Pliny is of a contrary opinion, and might have ieasted
also at this as at a thing full of impossibility and falsehood. So that
whatsoever Saint Augustine does affirm in this behalf, he did not take the
same from the Schools of Philosophers, but from the Scriptures, and Schools
of Christians, which he calls the City of God. This chapter of Saint
Augustine has been much better explained by a certain Doctor of Divinity,
well seen in the Scripture, and conversant in the Fathers, and in the doctrine
of Saint Thomas, who commented upon the said books before Viues his time, and
although he were not so learned in humane sciences as Viues was, yet was he a
better divine then he. Who when he comes to the explication of this chapter,
he only gives this brief advertisement of the same. Hic (inquit) diligenter
notandus est modus possibilitatis quem ponit Augustinus in transformationibus
hominum and bestiarum, qui a minus studiosis videt^r difficilis ad
intelligendum. In which he thwarteth Viues, and touches him to the quick, who
does not only conceit this to be d^fficult but also impossible. To conclude,
he that is desirous to see a large and learned Comment upon this chapter of S.
Augustine, D. Thom. 1. p. q. 114. a^t. 4. Joan. Georgius Goldemanus in
disputatione habita Rostochii 26. Februarii anno 1584 in collegio Fratrum
excussa, Francofurt: propositione prima, secunda and tertia. Propositione 11.
12. 14.
let him read S. Thomas in his first part 114 question, art. 4. In the year
1584. a Germane Lawyer, called Mr. George Goldeman did first publicly defend
by argument (as himself declares) and afterward caused 80. propositions to
be printed, which wholly tended to prove, that the things which Sorcerers
depose, are nothing else but dreams and fancies. Unto which it will be
needless to make a full and distinct answer, because they are all of them
confuted in diverse passages of this discourse. Yet we shall do well to
observe, that he affirms, that before him no man did make the distinction
between a Magician, a Sorcerer, and a Poysoner, and that the default of this
distinction was the cause that none hitherto could resolve this difficulty.
And although he grant that Magicians and Poysoners are worthy to suffer death,
yet he denies that Sorcerers are to be punished with the like, because they
have nothing that is hurtful in them but mere imaginations and illusions:
yea, he is bold to say, that although, when they are awake, they yield their
assent unto such imaginations, yet are they no way culpable either before God
or men. Propositione 38. vsque 61.
And to excuse them the more colourably, he alleges that they are drawn into
it by the deceit and sub^letie of Satan, and through ignorance and fear: but
herein he shows himself too zealous and eager in their defense. For, if
there be a consent and delectation in such fantasies, there can not possibly
be a constraint: and if those concupiscentiall and fleshly cogitations which
arise from the corruption of our nature be condemned by the law of God, Exodus
10. Matthew. 5.
how much more execrable is that impure carnal commixtion with Devils,
although there be only a desire, delectation or contentment in the same. But
to confute him in one word, since in his 12. proposition he mainteineth that
Magicians do really renounce God and their Baptism, and do adore the Devil,
doing all which he commands them, and putting their whole trust and
confidence in him, so far as to recommend their souls and bodies unto him at
the point of death: we would ask a reason of him, why Sorcerers should not be
as liable unto death as those who^ he calls Magicians, when they trespass in
the same, or in amore abominable manner then the others do. For example, if a
murderer be guilty of death, much more does a parricide deserve the same, and
if a fornicatour be severely punished, a far greater degree of castigation
ought to be inflicted upon him that commits adultery: but it is certain
that Sorcerers are known to do whatsoever he conceiueth Magicians are able to
perform: nay many times they do a great deal worse, and therefore are more
punishable then they. And what lets it, but that all these things may
concur in one man? since the Scripture itself makes mention of some that
were Inchanters, Magicians, Diuiners, Poysoners and Witches altogether, as
amongst the rest King Manasses for one. So that we shall do well to call those
sentences to mind which we have formerly cited to this purpose, as also those
which are alleged in the 6. chapter of this book. But this man's error is, in
that he thinks it an impossibility, that Devils should carry men or women in
the air, or should have carnal knowledge with women, or that such kind of
persons should have the resembla^ces of woolfes, dogs or cats, as he
expresses it in his 68. Proposition, as also in the 69. and 71. All which
errors have their full confutation in this book. The grace of our Lord be
present with us always. Amen.

THE EXTRACT OF THE SENTENCE GIVEN IN AVIGNON, AGAINST EIGHTEEN men and women
Witches, in the year of grace 1582. at which I my self was present, and was
an assistant unto the Inquisitour of the faith: which is here set down in
Latin, just as it was then read and pronounced.
EXEMPLAR SENTENTIAE CONTRA fascinarios latae Auenioni, anno domini 1582.
VIsis processibus contra N.N.N. etc. coram nobis constitutosreos accusatos,
and delatos, quibus tam per vestram and quorumlibet vestrum relationem ac
propriam confessionem iuridice coram nobis factam saepius inramento fundente
ipso rugiente diabolo denuo aquam, quam accepistis, vestro vero mutato nomine,
in sacro baptismatis font vobis imposi^o, sicque aliud commentitium nomen
vobis dicti sathanae immisistis, infantes que per vos, nonnullis etiam
scientibus tantum and annuentibus, art iam dicta malefica, oppressos,
confossos and interfectos fuisse, ac denique in coemeterio sepultos noctu and
clam exhumastis, atque in synagogam praedictam fascinariorum collegium
poriastis: denique daemoniorum principi in solio sedenti, obtulistis, detracta
and vobis conseruata pinguedine, capite, manibus, and pedibus abscissis,
truncumque decoqui and elixari and interdum assari curastis, iubenteque ac
mandante praefato patre vestro comedistis and damnabiliter deuorastis, mala
denique malis addendo, vos viri cum succubis, vos mulieres cum incubis
fornica^i est is, sodomiam veram and nefandissimum crimen misere cum illis
tactus frigidissimo exercuistis, and quod etiam detestabilissimum est,
Augustissimum Eucharistiae sacramentum per vos in Ecclesia sancta Dei aliquando
sumptum, iam dicti serpentis a parad^so eiecti praecepto in ore retinuistis,
illudque in terram nefarie expuistis, vt cum maiori omnis contumelia,
impietatis and contemptus specie Deum nostrum verum and sanctum dehonestaretis,
ipsum vero diabolum eiusque gloriam, honorem, triumphum and regnum
promoueritis, atque omni honor, decore, laudibus, dignitate, authoritate and
adoratione honoraretis, decoraretis and honestaretis. Quae omnia grauissima,
horrendissima, ac nefandissima sunt direct in omnipotentis Dei omnium
creatoris contumeliam and iniuriam. Quam ob causam Nos fratres Florus,
prouincius ordinis fratrum Praedicatorum, sacrae Theologiae Doctor, ac sanctae
fidei in tota ista legutione Auenionensi Inquisitor generalis, Dei timorem prae
oculis habentes, pro tribunali sedentes, per hanc nostram sententiam
diffinitiuam quam de Theologorum and iurisperitorum consilio more maiorum in
his fermus scripti, Jesus Christi Domini noslri ac beatae Mariae Virginis
nominibus pie inuocatis dicimus, declaramus, pronunciamus and diffinitiue
sententidmus, vos omnes supra nominatos and vest rum quemlibet fuisse and esse
veros Apostatas, idololatras, sanctissimae fidei defectores, Dei omnipotentis
abnegatores, and contemptores, sodomiticos and nefandissimi criminis reos,
adulteros, fornicatores, sortilegos, maleficos, sacrilegos, haereticos,
fascinarios, homicidas, infanticidas, daemonumque cultores, sathanicae,
diaebolicae atque infernalis disciplinae and damnabilis ac reprobatae fid^i
assertores, blasphemos, periuros, infames and omnium malorum facinorum and
delictorum conuictos fuisse. Ideo vos omnes vestrumque quemlibet tanquam
sathanae membra hac nostra sententia curiae seculariremittimus realiter and in
effectu condignis and legitimis poenis eorum pe^uliari iudicio plectendos.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE sentence given against the Witches. Whether the Devil
may at any time visibly show him self.
PEr vestram propriam confessionem, etc. and infra, etc. Cacodaemone in humana
specie existente, etc. It appears by the indictment, that all both men and
women do agree in this, that the Devil does appear unto them in a humane
shape, but the means and occasions are diverse. One of the women deposed, that
when she was, upon the loss of a daughter of hers, who was a little before
deceased, very melancholicke, and almost distracted, there appeared unto her a
man clothed all in black about the age of 25. or 30. years, saying: I see
good woman that you are in great distress and much grieved, yet if you will
believe me, I will show you the means how you shall be very happy. Others
depose, that in the time of the great dearth, when the poorer sort ^of people
were constrained to eat wild herbs, and to dry and sees the dunge of
horses and asses: and when they had now no means left them to give sustenance
unto their children, a certain man appeared to them, all in black, saluting
them, and speaking unto them, and being aged as it is above mentioned, who
labored to draw them unto him; but the most of them do depose, that at the
first they would not condescend unto his purpose, but yielded at the second or
at the third time, after that they had a little accustomed themselves
thereunto. From whence we are to learn how pleasing it is to God, and how
profitable unto our own souls to succor and give sustenance unto the poor
in their necessities and disconsolation: Matthew. 25.
since that it is as much as to preserve or gain them from the jaws of that
great infernal Lion, so that it is not without cause, that the works of mercy
shall be particularly mentioned at the great day of Judgment either to our
salvation or to our condemnation. For as Saint James says: Jacob. 5.
whosoever shall turn a side a soul from the way of perdition, he shall save
his own soul and shall by this means cover a multitude of his sins. Which
the Apostles well knowing, Act. 6.
did ordain as the first policy in the Church, that there should be men
deputed to help and minister unto the poor: and fo^eseeing that in their time
there would a great dearth happen, Act 2.
they gave order for a general collection through all the Cities and towns
where any Christians were, 2. Cor. 16.
thereby to succor and relieve the necessities of the poor: in which work
Saint Paul did diligently employ himself as appears by his Epistles, and
money was sent from all quarters, as from Corinth, Thessalonia, and other
Towns, to Jerusalem and Judea, where there was little to be had by reason of
the wars, and the Garrisons which were set over them by the Romans: so that
as it was said of their preaching. Psalm. 18.
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, the same might be said of their alms, In
omnem terram exierunt elecmosynae eo^um. By their example the first Christian
Emperors and Princes, as Constantine and others gave large and goodly temporal
possessions unto the Church, and built many Hospitals: Niceph. hist. Ecclesiast.
in so much that Julian the Apostate could not deny but that it was religiously
and piously done, and there upon gave order that more Hospitals should be
founded and plentifully endowed, because he scorned (as he said) to be in this
particular out-stripped by Christians. Those who withold the possessions of
the Church, and others that have a convenient estate where with all to live in
a plentiful and decent manner, and do not releive the poor, are guilty of
this crime: for those necessitous persons, who by reason of their poverty have
vowed and dedicated themselves unto the Devil, shall one day be presented
before them, because they have received no succor from them. On the other
part, poor people should consider that Christ Jesus himself the undoubted
son of God and King of glory was content to become poor in this world, to
teach us, that for his sake we are to endure, what necessity so ever he shall
be pleased to try us with all: especially since this poverty is an instrument
of our salvation, and is daily perfecting up a crown of glory for us, enriched
with all the treasures and precious stones which a man can express or imagine.
Thus it happened unto poor Lazarus who could not obtain the crummes of bread
which were cast to dogs under the table, Luc. 16.
although he labored what he could to get the same: but putting his confidence
in God, and bearing his poverty with patience, he was after his death thought
worthy to be carried unto God by ye Angels of Paradise. Matthew. 8. Luke 2. 2.
Cor. 8.
Christ Jesus himself had scarce a pillow whereon to rest his head; and at his
birth he was glad to have a cratch for his cradle, and was feign for his bed to
use straw and hay: to be brief as Saint Paul says, Cum dives esset egenus pro
nobis factus est. Concerning the visible apparition of the Devil, we are not
to think so strangely of it, especially in these days of which the prediction
goes: Apoc. 20. Genes. 3. Matthew. 4.
soluetur sathanas. He also appeared visibly unto Eve, and discoursed
familiarly unto her: touching his assumption of an humane shape, it cannot be
denied but that he thus presented himself before Christ Jesus: yea he took
stones and showed them unto him saying: August. tra. 42. in Job. Diabolus
serpente indutus locutus est mulieri.
Dic vt lapides isti panes fiant. As for the appearing of good Angels, there is
no difficulty to be made hereof, considering that every where, especially in
the book of Genesis, there is mention made how Angels appeared unto men in
humane shapes, and if the Devils did represent serpents, froggs, and the like
before Pharaoh and all the people, it is not to be wondered, Exodus 8.
if he show him self unto a man in a manly semblance: for thus he presented
himself before Job during the time of his temptation, Job. 2. Chrysostom homil.
3. de patient. Job.
as Saint Chrysostom does well declare saying: That the messengers who came to
bring him news so suddenly one upon the neck of another, were Devils in the
disguise of men: for otherwise it cannot well be reconciled, how a man being in
a house, which in an instant was utterly overthrown and demolished, could
escape the ruin of this house; nor how these losses being acted so far one
from the other, (as the sheep which were consumed by the fire that fell from
heaven, the Camels that were carried away by the Chaldeans, the house which was
rooted up from the foundations) could be so timed in the relations of them,
that as soon as one had delivered his news, another should come at his heels
and tell what detriment Job had received in other places. And since Satan had
liberty to kill not only the sheep but the sheepheards, and not to ouerwhelme
the house alone, but to wrap up also those that were within it in those ruins,
it is not probable, that he who is bloodily minded, a murderer of men, and a
ravening wolf, that deuoureth whatsoever comes in his way, would let any one
of them escape to bring the news, especially since it was in his power as well
to deliver the message, as to commit the riotts and murder, and since he had
leave to do unto Job whatsoever he would, except one only thing. Tantum
(says God) ne tang as animam eius. So that these news tempting him most, it
were no absurdity to say, that the Devil was the bringer of them: neither
does the text in reciting these crosses make mention of any one that did
escape, but only that he who brought the newes-said thus and thus: although as
the Amalechite told David that he had slain Saul, 2. Reg. 1.
although the truth was that he had slain himself: 1. Reg. 28.
Irruit super gladium suum; so might this father of lies mis-report one thing
for another Therefore Saint Chrysostom does not think it strange to say, that
the Devil appeared unto Job in the habit of a messenger or servant, or to be
of the age (as it is to be presumed, that such and so swift messengers were)
of 25. or 30. years. August. lib. 7. de Trinit. cap. 7. lib. 8. quest. 8^.
Saint Augustine does not only say that this might be, but also gives the
reason why it might be, and that is by the application of natural causes, by
which he shapeth unto himself what body soever he desires to assume,
especially for the quantity and quality which are mere accidents. And this
body the Devil can move by a kind of local motion: yet does he not
viuificate and operate in the same, as the reasonable soul does in a man's
body, for this body is not a live body, but is only clothed with external
accidents, and seems to have life by the secret working of these Spirits,
even as the celestial bodies are turned about by a local motion which
proceeds from the Angels: and yet cannot such bodies be properly said to
live. This is Saint Augustines resolution: Diabolus optat sibi corpus aliquod
tanquam vestem: and in this sort did he oftentimes visibly appear unto Saint
Anthony as Saint Athanasius reports, Athanas. in Anton. Seuerus Sulpit.
Epiphan. Tertul. de carne Christi.
and once to Saint Martin, as Seuerus Sulpitius writes. To conclude never did
any father of the Christian Church deny, but that this either might be, or has
bin really practiced. The Marcionites and Manicheans, who thought strange that
the Devil should touch Christ Jesus, denied not that the Devil did visibly
and corporally appear unto him, but they rather held that Christ Jesus was not
clothed with true flesh, but had a body of the same condition as those are,
which are formed by Spirits. 2. Cor. 11.
Saint Paul teaches us that Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of
light: the meaning is, that he sometime takes a comely humane shape as good
Angels use to do, to familiarise himself unto men: Matthew. 28.
as we see in the Gospel that the good Angels, who appeared unto those godly
women that sought Christ Jesus in his sepulcher, were like young men of 18. or
20. years of age: so that this point is clear and without controversy both
in the Scripture and amongst the Doctors of the Church. It would therefore
appear to be an ignorance and rashness too too gross, to make doubt of the
truth hereof, since there is such a cloud of Histories to give confirmation of
the same unto us, as for example: the History recited by Gregory Nazianzen of a
Magician, Greg. Nazian. de Orat. Cypr.
unto whom the Devil spoke familiarly, and the like. But that we may not
exceed the just limits of Annotations, it shall suffice that we observe, that
among other predictions of the end of the world Saint Hippolytus writes,
Hippolyt. Ora. de Antichrist.
that a great number of Devils shall appear unto men in humane shapes, and
being thus disguised in borrowed forms, they shall assemble themselves in
mountains, dens, and desert places; all which predictions do fitly agree
unto the depositions of Sorcerers. It will not be amiss to note the antiquity
and authority of this glorious Martyr, for the better resolution of diverse
passages in the forecited place, which by some might be offensiuely taken. He
was more ancient then Origin, Hieron. lib. de scripto Ecclesiast.
at the least he lived in the same time with him, for Saint Jerome tells in
his Homilies how he preached, and how Origin was present at his Sermons. It is
then to be presumed that since he took upon him to speak of things to come,
which were not expressly comprehended in the Scriptures, he had either the gift
of prophecy, wherewith all many were endued in the Primitive Church, as Saint
Paul teaches, and which endured down unto the times of Saint Ireneus, 1. Cor.
13. 14.
or he had learned these things from the Disciples of the Apostles: Ireneus.
as Saint Ir^neus tells how he writ many things, which he h^ learned from the
Disciples of John the Evangelist, and that it happened unto him as it did unto
diverse others who lived near unto the Apostles time, who having faithfully
treasured up those things, which the most familiar Disciples of the Apostles
did reveal unto them, yet there were some that would add thereunto certain
conceits of their own brain, which they themselves did conjecture might be
delivered by the Apostles. But in this they notably abused themselves, as we
may plainly see in Ireneus, Eusebius. lib. Histo. Ecclesiast.
Papias, and others. The same happened unto this holy man, in whom we may
observe many tracts directly flowing from the Spirit of prophecy, and other
useful instructions proceeding from his own judgment. Amongst this later
sort of Revelations from the Apostles, we are to place that which he speaks
of Antichrist, whom he says shall be a Devil taking upon him the shape of a
man. And this we may easily see to be his drift, for he speaks not
absolutely, but adds that for his part he is of this opinion. Hanc opinor
dilecti carnis suae substantiam phantastieam assumet organi vice. Hippolit.
orat. de fine seculi.
It may therefore well be, that all these things were revealed unto him by the
Disciples of the Apostles saying, that at the end of the world the Prince of
Devils shall show him self unto men in a humane form, and shall speak unto
them, as one man does unto another, that he may with the more ease seduce
them, and that there shall be a great number of other Devils with him in the
like forms. But the good Father does from himself conclude that such a one
Antichrist should be, and therefore adds the word, opinor; And this is not
only probable but necessary, to excuse so great a personage, who further
adds that there shall be at the end of the world many wicked Spirits in the
shape of men. Daemones (inquit) congregabit humana specie. And this in effect
the same which Sorcerers do depose, that there are a great company of Devils
in their assemblies, and both men and women have every one a Devil, to commit
abomination with them. S. Augustine out of the observation which he took from
the Scripture that says, August. lib. 20. de ciuit. cap. 8.
that in the last three years wherein Antichrist shall reign, all power shall
be given unto the Devil, asks this question, whether those fathers that are
Christians shall then be able to procure their children to be baptized, and
shall have power to resist the incursions of the Devils, who at that time will
be every where busied. Tertul. lib. de anima c. de somn.
Tertullian says, that Devils have no natural impeachment to hinder them from
entering into any place, whereunto they have a fancy, because God has not
circumscribed or limited their nature to any place, and therefore (says he) it
is an undeniable truth, that Devils may not only enter into men's houses, but
even into their very cabinets. Nemo (inquit) dubitauerit, domos quoque
daemonijs paetere, nec tantum in aditis, sed in cubiculis homines imaginibus
circum^enire. He adds the reason, Vtique non clausa vis est, nec sacrariorum
circumscribitur terminis, vaga and peruolatica, and interim libera est. From
whence S. Augustine draws this conclusion, that because the Devils shall in
those days be unbound, they shall be able to go in and out where they
please; yet are we not to understand this, as though they could be at one time
in diverse places, as Justin Martyr well declares in his 40. question. Now we
are witnesses of the beginning hereof, by their frequent appearing unto those
whom they abuse, and in whose behalf they effect some things which are in
themselves merely diabolical: and as S. Paul says of the scholars of Simon
Magus, and others of the same condition, Qui and nunc operatur in filios
diffidentiae. To conclude, the Devil may take unto himself a body made of
air, and may shape it after what form and figure he will, and clap it about
him as a garment, unless he be expressly forbidden by the divine providence,
as we have formerly unfolded. And this is the resolution of S. Thomas, who
next to Augustine does thus affirm it, Potest formare corpus ex aere
cuiuscunque formae and figurae, vt illud assumens in eo visibiliter appareat.
P.P.Q. 114. art. 4. ad 2. Cardinal Caietan in his Comment upon S. Thomas does
observe, that when a wicked Spirit is so hardy, or else has permission to show
himself visibly unto a man, it is an argument, that such a one is either
forsaken of God, and has one foot in hell already, or that he is a man of an
extraordinary holiness, and God permits it to the confusion of Satan, as
appears by Christ Jesus in the wilderness.

THE SECOND ANNOTATION. Whether the Devil can make men renounce God and their
Baptism?
DEum rerum omnium creatorem and opificem vnum and trinum abnegastis etc. and
infra. Et sacratissimo Baptismati etc. It is an ordinary practice of the Devil
to labor and persuade men to deny their God. Venit Diabolus (says Christ
Jesus) and tollit verbum de cord eorum, Luc. 8.
ne credentes salui fiant. He is the author of all the heresies that ever were
in the world, and amongst other inventions he brought in the plurality of Gods:
Iren. lib. 1. Tertull. lib. aduersus Valentin.
and to that end he stirred up diverse agents of his, as Basilides, Carpocrates,
and others. He it was that made the Arrians deny the sacred Trinity, and
persuades Atheists that there is no God; all which he practices, that he
may by usurpation invade the glory of God: for he still holds him to his first
pretension, when he said in his heart, I will be like unto the Highest.
Therefore S. Augustine does well observe, Esa. 14.
that the greatest ambition which the Devil has, is that men should perform
unto him those honors which they are accustomed to offer unto God. August.
lib. 10. de ciuitat. and lib. 20. contra Faust. Manich, cap. 22.
Daemones (inquit) diuinis honoribus gaudent. And this he can by no means
wrest and extort from Christians, unless they do first deny the Trinity of
persons, because the very belief of the blessed Trinity is of sufficiency
enough to give stop unto all Idolatry: for by it we believe an unity in
trinity, and a trinity in unity, which when we once comprehend, it cannot
be fastened upon our belief to worship or acknowledge any thing for God, except
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: for our faith is limited to these
three persons, and therefore excludes all other things whatsoever, in regard
that they are as much inferior and subordinate unto these three persons, as
the creature is unto the Creator. And therefore Basilides and others of his
likeness, must first have ^ost all belief of the blessed Trinity, before
they could give admittance unto this plurality of Gods. The like may be said of
the Arrians and Sabellians, who denied the three persons in unity of essence
and trinity of persons. Hence it arises, that neither the Devil nor any other
creature whatsoever can be worshipped by a Christian, unless he first abandon
the faith which he has of the blessed Trinity. So that it is no wonder if the
Devil does first exact this of Christians in his Synagogue, for if he should
do otherwise, he could have no color to pass further. Whereupon we may
observe, that there can scarce an heresy be found, if a man search narrowly
unto the same, which has retained the full and entire belief of the Trinity.
Sanctes does treat of the blessed Trinity in his Atheismes. Hippol. orat. de
Antichrist.
This we see daily practiced by the Sabellians of our time, who misconceiue of
the distinction of persons, and have opened a gap to the Trinitarians of this
age, to mock and make a jest of the blessed Trinity, as if it were a Chimera,
or a conceit framed and feined in the brain of man. In like manner it
follows of necessity, that they must renounce their Baptism also, which is
administered in the name of the blessed Trinity. S. Hippolytus a very ancient
father and Martyr made no difficulty to grant, that the Devil should at the
end of the world visibly appear to Christians, and should tell them, I will
that thou deny thy Baptism: for he is of opinion that Antichrist shall be a
Devil, clothed with the semblance of an humane body, although there be not
many that adhere to this opinion, because S. Paul does plainly affirm, that
he shall be a true man, 2 Thessalonians. 2
and shall at last be put to death by the power of Christ Jesus. Howsoever it
be, he says, positiuely that the Devil shall propose these words unto the
Christians, Nego Creatorem coel^ and terrae, nego adorationem a me Deo
praestari solitam, nego Baptisma, tibi adhaeresco, in te credo. Another reason
why the Devil would have us deny our Baptism is, because by baptism our
souls are affianced and wedded to Christ Jesus, and by it we reciue the ring
of faith from him, and therefore by accepting of this, we do expressly renounce
the Devil and all his works. There are also certain Exorcismes used against
Satan in Baptism, and therefore he had rather that men should deny their
Baptism then any other Sacrament, nay, he has for a long time had his
Baptism also, ever imitating and aping God Almighty. Tertullian does well
witness this, Tertull. lib. de Baptism.
Hic quoque (inquit) studium diaboli recognoscimus res Dei aemulantis cum and
ipse baptismum in suis exercet: whence he concludes, that many in his time
did by experience find it, that the Devils did for this cause exceedingly haunt
fountains and pooles.

THE THIRD ANNOTATION. Whether the wicked Spirit does cause the names to be
changed which were given in Baptism.
MVtato vero nomine, etc. aliudque commentitium, etc. There are two things to
be considered of in this point, for the better instruction of Parents: The
first is to cause such names to be given unto their children, which may put
them in mind to make head against the Devil: the second is to provide for
them Godfathers and Godmothers of honest report and conversation. For since the
Devil is not contented to make men renounce their Baptism, but will have them
also to renounce their Godfathers and Godmothers, and are desirous to change
the name which is given them in Baptism, it is an evident sign that these
things are very contrary unto him. And this is certainly true, for if we
mark, the ancient fathers of the Jews did give unto children their names
upon the day of their circumcision, as appears in the Gospel by the
circumcision of Christ and S. John Baptist: Luc. 1.2.
so that then they were wholly delivered from the bondage of Satan, and were
enrolled in the band, and were to fight under the banner of the true God, that
they might hence foreward manfully combat against his adversary the Devil. As
therefore soldiers when they are received under the banner and pay of an
Emperor or Captain, do presently cause their names to be registered, that
they may be always ready to march when they shall be commanded thereunto, so
that in the Monarchy of Room, Nomen dare, did signify all that which has
bin now said: in like manner in this Sacrament, men do give names unto
children, that they may always remember, what they have promised, and under
what banner they ought to march. And this was a custom amongst the very
Gentiles, Hieron. prolog in lib. 1. comment. in Micheam.
as S. Jerome has well noted, who governed themselves moraly well according to
the law and light of nature, and did not impose idle or frivolous names upon
their children, but rather made choice of certain names appellatiues, that
betokened some virtue, unto which they would appropriate and dedicate their
children, and to admonish them to live conformeable unto the signification of
their names. Thus we find many who have been called by these names Victor,
Castus, Commodus, Pius, Probus, and amongst the Greeks Sophronius, Eusebius,
Theophilus. But the fathers of the old Testament observed another custom: for
although many were called by names which signified good manners, as the word
Micah, which signifies humility, yet for the most part they added unto their
names the appellation of God, as in Heliseus, Samuel, Abdias, Zacharias,
Esayas: (and this is a general observation to be noted in Angels, who are
called by the names of Michael, Gabriel, Raphael) or at the leaft, they
retained the name of some holy man, that their children might imitate his
virtues. And therefore those that were present at the circumcision of S. John
Baptist, did wonder why they would call him John, since that there was never
any man of that ancient and illustrious family who was so called. Which very
well declares, that they did more religiously retain the names of their good
ancestors, then they did the heritage which was left unto them. Chrysostom.
homil. 12. in 1. ad Corinth. Genes. 45.
Hereupon S. Chrysostom did admonish the people not to use any superfluous
thing in Baptism, but to look well unto this rule, to give no names unto
their children but the names of Saints: and for the children, that they should
retain this name, and not suffer it to be changed for any other upon what
occasion soever. They must do as Joseph did, who notwithstanding that Pharaoh
had changed his name after the Egyptian manner, would yet keep him still unto
his first name as appears when he said, Ego sum Joseph frater vester. And the
Scripture it self does ever call him by the name of Joseph, and passes over
that profane appellation which Pharaoh imposed upon him: the same did Daniel
and his three companions, for although Nabuchodonosor had called Daniel by the
Chaldean name of Balthazar, and the other three by the names of Sidrac, Misac,
and Abednago, yet when Daniel writes his book he ever says, Ego Daniel:
Daniel. 3.
as also the three children being in the furnace cried out, Benedicite Anania,
Asaria, Misael Domino, neither did they acknowledge any other names, but these
that were given unto them in Judea. S. Chrysostom gives the reason hereof.
These kind of names, says he, were given to children, to put them in mind
to imitate holy men whose names they carried: for if they do not imitate such
and such a Saint, it is an assured truth (as he said else where) that the
prayers and merits of this Saint shall not be available unto them for their
salvation. From whence this conclusion may be drawn, that it is not lawful to
give the names of sinful men unto children, although they have been famous in
their generations, or have been our progenitors and ancestors, because such
impositions can serve for nothing, but for spurrs in their sides to prick them
on to imitate their pride and wicked conversation. How worthy then of
reprehension are those fathers and mothers, who disdain the name of Saints,
and had rather give their children the names of Infidels and Idolaters, who are
now frying in flames of hell. And it is to be doubted, that if our Lord had
specified the name of the rich man in the Gospel, they would rather have taken
it and called their children by the same, then have given the name of Lazarus
unto them: but he would not mention his name for many weighty reasons, and
amongst the rest this may serve for one. It is therefore clear that this is a
mere trick and devise of Satan, because he abhors the name given in
Baptism, and taken (as the usual custom of Christians is) from Saints, who
upon this occasion are the readier to aid us, and to bear a particular favor
unto us. The Germans are observed to have for a long time retained a barbarous
fashion in two things especially: first in eating Bacon without seething it,
and feeding upon horse flesh: the second in giving Scythian names unto their
children when they were baptized: Genebrard. in Chronolog.
yet at last upon better instructious they redressed and mended these faults.
It is therefore expedient to choose honest people for Godfathers and Godmothers,
which is an ancient custom in the Church, and practiced ever since the time
of Pope Thelesphorus, who was but 100. years after the death and passion of
Christ Jesus. For in regard that faith in Baptism is not infused into the
child to operate, but only to purify the soul, it behooves him to have a
Godfather to instruct him in the works of faith, and to protest in his behalf
that he shall believe in Christ Jesus, and shall be one of his Church; and this
is to be done although the child be dumb and deaf, as S. Jerome has it. And
further, Hierou. in Epist. ad Galat.
it is to bring him to receive the Sacrament of Confirmation, where the child,
who has bin baptized, comes now to ratify the promise made by his Godfather
and Godmother for him at his baptism, and by a consequent he comes to
receive new grace, that he may be strengthened to resist all the assaults and
temptations of the Devil. Hence it comes that because in these days this
Sacrament is so universally neglected, the Devil does deceive so many people,
and makes them with ease to renounce their baptism, which they have not yet
confirmed: for he does no more but make them say, I am not tied to that which
my Godfathers and Godmothers have promised for me. Eusebius. lib. hist. Eccles.
Cyprian. lib. Epi.
And therefore Saint Cyprian does not wonder that Nouatus had abandoned his
faith promised in baptism, because, says he, he did not ratify the same by
the Sacrament of confirmation. Hereupon ought the Pastors of the Church, and
fathers and mothers also to be vigilant in this particular, left it should
happen both to the one and to the other as chanced unto Hely and his children,
unto whom Anna, and little Samuel were directly opposite in their courses. And
concerning alteration of names, Magdalene did affirm that all did change their
names in the Synagogues, to the end that they might not be discovered by those
who perchance might call them into question for the same.

THE FOVRTH ANNOTATION. Whether the Devil exacteth any homage or tribute.
VEstimentorum vestrorum fragmentum, etc. The Devil has no need of any thing
we have in this world, except the faith and grace of God which is infused into
us: yet because, as we have formerly alleged out of S. Augustine, he is
greatly delighted that men should do him homage as to a God, he wills these
poor hood-winkt wretches to present unto him in sign of their acknowledgment
some thing or other, as for example a piece of their garment. He exacteth this
from these poor people, who have nothing dearer unto them amongst their
earthly fortunes, then is their garment. Deuteron.
And therefore God in the old Law does strictly forbid, that any one should take
a poor man's clothes for a pawn: and if he should take them, he commands
that they be rendered unto him again before Sunset, otherwise he threatens to
take vengeance on such a person. Thus we see this accursed beast gets them
to offer unto him the best of what they have: for of all the goods of fortune,
he desires the garment: of all the gifts of nature, he craves men's children;
and of all the endowments of grace and spiritual blessings, he longs after
faith and Baptism. 3. Reg. 18.
He also does sometimes desire the blood of men, as appears by the Priests of
Baal, who when they would pray that fire might descend from heaven, they cut
and flashe their flesh with Lances. But because most men did abhor and hold
this mangling of themselves in detestation, he did from thence forward content
himself with men's goods, such as are their garments; 3. Reg. 18.
and it may be he desires by this kind of tribute to be acknowledged for a
King. For it was the custom of the Jews, when they would make or proclaim
any one King, to put off their upper garments, and to use them for the service
of this King, by putting them under his feet for him to tread on: as we see in
the history of Iehu, 4. Reg. 9. Matthew. 21.
and in the relation of Christ Jesus his being received after a triumphant
manner into Jerusalem upon Palme-sunday. To these poor and blinded wretches we
may fitly apply the Greek proverb, which in Latin runs thus: Vest
circumfers ignem. For their garment is an external sign, that they are for
ever chained unto that eternal fire. And that may well agree unto them which
is commonly said, Vest is virum facit. Erasm. in Chiliad. 1.
To the same purpose is that which Tertullian said, Diabolus tunc se regnare
putat, quando sanctos a religione Dei deturbat.

THE FIFTH ANNOTATION. Whether the Devil does mark Witches.
SIgnum seu stigma cuilibet vestrum, etc. This point alone is able to convince
those, who conceit that these things are merely dreams. For experience does
demonstratiuely prove, Tertul lib. 2. aduersus Iudaeos ca probat. natiuitat.
Christi.
that this kind of mark which they have in their bodies is leprous, and deuoid
of all sense; in so much (as we have tried with a needle or a pin) that if a
man does secretly and finely thrust up a pin into the same, they feel it no
more then if they were direct lepers. But there must good heed be taken that
they do not perceive you, for if they do, they will make show they feel the
same when they do not; but howsoever, you shall be sure that you shall draw no
blood from those marked parts. And this manner of Satan is very ancient,
although it has received diverse changes according to the diversity of times.
Tertullian says, Tertul. lib. de coron. mili. and de Baptismo.
that the Devils custom is to mark those that be his, in imitation of God,
who does inwardly mark us in Baptism, by a stamp or character, that does
adheare and cleave unto our souls, as both S. Paul and S. John do witness:
And again, Ephesians. 1.4.
he does externally mark us by the Chrisome and sign of the Cross. Thus does
Satan stamp in the souls of his servants the mark of sin, and not content
with this, he now adds an outward badge, although it may be very possible,
that the Devil in former ages did not use to mark his with the like stampes
as now he sets upon them. Tertul. lib. de veland. Virg.
For (as Tertullian says) it is the Devils property to excogitate new devices
every day: and it is clear in Scripture, that the Devil labors and
aspireth as much as in him lies, to set his badge upon those that are his.
Saint John foresheweth, that at the end of the world there shall be a certain
kind of people, Apocal. 14.
who shall bear upon them the sign and character of the beast: which is
literally to be understood, as the text it self does sufficiently declare;
for he says, that by this mark we shall have access unto those wicked men,
which carry the same either in their front or in their hand. And although there
were no other proof but this, yet may it sufficiently euince unto us, that
this and the like texts are thus literally to be expounded, which S.
Hippolytus does very well observe and foreshew in these very words, Hippol.
Orat. de consummat. mundi.
where he speaks of the Devil that should take upon him a fantastical and
imaginary body. Adducet (inquit) eos ad adorandum ipsum ac sibi ob^emporantes
sigillo suo no^abit. So that a man would think that these poor misled
Sorcerers and Witches had read this Oration of so glorious a Martyr, so aptly
do their depositions agree with his predictions.

THE SIXTH ANNOTATION. Whether Magicians make a Circle, or no?
SVper circulo quod diuinitatis symbolum est, etc. The circular figure is the
most remote and distant from the figure of the Cross that can be. The Cross
must of necessity have four corners, whereas this has none at all. The Devil
uses those marks that are most different and opposite from the sign of our
Redemption and his ruin: and if any of his do use the same (as Nazianzene
writes of Julian the Apostate) he presently leaves them as soon as they
have made the sign of the Cross. Nazianzen. Orat. 4. cont. Julian. Apost.
Whereunto many later Histories do agree, which report that diverse who came
unto the assemblies of Witches, when as they had once made the sign of the
Cross, they were left alone in the field. The same also happened (as it is
more at large amplified in the indictment made against the Witches at Auignon)
unto a young man, who by his father was carried to the Synagogue where they
were to meet: but when he saw what abominable villainies they did, he was
much affrighted, and making the sign of the Cross he spoke these words, Jesus
what is the meaning of this? Whereupon they all vanished away, and the young
man remained all alone, and the next day he came home to the village where he
dwelt, which was distant from the Synagogue (as they call it) above three
leagues, and accused his father for leading of him thither, and ever since
those of that Village have called him in their language Masquillon, that is to
say, a little Witch: and this boy remained in the prison belonging to the
palace of Auignon, at the time that the said execution was done, where he was
detained for the discovery of the like practices. Epiphanius haeres. 30. does
report, that a young Magician did fly throw the air, and iustled against a
Christian woman who was washing her self in a bath, but she had no sooner
signed her self with the Cross, but she repelled him far enough from her:
And therefore Satan does cause all Crosses to be defaced where he comes, and
teaches his Disciples to use other marks very different, and (if a man may
say it) contrary unto the sign of the Cross, as is plain in the characters
of Magicians, which Agrippa a great favorer of the sect of the Beast did
unhappily publish unto the world. Nazian. Orat. in Julian Apostat.
We may further call to mind (for the Devil under one external thing does
hatch and cover a thousand impieties) what Julian the Apostate did conceive
hereof, who was a man exceedingly addicted unto Devils. He made this
interpretation, that when Crosses were enclosed in a Circle, it signified that
the religion of Christ Jesus was to be depressed and abolished, and that not
long after such a sign this should be put in execution. We also see that the
roaring Lion when he goes about to devour his prey, does with his tail
express a circle, out of which the poor beast that is environed with the
same, dares not in any sort to stir, such is the fear that he conceiueth
of his adversary. So that we may well apply this short sentence of Peter unto
the Devil: Circuit quaerens quem deuoret. 1. Pet. 5.
Thus do these poor and ignorant wretches stand in awe of the Devil, fearing
that since they have sworn fealty unto him, he would break their necks, if
they should back slide from the same, as appears by their own confessions:
for they have voluntarily slaued themselves unto this cruel Tyrant, and
therefore do, as it is written, Qui facit peccatu^ seruus est peccati, 11.
Pet. 11.
a quo quis superatus est eius and seruus est: John 5. 2 Cor. 3.
as on the contrary it is said unto those that are religiously given,
Simanseritis in sermon meo, vere liberieritis, and vbi spiritus domini ibi
libertas.

THE SEVENTH ANNOTATION. Whether Witches do use their staff and ointment that
they may be transported and carried in the air?
ADminiculo baculi, quoda^ nefandissimo vnguento, etc. That Sorcerers have for
a long time used staves, it appears by that which Aben Ezra has written upon
Leuiticus: Aben Ezra in Leuit. Leuit. 19. Sanct. Page in Thesaur. Apoc. 2.
where it is prohibited to do any act appertaining or belonging unto this
diabolical art. And he expresses by what means this was practiced, and
says, (as Sanctes Pagninus has translated his words) Non facietis experimenta
per figuras, per baculos, per opera, per motus, per dies and per horas. In
which he seems to have touched the principal points contained in this
Sentence and Indictment against Sorcerers. For touching figures, we see they
use the Circle, and for works, they commit wicked prankes upon the dead,
especially upon young children, as we will show hereafter: for motion, their
bodies are hurried from one place unto another: for days and hours, they
observe Thursday after midnight, at which time they are only thus transported,
as they all agree and affirm: And the reason hereof may be because the Devil
is desirous to have the first fruits, and to be acknowledged in the first part
of the week: For the Turks celebrate the Friday, the Jews the Saturday, as
the Christians do the Sunday: But the Devil has instituted his Sabbath
before them all, that he may have the first adoration. This is that arrogance
of Satan, which is spoken of in the Revelation, Apoc. 2.
blessed are they that have not known nor tried Altitudinem Satbanae. Last of
all, touching the staff which this Hebrew Doctor does mention, we see it by
experience, that the Sorcerers of our times use staves, bestriding them, and
putting them betwixt their legs. Neither was this opinion of so great and
learned a Rabbi without the ground and witness of the holy Scripture, as Arias
Montanus has well observed. Osea 4. Arias Montan. in Os.
For mention hereof is made in Osea, where it is said, Populus meus in ligno
suo interrogauit, and baculus eius annunciauit ei. And it may be that the
Devil did invent this custom to counterfeit Moses, who used a staff or a
rod in the working of his great miracles: and mention is also made of Aarons
rod that budded, and miraculously brought forth fruit. As for the ointment
wherewithal they anoint their staves and bodies, it is certain that the
Devil the better to abuse these people, and to cloak and cover his own malice
does make a compound of sundry idle and ineffectual ingredients, as of
herbs, roots, and the like: for the devil knows full well, that this
medley is not a whit powerful to transport their bodies through the air from
one place to another: and experience it self does also sufficiently auow the
same. So that he does this to cover his malicious ends, and his aim is
leuelled at no other mark then to commit murders, and imbrue their hands in
sheading of blood, as does clearly appear by the depositions of all
Sorcerers, who do concur and agree upon this point, that at the first it
suffices, if they can borrow ointment of their neighbors, but when they are
at the assembly, the Devil does declare unto them that they are to have
ointment of their own, and that it cannot be effectual and for their purpose,
unless they get the grease of young children that have been strangled by them.
It is then undoubtedly true that all these herbs and flowers are nothing else
but Parerga, that is to say, things that serve for no use but to set a gloss
and color upon that, which is their principal and primary intention: as when
a Painter draws some lines or florishes about the border of a perfect
portrature. And these are the goodly works which Aben Ezra does in more
obscure terms mention. Helias in Thisby.
Helias the Leuite reports, that Lilith, that is to say, a woman that wanders
by night, used secretly to steal into the bedchambers of those that are newly
delivered, to kill young children, that were not above eight days old. See
Lyran. Genes. 31. Hieron. lib. 1. comment. in Dan ad cap. 2. Terrul. lib. de
anima. f. 3.79.
He also says that the Therasins, whereof the Scripture makes mention, could
not be made without murder. Saint Jerome writes that Witches cast abroad
their charms by touching of dead bodies. Attingunt (inquit) malefici corpora
mortuorum: and Tertullian does enlarge himself in terms more perspicuous for
our purpose, saying: Pluribus notum est daemoniorum quoque opera, and immaturas
and atroces effici mortes, quas incur sibus deputant. And a little before: Per
vim (inquit) and iniuriam saeuus and immaturus finis extorsit: where he says,
that the Devil does bring to pass all these goodly devises of his, by the
means of those who have vowed themselves unto his service. And therefore S.
Augustine wondreth with himself, August. lib. 20. de Ciuit.
and asks a reason why God should permit that such massacres should be
committed upon poor innocent children, yea and upon those who have received
the character of his Baptism: whereunto he answers, that this proceeds
from the judgment of God, which is hidden and removed from our knowledge, and
if there were no other thing but the tribute which we owe unto death through
original sin, it would sufficiently conclude that God does permit this
according to all equity. Neither is this so new a thing unto us, since by
divine permission so many young children were slain in Egypt by Pharaoh, and
in Judea by Herod, unto which these two Tyrants were incited by the
instigations of the Devil. Apulelus lib. de Asino aureo. cap. 19.
We are further to observe what Apuleius writes touching this argument (who
was a part of his own history) by seeing a young woman that was a Witch
playing of her prankes before him: whereupon he was accused to be a Sorcerer,
and because thos^ that were contaminated with this devilish art were then put
to death without mercy, he was saine to make two Apologies, thereby to purge
himself of these crimes before the governors of Afric. Apul. Apolog. 1. and
2.
There are some that conceive his history to be merely fabulous: but as
himself reports of a great Orator, who when he saw that Apulei^s would by
no means credit, that a man might be carried through the air, or transformed
into an Owl, took him up short and told him; Friend, you talk like a young
man that has as yet made no experience of things, which a^e so full of
secrecy and importance. And he further recites that afterward he had
experience of the truth of the same. But that which gives reputation and
authority unto his history is, that S. August. de Ciuit. Dei.
Augustine does oftentimes allege him, and does not brand him with any hard
opinion of lightness or fiction. This Apuleius does declare, that on a
certain evening by the assistance of a chambermaid, he was brought about
midnight to behold the mistrisse of the house, whereunto he was guided,
anointing of her self with a certain unguent which she had within a pot, and
when she had made an end of besmearing her self she was changed into an Owl,
and began to fly out of the house. He also does relate what the ingredients of
this unguent were, to wit, certain aromaticall hearbe^, and some parts of dead
bodies that had been buried and were dug up again for that purpose: that
all was boiled together in a great brason Caldron in Well water together with
the milk of a Cow, the honey of mountains, and other stuff of the like
nature, using certain magical words over the whole compound. And this we
found also verified by the Witches that were condemned by the above cited
sentence, who confessed that they did boil dead bodies, whom they came and
dug up by night, and with the grease of their kidne^es and cer^aine other
hea^bes they made a certain ointment which they did use. From hence it did
arise that the Romans of Apuleius his time did punish witches with death,
because they did violate the graves of the dead, to pilfer from thence the
bodies of those which lay there ^n^erred, which is not only repugnant to the
law of nature, but unto the law of nations, called, Ius gentium. For if those
who forced open Sepulchers, that they might from thence steal the jewels and
rings which were buried with the dead corpse, were without mercy put to death as
sacrilegious persons; how much more severely ought they to be punished, who
steal away the bodies themselves? Which Apuleius also witnesses, relating
that it was then the custom to hier certain men to watch dead courses, for
fear least the Witches should come to gnaw and dismember them: adding that
himself one evening being set to watch a Course that lay in a certain Hall,
there came a Weesell to gnaw the said Course, but this being discovered by him,
the Weesell ran out at the hole through which it entered. So that it is
authentically true, that the Devil has anciently practiced this villainy, for
seeing that himself cannot discharge his full malice upon man, whom he
capitally hates, he leaves it to be executed by those that are his members:
and it gives some satisfaction unto his sanguinary nature, that he may wreake
his anger upon the dead. And therefore he is often called in the Revelation
the red Dragon, to express how furious, outrageous, and blood-thirsty he is,
being as Christ Jesus himself says, a murderer from the beginning. And as
God is called by the Grecians (...), that is to say, a lover of men; so by a
contrary the Devil is styled (...), that is to say, a man-hater.

THE EIGHTH ANNOTATION. Whether Witches go in the air?
PEr era ad locum constitutum, etc. Some do doubt whether the Devil can make
a humane body to go in the air, or no. But this doubtfulnesse of theirs does
argue a defect and maime in their knowledge, not understanding aright the
nature and property of Spirits: nay they are convinced to be ignorant of the
Scriptures themselves, for a Spirit is of a more excellent and noble
composition then any body whatsoever, and therefore he has a power in his
nature to move according as himself will. It is certain that man is sheltred
particularly under the safegarde and protection of Gods providence, yet does
not this hinder, but that God may sometimes suffer this to be done, as it is
clear by Christ Jesus himself, who was carried by the Devil unto a desert,
from thence unto a pinnacle of the Temple, and thence unto a mountain. If the
Devil did this to Christ, how much more shall he be able to effect the same,
when miserable men do quitte the service of God, to adore the Devil? The
Devil also in the wilderness of Egypt did bring before Pharaoh and the
people many great Serpents: for S. Augustine and after him S. Thomas do agree
and conclude, that they were true Serpents. We are also to call unto
remembrance that, which we have before alleged out of Apuleius, and which he
says that he beheld with his own eyes: and we are to observe the points
which we have handled in the sixth Chapter of this book. For why should any
man conceit strangely of this point, since Simon Magus himself was carried in
the air by Devils? and least any might apprehend that this was merely fancied
and not really done, the History says that he brake his neck, being forsaken
(by the commandment of God and his good Angels) by the Devils who were about
him for his supportation. Clemens lib. recogn. Hipp. orat. de Antichrist.
Thessalon. Polid. lib. 9. H^st. Aug. Guli. naugiac.
Semblable hereunto is that which Saint Hippolytus reports, saying: that
Antichrist shall cause himself to be carried in the air by Devils: whereof
there is some probability in the Scriptures. And to descend unto more modern
Authors, certain Chroniclers and Historiographers do report, that Berengarius
(who was a great Sorcerer) was at Rome at night, and yet the very same night he
was found reading of a Lecture at Tours in Touraine: whereunto may be added
that which we have noted in the sixth Annotationof the young man, who leaped in
the air after a woman.

THE NINTH ANNOTATION. Whether Witches do eat, drink, and dance in their
Synagogue.
SAltationes, compotationes, comessationes, etc. The works of Satan or of the
flesh are as Saint Paul says, Gal. 5.
gluttony, drunkenness, and whoredom, and this was the people of Isreal's case
when they danced before their calfe, as our Sorcerers do before their Devil:
for it is said of them; Exodus 34.
comederunt and biberunt, and surrexerunt ludere, id est, fornicari, even so
the Devil does make his servants leap and dance, and afterward he causes
them to banquet and make merry, and at last as we shall see, to commit
fornication and all uncleanness, And this is Saint Ieroms observation, when
he writes these very words: Hierony. lb. 3. commen. in Ep^st. ad Ephesians. ca. 4.
Nam and barbara quaedam nomina little esse dicuntur, vt saepe confessi sunt hi,
quos vere vulgus maleficos vocat: and incantationes, and preces, and colores
var^^ and diuersa velmetallorum velciborum, ad quae inuocati assistere
daemones, and infelices animas capere memorantur. Now whereas S. Jerome says
that the Devils do agree upon a set place to receive certain victuals which
are promised unto them, this is to be understood of the dead bodies, which the
Witches do dedicate and set before them in a place that shall be designed for
that purpose: where they cause them to be sodd and afterward eaten by the whole
assembly after an abominable kind of Anthropophagy: and in all likelie-hood
this is done to shake the Article of the Resurrection. For as Pliny does
atheistically argue, how can those bodies rise again in their own substance,
although God put his finger thereunto, when as now the flesh is eaten by
others, and is changed into the substance of those who have devoured the same.
Besides, by this barbarous and brutish manner of seeding, he makes them to
transgress the very law of nature, and so indeed makes them like unto
beasts, so that when Saint Jerome writes that the Devils are very serviceable
unto those, that will promise unto him such kind of victuals, it is not to be
conceived that they do eat any thing, for they are Spirits, but yt they induce
and persuade others to eat of these diabolical viands, because they know the
impiety and wickedness of such an execrable diet: for it is directly against the
first commandment which God gave unto man after the flood, to re-establish the
law of nature, which by Giants and other wicked people had been much violated
and profaned. I give you leave (says he) to eat of all living creatures upon
the face of the earth, but I forbid you to spill the blood of man; Genes. 9.
that is, to eat and devour man's flesh. For in this passage of Genesis, as
the text it self declares it, there was no question or mention of murder,
but only touching the diversity and use of meats. So that by this text,
Anthropophagy, or eating of man's flesh is expressly forbidden, and therefore the
Devil has brought up the practice thereof amongst his people, because it is a
thing against humanity and reason: and this is the cause why he gathers them
together, and inciteth them to those abominable banquets and meriments.
Touching other victuals and refreshments which he causes them to take,
although in the eating of them they please and give contentment unto their
taste, yet when these poor wretches return unto their own homes, they are
then as much or more hungry then they were before. Conformable hereunto is the
observation of Saint Thomas, who says, that although all natural bodies in
respect of motion and quality are under the command of Spirits, yet can they
not change the substances of them, of which God is the sole creator, but are
only powerful to make an alteration or change in the accidents. And therefore
the Devil cannot make a stone bread: so that we may hence conclude, that this
is out of the compass of his natural power, and that such meats are so only
in apparancy, being clothed with certain qualities of bread, wine, or flesh:
and these qualities are but of short continuance, for as Saint Thomas says,
the works of the Devil cannot be permanent, because they have not the prop
and ground work of true substances. So that this was it, that showed Christ
Jesus to be the true God, because he had not only caused five thousand to
eat, but had also fed and filled them for a long time after. Thus the bread
that was baked in the ashes and eaten by Helias, 1. Reg. 19.
was framed by the fingar of God, because in the strength thereof he walked 40.
days and forty nights. The same may be said of the Manna in the deser^, which
did fill and satisfy those that did eat of the same, as it is said, Pae^e
caeli saturauit eos. Therefore it is a property peculiar unto God alone to give
corporal food and sustenance unto men, either by the means of his creatures,
or by some other extraordinary power. I a^t a (said David) super Dominum curam
tu^m, and ipse te e^^triel; Psalm. 54.
and aperis tu (domine) manum tuam, and ^mple^ omne animal benedictione. This
being altogether hid from these miserable creatures, they go a whoring after
Satan in the time of their necessity, and imagine that it is in his power to
keep them from hunger or from any other want, wherewith they are pinched, by
giving unto them victuals or money according to his promise: from which we may
also draw this conclusion with S. Thomas: that when these kind of people are
changed into cats, wolfes, or any of the like resemblances, (as Witches have
deposed, and Saint Augustine does largely make mention of the same, as of a
truth in his time beyond exception, and as Apuleius Vincentius in his history,
and Ephordiensis do all witness) we are not to conceive that the true
substance of the man or of the woman is changed into the nature of these
beasts, (for this does surmount the power of the Devil) but that the Devil
does cover and cloth their bodies with a cloud of air, having the resemblance
of such a beast. For as he sometimes seems to be a perfect man, because he
has taken such an airy form upon him, so does it also appear unto those that
behold these Witches, and unto themselves also that they are perfect beasts,
although in truth it be otherwise: and thereupon S. Thomas does thus conclude.
P. p. q. 114. art. 4.
Illae transmutationes corporalium rerum quae non possunt virtute naturae
fieri, nullo modo operatione daemonum secundum rei veritatem perfici possunt.
sicut quod corpus humanum mutetur in corpus bestiale, etc. And afterward he
comes to describe the means how this is done, in apparancy and show. Cum
demon possit formare corpus ex aere, cuiuscunque formae and figurae vt illud
assumens in eo visibiliter appareat: potest eadem ratione circumponere
cuiuscunque rei corporeae quamcunque formam corpoream, vt in eius specie
videatur. And this is farther proved by the sentence taken out of S. Augustine
in the 18. book of the City of God. It may also very well be, that the Devil
may imprint into their fantasies such kind of shapes, and then they will
apprehend them as though they were true and real forms: the experience
whereof we are taught by those that are frantic, wh^ think they see Toads,
Serpents and Dragons flying and crawling up and down their chambers where they
lie, neither can any one persuade the contrary unto them, because these shapes
are as properly inherent in the common sense as in the fantasy it self,
whether they are sent by transmission from the eyes. Neither ought we to
think that Nabuchodonosor was substantially changed into a beast, although
that this happened unto him by the power and finger of God, but that he was
rather deprived for a time of his understanding, thereby to chastise and humble
him for his transgressions, and was afterward by special grace re-setled in
his former senses. And the text affirms not that his substance was changed,
but his heart, which himself does afterward interpret, when he says, Sensus
meus reuer sus est ad me. Hieron. in Dan.
Whereupon S. Jerome says, Quand^ dicit sensum sibi fuisse redditum, ostendit
se formam non amisisse, sed mentem. As therefore a man whose senses are taken
from him, does not care if he cohabite with beasts, and feed amongst them, the
same was Nabuchodon^sors case until God had compassion of him, at what time
he was reclaimed and reduced unto himself, and craved pardon of Almighty God.
Touching Lo^s wife, she was indeed changed into a pillar of salt, but it was
either after her death, or upon the very instant of the same, and her body in
succession of time was turned into the mould from whence it was taken. Thus we
see the Devils disabilitie in changing the substance or shape of man, although
he may counterfaite and cover the same with his shows and apparances. Of this
nature shall the miracles of Antichrist be, which shall be lying signs, framed
to all kinds of deception by the industriousnes and art of Devils. Thus when
S. Augustine reci^eth the history of the Hostesses of Italy, who used to give a
certain kind of broth unto their guestes of their own making, which when
they had once eaten, they were presently changed into Horses, Mules, or Asses,
and were made to carry all burdens and loads which they pleased to put upon
them, till they came to a certain place; we must not think that these men
lost the use of their natural reason, because by virtue thereof they saw and
conceived themselves to be beasts according to their bodily shapes, and being
come unto the said place they returned unto their former estate. Saint
Augustine says not that these things are fables, but that they may either be
so indeed, or else may seem to be what they are not, by charms and
collusions. And concludes, that when it is so indeed, we are not to think
that the substance of the man is turned into the substance of the beast, but
that it is only thus in external appearance by the working of the Devil* Nec
sane (inquit) Daemones naturas creant, si aliquid tale faciunt de qualibus
factis ista vertitur quaestio: sed specie tenus, quae a vero Deo sunt creata
commutant, vt videantur esse quod non sunt. And speaking of Apuleius, whom he
reports to have been turned into an ass, he says, that either Apuleius
did counterfaite and devise such a thing, or did set it down in writing as it
really happened. I ste (inquit) aut iudicauit aut finxit. And for the burdens
which he carried, it was (said he) the Devil who did bear and undergo them
for him.

THE TENTH ANNOTATION. Whether witches worship the Devil in the form of a
Goat?
COluistis and adorastis in formam and speciem foedissimi and nigerrim^ hirci,
etc. That the Devil is ambitious of nothing more then to be worshipped as a
God, we have formerly at large declared, and concerning the visible form in
which he does appear, we have likewise showed out of S. Augustine, that it
is not permitted unto him to inuest himself with what form he will or
naturally can take upon him, but he is limited unto such semblances as God is
pleased to permit unto him: and therefore says S. Augustine, there is no
question but he would have taken a goodlier and more specious resemblance upon
him, then the form of the Serpent was, if God would have suffered him so to
do: but God would not have it so. When he comes to be adored, he appears
not in a humane form, but as the Witches themselves have deposed, as soon as
they are agreed of the time that he is to mount upon the altar (which is some
rock or great stone in the fields) there to be worshipped by them, he
instantly turns himself into the form of a great black Goat, although in
all other occasions he uses to appear in the shape of a man: for God will
not suffer him thus to abuse the nature of man, because Christ Jesus his only
Son is a true man, and worshipped as God and man both together: for the
Hypostaticall union of both natures is so indissoluble and so fast linked one
to the other, that there is but one essence or person that arises from both
natures. Again, if the Devil had presented himself in an humane form, our
first parents might have conceited him to have been the Messiah, Genes. 2.
Ephesians. 5.
who was already revealed and fore promised to Adam, as Saint Paul expresses
it. Hence it is that God will not suffer him to assume the form of the Son
of God when he goes about to be worshipped, but only of a beast, or of some
such monstrous and i^ favored shapes, which are one half of them beasts, and
the other addition of a different form unto it, as are Centaures and other
such prodigious resemblances, which were indeed nothing else but Devils: and
many times they appear, as Pliny says of sea monsters, with a long tail of a
Serpent, by which exorbitant parts and so unusual in the course of nature,
they are known to be true monsters. And this is S. Apoc. 3.
John's meaning when in the Revelation he does so often ingeminate, that men
shall come and worship the Beast: by which a man may probably guess that he
means Satan changing himself into a beast: for we need not to make inquiry
after a mystical sense of such places as these, when literally a man may
interpret the Scripture. Touching the form of the beast, which he ordenarliy
assumeth unto himself, it is a thing not to be controuerted that he
presents himself in the form of a Goat. And here we are to note, that
there are three or four passages in the Scripture which have a great
resemblance and affinity with this point. The first is in the 17. of Leuiticus,
where it is said, Leuit. 17.
Nequaquam vltra immolabunt hostias suas daemonibus. The second and third
passage is in the 30. and 34. of Esaias. Esa. 13.34.
Pilosi saltabunt ibi. In which places the Hebrew word Sehir signifies three
several things; first a Goat, secondly something that is hairie, as Esau was
for his hairynesse surnamed Sehir, and the mountains unto which he used to
resort were called, Montes Sehir: thirdly, it signifies the Devil, and thus
does S. Jerome render the word in the 17. chap. of Leuiticus: the like also
does the author of the Chaldean translation. Touching the two first
significations, Versio. Cada.
it appears that the one has a dependence upon the other, because a Goat is
the most shaggie beast of al other creatures: but why the Devil should be
called by the name of Goat, or of a beast that is shaggie, Rabby Quimhi, the
best interpreter of Hebrew words amongst the Jews, rendereth this reason,
because he appears in the shaggie form of a Goat to those that put their
confidence in him. This is the observation of S. Thomas 12. q. 102. Rabbi
Quimh^in lib. radit.
art. 3. And Doctor Lyranus upon the 12. of ^xod. and 1. Reg. 30. Hence it is
that the Chaldean interpreter and S. ^erome have by this word Goat, meant and
interpreted the D^uell, and thus is he called by the Witches themselves, as is
euinced out of their own depositions. So that it is no new thing that the
Diu^ll does show himself in the form of a Goat to those that have sl^u^d
themselves unto him, and do him homage and service. Sanctes Pagninus following
the same signification upon the place of the 30. Esa. 13.34. S. Pagnin.
and 34. of Esaias, where the text says, that the Sebirins shall leap and
dance in the wilderness, does thus interpret the same. The Devils shall
dance there. And this also is verified by the witness of Witches, who affirm
that this goatish Devil does leap and dance amongst them in their night
assemblies in the deserts. Moreover, it is very remarkable that the Septuagint
Interpreters have rendered this Hebrew word of the 17. Septuagint. in terpret.
of Leuit. by the Greek word, (...), that is to say, fools: and the Italians
borrowing that word from the Grecians, do call those that are ridiculous and
impertinent in their behavior, Matos, that is to say, fools. And the truth
is, men do now in the country of Province call such Spirits fools, or
mad-capps, because they play many fond prankes, as laughing, leaping, dancing
and whisteling: and in this respect have the Septuagints translated the word
(...). S. Thom. 1.2. q. ^^. art. 4. ad 3.
To this purpose is the saying of S. Thomas, who affirms that the Devils do
show many light and careless behauiours, as laughing, leaping and whisteling
which are but venial sins in men, but the Devils use these kind of gestures
thereby to familiarize themselves with men, and in conclusion to entice them
into his nets by these semblances of merriment. Thus S. A^hanasius makes
mention of Devils that sung songs. Athanas. in vita An^hon.
In profane histories we find that the two most ancient Oracles, the one
called Hammonium, which comes from the word Ham, or as we pronounce it Cham:
the other called Dodonaeum, which comes from the word Dodonum, of whom
mention is made in the tenth of Genesis amongst the grandchildren of Noah,
Genes. 10.
the first of them was in the form of a Goat, and the second in the shape of
a Ram with great horns. So that it is no nouelty to affirm that the Devil
does cause himself to be adored in the form of a Goat. And to descend to our
more modern relations, Alphons. de Castro. aduers. Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Alphonsus de Castro does report that in the country of Biscay they have found
it to be certain, that diverse women and some men have assembled themselves
together in a Mountain, where a black Goat did visibly present himself
before them, whom they all worshipped. In this late history of the Magician
Gaufridy, Beelzebub repining at the too abundant mercy of God, does reprehend
the Magicians for their adoring of a Goat.

THE ELEVENTH ANNOTATION. Whether there be Incubi and Succubi?
VOs viri cum succubis, vos malieres cum insubis fornicati estis, etc. From
hence we may learn the reason why the Devil appears in the form of a
Goat, because he is the most rank and the most lustful of all other
creatures whatsoever, neither does he ever observe set times for his hot
luxurious nature, as all other beasts use to do. The Devil does assemble his
people in a place designed for such a purpose, and there makes them to commit
uncleanness, and himself is the first and forwardest to practice the like
abominations, and appears unto women in the shape of a man, and unto men in
the fashion of a woman, by which means he induces them to defile themselves
with those devilish and execrable copulations with him; not that he receives
any delectation or pleasure from the same, but as S. Thomas says, (giving the
reason why S. Augustine did affirm, August. in Leuit. S. Thom. 1.2. q. 73.
art. ad. 2.
that the Devil took more delight in Idolatry and fornication, then in any
other sin whatsoever) he therefore is delighted with them both, because by
the first he usurps upon the glory of God, which is his first and principal
intention: and secondly, he keeps both men and women in his claws with more
security, by fastening them unto him through the sin of lust; for by reason of
the strong and vehement delectation which it carries with it, he makes them
to stick close unto him, so that when they fall into the same, they will be
hardly able to recover themselves again. He also makes them to loose the use
of their reason, so that they have no more command and sovereignty of
themselves, then the very beasts have: especially when they are once enured to
these sensual delights which are so vehement, Tertull. de anima.
that Tertull^an was of opinion, that as the body of an Infant is engendered
from a portion of corporeal substance, so is the soul also begotten from a
part of his soul that does beget: for (says he) we see that in the act of
generation, the soul, as if it were divided into portions, has not the power
to produce any act of reason. And hereupon it grows, that the Devil is so
much taken with this filthy and unclean sensuality, as appears by the
reasons which we have alleged. Neither are we to question whether such a thing
may be practiced by the help and working of the Devil, since it is out of
all controversy, that he does and may take (when he is not in the act of
adoration) any external form, that he pleases to inuest himself withal,
especially amongst those who have abandoned themselves unto him, and have done
him fealty and homage. And although there were no other proof then that two of
the most famous Doctors, the one amongst the fathers, the other amongst the
Schoolmen, August. lib. 15. de ci^^t. cap. 88 Thom. p. q. 51. art. 3. ad 6.
that is to say, S. Augustine and S. Thomas do concur and agree upon this
point, and do expressly auerre, that it were impudence to deny the cleerenesse
of this truth, yet is this confirmation enough to create a belief in men, that
it is a certain and undoubted verity. And hereupon it is, why the Turks do
not think it strange which we have amongst the Articles of our Creed, that a
Virgin should be conceived by the holy Ghost, because they think that this
may be easily done unto all Virgins, since they are assured by experience,
that be there Virgins never so closely restrained and kept from the company of
men, yet are they many times found to be with child: and this is the cunning
and practice of the Devil, Qui surripit aes demum in fundit semen. Moreover
this is shadowed out unto us by the ancient Histories and Poets, who do
frequently mention, that their Gods came down from heaven to commit folly and
uncleanness with their fairest women, and had often times issue by them. The
like does Apuleius report of his times: and these Gods (as they termed them)
are nothing else but Devils, as it is written, Omnes Dij gentium Daemonia. To
conclude this and the precedent Annotation, I should thus remember these kind
of people, that God does permit the Devil to appear unto them in the form of
a Goat, thereby to put them in mind, that they are to assure themselves they
shall be placed amongst the Goats in that great and last day of judgment,
because they have leagued and combined themselves with Goats in this world,
and have committed execrable idolatry unto them, as if they had been Gods. We
will only add, that the greatest part of the ancient Greek and Latin Poets
are clear of opinion, that Devils do desire and practice to have carnal
knowledge with women: yea S. Jerome himself uses these words. Daemones
quibujdam amoribus seruiunt, etc. And Justin Martyr says that this is not
peculiar to women alone, but is common unto men also, whereby he does plainly
express himself, that Devils do vary sexes: which is also the opinion of S.
Augustine. For although they, that did labor to interpret and accommodate the
sixth chapter of Genesis to this particular, are worthily reproved by him,
because the precedent and following passages do declare, that the mention
which is there made, is of men, and not of Angels: as S. Augustine well
shows, yet does he not disapproue the opinion of the ancients touching this
carnal commixtion, but on the contrary he affirms, that it is an impudency
to deny it. Justin the Historian in his 11. Book relates, that Olympias
mother unto Alexander the great, did freely confess unto her husband, that
Alexander was no son of his, but was begotten by a serpent, with whom she had
carnal knowledge. And hereupon did her husband repudiate her as an
adultresse, and ever after would Alexander style himself the son of the
Gods, and not of Philip. He also reports in his 15. Book, that Loadice
mother unto Seleucus did affirm, that she kept company with the God Apollo in
her sleep, who (as she thought in her dream) gave a ring unto her, and when
she awoke in the morning, she found the ring in her bed. But such kind of
women, are full of impiety, and God has utterly abandoned and given them up
unto themselves.

FINIS.
Ad Authorem Epigramma.
ANgelicum nomen claris virtutibus aequas
Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe suis,
Angelus vt Domini magna virtute Draconum
Turbam deuicit, corpora foeda necans.
Sortilegos tua sic vincit doctrina Michael,
Quae clare illorum dogmata falsa probat.
Angelicae laudi tua credito gloria par est,
Damonis astutiam fortis vter que fugat.
BAPTISTA BADERVS Parisiensis in eodem Parisiensi Senatu Patronus.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE principal matters contained in the first part.
A
ABominations of the synagogues of magicia^s. 302.305 Abraham sacrifices his
son. 107 Absolution required in him that confesses himself. 127 Abyron and
Dathan swallowed up by the earth for their impieties. 213 Accusation of
Sorcerers. 8 The acts of Adoration of Verrine. 3.143.185 An Act of humility in
Magdalene. 149 Adoration of Verrine. 3.143.185 Adiuration of Verrine. 103.123
Adam driven out of Paradise for his disobedience. 133 Adams Repentance. 115
Adam, and what he did. 44.217.246.106 Adoration of the Eucharist. 26.33
Adoration of the Goat in the synagogue. 302 Adoration of God by a Devil in a
miracle. 89 An aduertizement unto Monks and Priests. 133.144 An advice to
write that which the Devil delivered. 30 An advice given to Priests. 104. and
unto religious persons. 172. and generally unto all men. 192.238.274 The Age
wherein we are to do penance. 237 Agnus dei is a lamb for true Christians,
but a roaring Lion for Devils. 24 Against such as address themselves to
Witches. 253 Allusion made by the Devil touching the constraint which be
suffers in exorcismes. 204 Saint Andrews day appointed by the Devils to
carry away Magdalene. 1.2 Angels of heaven and their force. 36 Angels which are
our guardians ought to be worshipped, and why? 199 Angels and Saints are our
advocates. 147 Angels are not able to sing at full the praises of God. 136
Angels that were goodly creatures condemned to hell for their pride. 181 Angels
are waiters at the table of God. 184 Answers of the devils which were in the
body of Louyse. 2.3 Antichrist borne. 260.268.269.299.305 Antichrist will cause
himself to be adored, and the Kings of the earth shall serve him. 267
Apostrophe unto S. Magdalene. 298 Apostrophe to the laity. 145.274 Arrival of
Jews to S. Baume. 287 Arrival of S. Magdalenes mother to S. Baume. 13
Arrival of Father Michaelis to S. Baume. 283 Arrival of Magdalene to S.
Baumie. 1 The Attributes given to divine persons. 46 Audience given to
Magdalene. 290 An Auie said for our enemies waighes more then a Pater for our
friends. 257 Authority of the Church. 171 Authority of Priests. 190
B
Balberith is he that tempts me^ to blaspheme God. 252 S. Baume ought to be
reverenced. 226.281 Baptism not regarded. 123 Barbarous nations live in
darkness 123 The Be ought to be proposed to our imitation. 229 Beatitude not
essential but accidental may be augmented. 96 Beelzebub tosseth Magdaleue
from one side to another 21 Beelzebub belloweth like a bull, and casts
Magdalenes shoes at Louyse head. 6 Beelzebub makes an out cry when he heard
these words Ecce Ancilla domini. 24 Beelzebub swears that Louyse is possessed.
294 Beelzebub in speaking to another Devil does imitate the Exorcist. 66
Beelzebub humbled and trodden under feet. 86.124 Beelzebub complains to God of
his too great mercy. 62.63.73.74 S. Bernard a great familiar of the Virgins.
194 Beauty of Paradise. 38.281 Beads without works are of none avail. 80.81
Birds of the air bless God. 250 Blindness of men 188 He is Blind who neither
has understanding nor will to do good. 141 Book of life and death in Gods
keeping. 271 The Booko of the Crucifix. 145.275 The Book with two leaves. 173
Bread taken for the species and form of bread. 151
C
CAluenists believe not the Church of Rome. 39 Capuchins go to Marseille. 299
Carreau one of the Devils. 243.116 Catherine of France guardian unto Magdalene.
6 Caroches enter into hell, but men go to Paradise on foot. 21.124 A Change
in the life of Magdalene. 132 The Charity of Saints. 37 The Charity of Christ
Jesus. 77 Charity the daughter of God. 44 Christians that serve not God are
miserable. 17 The Church shall examine all these things. 116 Out of the Church
there is no salvation, and it is but one. 209 Single Combats prohibited by God.
135.242 Confession of Magdalene. 8 The holy Communion the table of the King of
Kings. 183 Confession without due preparation is not good. 126 Confessors and
Exorcists are excluded from the consultations. 289 Consultations touching the
verification of the acts. 289 Considerations to be thought upon when we sit
at table. 228.229 Consultation touching the business of the Magician. 185
Conversion of Magicians. 261. It is a miracle. 305 Constraint of Verrine.
18.20.57.58.64.106 Constraint of Beelzebub to renounce the actions of the
Magicians. 241 Constraint of the Devils to speak truth. 42.43.91. and to
humble themselves. 63.92.93.160.186 Contradiction when the miracles of God are
wrought. 205 Contradiction of Leuiathan 152 Cooperation of the creature with
God. 229 Five Counsels or instructions given to Louyse. 40. and to Magdalene.
40 The Contrition of Magdalene. 10 Another Consultation how to proceed in case
that the Magician would not confess. 106 The Contempt of Devils toward our
Lady. 5.182. The Contempt which some have of Priests is not to be regarded by
Priests. 135 The Cross a glass in which we are all to look, 145 Christ Jesus
is the same also. 146 The Cruelty of the Magician Jews. 298 All Creatures obey
God. 60 Damnable Curiosity touching the blessed Sacrament. 90 The Curious fall
into a pit out of which they cannot get when they will. 116.90.133 The Custom
of the Dominica^s in saying of their Rosary 3
D
DAmnation the recompense of Devils. 60.61 Dathan and Abyron swallowed up for
their impieties. 213 Death, and the sundry sorts thereof. 170 The Deformity of
Devils and the damned. 38.61 The Devil begins to speak at the first
exorcismes, but by constraint. 2.3.157 The Devil boweth himself to worship
God. 3 The Devil that is inferior, dares not speak before his superior. 6
Devils make dainty to tell their names, for fear of being exorcised, commanded
and punished. 66 The Devil seen by Magdalene. 14 The Devils beaten. 24.25 The
Devils are constrained to speak at S. Baume. 30 The Devils would overthrow the
company of S. Vrsula. 34.89 The principal Devils that were in Magdalene. 39
The Devils condemned for one only sin, and why. 93.64 Devils are thieves. 90
Devils are incapable of conversion. 90 The Devil commands not: neither are we
to obey him. 94 The Devil does falsely affirm that Jews was no Magician, and
that Magdalene was not bewitched. 131 The Devil employed by God, and why? 236
The Devils that tempted our first parents. 266 The Devil exprobateth Jews
with his villains. 289 The Devils are bound. 300 304 The Devil resists and
disputes against God. 24.143 The Devil is proud, and is vexed that God would
choose a woman to be the instrument of so important a business. 85.54 The Devil
issues forth like a blast from the body of Louyse. 210.211 The Devils keep
Magdalene bound in all her body to make her to despair. 84 Devils who are
forced by God or his Church to swear a truth cannot lie.
29.88.91.92.95.153.154 Devils do laugh at those who are curious. 51 The Devils
and their number which was in the body of Louyse. 3 A Dialogue of the soul and
the body. 217 A Dialogue between Verrine and Leuiathan. 161.187 A Dialogue
between Verrine and Beelzebub. 62 A Dialogue between Verrine and the Exorcist.
186 A Dialog^e between Leuiathan and one of the fathers. 296 That it is
difficult to believe what we cannot comprehend. 277.278 The Difference of
possession. 301 The first Discovery of the Magician. 82 Discourse touching the
blessed Trinity. 43.44. and of their consultation. 45 Discourse touching the
French King lately deceased. 219.263.272 Discourse touching the possession of
Louyse and the progress thereof. 137.138 Discourse unto the people 145
Discourse touching the three Kings. 306 Discourse of the pains of hell. 19.20
Discourse of the birth of our Lord well worthy to be read. 230.243.244
Discourse of Verrine touching Saints. 68.69 Disputation between one of the
Fathers and Verrine. 90.91.201 Disputation between the Exorcist and the
Devil. 186 Disputation of Leuiathan with Verrine. 151.152.154 Disputation of
Beelzebub with Verrine. 62.63 Diversities of offices amongst the Devils. 170.191
S. Dominick with the good Angel of Magdalene intercede for her. 13.15 Verrines
enemy. 37.189.203 S. Dominicks praises. 190.197.198.203. Doubt of the truth of
this history. 223
E
THe Earth made of nothing. 222 The End crowns the work. 272 Enmity between
Devils. 6 Eucharist. 90.151.182.183.191 Eve created without sin. 207
Examination of the acts. 308 Example of the Publican and Pharisee in S. Luke.
180 Exclamation touching the conception of our Lady. 4 Exclamation upon the
praises of God. 6 Exclamation touching the day of Judgment. 16 Exclamation of
Verrine to God who constrained him. 27 Exclamation against the proud and
curious. 28 Exclamation unto the Church. 97 Exclamation of the Devil.
6.21.24.78 Exhortation to Magdalene. 10.91.147 Exhortation to the poor. 31.225
The Exorcist demands the Devil Verrine what Saints did most trouble him. 3
The Exorcist changed. 296
F
FAith sufficient in receiving of the Sacrament. 90 Fasts recommended. 122
Father d' Abruc comes to S. Baume. 195.287 A father is not to answer for his
sons offenses, and of what son this is to be understood. 177 Fear is not
available without love. 226 A feeling of devotion and strength at the prayers
of the Saints. 3 Force of Devils limited. 35 The force of Louyse. 71 Francis
Billet exorciseth at Saint Baume. 90 Francis Billet uses much patience. 2
Francis Billet writes to the Priests of the doctrine a letter, and the tenure
thereof. 155.156 The friends that God has at his table the four feasts of
the year. 121 Frequenting of the Sacrament. 269 The Fright wherein Magdalene
was. 30
G
GAlly-slaues are more happy then sinners, and why? 248 The Guardian of
Magdalene. 6 The Guardian of Mary was Joseph. 249 The Gates of Paradise very
narrow. 124.200 The holy Ghost called a fire. 235 Gloria in excelsis sung at
the birth of our Savior. 224 Gloria in excelsis to be sung by Devils is a
great miracle. 245 God adored in the cratch with bowing down of the knees.
233.247 Gods goodness toward men. 96. his mercy. 101.115. 268. and goodness
toward Magdalene. 84 God is a Physician. 268 God speaks by an inward
intelligence. 187.189 God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
40 God is never a witness unto falsehood. 188 God preuenteth the sinner. 115
God is so beautiful that the Devils would willingly endure all torments to
have but one glance of him. 12 God makes reservation to himself of three
things. 213 God is incomprehensible. 96.136.259 God calls no man to reject
him afterward. 10 God cannot lie. 31 God is merciful. 99.120.167 God is not
to be served out of expectation of recompense, but rather out of love. 122 God
does expressly command that they who keep not his law should be punished.
109.110 God is obeyed by all his creatures. 135.136 God created the creature
without any consent of it. 272 God descends upon the earth, and how. 179 The
government of a family appertains not to women but to their husbands, unless
they do prudently manage things. 237 The grace which was given to the Virgin.
208.281.282 Grace is far removed from the sinner. 185 A Great reprehension of
men. 262 A Great sinner needs great repentance. 98 Gresill a name of one of
the Devils. 237
H
Hardness of Magdalenes heart. 7 Hell in an vproare. 62.66 An Heretic
withdraws himself much confounded. 155 An Heretic reproved; as also those
that are curious. 133.134.154 This History is to be published unto all. 245
This History found fault withal. 245 Honor ought to be snewed unto priests.
129 Honor ought to be given unto Baptism. 123 Humility represents the birth
of God. 124 Humility recommended unto us. 70.117.134.135.220.285 The Humility
of our Lady. 36.281.248 The Humility of Magdalene. 129
I
IEremias sanctified from his mothers womb. 207 Jesus Christ has a glorified
body in the Sacrament, which takes up no place. 182 Jesus Christ descends in
his divinity and humanity in Saint Baume to visit Saint Magdalene. 281 Jesus
Christ a King. 247.248 Jesus Christ is before his mother, and how? 215.216
Jesus a Painter. 148.167 Incredulity reproved. 132.232.234.246. Ingratitude of
men. 26.35.146 Intellectual conferences internally expressed.
27.28.53.56.57.176 Interrogatories propounded to Jews. 287 Interrogatories of
the Exorcist. 3 Interrogatories of the Exorcists to Magdalene. 11 An Inuectiue
against the Magician. 216.220 John the Evangelist compared to an Eagle and his
prerogatives. 259.260 Joseph is in doubt, 223. and is sanctified. 228 The
Judgment day of Godwill be very terrible. 10.11 286.287 Judgment that is rash
is naught. 136
K
THe King of the Nineuites did wisely take sackcloth and ashes, to appease the
wrath of God. 119
L
A Letter of Magdalene unto the Virgin changed and corrected. 40.41.42 A Letter
of Magdalene to Saint Magdalene, and the tenor thereof. 22 A Letter sent to
sundry persons. 59.100.104.107.108. Jews unlearned. 288 Jews despised of the
Devils. 288 Jews strikes an horror into Magdalene. 288.289 Jews had no
memory in him. 292 Jews accused by Beelzebub to be a Magician. 292 Jews
accused by Leuiathan. 296. and by Verrine. 301 Jews goes to Auignon and Aix,
there to be declared innocent. 308 Jews is shut up in the place of holy
penance, which was locked with a key. 289 Jews very familiar and dear unto
the Capuchin fathers. 102 Jews plays the Hypocrite and Pharisee. 288.297 298
Light what it signifies. 143 The Love of God and the recompense that attends
it. 123 The love of a man's self. 251 Louyse recites to her superior all her
tentations and intrinsic speakings. 58. Louyse to be examined. 94 Louyse
exorcised by Father Francis Domptius. 2. Baptized in a Kitchen. 55 Louyse was
an Huguenot. 32.55.149.263 Louyse possessed for Magdalenes sake. 29.157 In
Louyse many signs of possession. 106.120.138.263. She is at peace with
conscience although she be possessed. 57 Louyse exorcised by Jews the priest.
287 Louyse is possessed for the conversion of two souls especially, and by a
consequent of many others. 120 Louyse offreth her prayers to God for Jews.
275.283.287 Lucia for saketh all for the love of God. 49
M
Magdalene troubled with Incubi. 33.300 Magdalene shall be repentant. 129
Magdalene contemns and resists the Devils. 33 Magdalene brought to the holy
place of penance to avoid a danger. 2 Magdalene spitteth at the persuasion of
the Exorcist. 11 Magdalene strongly tempted by Beelzebub at the time of
communion. 49 Magdalene changed. 147 Magdalene at times wauereth. 116.118.119
Magdalene weepeth and prostrateth her self at the feet of the Dominican. 8.10
Saint Magdalene the first among sinners. 36. and in beauen is the next after
the mother of God. 189 Magdalene a table. 148 Magdalene given to the Devil and
by whom. 116 Magdalene falls down at her mothers feet. 14 S. Magdalene
intercedeth for Magdalene. 13 Magicians are not possessed. 304 Magicians spread
abroad ill savors, and cast some of their stinkes upon two Fathers. 301 Magic
much used. 282 Maladies of men. 267.268 Malice of this world. 26 Maliciousness
of Jews. 282.297.298 Man is endowed with free will. 272 The manner of
Magdalenes transformation in soul, and of others also. 147 The Mantle or
cloak of impiety. 259 Mary the Moon, and her son the Sun. 222. and the
Saints, Stars. ibid. Mary intercedeth for sinners. 9 Mary conceived without
original sin. 205.206 Mary the sinners advocate. 41.42.128.147 Mary the
goodliest creature that ever God made. She is a garden. 4.47.233 Mary is a
ladder. 19.8 Mary is all in all. 5. She is the temple of the blessed trinity.
4.5 Mary's prayers. 233.270 Martha next after the mother of God, and why? 50.
She is loved by Mary. 53 Martyrdom of S. Lucia and the Virgins. 49 Martyrs ten
thousand went in one day to Paradise. 125 The Mass of a wicked Priest is good.
32 Memory represents the eternal father. 193 Menaces of the Devil to carry
away Magdalene. 2 Menaces of Beelzebub. 10 Menaces of Jews the Magician. 291
The Mercy of God. 11.73.77. and his justice. 44 The Mercy of Christ Jesus.
45.48.62. and of our Lady. 78 Mercy and Justice the two daughters of God. 44
Miracles discovered. 34.43.68.88.143.205 Miracles oppugned. 205 A great miracle
that the Devil should praise heaven. 20 A great Miracle, that God by the
pronouncing of four words should descend upon the Altar. 133 Miserable is he
who gives good counsel unto others, and keeps none for himself.
110.112.113 Mortification recommended unto us. 68.130 The Mother of God ever
intercedeth for Magdalene. 9 The Mother of God dared not to touch him upon his
birth day. 183 Moses one of the four trumpets, who together with Saint John
shall come and summon men to judgment. 265
N
NAbuchodonosor turned into a beast, and is saved. 251.258 Names of the Devils
which were in the body of Louyse. 3 The name of Verrine shall be rased forth.
259 Neighbors necessities to be relieved. 226.227 Every night two Priests
watch with Magdalene 84 No man without sin. 239 True nobility. 252 True
nobility comes from heaven. 243 Nonnus would not baptize Pelagia. 40 Nostre
Dame de grace, the place where Magdalene was exorcised. 1
O
THe Oath of the Devil. 131 Oaths that are of validity. 92.165.209.304 The
Oaths of Beelzebub and Verrine. 35.63.64 Without Obedience no Paradise. 40
Obedience in some cases not to be given. 175 Obedience recommended.
126.133.134.171 Obstinacy and hardness of heart in Magicians accompanied with
a great blindness. 254 Offices to be performed by religious persons. 144
Offices of the Devils. 170.191 The order of S. Dominicke admits not mortal
sin. 206 The Order of S. Dominick extolled. 206.263 The Order that is
Hierarchichall and appertaining to the Church is not among the good Angels
themselves. 93 Order among the Devils. 80
P
THe pains of hell are not so insufferable as the wrath of that great God 17
The pains of hell. 19.60.61.121.122 Pains of this world as flowers, but the
pames of hell are truly punishments. 133 Gates of Paradise very narrow. 124.200
Pardoning our enemies. 256 The pastor is to give an account of his sheep. 177
Patrons of Province. 65 Penance recommended. 177.181.120.208 People flock by
troops to S Baume. 124 A great perfection to omit nothing that is good. 203
Persuasion of Verrine to Magdalene. 12 Physicians of the soul. 268 The holy
pillar. 130 A Plot to ruin the companies of the doctrine, and S. Vrsula. 55
Possessed persons are much eased at the departure of Devils. 211 Possession by
witchcraft. 3 Possession of Magdalene by her spiritual father. 88 The power of
God toward sinners. 64 The Power of God. 73.151.163.168.169 Prayers powered
forth by Verrine unto God. 240 Prayers for our enemies. 48.257 Prayers cause
tears. 8 Prayers for Magdalene. 98 Prayers made by Magdalene unto the Virgin,
by the advice of her Confessor. 15 Preachers labor much, and have not such
easy lives as some imagine. 227 The Praises of the Nuns of S. Vrsula.
34.50.51 55.65.118 Prediction of the punishment and death of the Magician,
bound with a solemn oath. 88.89.213.301 Prediction yet to come.
260.262.263.304 Predictions already happened. 265.278.299.303 304.305 Priests
ought to be had in reverence. 133.171 Priests ought to study and preach,
because they are separated from the world. 133 The Priest is not the cause why
sinners receive no grace by hearing of the Mass, but they themselves. 192
Pride of the Devil. 24.66 Five Prinses of the Devils in the body of Magdalene.
39 Proceedings to convert the Magician very charitable and repugnant unto
Devils. 102.106 Promise of witnesses to keep Jews his sins secret. 102 The
proud shall not enter into Paradise. 242 The great Punishments of those that
do not obey God. 119 Purgatory. 153 Purity recommended. 186
R
THe Rage of the Magicians.* 73.74.116.236. 254.302 The rebels person
displeases God. 133 Recompense which the Devil gives to those that serve
him. 254.255 Redemption of man. 145.146 Reformation. 204.206 Refusal of father
Francis Domptius to exorcise, and why. 2 To Render evil for good is the
property of Devils. 254 Renunciations of Magicians. 74.75. and of Verrine.
235.236 Reprehension of Magdalene. 7.8.116.119 Reprehension of Christians.
16.93 Resignation of Louyse. 56.94 Resistance to withstand their coming to
Saint Baume. 112 Resistance of the Devil at the Communion. 24 Return of Jews
to Marseille as innocent. 308 Riches of this world the of scourings of
Paradise. 256 Father Romillon could not hold in Magdalene but cries for help.
2 Ruin of Angels. 266
S
THe Sabbath held in Saint Baume. 119.132 The same Sacrifice is always seen
in the Church. 190 Sacrifices that are public, and why they are offered. 114
Saints devoted to the Virgin. 198 Saints and their virtues. 68.69.70. They pray
for us. 150 Solomon the worlds wisdom damned. 251.258.304 Satisfaction
follows confession. 181 Schedules restored to Theophylus and others. 305
Science of Devils full of malice. 25 Science of God knows all things. 46
Science of Cicero and Plato to what use they serve. 232 Separation of the two
women. 289.295 The service of Devils is laborious, but the service of God
delightful. 254 The shame which Magdalene took to be proclaimed a Witch
before all people. 10 Signs of the day of Judgment. 260 Sign of
Predestination what it is. 228 Signs of Magdalenes possession. 39.93.305
Signs of Louyses possession. 201.202.261.265.276. 287.300 Sinners are not
punished according to their offenses. 181. Sinners reprehended. 163.278.279 He
Sins mortally who hears not Mass upon Holydaies and Sundaies. 191 The
Sins of Magdalene. 116 Sonneillon the name of a Devil, and to what he
tempts men. 258 Sorcerers abominable before God. 240. their superstitions.
250. They go invisible. 299.300 The sorrows of Christ Jesus in his passion.
48 The sorrow of Verrine to be constrained. 20.36.231 The Soul of a poor man
as welcome to heaven as the soul of a King, so that it stand in the grace of
God. 225 The souls in heaven do thirst after the salvation of our souls.
57.100 The soul is a mistrisse, and the body as a^chambermaid. 237.238 The
souls of the damned were fair at the first, but afterward by sin grew most
deformed. 122 Every soul belongs to God. 192 The Soul represents the
sacred Trinity. 193 The souls fall as thick into hell as flower does from the
millstone. 125 The soul is a vineyard. 285 The soul compared to a
Commonwealth. 218.86 The soldier to kill himself is an extraordinary
accident. 18 Spirits go and come exceeding swiftly. 230 The stable made
honorable by the birth of our Savior. 226 Three suffrages presented by the
Dominican father to three several Saints. 3 We are to Suffer for to reign.
114 The Sunbeame does not break glass, but adds a brightness unto it. 224
Suspicions of a certain^ father. 91 Sympathy between God and his creatures.
272
T
TE Deum sung by the assembly to give thanks unto God. 14 Temptation of some
persons. 140 Temptation to hardness of heart. 243 Temptation of the world.
174.175 Temptation to single combats, and against youth. 121.242 Temptations of
diverse sorts. 204.251.252 Temptation against the gentry and heretics. 241.242
Temptation of the Devil to Magdalene. 98 Thanksgiving ought to be used after
the communion. 184 The Thirst of Christ Jesus. 284 S. Thomas was not ignorant
of the death of his master. 194 Three things we are to ask of God. 194 Three
sorts of people serve God. 122.174 Time past or future is not in God. 46 The
Time prepared for Martyrs. 269 Torments of hell. 19.60.61 Torments of the
Devils. 24.33.79 Torments of Magdalene. 90.91
V
VErity a moral virtue. 91 Verrine does nothing but at the command of the
Exorcist. 10 Verrine causes that which was spoken and disputed by him, to be
written. 30 Verrine does dictate word by word that which he spoke unto the
Dominican. 41.42 Verrine makes excellent discourses, leaving all men full of
astonishment at the same. 11 Verrine does renounce all Magicians of both sexes,
Sorcerers and Sorceresses. 235 Verrine remains mute and silent; and why. 51
Verrine confesses God to be in the Host, and in the Chalice with his blood and
bones, with his humanity and divinity. 52.126 Verrine disputes with God.
52.53.176.275 Verrine braueth Beelzebub. 93.261.266 Verrine never said Miserere
mei. 87 Verrine curses S. Baume. 87 Verrine the executioner of Gods Justice.
89 Verrine incapable to be prayed for. 89 Verrine denies that God is his
redeemer. 93.185 Verrine denies that he^is a Preacher. 93.187 Verrine Gods
sergeant. 119.127. and his Ambassador. 162 Verrine craves to be commanded.
126.211.240 Verrine constrained. 18.57.106.197 Verrine asks his own
confusion. 129 Verrine an accursed Devil. 28. and a liar when he speaks
besides his commission. 51. is damned. 92.188.221 Verrine a naughty and
barraine tree. 230 Verrine says he shall have diminution of his torments. 230
Sonneillon says the same. 255 Verrine forces no man to believe. 249 Verrine
is angry at unbelievers. 301 Verrine complains that he is made the instrument
of this History, by the mouth of Louyse. 263 Verrine barketh like a dog.
300.303 Verrine never assured the conversion of Jews. 277 Verrine resists
God. 169.203 Verrine turns toward Magdalene, and cries as much as he can. 6
Verrine cries out when he heard them say; in principio. 43 Verrine disputes
with Bezebub. 114.115 Verrine one of the Devils in Louyse body, and why. 3.94
164 Virtues recommended. 171.229 Virtues properly termed the physic of the
soul. 268 Vices are as Princes. 86 Virgins 11000. went in one day to Paradise.
125 Virgins praised. 53 Vision of the damned very fearful. 17 A Vision which
struck a great fright into Magdalene. 155 The Understanding represents the
Sun. 295.297 Union of the humane nature with the divine. 44 Union of God with
his Church. 275 Vocation and the first grace, is from the mere and sole favor
of God. 17
W
WOmen possessed of the company of S. Vrsula. 56 Wicked Spirits labored to
carry away Magdalene by maine force. 2 The Will desires to do well. 20 The
Will represents the holy Ghost. 193 The Will and power thereof. 217 The wings
which carry us into heaven, is love and fear. 289.130 Witchcraft changed into
a blessing. 30.67 Witnesses of the acts. 18.102.142.289 The words of Verrine.
4.5.291.301 The Words of Verrine to Magdalene. 7.265.8.9.10, etc. 247 The words
of Verrine to Jews. 288.292.300 The words of Verrine to Louyse. 305 The words
that sinners are to say when they are converted. 117.118
Y
THe Yoke of our Lord is easy and his burden light. 231 Young people do not
think it a sin to offend God. 242
AN ALPHABETICALL Table of the principal matters contained in the second part
of this Book.
A
ABnegare s^ipsum, is the perfection of true contrition. 395 Acoules a parish
in Marseille. 357 Acts of humility performed by the woman that was possessed.
315 Adam was the first that presented himself to Christ Jesus in Lymbo. 314
Adoration of the Eucharist by the Devil. 375 Aegidius gives himself to the
Devil that he might be a skillful Physician. 384 Affectation of Priests in
their clothes very pleasing to Beelzebub. 382 An Agnus dei charmed and given by
a Magician to Magdalene. 379 An Angel assisteth Magdalene. 367 Angels who are
Gardians unto men are of an inferior order, and are commanded by the superior
Angels. 360 The Angel which is Magdalene Guardian tormenteth the Devil, and
why. 360.375 Father Angel the Capuchin bewitched at Marseille. 383 Anthony
bishop of Aix. 389 Arrest of the Court of Parliament in Province against Jews
Gaufridy. 410 Arrival of the women that were possessed at Aix. 370 Asmode^
tempts Eve taking on the shape of a girl. 313 Asmodee Prince of wantons and
his tentations. 313.323 Asmodee shakes Magdalene by the commandment of
Beelzebub with unclean gestures. 317.374 Astaroth tempts men to laziness,
and his enemy in heaven is S. Bartholomew. 324 Aurey the name of a Devil. 393
B
BAlberith tempts men to single combats and his enemy in heaven is Barnabas.
324 The banquets in the Synagogue. 335 Saint Baume held in detestation by the
Devils. 338 S. Baume to be reverenced. 338 Belias the Devil prince of virtues,
and his tentations. 325 Beelzebub takes Magdalene by the throat to strangle
her. 315 Beelzebub says that many Devils did issue forth upon the day of the
exaltation of the holy Cross. 311 Beelzebub was he that tempted Adam and
Christ. 313 Beelzebub goes forth out of the body of Magdalene. 322 Beelzebub
goes to the Magician to teach him to weep. 388 Beelzebub the prince of pride,
and his tentations. 323 Beelzebub begins to speak. 313 Beelzebub says that
absolution burned him more then hell fire. 338 Beelzebub shakes Magdalene. 312
Beelzebub bound. 313 Beelzebub interrupteth confession. 338.357 Beelzebub
discourses of diverse things that were absent. 372 Blood drawn from the finger
of the left hand, where the veins of the heart are, of Jews the Magician to
write the schedule. 393 The body of Magdalene swollen by Beelzebub. 315 The
brauado of Verrine unto the other Devils. 316 The broom, wherewith Magdalene
(to show her obedience) swept the Church, is by the Devil cast upon the
ground. 391
C
THe Charity of two Capuchin fathers. 388 Charms to what end they are given.
343. and the remedy against them. 344 Charms spread abroad by Sorcerers,
320.347 Charms blown through a cane by Sorcerers. 300.383. and the
composition and ingredients of them. 330 Charms in the eyes of Magdalene. 320
The Cherubins manner of adoring God. 408 Commissaries deputed to apprehend the
Magician. 372 Confession of the Magicia^ unto the Capuchin fathers. 396
Confronting of Magdalene and the Magician. 379 Contrition truly practiced. 394
Conuersions of men successively and by degrees. 90.386 Cries of Magdalene. 331
Cries of Beelzebub. 364 The Cross of our Savior very high. 313 The Cross not
made in the form of a (...). 314 The Cross applied to the back of her that
was possessed. 393
D
Defense prepared against the sorcerers that came inuisibly to Saint Baume. 330
Devils tied to charms, and the remedy against them. 343 The Devil runs in
and out in the Chapel, when the woman which he possessed was to be confessed.
382.383 One of the Devils answers the Exorcist, and reuealeth many things
unto him. 323.324 Devils not able to bewitch men that are superiors, as
Bishops, Abbots, etc. 344 The Devil first blinds men, and after jests at
them, and why. 354 The Devil complains of God. 392 The Devil excuses his
sin. 392 Devils are deceivers. 374 Devils by constraint may speak truth. 389
Devils bound. 349 Devils tormented. 321.375 Devils fear the relics of Saints.
369 Devils feel the efficacy of prayers. 375 Devils change their names as
they please, when they enter into sundry bodies. 321 Devils have no names, and
why. 321 The Devils by constraint have revealed the bodies and relics of
Saints. 389 The Devil answers that God was purposed that the Magician and his
adherents should be discovered. 366 Devils labor to bewitch father Michaelis
and cannot^. 344. the cause, ibid. 15. Devils in a body of acertaine man. 394.
30 Devils in the body of Magdalene besides inferior Devils. 325 Dialogue
between Beelzebub and the Magician. 373 An excellent dialogue between one of
the fathers and the Devil. 392 The difference between a mark and a stripe.
379 Difference in the knowledge of God. 320 Diligence of the Sorcerers to turn
Magdalene unto them. 345.349 Diverse tentations of Devils. 323.324.325. etc Some
Doctors hold that our Lord was nailed to the cross with four nails. 313 A
dog kneeleth before the blessed Sacrament. 337 Dogs forbidden to be brought to
the Sabbath. 337 The duties of those who go to the Sabbath. 334
E
THe excellent effect of consecrated fingers. 385 Exhortation of the Exorcist
unto Magdalene to renounce the Devil. 311 An Exorcisme called Luciferiana. 342
Exorcismes, and the Devils answers unto them. 318.319 The Exorcist called
Hangman by the Devil. 395 Experience teaches that Witches being beaten or
threatened do make their withcrafts cease. 354
F
FIngers that were consecrated put upon Magdalens throat. 385 Fontaine the
Physician counterfaiteth himself a Priest to deceive Beelzebub. 371 The forces
of Magdalene fail her. 381.363 Force of Exorcismes. 367 Fortitudo Magdalens
good Angel. 360 Father Francis the Capuchin does Exorcise Magdalene, and what
he asked her. 383 A Franciscan puts relics unto Magdalens back. and what
relics they were. Ibid. 369 Frequencie of the Sacraments a true remedy
against witchcraft. 320.344. Holy Friday apt for the remission of sins. 396
G
A Gallery near Magdalens chamber to which she used to come. 390 Monsieur
Garandeau leads the woman that was possessed into the Chapel of S. Savior.
387 Garandeau Vicar general unto the Archbishop of Aix does question
Magdalene. 370 Garanier the name of a Devil. 394 Gaufridy Prince of Magicians
Priest of Acoules. 367 A gentleman of the pretended religion speaks unto
Magdalene, and the sum of his discourse. 386 A girl dug out of her grave
by witches 352 God binds and loses Devils when and how he pleases. 322
Gombert Priest of nostre Dame de Grace is sent to confess the Magician. 386
The Gormundizing of Jews. 355 Great store of Magicians come and make a noise
at Louyses Exorcismes. 316 Great injury done to the Host by Jews. 366 A Great
light sent from God, when corporal punishments are less esteemed then
spiritual tentations. 407 Great strokes given by the Devil to Magdalene,
being on her knees. 405 Grassy a doctor of Physic tries Magdalene, and is
helped by other Physicians. 371.374 Gresill and his temptations 324 The
Grumbling of the Devils when they are together. 394
H
THe hate of Magdalene infused into her by the Devil. 359 The head of an Owl
engraue^ within a circle in a ring. 328 Henry Alphonsus the father of Marie.
332 An Heritick spied out by the Devil as he came to see these wonders. 377
The Host could never be put into Magdalens mouth by the Magician, although her
mouth was forced open by the Devil. 368 The Host presented by the Magician in
the sabbath unto Magdalene, and her refusal of it. 368 In the Host a young
child is seen by Magdalene, and what he said unto her. ibid. The Hickcough in
Magdalene when she should communicate. 392 Honor Lion of the covent of S.
Maximin lately arrived and his Angel. 366 Horrible gestures used by Beelzebub
toward Magdalene. 315
I
James the Hermit despised all honor and dignities. 326 The Image of our Lady
brought by Mary, one of Magdalens acquaintance, unto her. 342 Imploring of
help from the Virgin. 333 Imploring of aid from the blessed Virgin and all
Angels by Magdalene. 311.312 Impotencie of Devils. 331 Impudence of Devils. 373
Insolence of Beelzebub. 349.352.357.363 An instrument of glass four cornered,
and the use of it. 42 Intellectual conferences externally expressed. 321
Interrogatories put unto Beelzebub and his answers. 332 The iumping of Magdalene
upon her knees. 383
K
SIx Knights came from Marseille to lead away the Magician, and favored him,
as their special friend. 317 Knowledge of things absent. 377
L
LAdies and other women intercede for Jews Gaufridy. 372 Laudate Dominum sung
by Magicians. 336 Father Lawrence Provincial of the Capuchins 407 Letanie sung
to awake Magdalene. 349 A letter brought unto Magdalene by the Magicians
lieutenant. 342 Leuiathan neigheth like an horse. 333 Leuiathan Prince of
Heretics. 323 Jews is ignorant. 355 Jews celebrateth Mass in the Sabbath.
337 Jews the Magician throws a character upon the head of the woman that was
possessed. 315 Jews tormented. 361.362 Jews used Magic 14. years. 380 Jews
gave himself to the Devil 15. years past. 393 Lights and candles seen in the
air. 332 Lucifer chained up in hell. 321.323 Lucifer knows what soever is
done in the world, and how? 321
M
MAgdalene relates that the Devils were in every part of her body. 353
Magdalene confesses her self and does communicate. 393 Magdalene called
Tharasque (a Dragon) by Beelzebub. 397 Magdalene beaten by the Devil because
she cut her hair. 400 Magdalene is not suffered to eat by the Devil. 384
Magdalene maintains her accusation against the Magician. 379 Magdalene
recouereth her hearing, sight and appetite on Whitsontide. 416 Magdalene pricked
in the heart finger by John Baptista a Magician. 390 Magicians cannot look
directly upon a man. 396 Magicians not possessed, and why? 341 Magicians are
marked upon Wednesdaies and Saturda^es by Devils, and with what? 386 Magicians
beaten or threatened, make their charms to cease. 354 The Magician searched by
surgeons with pins, and found very ugly to be looked upon. 378 The Magician is
greatly tormented inwardly. 351 The Magician sprinckleth a kind of consecrated
wine upon the whole assembly. 337 The Magician comes to Magdalene with a cord
about his neck. 349 The Magician marked in the head by the Devil. 362
Magicians wounded to death, and what becomes of them. 358 Magicians compared to
Woolues. 316 Magicians worse then Devils. 362 The Magicians watch every night
through the month of January to turn Magdalene. 346 Malice of the Magician.
380 The Man sick of the palsy calls for the mercy of God to be delivered
from his miseries. 343 Mary of Parise carries a loue-letter to Magdalene and
is wounded. 331 Marks made by the Devils, and found upon her that was
possessed. 370.398 The marks of Witches. 337 The Marks of Jews the Magician.
362.376.378 The matters whereof charms are made are of no use or power. 343
Memorials made by the Magician to blaspheme Christ Jesus. 380 Four men cannot
hold Magdalene. 390 Men offend God daily. 392 Men are frail and ignorant. 393
Menaces of the Devil in Magdalene. 329 Mention of the parts of the body of her
that was possessed, by the Exorcist. 318 Merindol, Fontaine and Grassie try
Magdalene. 374 Saint Michael the chief of Angels. 323 Father Michaelis
threatens the woman that was possessed bring her into the place of penitence.
314 Miracle of the blessed Sacrament. 337 Musicians sing to cheer up Magdalene
who was tormented. 391
N
NAmes taken by the Parliament of Aix of two that scratched a woman. 352 At
night the Devils make Magdalene leave her chamber, but she is fetched back by
father Francis Billet. 401 No consent to be given to any thing which is offered
by the Devil, or Magicians. 368 Notable instructions for priests to make
charms to cease. 354 The Number of Magicians exceeding great in Spain, France
and England. 340
O
THe Oath which was taken by the devil. 319.333.367 An Oath taken by the Devil
not to depart from Magdalenes body until Jews were either converted or dead.
365 Obedience unto superiors commanded. 392 Obstinacy of the Magician and the
cause. 356.365.380 O Eillet the name of a Devil and his tentations. 324
Offices of Devils. 313 The operation of the blessed Sacrament. 374 Oscillon the
name of a Devil. 388 An Owl and dogs heard at the arrival of the Magician.
372
P
Pains imposed upon Devils. 341.342.344.354.360 Pains that accidentally be
fall Devils. 321 Much People come from all quarters to the Sabbath, and what
they do there. 346.377.399 Much people hear the voices that cried in the
wood. 344.345 Red Pimples found on the veins of the Magician. 386 A Pin put
into Magdalenes ear by Beelzebub. 397 The holy Pix applied unto Magdalene
makes her to come unto her self. 338.340 A Prayer which Magdalene often used.
311.312 Upon the Prayers of the blessed Virgin, Beelzebub leaves his hold on
Magdalenes throat. 360 Prayers of the assembly aided to chase away the Devil.
329 Predictions which afterward happened. 366.372.376 Priests be bewitched,
and why? 344 The pride of the Devil, and all wicked spirits. 348.353 The
Prince of the Magicians commands all the Witches in Spain, France and
England. 340 The principal Devils are related and named who are in Magdalenes
body. 323 Proceedings of the Devil for the discovery of the Magician Jews.
366.367 Proceeding in the Exorcismes. 310 Promise of Beelzebub unto Jews. 373
Promise of Magdalene to cleave no longer to the Devil. 312 Proof and trial
of the Devils. 320.353.367 Purification the feast of Acoules. 311
Q
A Question friuolously asked by the Magician touching his marks. 378
R
Rabafse the Kings Advocate goes from Aix to Marseille to fetch the Magician.
372 The Rack given to Magdalene by the Devil. 373 The Rage of Jews.
337.345.356.368 Raymond Bishop of Arles. 389 Three Realities found in Magdalene
by father Michaelis 369 Recommending of a man's self to God in his adversities,
the advice of father Michaelis. 351 Reconciliation does frustrate the Devils
purposes. 359 Relics applied unto Magdalene. 369.389 Remedy against
witchcraft. 344.354 Remedy against the perverseness of the Devil at
Exorcismes. 333.349 Renunciation which Magdalene makes of Devils, hell and the
schedules. 362 Renunciation of Paradise made by the Devil in behalf of Jews.
376 Reverence due to the place of penitence of Saint Magdalene. 315.316
Revelation of the fact, not of the time. 367 A Ring enchanted, and what was
found within it. 328 The Robes of Eve what they were. 349 Rosier the name of a
Devil, and his tentations. 325
S
THe Sabbath not kept in the chamber of Magdalene because of two skulles. 390
The Sabbath in what place it is kept, and what the Witches do there. 334.346
The Sabbath how many times kept in a week. 334.335 336 The Sabbath of
blasphemy and revenge. 335 The Sabbath kept at Saint Baume. 355 Saints
adversaries to the Synagogue, who they are. 384 Sandrie the name of a Devil.
394 Some Schoolmen hold that Christ Jesus did not deliver all the souls that
were in Purgatory, but all the souls in Lymbo he did deliver. 314 The Schedule
of the Magician reduced to 16. years. 380 The Sexton reports to the vicar
general what relics and bones he had in the Chapel of S. Savior. 387
Segoyer prays unto God for her that is possessed, and what the Devil said
thereupon. 395.396 Signs of Magdalens possession. 365.366.367.370.371
318.320.369 Signs of Louyses possession. 319 Sign of the Cross chaseth away
the Devils. 329.384 Six thousand six hundred and sixty Devils depart from the
body of Magdalene. 311 Skulles applied to her that was possessed. 387 Songs at
the Sabbath. 336 Sorcerers are damned. 332 Sorcerers called Tharasques by
Verrine. 316 Sorcerers burial. 332 Surgeons prove Magdalene. 374 A Syrrope
brought unto Magdalene by a woman. 384
T
TE deum sung with a prayer unto the sacred Trinity. 387 The Tears which
Witches shead, full no lower then their cheeks. 388 Tentation of the Devil to
change our confessors. 394 Tentations of sundry Devils, and the Saints
opposite unto them. 323.324 The time of Antichrist. 316 Mounsieur Thoron is
present at the Exorcisme. 375 The Throat of Magdalene quitted by the Devil.
329.363 Tortures and the rack given unto Magdalene by Devils. 329.373 Tortures
which the Devils inflicted upon Magdalene. 400.401 Torments which Magdalene
endured more then ordinary. 358.359.362 Torments redoubled upon Magdalene twice
a day. 391 A Tyrant will not suffer any great Lord to dwell near him. 394
V
VErrine a Devil, and Prince of Principalities, with his tentations. 325
Verrine tormented, and why? 322 Verrine says he shall have diminution of
pains. ibid. and 328 Verrine and his tentations. 324 Verrine says not that he
is a Preacher. 328 Verrine says, he is sent of God to speak truth. 328
Verrine was never bound, and the reason. 349 Verrine cries aloud because some
would declare the Magician to be innocent. 318 Verrine barketh like a dog. 316
The Virtue of the blessed Sacrament. 315 Vestments of Priests. 382 Villainies
committed in the Sabbath by Witches. 3^7 Violins and other instruments of
music used in the Sabbath. 336 Vision of the blessed Host. 368 The Vision of
Magdalene red as fire. 402 The voice of a woman dying. 331 The voices of the
Witches plainly heard. 344
W
Wantonness of the Sabbaths. 336 Weeping of Witches, and the manner. 388
Wicked Spirits cannot be consecrated fingers. 385 Witchcrafts and Charms cast
into Magdalens ears, and why? 347 Witchcrafts and Charms given to two ends.
343 Witness of Physicians and Surgeons. 371 Witnesses of the marks of the
Magician. 376 Witnesses touching those that were possessed. 375 A Woman lost
and sought after, and the place where she was. 351 A woman bewitched. 383 The
working of Devils is in vain against the just. 344 When God works not, all
is dark, but when he works, every thing is full of light. 380
Y
A Young man that was an heretic, confirmed the more in the Catholic
religion by the words of the Devil. 404. and is converted by father Michaelis.
ibid.
The end of the table.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS contained in the Discourse of Spirits.
1. WHether there be Spirits or no: There are four points to be observed
touching Spirits: that there are Spirits; what their nature is, from whence
they came; and the end why they are. 1 2. Whether Spirits have bodies. 14 3. Of
the Creation, goodness, or maliciousnes of Angels. 29 4. The means which Devils
have, to appear and come unto us; in what part of the world they reside; how
they are bound; and their sundry ways to tempt men. 41 5. That the Devils
scope is to make himself to be worshipped as a God, and to deceive men: that
the Devil knows not things to come, neither can he penetrate or diue into
the secrets of man's heart. 51 6. That Sorcerers are as detestable, and as much
forbidden by the law of God, as the very Oracles of the Heathen and their Idols
were: that it is an idle speech which is given out of Sorcerers, that Princes
should take heed of them: the diversities of customs, which the Sorcerers used
in the old time all proved by the Scripture. 63 7. Of Witches; and that women
are more addicted to witchcraft then men are. 76 8. An answer unto those, that
demand what danger there is in craving the assistance and aid of the Devil.
82 9. Whether the Articles contained in the depositions of Sorcerers ought to
be taken as idely and dreamingly spoken, or whether they ought to be received
for truth. 94
FINIS.

