ASTROLOGASTER, OR, THE FIGVRE-CASTER. Rather the Arraignment of Artlesse
Astrologers, and Fortune Tellers, that cheat many ignorant people under the
pretense of foretelling things to come, of telling things that are past,
finding out things that are lost, expounding Dreams, calculating Deaths and
Natiuities, once again brought to the Bar.

By John Melton.

Cicero. Stultorum plena sunt omnia.



Imprinted at London by Barnard Alsop, for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold
in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Blazing-Starre. 1620.

TO THE DEAR GIVER and preserver of my Life and Being, my very loving Father,
Master Euan Melton, your most Dutiful Son, John Melton, faithfully and
freely offers on the altar of my purest affection, this Sacrifice of my Duty
and Obedience.
SIR,
THe Misterious Egyptians when they could not elegantly with their Pensels
describe the true condition, or Nature, either of Timorous, Terrible, mild or
fearful man, would excellently with their Pensils in lively colors, limb
forth on a Table the full shape and portraiture of a Heart, a Lion, Lamb, or
Hare. So I though not so Hyerogliphicall as they, seeing I cannot express my
duty to you with my Tongue, strive to paint it forth in this Book, which is
one Emblem both of my Love, and Labor, of my love in presenting it to you, of
my labor in pe^ning it for you. For God sels nothing to Man without the price
of lobour, And howsoever the purblinde Ignorant, that only see with their
Corporal and not Intellectualleies may surmise, yet Art is the fellow of sweat
and labor and the Muses have no other Temples to dwell in but studious and
laborious bosoms. Sloth and Riches never begat Art, but poverty and Industry.
Money buys Houses and Lands, but Study the Sciences: And dear Sir, to you that
always loved Art I hope nothing can come more pleasing then a Book (which is
the child of Art) for Books that Menerua-like, are always borne without a
Mother are the forward Infants that speak for their fathers as soon as they
are born: They are dumb Orators, who though they want both Tongue and Sense yet
are the faithfullest speakers. They are the witnesses of Time the lights of
Truth, the life of Memory, that make present times speak with the past, and
both past and present of our own. The World it self is a Book consisting of
four leaves: Fire, Air, Earth and Water; whose letters are Stars, Birds,
Beasts and Fishes: And (Man that is the Epitome and Abstract of the World) is a
Book consisting of two leaves; Soul and Body: whose Letters are his good and
bad Affections. But I will say no more in the commendation of Books, because
they can strongly defend and truly commend themselves: as for my Book, rather
your Book, although it have not that Life, Soul, Spirit, Quintessence, and
Elixar of wit that quickens others, yet the old saying helps me.

Nullum esse librum tam malum vnde aliquid
Boni discerpere non possis.
Receive it then dear sir, not as mine, but your own, and howsoever you may
esteem of it, yet I will remain

Your dutiful and ever loving Son, John Melton.
From my Chamber June the 10. 1620.
A Symbol made on the Name of his very loving Father, Master Euan Melton.
E1V2A3N4

E1Ver V2Allew A3Rt N4Obly

M5E6L7T8O9N10

M5Vch E6Xperience L7Earning T8 Eacheth O9Bdurate N10Atures.

To his witty and ingenious friend Master John Melton:
I cannot choose but laugh to think how all
The brood of Figure-casting-knaues will braule
When they by chance or rather mischance look
Upon the title of thy well writ book:
Which in a True-borne-straine of wit displayes.
Their gross abuses and how many ways,
They cheat old women, men, and maids, and such
That build upon their Art and do not gruch
To give them money to be cheated when,
They lose things that no Art can find again.
But now I hope they will be wiser since
Thy Pen has truly blazd their Impudence,
And when they lose gold, rather then bestow
More on a Knave; to let the first gold go.
For it is mere improuidence to care,
For things drowned in the Ocean of despair.
Therefore if all believing fools could find
Like thee, their pollitike tricks wherewith they blind,
Their easy Natures; they, would then proclaim,
All Figure-sellers, Knaves and sharply blame
Themselves for being guld, and never more
Whatere they lose, frequent them as before.
Then would all Artlesse Empericks forsake.
Cheating and study lying Almanacks.
John Maslin, Master of Art and sometime Student of Trinity College in
Cambridge.

To his most dear and truest of friends Master John Melton, and in the
commendation of his witty Poem. Astrologaster.
PHoebus provide a Garland for thine Heir,
That has deserved so well, and make him wear
It on his temples; let the immortal wreaths
Of Laurel crown, him while his rich Muse breaths
Which will be ever. A good Poets name,
Lives after he is dead: Non spotted fame:
Cannot be mortal: why? because what is good,
Can never perish, it may be with stood
A while by Envy, but she will advance
At last her self above dull Ignorance,
And that foul snake-eyed-Hagge that still does strive
To wound her that by wounding does survive.
Then my Ingenious noble friend rejoice
And though thou hear some Figure-Casters voice,
Like a Portentous Ravens croake and cry,
Thy Books not only ill writ, but does lie,
Be not disturbd, for know theirs none finds fault
With those that scourge vice, but those men are naught.
None hates the righteous Judge, but those that stand
At'h Bar before him holding up their hand.
The virtuous love him knowing that the Law
He executes keeps hell-borne-vice in awe
Then let all Knaves let all Impostors swell
All honest men will say thou have done well
John Hancocke, Bachelor of Art, and Student of Brazen-nose College in Oxford.

The intent of the Author in this work is first to confute all Figure-Casters,
by the Divine Law, Imperial Law, Cannon Law: by Philosophy, Common sense and
Reason.
Secondly, to overthrow the absurd opinions of many Philosophers Astronomers.
Geographers. Cosmographers.
Thirdly, to unfold the dark and abstruse Answers of the Delphian, rather
Deuillish Oracles.
Fourthly, and lastly, to show the Sympathy and Correspondency that is between
the Roguish Coniurers, and Romish Impostors, in their Ceremonies, Superstitious
Deceits, and Cousenages.

Horat. Epist. Lib. 1. -- Si quid nouisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non vis vtere mecum.
ASTROLOGASTER, OR, THE FIGVRE-CASTER.
IT was about the Heart of Summer, (when the Celestial Dog belch't from his
burning Galls infectious Diseases to poison frail Mortality) that I walked
into a friends Garden of mine, not far distant from this sumptuous (but
sinful) City, to sent the fresh and cool Air, that did breathe on those
sweet smelling flowers. But I no sooner entered into this Microcosme of
Sweetness, but the Amenitie, Neatness, Elegance, and Splendour of the Place
did so tickle and delight my senses, that I thought it rather a Celestial
Paradise, then a Terrestrial Garden. The glorious Fires that in the peace of
Midnight gild the rich Roof of Heaven, showed but dim to those bright
flowers that in the day time did illuminate that place; so that a hundred times
I did wish I had Argus hundred eyes, that I might always see them, or Catullus
sweet senting nose, that I might always smell them. The Arabtan Odours and
Indian Drugs were but Weeds, compared to the flowers that did bless those
banks. The Gardens of Adonis, Alcinous, Tantalus, Hesperides, or the Banks of
Po were but the Types of this Real and Essential sweetness; for all things
grew so beautiful and pleasant, as if Nature had concluded, that whatsoever
has been eximious or brave in former Ages, should then dwell there, for it
was Floras Palace, her Standing-House, and her Spicerie, from whence she did
breathe forth her sweetness to every Climate.

When I beheld the industrious Gardener grafting young Syens, me thought (with
my Minds eyes) I beheld Dioclesian the Prince exercising himself in the
delightsome labor of Agriculture; and that which all Africa admired,
Massinissa walking among his Quick-sets: I could not be persuaded, but I saw
the valiant Romans, learned Grecians, wise Philosophers, and wrangling Lawyers;
their Arms, Oratorie, Morality, the loud and troublesome Bar laid aside,
quietly and peaceably reposing themselves on those Banks: Tarquinius the King
cutting off the heads of Poppyes, as if they had been the heads of so many
rebellious subjects; Cato the Censor writing in the praise of Husbandry;
Scilla, after his Dictatorship, and Luculius, after his Asiatick War.

But as I was seriously looking over this Aeden of delight, my eyes took
notice of a withered bank of flowers, hanging down their weather-beaten
heads, that not seven days before had flourished in their full prime;
intimating unto Man, that the beauty of all Mundane and Earthly pleasures have
no perpetuity. Not far from them grew a sweet company of fresh and redolent
flowers, that like so many young Gallants, thought the brightness of their
glory would never vanish, but that their beauty and color was dyed in such a
deep grain of perpetuity, that neither the violence of a Storm, the pruning
North-Winde, nor the heat of the Midday Sun, could beat down, nippe, or
wither them. And these sading and flourishing Plants were not only the
Emblemes of Man's Mortality, F^ower^ ^^e true ^^gu^^s of Man's 5 Death and
Resurrection.
but the true Type of his Death and Resurrection; of his Death, in their decay;
of his Resurrection, in their growth and flourishing.

Every Tree I saw there clad in Natures Liuerie (which is green) put me in
mind of that Protoplast, Adam our Great Grandfather, and his Fall: for if he
never had transgrest, he never had worn a Suit of green leaves; and he
never had been clothed in the Trappings of Sin, if he still had kept
himself Naked, that is, Pure, Sincere, and Spotless. Therefore, Nota.
every Gallant or proud Man, that wears Clothes as fresh as the Fields, that
bought them, may think with themselves, that although they be never so rich,
yet they wear but the Rags of their Forefathers, Sin and Transgression.
The Oak stood there like a great Man, Oak.
whose curied Brow was incident to the highest Inflammations of Heaven, as
Thunder, Lightning, Tempest, and Rain, while the poor humble Shrub, that grew
under him, Shrub
like a contented Cottager, laughed at the lowdest storm that could ever chide.
The Pine Tree stood like an upright Man, Pine Tree.
whose Conscience was faire-shap't, smooth, and even. The little Goose-berry
Bush, laden with fruit, Goose-berry Bush.
did include within it a Triple Emblem: First, that the greatest Men have not
always the greatest Wits, but that a small Body has often as fertile a
Brain: Secondly, that although it had but a few Leaves, yet it had an
abundance of Fruit; teaching Man, that his Actions should be more then his
Words: And last of all, that the heavier he was laden with Fruit, the lower
his head bowed to the Earth; teaching rich and learned Men, that the richer and
learneder they grow, the more liberal and humble they should be. The Bramble,
as I walked by, Bramble.
scratch't me by the Legs, which put me in mind of a griping Lawyer, that
never meets with a Clyent, but he will be sure to fleece him, if he do not
flea him. The Laurel resembled a constant and brave Martyr, Laurel.
whose leaves being torn from him, and flung into the fire, will spit and
crackle, as if it derided the devouring flame. Rose.
The Damask Rose looked like a chaste and modest Virgin, that will blush as
soon as you cast your eye upon her; Primerose.
and the siluer-coloured Primerose, that grew near her, like a spotless
Conscience. Me thought the Mushrombe was like one of our Melting-Gallants,
Mushrombe.
who held up his head but for a small time, but perished as soon as it began
to flourish.

These, and many more beside these, I saw in that place, growing peaceably by
each other: For the Shrub enuyed not the sublime height of the Oak, nor the
Oak the quiet peace the Shrub enjoyed. The Daisie murmured not, that the Rose
should look so beautiful, and smell so sweet; nor any Weed complained, that
the Daisie should have such a gay Coat: but all, like so many honest and quiet
House-holders dwelling nigh each other, did rejoice at each others happiness.
But Man, that is made ad imaginem Dei, that is the Golden Key, opening the rich
Cabinet of all Arts and Sciences, the Compendium and Epitome of the World,
cannot live quietly together, but like so many Salamanders, must either be
burning in the fires of Contention; or like Wolves, living on the spoil of
Innocence; or like Camelions, turning themselves into any color of Mischief,
Villainy, or Dissimulation.

But, as I was wondering at this Place worthy of wonder, this ecstasy of my
admiration was broken off by the occasion of a noise I heard not far from me,
which at the first was but like the soft breathing of a wind, sighing from the
pregnant entrayles of the earth, but by degrees it began to resemble a Tempest,
sailing aloft in the Air. When it drew nigher me, I perceived this Lowdnesse
to be engendered by the euer-mouing tongues of some twenty Women, that came
talking and walking down an Alley (neighboring very nigh me) and all of them
talking together: so that although I had an itching desire to understand, and
an attentive ear to hear the subject of their discourse, yet it was as
possible for me to know what they did talk, as to make them leave talking. In
the Rere of these I perceived an ancient Man (on whose head the hand of Age
had snowed white hayres) come with a grave pace after them; whom I entreated,
if it lay within the reach of his knowledge, to resolve me what the cause was
so many people, and most of them Women, should flock together, or what business
they should have in such a remote and by-place as that was, so early in the
Morning? This old Father without any peevishness (which is a Passion incident
to Age) first smiled in my face, then took me by the hand, and began to open
the mystery of their meeting, and his own being there, in this manner.

Son, said he (for so I may properly call thee, because Smoothness and
Alacrity, the Characters of Youth, sit on thy un wrinkled for head) these
Women your eyes did lately take notice of, are Creatures so ignorantly
obstinate, that neither the mild entreatie of a Friend can persuade them from
their follyes, nor the bad report of an Enemy dissuade them from their
perverseness. The Party to whom they come, is a Bird, of whose kind I think
there are but few living, for he professes himself to be a Wiseman; and the
cause of their coming, is to be resolved either of Money, Siluer-Spoones,
Rings, Gowns, Plate, or Linen they have lost: some, to know how many Children
they shall have; some, how many Husbands, and which shall love them best:
others, about other business; but in general, all of them to know something,
which indeed at the last comes to nothing. And I my self (like a Holy Day
fool) have been there at the least half a score times, only to give my
money away, to be laughed at. Yet I have words enough: for he will promise more
then twenty Courtiers, talk more for half a Piece then half a score
Lawyers, and lie more then twenty Chronologers: yet with some trick, or
evasion, he will come clearly off, without being suspected for an Impostor,
especially if he have some man in hand he thinks he dare work on, as he has
done me for example.

For going to the Cross one Sunday morning to hear a Sermon, Exordium.
some Mercurian and nimble-finger'd Pickpocket, that had more mind of my Purse
then the Preacher, gelt it of sixteen pound; so that I went home lighter by
two Stone then I went out. After I had fretted much, and to no purpose, I used
all the means I could to recover my loss, as by feeing the Keepers of
Newgate, who know which of that Law are appointed to filch in every part of the
City; yet still I came home a greater looser then I went out: for always
being in hope to find that which I lost, I lost more, by bribing one Knave, to
discover another. At the last, it was my bad fortune to meet with an old Woman,
that put a greater confidence in the Jews Caballs, Books to tell Fortunes.
and Thalmud, the Shepherds Calendar, and Books of Palmistry, then any part
of the Bible; who advised me to repair to Doctor P. C. in More-fields, at the
upper end of this Alley, and if Art could help me to it again, I should be
sure to hear of it. This draught of good news this old Woman gave me, to
quench the thirst of my desire, which I drank in at mine ears as greedily, as
a man sick of a burning Fever will the coolest Iulips: so giving this old
Piece of Superstition a Tester for her news, I instantly went to Master
Doctor. Who perceiving me to be one that loved Gold well (because Age most
commonly is covetous) thought the better to work upon me, Auri sura ^ames.
as he did: for his Doctorship had the Art to hold me in hand three weeks; in
which time, he made the sixteen pound I lost, twenty: and when all came to a
Period, he told me, that he had labored hard for me, and at the last, by his
no small industry and pains, had found out the Thief that had my Money, but
he was fled into the Low Countries, because there were many Warrants out to
apprehend him for many Thefts and Burglaries he had committed; and if it
pleased me to take shipping, and sail thither, I should be sure to find him at
the Labor in Vain in Bredawe. The Labor in Vain.
But this comfort went as cold to my heart, as the Sentence of Death to a Man
that stands arraigned at the Bar: for I had rather go five thousand mile by
Land, then five mile by Sea; and if it had been a hundred pound I had lost, I
would rather have given as much more, then hazard my self by Water. Yet
howsoever I may doubt, nay truly resolve my self; that he has palpably
cheated me: yet it was impossible to find him a liar, except I meant to take
more pains about it, then it was worth. Therefore as patiently as I am able, I
am going home again, purposing hereafter to take heed of two Pick-pockets; the
one, the Diuer that me^ with me in Paul's Churchyard; the other, the Doctor in
More-fields, that robbed me as well as the first, who in my mind has deserved,
for his artificial Cheating, the Pillory, as well as the other did the
Gallows, for Stealing.

Thus Sir, according to my weak ability, have I discoursed to you the
condition of him, to whom these Women and my self come, the cause of our
coming, with his manner of deluding us: for howsoever he professes himself
to have an absolute and exquisite knowledge in Philosophy, Astronomy, Physike,
Metaphysikes, the Mathematikes, and Astrology; yet if a Scholar had him in
handling, he should find him as mere a Mountebanke, as ever sold
Sophistications in Italy or the Low Countries.

He no sooner had delivered me this Relation, but he hasted away from me:
therefore seeing he was importunate to be gone, I only showed my self
grateful in thanking him for his kindness; so he went homewards, and I into
my Garden. But now my mind was quite transported from the sweetness of that
Place, and only fixed on the subtlety of the Doctor, and his politic answer to
the old Man about the recovery of his Money; so that I could not be at quiet
with my self, while I was truly resolved of the Art of this Star-gazer.
Therefore on a Morning which was as calm as I could wish my thoughts now were,
I put on a Suit of course Northern Dozens, with all account^ements that were
most suitable to that homeliness, and with all expedition went to Master
Doctor, and hastily knocking at his Worsh ps door, there came running down
the stayres with a nimble dexterity (the little Mephistophiles) his Boy,
demanding with whom I would speak; to whom, in a broad Somersetshire
language, I answered, with Master Doctor, upon an earnest business. Upon the
delivery of this Message, this young Spirit, like exhaled dew, nimbly flew
away from me, who upon an instant, like a flash of Lightning, was in my bosom
again before I could perceive him; and then, without any more Interrogatories,
marshalled me up into his Masters Study, who sat in this manner following:

The description of the Figure-Caster
Before a Square Table, covered with a green Carpet, on which lay a huge Book
in Folio, wide open, full of strange Characters, such as the Egyptians and
Chaldaeans were never guilty of; His Instruments.
not far from that, a silver Wand, a Surplus, a Watering Pot, with all the
superstitious or rather feigned Instruments of his cousening Art. And to put a
fairer color on his black and foul Science, on his head he had a
foure-cornered Cap, on his back a fair Gown (but made of a strange f^shion)
in his right hand he held an Astrolabe, in his left a Mathematical Glass. At
the first view, there was no man that came to him (if he were of any fashion)
could offer him for his advice less then a Iacobus, and the meanest half a
Piece, although he peradventure (rather then have nothing) would be contented
with a brace of Two-pences.

I no sooner came into his Study but I did him the reverence belonging to his
Doctorship, and stood as long bare to him, as a poor Country Client that sues
in Forma Pauperi^, will to his hungry Lawyer. At the last* with the expense of
many a Leg (and may it please your Worship) I told him, that the cause of my
coming was, that having lately lost at the Kings Bench Bar in Westminster
Hall a Chain of Gold of three hundred Links, therefore I came to his
Doctorship, having been informed, that his Art could bring it to light again:
so putting my hand into my Leather Pouch, I greased his euer-dry Palms with an
Angel; who no sooner had a feeling of my bounty, but he began to be more
liberal to me of his Tongue, then I was to him of my Purse: And while I stood
leaning on my Staff, he delivered this Emperike-like Oration in this or not
much unlike this manner.

The Figure-Casters Oration.
HOnest Friend, the loss you have sustained, is so great, that I make no
doubt, what you now have given, or hereafter shall give, will not come forced
or wrackt from you, but voluntary and free. Nota.
For it is wisdom in a Man to adventure small things to regayne greater, where
there is a possibility of obtaining. He is not worthy of Money, that will not
seek after it, and he cannot truly judge, how to value so precious a Metal as
Gold, that is not stung with the loss of it. Therefore Sir, your care deserves
a redress, and this Book (meaning his Ephimerides) with my Art and Industry,
shall be the Isntrumental Causes to make you happy in the recovery of that
which is worthy both of my Care and your Cost. And to put you in some hope, if
that Man that had your Chain, lives either within the Horizon of England,
France, Spain, Italy, or the Low Countries, I will undertake to show you him,
and in what place, and what company he is in. There is not a Spirit, either
of the Fire, Air, Earth, or Water, but I have at my command as readily as any
Gallant has his Page or Footboy: I can conjure them all together, and make
them trot up and down the City, leaving not a Pick-pockets, Gilts, Lifts,
Decoyes, or Diverse Hose vnsurueyed.

Admi^anda jed ^on credenda.
Look here Sir (with that, he advanced his Mathematical Glass) with this
Instrument, first devised by that learned Man in our Art, Hermes Tresmegistus,
otherwise called Mercury, I can see all things done in Christendom. If in the
day time I look in it, I will as easily see what is done in the City, as the
Sun. There cannot a withered-faced Lady paint her decayed Countenance at her
Chamber-Window, and set a fair gloss on it with her Fucusses and Italian
Tinctures, but I see her as perfectly as her she Secretary her Chambermaid.
There cannot a Compter Booke-Keeper and a Constable share a poor Man's Fees,
that the Night before was brought into Prison (because he would not give the
blinking Beadle or begging Watchman a Tester) but I see it as easily as their
fellow, the Bawd-like doore-keeper. There cannot a Justices Clarke, that it may
be is more Justice then his Master, take a Bribe of a noted Cutpurse, whose
Name peradventure stands at least twenty several times upon record in Newgate
Book, but I perceive it as well as the Doxye that brought it him.

In the Night time, if I stand with this Instrument in my hand, I can see what
is done in the City as well as the Man in the Moon. There cannot a Drunkard
come reeling out of a Tavern at twelve a Clock at Night, but he is as
manifest before me, as the Drawer that beat him out of doors after he had
spent all his Money. I can see the commanding Constable and the drowsy Watch
sit nodding on a Stall, while a company of Roaring-boyes, alias Brothers of
the Sword, come by first swearing them awake, then out of their Authority, who
in spite of their teeth will crave leave to pass by them. There cannot a
Trades-mans Puritanicall Wife rise early in a Morning, under the pretense of
hearing a Lecture, but I know where she goes as well as the Foreman of her
Shop that vshers her. Nay Sir, I have seen the Pope go in his
Pontificaelibus with his whole Heard of Cardinals to Saint Peter's Church in
Rome, as often as any Citizen has seen the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor
go to Pauls-Crosse in London. As for Prester Jack, the Great Mogul, the Sophy
of Persia, and the Great Turk, I can see them as often as I do my Boy, that
is never from my elbow. And all this is done by Astrology, by sacred
Astrology, Divine Astrology, the Art of Arts, the Science of Sciences, for it
is the Ancient, the most Authentike, the most excellent Art in the World. For
old Father Adam was both an Astronomer and Astrologer; Abraham, and all the
Patriarchs: Nay, I will assure you, the Students of our Art have been famous
in all Countries; Countries famous for Mathematicians.
for Porphyrius and Apulcius derive the Original of Magike from the Persians,
although Suidas will have it from the Maguseans, and from them he calls them
Magi; the Latins call us Wisemen; the Grecians, Philosophers; the Indians,
Gymnosophists; the Aegyptiant, Priests; the Cabalists, Prophets; the
Babylonians and Assyrians, Chaldaeans; the Frenchmen, Bards: And many excellent
and eminent Men have flourished in this Knowledge; as Zoroaster, the son of
Aromasius, who laughed when he was borne, among the Persians; Mathematicians.
Numa Pompilius, among the Romans; Thesbion, among the Gymnosophists; Hermes,
among the Egyptians; Buda, among the Babylonians; Zamolxis, among the
Thracians; and Abbaris, among the Hyperboreans. A thousand more beside these,
were excellent Astrologers; as Ptholomeus, whom some (though very fools in
their Opinion) hold to be the first Astronomer that ever was: then Messahala,
Astronomers and Astrologers.
Aboasar, Abenragel, Alchibichius, Albumazar, Abraham, Auenezra, Algazel,
Hermes Tresmigistus, Aratus, Higinus, and Thebit; after whom, did arise
Maternus, that famous Mathematician: then, Georgius Purbachius; after whom,
followed Johannes de Monte Regio, Alphonsus King of Castile, as his Tables can
testify. Was not broad-shouldered Atlas, that was bigger then the great
Porter, an admirable Astronomer and Astrologer? Was not * Erra Pater (whom I
had almost forgot) a rare fellow at Astronomy? Pater E^^o^um.
Yes, as this his Table can testify, which he made I know not how many years
since, in an unknown Language; but now faithfully translated into the English
Tongue by my self.

A TABLE MADE BY THE LEARNED ASTRONOMER ERRA PATER, showing, that the Twelve
Signs and Seven Planets have as great a Predomination over all Trades, and
Callings, which are the Members of the Body of a Commonwealth, as over the
Body of Man.
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Sol. Venus. Mercury. Luna. Aries. Goldsmiths.
Haberdashers. Merchants. Mercers. Drapers. Vintners. Horners. Taurus. Butchers.
Grasiers. Cooks. Drugsters. Tobacco men. Players. Fiddlers. Gemini. Serieants.
Baylyes. Highway men. Lifts. Cutpurses. Gilts. Decoyes. Cancer. Brewers.
Dray-men. Porters. Tapsters. Hostlers. Constables. Beadles. Leo. Roaring Boys.
Young Gallants. Courtiers. Cutlers. Fencers. Armorers. Brothers of the Sword.
Virgo. Sempsters. Laundresses Chamber-Maids. Tyre-women. Waiting Gentlewomen.
Flax-maids. Tobacco Women. Libra. Grocers. Chaundlors. Cheesemongers.
Silke-men. Apothecaries. Pewterers. Plummers. Scorpio. Usurers. Brokers.
Informers. Promooters. Petty-foggers. Sumners. Iaylors. Sagittarius. Fletchers.
Gunners. Scriueners. Smiths. Brasiers. Iron-mongers. Turners. Capricornus
Drugsters. Milliners. Coach-makers. Iewellers. Stone-Cutters. Painters.
Shoomakers Aquarius. Watermen. Water-bearers. Cloth-workers. Bakers. Salters.
Sadlers. Barbars. Pisces. Oyster-Wiues. Fish-mongers. Fruiterers. Hosiers.
Gold-finders. Tailors. Plasterers.

A Heavenly Oration.
What think you Sir, was not this learned Artist deeply read in the
large-leau'd Book of Heaven? Do not you think he could learnedly discourse
of the Poles, Spheres, Orbs, Circumferences, Circles, Centres, Diameters, the
Zodiake, the Zenith, the Artike and Antartike Poles, Tropicus Capricorni, and
Tropicus Cancri? He was as well acquainted with the Twelve Signs in Heaven,
as any Tradesman with those in Cheape-side, and run over the Nature of the
Seven Planets as nimbly as the French Vaulter over the Ropes. And I my self,
Margarita Philosophica de principiis Astronomiae, Lib. 7. tract. 1. cap. 7.
(but that I know this kind of Learning is out of your Element)could discourse
to you what a sullen fellow Saturn is (on whom the permanent continuation of
all things depend) what a iouiall fellow Jupiter (on whom the fecunditie of
Agent Causes rely) what a quarrelling Swash-buckler Mars (on whom the swift
expedition of any thing to the effect does hang) what a hot fellow Sol (whom
all Agent Causes follow) what a wanton Wench Venus (on whom the fecunditie of
all Material Causes look after) what a merry fellow Mercury (in whom a
manifold virtue does flourish) and what a mad Less Luna (on whom the
increase and decrease of Humane things consist.) For know, that the rich and
golden Harvest that I have gathered out of the sweet and fruitful Fields of
many Learned Men's Works, and carefully hoorded up in the Garner of my breast,
has made me full and copious in my Knowledge; so that there is no Art and
Science, but I am as deeply and profoundly read in, as those that have taken
the Worshipful Degree of Doctor. I am so good at Physike, that every Morning I
have whole troops of Madmen, and others, sick of Sarpegoes, Gouts,
Epilepsies, Fevers, and many others laboring under as dangerous Diseases as
these, send their Urine to me, so that never Doctor was so famous: for when
Medicine will not prevail, Physicians.
and that neither Galen, Paracelsus, Auecin, Hippocrates, nor all the Heirs of
Aesculapius can cure them; I have a Spirit that will fright any disease from
the most dangerous and ouer-spent Patient. My skill in Alchymie is so great,
that I can turn any thing that is brought to me into as perfect Gold as ever
came out of the Indies. Alchymists.
Friar Bacon was an Ass, Doctor Faustus a Fool, Ripley an Empericke, and
Kelly a Coxcombe to me; they were not worthy to blow my Bellows, or look to
my Stylls, while I work for the Philosophers Stone. But for Astrology, I can
do that none of my Profession, besides my self, could ever reach unto: for
there is nothing lost, but I can find again; nothing in hazard of losing, but
I can preserve safe and sure; I have given Tradesmen Spirits, that have kept
their Shops as faithfully, as if they had twenty Iourneymen continually in it.
There is not a part of the Body, but I can give a Spirit to keep it safe and
sound.

Therefore Sir, to conclude, assure your self, that if all my Spirits and mine
own endeavors can do you a pleasure (as you need not doubt of mine Art) you
shall not fail of your Chain: so merrily return to your Lodging again, and
repair to me to morrow Morning, thirty Minutes after six; and always
remember to admire at the wonderful power of Sacred, Divine, and Heavenly
Astrology.

When he had made an end of almost his endless Discourse, wherewith he had so
bejaded and tired mine ears, I was as glad as any young Dottrell, that had
made an escape from the claws of the Puttock-like Catch-poles. A sick Man,
that is troubled with the tedious impertinent discourse of a prating Nurse,
could not be more happy at her silence, then I at his; for I was in doubt, that
his voluble Tongue being once on the Wheel, would never have left running. The
Mountebanks Drug Tongue, the Soldiers bumbasted Tongue, the Gypsies Canting
Tongue, Strange Tongues.
the Lawyers French Tongue, the Welsh Tongue; nay, all the Tongues that were at
the fall of Babylon (when they were all confusedly mingled together) could as
well be understood as his strange Tongue: so that if I had been but as
ignorant as he took me to be (supposing, that I did not apprehend what did
belong to his learned Art of Cousenage) he would have made me believe, that his
worth was correspondent to his words. At the last recovering my self (for he
had almost talked me out of my Wits) I heartily thanked him; first, for his
learned Discourse; secondly, for his Comfort; and thirdly, and as speedily as I
could, made him this Answer, which I hope will prove as great a terror to all
Figure-Casters, as Newgate to Cut-purses.

The Answer to the Figure-Caster, and the Confutation of it.
SIr, if you every day should trouble your self, or rather those that hear
you, with these long-winded Exercises, you had need eat great store of
Lycoris: and if you lie so much to every man, as you have done to me, you had
best learn of Symonides the Art of Memory; for these two things are most
requisite for those that talk and lie so much as you do. You have made a
large Astrologicall discourse, only to make me a Fool, and prove your self a
Knave; for cunningly in your Exordium you hearten me on to cheat my self: for
does not a man palpably cosen himself, when he gives money to a Knave, that
first cheats him before his face, then laughs at him behind his back; which is
the true custom of all Figure-Casters, of whose faculty you profess to be.

As for your Instruments, as your Mathematical Glass, with which you can do
wonders, your Silver Wand, Watering Pot, foure-corner'd Cap, are but mere
superstitious Ornaments, either borrowed from the Jews or Romans. And it is a
question, Koia. The Papists mere Coniu^ere.
whether the Romish Priests had these from the Roguish Coniurers, or the
Coniurers from them: for just such Ceremonies and Exorcismes the Coniurers use
upon their invocation of Devils, the Papists do in their inuocations; for
they exorcise and conjure their Salt, that it may not lose the savor, and
their Water, which the ignorant people gape for as greedily as a Raven will for
cool air in the midst of July, and this they call * Holy Water: ^otius aqua
ma^^dista.
then they conjure their Oil, their Balm, their Herbs, and Plants, that
they may have the virtue and influence to heal the sick and diseased: they
conjure their Candles, that they may not burn blew; and Bees, that they
prosper, and not sting any Holy or Religious Friar, when he dares adventure
his bald Crown nigh one of their Hyues. What is their Christening of Bells,
Altars, Pilgrimages, Processions, Images, Holy-Ashes, Holy-Pace-Egges, Flames,
Palms, and Palmeboughes, Albes, Copes, and Maniples, Vestiments, Miters,
Staves, Fools, and Friars Hoods, Shells, and Bells, Paxes, licking of rotten
Bones, creeping to Wooden Images and Crosses, shauing of Crowns, and a
thousand of the like Antike Tricks, but flat Sorcerie and Witchcraft?

And do not all these Fooleries agree with the Coniurers Rogueries? Who
always observe the Time of the Moon before they set their Figure, and when
they have set their Figure, and spread their Circle, first exorcise the Wine
and Water which they sprinkle on their Circle, then mumble in an unknown
Language: Do they not cross and exorcise their Surplus, their Silver Wand,
Gown, Cap, and every Instrument they use about their black and damnable Art?
Nay, they cross the place whereon they stand, because they think the Devil
has no power to come into it, when they have blessed it: therefore I cannot be
persuaded, but you had your Ceremonies from the Papists, who first had them
from the Jews or Pagans, or they from you, for you both cosen the poor
blinded people after one manner; first, of their Souls, by drawing them to
Superstition; secondly, of their Estates, by defrauding them of their Money:
for which cause, both of you have devised these Ceremonies.

Thus much for your Instruments. Now for your Authors you pile up on the neck
of each other, I hold not lawful to be studied to an ill intent; and for most
of them, I hold Atheists, and fellows, whose Works ought rather to be burnt,
for being stuffed full of Blasphemy, then to be read for our instruction, or
knowledge, as hereafter I will show you. As for Adam, Abraham, or any of the
Twelve Patriarchs skill in Coniuration, Figure-Casting, or raising a Spirit, as
you say, I am sure they practiced none.

And for your knowledge in Astronomy, Astronomy.
this is my opinion of you, that you have as much skill of the Poles in Heaven,
as you have of the Poles on Paul's Steeple.

Your skill in Physike shall by no means make me (if I chance to fall sick)
choose you for my Doctor, Physike.
except I am weary of my life; for I shall be in more danger of death by
taking your Potions, then I shall be of the Disease. But indeed, for a Man that
desires present Cure, I think you are excellent for, because I make no doubt,
that you will hold him long in hand: and in this you and all other Medicasters
and Dog-leaches are happy, because the Sun does always behold your good
success, and the Earth couers all your ignorances. Pli^. li^. 29. cap. 1.
Talis Medi^^^ est Ded ^us.
It is a common saying, Nullum Medicum esse peritum nisi triginta homines ad
orcum dimiserit^ That it is impossible for any Physician to be skillful, except
he has killed his thirty men. But for your part I dare swear, if you should
kill three hundred (as it may be it comes something nigh that number, because
you have been a long practitioner) you would still remain but a Quack-saluing
Physician; one, that it may be has some little faint glimmering of the
Practicke, but nothing of the Theorie of this most learned and deep Art: Mo^^.
For being so illiterate as you are, how can you, (neither understanding the
Greek or Latin Tongues, in which the grounds of Physike were first writ) be
so famous as you report your self to be? Yet there is one thing in your large
Oration, that would make a Man believe you have some skill in Physike, because
you say, that whole Troops of Madmen come to you: in this a Man may believe
you, for if Men were not mad, and stark out of their Wits, they would never
come to you for your advice.

There is nothing you have spoken, that I can persuade my self you have said
true, Alchymi^^.
but in this, in professing your self an Alchymist: for I dare undertake, that
if a Man bring you a Cart-Load of Brass, Iron, or Pewter, you can, in the time
a Man will go either into Long-Lane, or Hounds-Ditch, turn it into as good
Gold, as is in the richest Usurers close-shut Powch in the Ci^ie. But for the
Philosophers Stone, I think you can find out the Quadrature of the Circle, or
a new way to the East Indies, as soon as find out that: if you can find it
out for others, why cannot you as well for your selves?

By this, a Man may perceive the Roguerie of all Alchymists, and the true
nature of their Art, which indeed is an Art without Art, whose beginning is,
stoutly to lie, (...). ^^^s^^ns,
and whose end is, miserably to beg. And to conclude, all these
Gold-engendring Chemists, are Archymists, rather Lechymists, and make all those
that follow them, Lachrymists.

Flies and Spirits.
For your Art, in giving Men Flies and Spirits to expel all ill luck from
them; I think it is as easy to be done, and to as much purpose, as the
License and Power Pope Paul the third gave to Serona Marta Osori^, and twelve
of her Blood, who by the virtue of a pair of coniured Beads, could be forgiven
the third part of their sins, if they said but one Paternoster, although it
was said without Devotion.

Also your Spirits for all Trades, and to cure all Diseases, and to defend
every part of the Body, is as pretty and quaint a Deceit, as that of the
Romish Religion; who will sell any Vocation a Saint, to keep, defend, and
prosper it: For they hold, that Saint Hugh and Saint Eustace guard Hunters from
Perils and Dangers, that the Stagge or Bucke may not hit them on the Head with
their Horns; Saint Martin and Saint Urban guard all Ale-Knights,
Tauerne-Hunters, and Drunkards, from falling into the Kennell, as they go
reeling to their Lodgings; Saint Chrispine and Chrispinus defend all
Shoo-makers; Saint Arnold preserues Millers; Saint Stephen, Weauers.

Saints for Cattle.
They have Saints also for Cattle: as, Saint Anthony for Hogs, Saint Loy for
Horse and Kine, Saint Gallus for Geese, Saint Wendelin for Sheep; and Saint
Gertrude poysoneth all Rats and Mice: so that none of these Vermin were ever
known to gnaw any Friars Cheese or Bacon.

Saints for Diseases.
For Diseases, they hold, that Saint John and Saint Valentine keep Men,
especially Women, from the Falling Sickness: that Saint Anthony heales all
kind of Fires, though they be as hot as ever came out of any French Hospital:
Saint Roch the Pestilence; and that is the cause (they say) so few of them dyed
the last great Plague-time: Saint Roman restores all Mad people to their Wits;
Saint Job is good for the Pocks; Saint Appolin is as good at the Toothache.

Saints (...) part of the Body.
A^^^ for every Limb in M^ns (...) they have a Saint: for S. O^^^a keeps the
H^^d, in stead of Aries; S. Blasius is appo^^ted to goue^^e the Neck, in stead
of Taurus; S. Lawr^nce keeps the Back and Shoulders, in stead of G^n^m,
Cancer, and Leo; S. Erasmus rules the Belly, with (...) ^ntrayles, in the place
of Libra and Scorpius: in the stead of Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and
Pisces, the Holy Church of Rome has elected S. Burgarde, S. Rochus, S.
Quirinus, S. John, and many others, which govern the Thighs, Feet, Shinnes
and Knees.

All these things being truly considered, I admire there are so many Tradesmen
break* so many great rich men dye, and so many Sicknesses and Diseases in
Italy and England, seeing their Saints have such power to drive theirs away,
and our Cunning Men and Women so many Charms to fright away ours. But sure, if
these things were true, Doctors, Apothecaries, and Chirurgians would be as
poor as Fiddlers, Poets, and Alchymists. But I will give as much credit to the
Romish Saints, as to our English Mountebanks Spirits, which were first invented
by subtle Friars and crafty Knaves, only to beguile the poor people of their
Money.

It may be (Sir) at the first you supposed me to be (because of my plain
Country Habit) a Woodcocke fit for your Sprindge: but to be plain with you
Sir, your Worship is deceived of me, for I can perceive you to be an arrant
Knave; for your tricks are so thin and slight, that a Man of a very dim
understanding may see clean through them. Your discourse is neither knit
together with the Nerves of Understanding, Wit, Art, Judgment, or Discretion,
it has no Realitie or Essence in it: but you huddle a company of
Astronomicall words together, wanting both Coherence, Method, and Congruitie;
you power out whole Dictionaries of strange Words, talk as though you could
repeat Dutch* Gallobelgicus or English Hollings-head without book, ^^^^^pulent
(...).
and lie as if you had held Herodotus Pen while he writ the Nine Muses. To
tell you true Sir, I came not hither to find out a Chain (for indeed I have
lost none) but first to find out, then to express your Roguerie: therefore I
think, if you had been a true Wizard, it were impossible I should put a
Trick upon you, that is so excellent at the most Cousening, Cheating, and
Conycatching Art of Astrology.

I perceive by your sweating, I am very tedious to you: but good Sir be
patient, for I have given your Tongue an uncontrollable liberty, to speak in
the defense of your Art, that has been so beneficial to you: therefore I hope
you will give me leave (if not, I now will be so bold as to take it) to speak
in the disprayse of it, because it has been so prejudicial to many.

Ordo praepostorus. Confutatio vulgaris.
If Figure-Casting be an Art, or Science, why is it not a Liberal Science as
well as all the other? or why is it not studied as freely and as lawfully as
the rest, but that the Professor of it is forced to fly into such by places,
dark Corners, and Garden-Allyes, as these? If you are ashamed to show the
reasons, I will not, but truly reveal them; which are, either because the
general eye of the world may not take notice of the foolery of those people,
and so give them warning, or that the roguery of you that entice them may not
be apparent, and so you come to a deserved punishment: Or that you may be
thought more famous in the opinion of the ignorant, who suppose that such
melancholy places best suite with such as study these Arts. Figure-Casters,
Cunning Men, and Women.
This may appear by the cunning Man on the Bank-side, Mother Broughton in
Chicke-Lane, young Master Olive in Turnebole-street, the shag-hair'd Wizard in
Pepper-Alley, the Surgeon with the Bag-pipe Cheek, Doctor Foreman at
Lambeth, and you here in More-fields, and many such Impostors, that like the
Birds of Wonder fly the light of the City.

Again, there is no Art or Science, but the definition shows the excellency
of it.

Grammar is the Science of speaking and writing truly, Grammar.
the Fountain and Original of all Arts.

Logic the Art of Arts, Logic.
the Science of Sciences, that makes way for the beginning of all Methodes, and
an Art that by disputing finds out the Truth.

Rhetoric is an Art, Rhetoric.
teaching to speak elegantly, by Tropes and Figures.

Arithmaticke is the Doctrine of Numbers. Arithmaticke.


Music the harmonious faculty of weighing the differences of Sounds by Sense
and Reason. Music.


Geometry the Discipline of Immovable Greatnesses, Geometry.
and the contemplative description of Forms.

Astronomy a certain Law and Rule, Astronomy.
considering the Motion of Superior Bodies.

Philosophy the knowledge of Divine and Humane things Philosophy.
joined with the study of living well.

Physic the Art of curing and healing the sick and diseased. Physic.


But for your Astrology, your Sacred Astrology, your Divine Astrology, I
never read, that any Divine, Father, or Preacher ever gave any commendable
description of it: Indeed, some of that wise Sect you profess your self to be
of, have endeavored to illustrate and beautify, with one of whose Authority I
will not allow of, because Divinity (the Queen and Mistress of the Arts)
does deny it. Therefore, because there is no true description of this Art, if
the Students of it will think themselves beholding to me, I will furnish them
with one.

A new and true description of Astrology.
Astrology i^ an Art, whereby Cunning Knaves cheat plain honest Men, that
teaches both the Theory and Practicke of close Cousenage, a Science
instructing all the Students of it to lie as often as they speak, and to be
believed no oftener then they hold their Tongues; that tells truth as often as
Bawds go to Church, Witches or Whores say their Prayers, or never but when the
English Nones and the Greek Calends meet together.

This is the true description of your Art. Now the virtue and power of your
Art, is to calculate Deaths and Natiuities, cast Figures, find out things that
it may be were never lost, give Fools Flies to win if they can at Ordinaries,
and more of the like, which I will not nominate, because it will be troublesome
to my self, and tedious to your Doctorship (whom I perceive to be as full of
Frets, as a Musician) all which I will prove to be unlawful, to the disgrace
of all the damnable and diabolical Students in that Art; and if I do not
artificially confute and confound all those that can raise a Spirit* and cast a
Figure, and all other Mountebankes, Emperickes, and Impostors, such as you are
that pretend to do it; then let them boldly and confidently say, I am but a
mere Fresh-man, and no true Master in my Art.

Some Principles, conducing to the perfect Science and Knowledge of Astrology,
handle the Natures and the Parts of the Zodiake; others, the Qualities of the
Planets; some, the Dimensions and abstruse significations of the Houses. The
Astrologers themselves divide the Zodiake into twelve Parts or Signs, having
every part consisting of thirty degrees of Longitude, and twelve of Latitude.
In these pretty Inventions they show themselves Poets as well as Astrologers,
in fayning so neatly: for can any of them make me believe there are Twelve
Signs to be seen in Heaven as visibly as those on the Earth, Astrologers
make a Wilderness in Heaven.
or that there are any such Creatures in Heaven, as the crookehorn'd Ram, the
goring Bull, the poyson-spitting Scorpion, any lecherous Crab-fish,
unconscionable Scales, Lege Margaritam Philosophi^ came de princ^p^^^ A^tr^n
cap. 23* and cap. 24.
roaring Lion, or hot-rayned Go^t? Can any of you make me believe there is such
a Wilderness of wild Beasts as these? it may be indeed there is Virgo,
because she is seldom seen on the Earth; V^sa mayor and nanor. Canis ma^or
and Cani^ula. Drago. Vultur. Anguis. L^pus and Ca.
but for the angry Bear, snarling Dog, venomous Dragon, greedy Vultur,
hissing Snake, horrible Hydra, fearful Hair, or Man-louing Dolphin to be in
Heaven, I never will believe it: howsoever I have heard a plain Country
fellow stand in defense of it, that if there were no such things in Heaven,
such Wisemen as Almanack-Makers would never put them forth in Print. But I
will laugh at their ignorance, and scoff at all Weather-wise Wizards with Bion
the Philosopher, Bion.
that held those Astronomers and Astrologers ridiculous, that cannot see Fishes
swim in the Sea, yet affirm they have seen them in Heaven: Diogenes.
Or deride them, as Diogenes did; who seeing an Astrologer offer a Table to
sell, whereon was painted the Errant Stars, Lege Lucia.
said to him: Sure thou art deceived good fellow, they are not the Stars that
err, but thou that sellest them; biting at the folly of these Calculators,
that most commonly err in their Opinions.

The same Philosopher hearing a Starre-catcher make a long, and (as he
thought) a learned discourse about the Celestial Signs, asked him if he ever
were there, he knew them so well, or ever had any hope to come thither, he did
lie so much? for is it possible (says he) that you can truly know what is in
Heaven, or what is done there, when in your absence, you cannot see or know
what is done at home? But these are only Jests put upon them, not Arguments to
confute them: but I will prove there are no such things in Heaven as these they
talk, and show the reason why they feign such things to be in Heaven.

As the diversities of the Circles described in the Spheres are merely
imaginary; Note.
The division of the Zodiake merely imaginatie, not natural.
so the division of the Zodiake is not material, or of the first Creation, but
only feigned by the will and arbitrament of the Astrologers, that thereby they
may know the Beginnings and the End of the Heavens Motion. And the reason that
they divide the Zodiake into Twelve Signs, neither more or less, and that
every Sign is divided into thirty Degrees, and every Degree into sixty
Minutes; is because this Number is most fit for Calculations, as the
Astrologers themselves do witness: as Hales Auenradon on the exposition of
Ptolomy, and Abrabam Auenozra in his Book of Astrologicall Reasons,
plce="marg" Hales Auenradon.
so that they might, if it had pleased them, have divided the Zodiac into
more or fewer parts, but they would not: which division is clean contrary to
the Doctrine of the Caldeans, for they teach, Caldeans.
that there are not Twelve Signs but Eleven Images, so couple Libra and
Scorpio tegether.

A man cannot allege a stronger reason not to believe these Astrologers and
Artlesse Empericks, then the strange opinions they hold, and to hear how
stoutly most of them will defend the gross absurdities of many Philosophers
and Astronomers: For do you not think Eudoxus and and Aratus were mad when
they would boldly affirm, Aug. de Guitate Dei.
that they knew how many stars were in Heaven, and the Names and Operation of
them all? Were not the ancient Astronomers out of their wits, that held the
stars were stuck on the roof of Heaven, no otherwise then Artificial
stars on the top of some sumptuous building? Was it not a fondness in that
Epieure, that did certainly believe, that when the stars did shine in the
night that then they were but kindled of God, and when they did vanish away, by
the approach of the day, that then they were quenched by him? as if we should
say, when we see a man, then he is borne; but when he is out of our sight,
then he is dead. Origin lib. 1^.
What an Absurdity was it in Origin to affirm that the Sun and the Moon,
and the rest of the stars, were living creatures, Lactant confu^^ hanc
opinionem. in lib. 1. Inst c. 5
being capable both of our Vices and Virtues? grounding his weak argument upon
the words of Job, who said; That the Stars were not Pure in the sight of
God: which was not meant, or spoken, as they were Rationable Creatures, but as
they were glorious stars, and of a most excellent and full brightness, who
although they were never so tralucent and bright, yet they were but dim in the
sight of their Maker. Therefore in my mind, what Astrologers or Astronomers
soever they be, that thinks Stars rationable Creatures, are worthy to be
accounted most unreasonable and senseless themselves.

What a Vanity was it in that Astronomer, that held, that Stars had their
Motion from themselves? which is most absurd: for if a Star is moved by it
self, then Nature is defective, which never gave any Figure or Organ to any
Star for such a Motion. But Nature never was defective in any thing, Motas
Stellarum.
does not abound in superfluous things, or does any thing in vain: Therefore
we must conclude, no Star has the Motion from it self, but has it from
God, that is the true Prime Moter all the wise and learned Philosophers have so
much talked of.

What an error is it in some again, that doubt whether the World be
Sphericall, or round, or not? which doubt is most vain and idle: for this
sensible World was made according to the example and similitude of the
Intellectual, the Arch Type and Idea of the Divine Mind; in which is neither
Beginning nor End, Boethius, de cons^lat. lib. 3. Plato, and Mercurius
Trismeg^stus.
such as you may perceive in a Sphericall Figure. Again, it may be argued
Mathematically thus, That it is a fit thing for that Body that contains within
it all things, should have the most capable Figure, which is the Sphericall.

What an absurdity was it in Plato (the Diuinest Philosopher and greatest
searcher of Nature that ever writ) to hold, that after the full resolution of
thirty thousand years, Magnus Annus Platonis. In Margarita Philosophica post
reuolutionem 49000 Annorum. Polyd. Virg lib. 2. cap. 4. de (...) ant. one.
all things should return again to the first state and condition they were at
in the Nonage and Infancy of the World? If this were true, then our first
Father should be placed once more in Paradise, once again should the Serpent
tempt Eve, and once more should Christ be crucified, and rise again: then
should all those blessed Souls that are in Heaven, live on the Earth again, and
all they that are in Hell, be freed from their torments. But Divinity proves
all this to be false.

Was it not a great oversight in Cicero, Plato, and many other Philosophers to
believe, The chiming of the Spheres. Ambro. lib. ^.
that there is Musical consent and sound wrought by the ordinary Motion of the
Stars and Planets? which cannot be: for the celestial and superior part of
Heaven has no Air in it, without which there can be no sound made; neither do
celestial Bodies, while they move in their Spheres, touch any hard or harsh
thing, as the finger does the Lute or Harp, which is the cause of such
Musical and Harmonious Raptures.

Also to what purpose was it in many Writers, to hold a difference whereabout
the Middle of the Earth should be? The ancientest Writers hold that it was at
Delphos: upon which occasion Strabo does declare a Fable, Strabo.
how that there were two Eagles sent forth by love, one from the East, another
from the West, both which came to Delphos, to a place called Omphalo, that is
Vmbiculo, the Navel: but this is fabulous, therefore vain Many Cosmographers
and Astronomers hold that the Center of the Earth is either in Mount Taurus,
hard by Caucasus, where they report the Ark stood, or in the field Semiaar, or
in some other place of Mesopotamia. Ptolomey.
Ptolomy believes it was placed under the Aequinoctiall Circle. Strabo says,
it was in Pernassus, a Mountain in Greece: to which, Plutarch and others
agree. Plutarch.
But I will not credit the best of these (although it be a matter of no great
consequence) but inquire among the learned Fathers, and seek out the truth
from them many of whom believe and report, that the middle of the Earth is in
Judea, and especially Jerusalem to be the Center: of which opinion is Lyra,
Hylarius, and many others, Iyra. Hylarius.
who most confidently believe it, because they allege the saying of the
Prophet, Psalm. 74.
Deus operatus est salutem in medio terrae.

Is it not as gross in many Geographers and Astronomers, to argue with
forcible reasons, Versipodes.
that just underneath this habitable world there is another beyond the Ocean,
in which people live whose feet are opposite to ours? which opinion seemed
strange both to Lactantius and S. Aug. and I cannot choose but admire at their
confidence in it: for if they argue thus, Lactant. Institut. lib 3 cap. 24.
Augustine. de Ciu. Dei. li b^^.
why do they not argue this concerning the Water and the Earth, which by this
means is no less pendant and hanging then the body of man: For if a man look
on the situation of the Heaven and Earth, the Antipodites have their feet
downwards and their heads upwards as well as we: and contrarily, we as well
as they, by the collation of one Nation to another, have our feet upwards and
our heads downward. None can deny the Heavens to be round, where then does
the Sun rise when he sets from us? Some say it rises in the Antipodes; Why
then if the Sun be with them all the while he is absent from us, we are
the Antipodes. Again, it is not to be doubted that the Sea is round, yet when
a ship has sailed so far that the Pylot may judge it to be in the farthest
and uttermost Region of the Watry-Wildernesse, yet the ship will not fall into
Heaven, which compasses the Sea and Land round about, for they hang by the
rare Art of the rarest Geometrician, God: between the Heavens having all the
Elements compassing them round about, so that which way soever we go, Heaven
is still above us and beneath us. Now if this be so, as it is not to be
doubted; why do not the Antipodes, that have their feet opposite to ours, fall
into the Heavens?

No sure, these Geographers were deceived, for whereas they say the Antipodes
were in a world under us, they should have affirmed that they were, These are
the true Antipodes.
and are, here with us; and then I should have agreed with them, for there are
many, that seldom or never see the Light, the Sun rise, or set: Sense Epist.
22.^.
For what are Drunken-Alehouses, Wine-tauernes, Bousing-kens, and
Victualing-houses, where men drink and swill, and never see any light, but
that of a Candle to kindle their Tobacco, or that of the fire which burns
their Pipes, but the Antipodes? And do not those that in a perverse order, and
quite retrograde from Nature, making the Day Night, and deprive themselves not
only of the Common light, but the light of the Mind, by inuoluing themselves
in the thick clouds of Ignorance and Heresy, live like true Antipodites? But
for any other then these, I know not of, nor will acknowledge any other,
whatsoever Astronomers or Geographers may affirm.

But I fear I have erred too far out of the path I am bound to follow:
therefore I will come into it again.

There cannot be a greater argument of the falsenesse of Astrologers, then the
deadly Antypathie that is between them concerning the Art it self: for some
of them hold, that the Degrees, Planets, Qualities, Apparances, Ends,
Diuersitates qualitatum and influentiarum Coeli ab effectibus cognoscuntur.
Exaltations, and Fallings, they attribute to the Planets, may be attained unto
by the diligent observation of the Effects of the Heavens, who by degrees may
come to the knowledge of the Causes: for they think, that in the beginning of
the World God gave Men so long lives, that they might give their Minds to
Speculation, whereby they might find out Astronomy, Astrology, and such Arts
and Sciences, which require a long, large, and exact experience. In this I
believe they say true: for some say, (it is a sin to belie the Devil) by
long observation they may learn many experiments concerning Astrology; yet,
if by mere experience they had attained to the Principles, then not once, but
often, they should have observed the same Constellation, which is opposite to
the Tenent of most of them, who hold, that the same Constellation cannot
appear wholly again, unless it be after the revolution of many thousand
years: and if they could perceive them sooner, yet does it not suffice to
observe the same particular Constellation, because seeing the influence of no
Star tends upward, it is decreed by Astrologers, that it is uncertain
whether the experimental effect is to be ascribed to this or that Planet,
unless by chance it be to the Sun or the Moon, which are often proposed to
us in operation, when oftentimes they are the influence of a lesser Star,
although farther from us. Nota.
For another Constellation in superior parts does vary, hinder, and diminish
the operation of Heaven in inferior parts, the disposition of the matter.

But suppose the influences of Constellations may be understood, yet they are
not sufficiently made manifest, as may appear to him that reads the many
doubts that arise about Astrology, concerning the Motion of the Stars, the
Firmament, and the Planets.

Stellarum fixarum motus triplex.
Some grant, that there is a Heaven above the Firmament: some late Writers make
use of and practice another Heaven; the Chaldaeans and Egyptians one Motion,
that is to say, diurnall to the Stars: Ptholomey adds a second, which is
from the East to the West; Thebit a third, which is from the North to the
South: but they all vary about the Time. And wonder not, if they vary about
the fixed Star, seeing they differ about the Motion of the Sun and the
Moon, for the precise knowledge of the Solar year: and it is needless to
report, how much they differ about the declination of the Sun.

Therefore, why should any man believe them, when their Writings and Opinions
differ so far from one another? for it is certain, that if Astrologers be
deceived but in one Degree, in taking an Hour, they err likewise in the
division of the Houses; for the Degree will change the Sign: then is it
necessary that their experiments are deceitful.

The Astrologers Prize.
The Chaldaeans (the most ancientest Astrologers) differ from the Opinion of the
Egyptians; for the Egyptians divide the Zodiake into twelve Signs, but the
Chaldaeans into eleven Images. Again, some of them disagree in their Degrees:
some of them will have this Planet placed in this House, another in the third,
fourth, fifth, or sixth. Thus is there such a deadly enmity between these
Heavenly Doctors, that like so many Masters of the Noble Science of Defense,
they strive to break the head of each others reputation, and stand at defiance
with each other. For when Ptholomie has his Jacobs Staff in his hand, he
thought himself as skillful at it as Turner was at his Rapier and Dagger, and
was assured, that Hermes Tresmegistus durst not stand up against him. When
Alchibicius had got hold of his Astrolabe, he was as safe as Robin the Devil
with his Sword and Targuet, and durst prognosticate, that neither Albumazar nor
Aboazar durst challenge him. When Abraham Haly, or Thebit, were peeping through
their Prospectiue Glasses, they did believe, that neither Auenozra nor Algazel
durst look them in the face. Nay, do but look into the humors of our
Modern Calculators, and you shall find them rail one against another as
bitterly as Nash against Haruy; and why is all this? but because they condemn
each other for lying; when Heaven and Earth, God and Man, know, that he that
lies the seldomest, does lie very often.

Some of them will prognosticate, that on such a day very infallibly there
shall be Rain, when it is a thousand pound to a Farthing Token, but all the
people dwelling in that Meridian his Almanacke was calculated for, but will
find them Liars; except some Widows, that have buried their Husbands, or
Sons their Fathers, who rain whole showers of tears from their clouded
eyes, it may be more for joy then sorrow. Another will foretell of Lightning
and Thunder that shall happen such a day, when there are no such Inflammations
seen, except men go to the Fortune in Golding-Lane, to see the Tragedy of
Doctor Faustus. There indeed a man may behold shagge-hayr'd Devils run
roaring over the Stage with Squibs in their mouths, while Drummers make
Thunder in the Tyring-house, and the twelue-penny Hirelings make artificial
Lightning in their Heavens. A third will foretell, that great Darkness shall
happen on such a day, when it may be none find it true but Drunkards, that
most commonly drink themselves so blind, that they cannot see daylight.

Who then will believe these Fortune-sellers? for whom it is as easy at all
times to tell true, as to make a thricecarted Maquerella forsake her Venetian
Tinctures, and paint her old wrinkled face with a modest bl^sh.

Yet which is most strange, and to be wondered at, I read one of their
Predictions, which hitherto has proved true; which was, This is exceeding true.
that from the year 1617. to the end of the World, should be great Fires in
many parts of the City of London: which hitherto has proved true, to the no
small admiration of the Reader, and the no less praise to the Calculator. For
there have been such hot fires in Pickthatch, Turne-bole street, the Myneryes,
and both the Friars, and other such religious places, where Verus Nuns are
Cloystered, that if Tom Todd and his fellow flesh-dressers had not quenched
those inflammations, many three-chin'd Bawd, dry-fisted Punke, and bisket-handed
Pandar would have had all their hair burnt off long ere this. There have been
great fires many Months together in the Old-Bayly, so that many have been
burnt in the Hand, and very glad they could escape so to. Many Drunkards have
had terrible heart-burnings with drinking stale Beer, and vehement hot
inflammations at their stomach with drinking hot Waters, so that many of them
dare not go to bed without a Thurrondell Pot of six shillings Beer stand by
them all night, for fear their throats be set on fire before the next morning.
Prodigalls have had many fantastical fires in their brains, that have almost
burnt up their Wit.

But that which most grieves me, is, most of the Varlets belonging to the City
Colleges (I mean both the prodigious Compters) have fiery red faces,
Excellent places to breed up youth in.
that they cannot put a Cup of Nippitato to their Snowts, but with the extreme
heat that does glow from them, they make it cry hiss again, as if there were
a Gadd of burning Steel flung into the Pot. But because I do cruelly love
them, I will be their Aesculapius, and prescribe this Medicine following: Let
them every morning take a spoonefull of Aqua Fortis, rather Aqua Regis, as much
Olcum Origanum, Probatum est for the cure of Red Noses.
and mingle it with a little Mercury sublimate: then take a piece of the
coursest haire-cloth, and dip it in this liquor, and so every morning, while
their Noses is well, wet them with this Medicine, and it will do all the
Compter-Kites as much good as the World can desire: for it stands to great
reason it should cure them, for one heat always drives out another; why else
do Cooks that burn their fingers, hold them to the fire, but that the
greater heat should expel the less? or why do footmen, in the hotest
Weather, after they have run a Race, drink so much Vsquebah and Rosa Solis,
but that it frights away the other? But I will leave this Medicine to them,
hoping they will take it, for it is for their good: and now I will come again
to our Praedictions.

There has been day and night continual Fires in Fleet Street and the
Strand, and in many other places of the City, but especially in Tobacco shops,
so that there cannot a man come in, but his Nose will smoke for it.

Thus once in their lives they have told truth: yet this does not give
satisfaction for the whole Legend of Lies they yearly set forth, and who so
artificially tell them, that they well may be called Lies in Print.

Yet, howsoever they do often miss in their Praedictions, when they foretell
of the disposition of the Weather, of War, of Sickness, of the Change of
Times, and of Laws; yet I cannot deny altogether, but that future Contingences
may be seen by the Contemplation of Heaven. For there is none can doubt, but
that God, the great Architect of this visible and invisible World, infused a
manyfold virtue and operation in the Heavens: but that many of these Qualities
are secret, and occult, the Kingly Prophet David tells us, saying; Psalm. 40.6.
God numbreth the multitude of Stars, and imposes several Names unto them.
Therefore it is manifest, that things are named according to their properties,
which none but he that made them, can perfectly and distinctly understand.

Yet many Philosophers by their Speculation knew and observed the general
Influence of Heaven, by their Motion, Heat, Ar^st. l^^r Mercr^^^^, and de
Generation^.
and Light: which made Aristoile affirm, That this Elementarie World is
contiguous to Heaven, and that the Sun, under the Oblique Circle, or the
Zodiake, causes Generations. Which is not absurd to affirm: for certainly,
the thick and gross Bodies are governed by the thin, Corpora inferiora
sub^^ciuntur superiorum ^^ffu^^^^.
and that the influences of the Stars do rule the differences of Bodies; as
in the Suns rising or setting, we see the times of the year do vary, and
by the increase and decrease of the Moon, some Creatures are augmented, and
diminished: as shellfish, at the wonderful flux and reflux of the Sea. But to
be of the Astrologers Opinion, that the Stars have a power over the Will of
Man, I never will believe; for the Mind cannot be subject to the Position of
any Star: Nor is it at all times true, that the differences of Bodies are
caused by the Influence of Heaven: (...) diuersitas.
for two Twins of diverse Sexes may be conceived in the same instant a Man and
a Woman. And though many hold, that there may be a general Influence into
Bodies, yet not into the faculties of the Soul or Mind; Not^.
for a corporal substance cannot cause an operation in a spiritual essence.

The true caus^^ why they straggle from the Truck.
But the reason that many Astrologers and Prognosticators err in their Opinion
(although there be an Influence in the Stars concerning the fertility of the
Year, of Pestilence, of War, of Thunder, Hail, Rain, fair or foul
Weather) is, because they do not keep themselves within the compass of
Astrology, but thirsty after Vainglory, go beyond their limits, thinking
to presage that by Stars which possibly they cannot do. Again, most
Astrologers in former Ages held diverse opinions concerning the Principles of
Astrology, and they (though but Pupils in this Art) presume to come in with
their Opinions, because they would be thought Masters of their Art: and
although oftentimes they hit upon the disposition of the Weather, and future
things, by the observation of the Heavens; yet at all times, concerning the
disposition of Corn especially, they cannot choose but err, because the four
parts of the year are so different in Quality, so that it is impossible, but
that the excess of Heat in one part of the year, and the excess of cold in
the other does distemper the Soil. Concerning the Praedictions of Diseases,
they may the easiest tell, for by the corruption of the Air, Physic teaches
us, many infections may putrify the brain.

This only shall suffice for Astrologers. Now I will come to the Art it self;
whereby they can calculate Deaths and Natiuities, tell Fortunes either good or
bad: which they fetch as far as from the Twelve Houses they have built in
Heaven.

The signification of the Twelve Houses of Heaven.
THese Twelve Houses are the Tenements most commonly such Astrologers as you
your self do let out to simple people, whereby they purchase to themselves
much Money, and to their Tenants much sorrow. And to tell truth, these Twelve
Signs, placed in their Twelve Houses, are like a Jury that sit upon the life
and death of Mortality.

By the disposition of the first House, The 1. House.
by the Planets and Stars fixed in it, by the natures and diverse effects that
are wrought by them, many Wonders are discovered: as to know of what condition
he shall be of, either as liberal as an Aldermans Son and Heir, or as
penurious as the Irish Catch-pole, that will feed his Dogs with Rabbers in
Lent, while he sits eating a piece of poor John: it can tell of what vocation
or calling a Man shall be of, either a Stubble-bearded-Barister, and wrangle
stoutly and loudly at the Bar, or whether he shall be a Soldier, and fight
bravely, if a man do but scorn for to pledge him a deep health unto some of
his White-Fryer Mistresses, etc.

By the second House you can foretell of the prosperity or adversity of him
that is borne: The 2. House.
whether he shall be a rich Citizen, and break three or four several times
of set purpose, either of set purpose to cosen the world, or out of mere
poverty; whether he shall be an Heir, and inherit his Fathers vices as well
as his riches, or whether he shall be a Merchant and loose his goods on salt
Seas, or have them drowned in the Canaries of some Tavern.

By the third House you can judge of the secrecy of the Conscience, The 3.
House.
whether it be good or bad toward God, or Man. In my Conscience they err from
the truth at the least a thousand Dutch miles, because the Holy Ghost tells us,
that no man knows whether he deserves Hate or Love; so that by this we may
perceive that the secrets of the Conscience are only known to God. Ecclesia.
9.
Therefore this madness of the Astrologers is not only to be confuted, but burnt
for an heresy. Besides this wickedness, they hold there are two most fortunate
Planets above all the rest; which are, Venus and Jupiter, Venus and Jupiter two
fortunate Planets
and that Venus gives the felicity of this life, and Jupiter of the life to
come, which I utterly disallow of: for if a man follow such a wanton wench as
Venus is, he shall in small time lie sweating in some hospital, or groaning in
some Barber Chirurgions house, which I think can be no great felicity; and he
that follows the humor of Iouiall Jupiter, shall find, and quickly know, that
he deserves that place which is contrary to immortality. So that by the
assertion of these Astrologers, whosoever is borne when Venus raigns shall live
in this world most pleasantly, in spite of ill Fortune and when Jupiter
reigns, he shall live in the world to come, although he live never so
wickedly, for you make no exception, but indefinitely say, They shall.

Maternus Astrolog.
Maternus was as mad, or rather as wicked as the rest, who writes and affirms,
that when Saturn is placed in Leo, men live long, whose souls afterward shall
go to God. Mark but how confidently and arrogantly he speaks this, which I
will confute with the words of our Savior, who says: Math. 19.
Whosoever will enter into the Kingdom of God, must keep his Commandments.
And not whosoever will enter into the kingdom of God must be borne when
Saturn is in Leo.

Albumazar also is as devilish as the rest, Albumazar
heaping impiety on impiety; affirming that he that prays to God in the
hour in which the Moon with the head of the Dragon is joined to Jupiter,
shall obtain whatsoever he asks. If this sacrilegious foolery is true, why
do not the Astrologers themselves observe this hour, that they may pray that
they may never more err, or that they may obtain so much riches that they
never after may be forced to set their lies to sale, or that they may live no
more on the fourepenny reward of some Suburbe-sinner, for casting her hot
water; or the six-penny gratuitie of some old Maid servant that would be loath
to die a Virgin: or they may pray that they never more sell their good Fortunes
to Oysterwiues and Butte^-women for greasy Two-pences? But by this Argument
that you cannot follow that you prescribe to others, a man may smell your
Roguery to be as rank as a Mountaine-Goate.

By the fourth House, The 4. House.
you will judge of the essence of the Child that is borne, how long it shall
live, and how well: if it shall be as long lived as a Raven, or Stagge; or as
shortliued as a Goat, or Cocke-Sparrow.

By the fifth House you can judge, how he shall live, and affect his Parents,
The 5. House.
whether he shall love his Father better then his Mother, or his Mother then
his Father. Ptolomey thinks you may judge by the tenth House, but Mallius ab
Ascendente.

The 6. House.
By the sixth House you will know of what Profession it shall be of, either a
Fool, or a Physician; a Parasite, or a Courtier; a Beggar, or an Alchymist; a
mad Man, or a Musition; a Thief, or a Tailor.

The 7. House.
By the seventh House you will judge what wife he shall have, either a delicate
young plumpe Helena, that looks as merry as may, and as iocound as June; or an
old decrepite Lamia, that is as frosty as February, and as dull as December;
whether she shall be as mute as a Fish, or have a tongue as loud as a
Fish-Wife.

The 8. House.
By the eight House you will judge how unfortunately a man will die, either on
the water, like a Pyrate, or in the water like a Fish, or on a tree like a
Highway man, or on the bow like a Bird: whether he shall be starved to death
in a Prison, like some Prodigal; or in some Burdello, like a French Monsier,
or a Spanish Don, whose bones the Neopolitan Dog has picked so clean, that
they would serve well some Gilder to Burnish with.

The 9 House.
By the ninth House you can judge, whether he shall be a Traveler, as famous as
our English Coriate, or outlandish Peter Columbus; what fortune he shall have
in his travel, what fashions he shall wear.

The 10. house
By the tenth House you can judge of the state of the Mother.

The 11. house.
By the eleventh House, you can judge of what complexion he shall be, Sanguine,
Chollericke, Phlegmatic, or Melancholy, or what hair he shall be of, of a
Brown or Abraham color, as the English; of a Yellow, as the Dane; Flaxen, as
the Irish; or Black, as the Spaniard.

The 12. house
The twelfth and last House, where he shall dwell, and what neighbors he shall
have.

Thus have I run over the twelve Celestial Houses, whereby you can
infallibly foretell of our good or bad fortunes, according to the Nature and
Influence of that Planet that reigned at our births, in which you are most
lamentably deceived: for you say, there is no man borne but he is borne either
under an Auspitious, or Maleuolent Star, and according to that Planets
influence he is borne under, he shall thrive and prosper; also you say, that
every Planet has but one influence, either good or bad, now that this is false
I instantly will prove.

I have heard of two brethren that were Twins, now there is no Astrologer will
deny, Gemini.
but that these brethren were borne under one Constellation, because they were
borne within the space of one Minute, and being borne under a Maleuolent Sarre
they must be both unfortunate, and under a smiling and luckie Star, happy.
But not long after the birth of these Twins there was a Fortune Tellers did
calculate their natiuities, No Planet has a double influence.
and told the Parents of these children that they should both be fortunate,
because he perceived they were borne under a fortunate Planet, which proved
contrary to his predictions: For these wanting means belike to supply their
wants, being come to men's estates, did against some good Time (although they
had no Lands or Tenements of their own) take up other men's rents either on
New Market heath, or Salisbury plain: who for those facts, to be short, were
taken, carried before a Justice, by him committed to Prison, the next Sizes
were brought to their trial, convicted, condemned, and judged to be hanged.
Now all this while their Fortunes were equal, but contrary to the Prediction
of the Astrologer; but belike the Star that reigned at their births had a
double influence, which is contrary to your writings, for when these brethren
were brought to the place of execution, and ready to be turned off, there came
a repriue for the youngest, who was carried back again to prison, had his
pardon, and afterward became an honest man; but the eldest with the loss of
his life satisfied the Law.

There was another Astrologer did divine, that one Donello Forobosco a
notorious thief should be hanged, Donello Forobosco.
which did come something nigh his Prediction, for he being a hungry Lazarallo
de Tormes, robbed Market women, and country people of Cheese-Cakes, and Butter
milk, for which fact he was apprehended and condemned to be hanged: so
coming to the gallows, he studied how he might escape that destiny; at the
last, seeing his time, he flung Ginny-Pepper in the Hangmans eyes as he came
to put the nooze over his neck, Scorning hanging with his heels.
lept off the ladder, and showed himself a very nimble footman, for he ran
away, making toward the Sea, which was nigh the place of execution, and
endeavoring to swim to save himself from those that pursued him, the Crampe
took him in the great Toe; and so, whereas by the law of Nations, and the
opinion of the Astrologer he should have been hanged, he was most
unfortunately drowned: and thus these learned Astrologers were deceived.

Erasmus in lingualatina.
It stands to great reason, that these Artists cannot at all times tell others
men's fortunes, when they cannot foretell of their own good or bad luck: For
there was an Astrologer made a prediction of Henry the seuenths death, (but
some attribute this to Alphonsus king of Arragon) and that he should die on
such a year. The King hearing of this South-sayer, sent for him, and asked him
if he were an Astrologer, and could tell Fortunes, to whom he answered yes; The
King again asked him if he never did foresee by his Art that there was
imminent danger, that much about that time should hang over his head, meaning
the Astrologers, to whom he answered no: Then the King replied, thou art a
foolish Eigure-Caster, for I am more skillful then thou art; for as soon as I
saw thee, I instantly prophesied thou should be in prison before night, which
thou shall find true: so the King instantly sent him thither. But he had not
been long in custody, but the King sent for him again to know if he could cast
a Figure truly, to know how long he should be in prison: to whom he still
answered no; then the King said, thou art an illiterate fellow, that neither
can foretell of either good or badde luck that shall befall thy self;
therefore I will conclude, thou can not foretell of mine: so forthwith set
him at liberty, giving him many disgraceful words.

Yet howsoever these examples touch the reputation of those that profess your
Art; yet I will not infallibly say, that such things were never done, although
it be not ordinary to do them: for it is almost incredible to believe, yet I
persuade my self that it is true what Zonaras declares, That the day before
Julian the Apostata dyed, Zonaras.
a certain man lying in a solitary place by himself, saw a heap of Stars
in the Element, which he said did express these words, Hodie Iulianus in
Persia occiditur; That this day Julian the Apostata is slain in Persia: and
the time being afterward noted, it was perfectly known that he dyed that
day. But this I take to be an extraordinary revelation.

Another Astrologer did foretell a Prelate, an acquaintance of his, that he
should have a great fall: Therefore the Prelate, that he might be the more safe
(knowing the Astrologer to be a learned Man) would never go higher then the
lowest Room of his House; would never dyne, or suppe, but sit on the ground;
when he went to bed, would lie on the ground; hoping by this wariness, to
change the Position of the Star that did threaten him: but it was in vain;
for a while after news was brought him, that he was deposed of his Bishopric:
who instantly cried out, Now the Astrologers Prediction is come to pass, for
indeed I can fall no lower.

Byron, Marshall of France, was told by a Wizard, Byron.
that a Burgundian should be the death of him: upon which Prediction he gave
express command, That not a man of that Nation should come nigh him: but all
would not help, for he found the Prediction true, by the loss of his Head,
which a Burgundian cut off, that was his Executioner. These two last seem to
savor somewhat of the Devils Subtilties, and the Astrologers Amphibologies.

There was another Wizard (as it was reported to me by a learned and rare
Scholar, as we were discoursing about Astrology) that some twenty years
before his death told Cuffe our Countreyman, and a most excellent Grecian,
that he should come to an untimely end: at which, Cuffe laughed, and in a
scoffing manner entreated the Astrologer to show him in what manner he should
come to his end: who condiscended to him, and calling for Cards, entreated
Cuffe to draw out of the Pack three, which pleased him; who did so, and drew
three Knaves: who (by the Wizards direction) laid them on the Table again with
their faces downwards, and then told him, if he desired to see the sum of
his bad fortunes reckoned up, to take up those Cards one after the other, and
look on the inside of them, and he should be truly resolved of his future
fortunes. Cuffe did as he was prescribed, and first took up the first Card, and
looking on it, he saw the true portraiture of himself Cape a Pe, having men
compassing him about with Bills and Halberds: then he took up the second Card,
and there saw the Judge that sat upon him: at last, he took up the last Card,
and saw Tyborne, the place of his Execution, and the Hangman, at which he then
laughed heartily; but many years after, being condemned for Treason, he
remembered the fatal Prediction of the Wizard, and before his death revealed it
to some of his friends. If this be true, it was more then Astrology, and no
better then flat Sorcery or Coniuring, which is devilish.

There was another (with whom I will end) that was told by a Scholar, An^^^^us.
that he should have his brains beaten out: but he was so wary of himself,
that he would not lie in a house for fear the roof should fall on his head,
resolving to lie in a Tent; but that resolution lasted not long, for he durst
not trust himself there, for fear the great Pole, that went cross over it,
should knock him on the head: then he resolved to lie under some Tree, but then
he feared, if he should fall asleep in a windy night, the Tree might fall on
him. He durst not go into any Town, lest a Tyle should crack his crown: so
that what place soever he went into, he still was very wary of himself. At the
last, as he was walking in a hot Summers day in the fields, he was forced to
put off his Hat, and having a bald Head, a strange Bird that was in the Element
having an Oyster in her claw, thinking it to be some white stone, let it fall
on his head, and so beat out his brains. Thus for all his care and providence,
he came to his untimely end, and fulfilled the Prediction of the Astrologer, or
rather Coniurer, if the Tale be true, which I scarce believe.

Thus Sir you see I will not so much disparage your black Art, as to say, that
you cannot fore tell of things to come, calculate Natiuities, or do strange
things, though not by it, but by the help of the Devil, who abuses you: but
I say they ought not to be done, because as S. Jerome says, Ierom. in Com.
super Prophetam Sophoniam.
you lift up your self against the knowledge of God, giving your selves to a
fained Art, imputing every accident that happens in a year, or an age, to the
rising or setting of Stars, Gregan Homeli^ Epiphaniae accepta occasion ab
apparitione Stella quam Magi viderunt in Orient Nato Domino contra
Mathematicos orationem texens. Ambros. in 4. lib. Hexa. August^ne.
thinking that humane affairs are managed by the course and falling of the
Stars, and while you promise health to others, you are ignorant of your own
punishments. Again he says, That to seek out the course of the Stars, and
the events that follow them, is the scandal of Egypt, and plain Idolatry. S.
Ambrose says, He that thinks to express the several qualities of Natiuities,
and will tell what disposition the child shall be of as soon as it is borne, is
both a villainous and vain man, because it is most wicked and impossible to do.
S. Augustine says, That these Astrologers and Southsayers hold, that all
things good or bad happen by Fortune, which is most wicked and Heathenish: for
the Gentiles called Fortuna, Dea, or a Divine Power, not considering any man's
merits, but gave riches to one and misery to another. And the better to
express her, they made her Image according to the form of a Woman, sitting in
the middle of a Wheel, always turning it, having the right side of her face
bright, the left obscure, yet both blind; showing, that those she favored,
were merry and iocund, but those she hated, discontent and melancholy. Her
blindness showed the indifference both of the good and bad: by the Wheel,
they did show the prodigious change of this unconstant Goddess; which is
impious, and against all Christian Faith: for we ought to consider, that all
the ill that happens to us, have their original from our sins, and all the
benefits and good that comes to us, from the mercies of God, and not from this
or that maleuolent or smiling Star, or from the frown or smile of Fortune.

But if you will have these accidents good, or bad, that happen in a minute of
an hour, and sometimes in larger and lesser distances of time to Fortune, she
is very predominant among us, and like one of the most powerfullest Planets
reigns and rules over our Natiuities and Affairs. For it is some men's fortune
to be Citizens, some again to be Cuckolds; some men's fortune to be Courtiers,
some to be Flatterers; some to be Scholars, some to be Fools; some to be
Lawyers, some to be Knaves; some to be Usurers, some to be Devils; some to be
Captains, some to be Cowards; some to be Beggars, some to be Alchymists; some
to be Heirs, some to be Fools; some to be younger Brothers, and some to be
Wisemen. Again, it has bin many a Gallants good fortune to have a brave Suit
of Clothes on his back on the morning, ^nfortunium.
yet it has bin his bad fortune to have them in the Lumbard before night:
Dissortunium.
it has been many honest men's good fortune to have a fair Wife, yet it has
been his bad fortune, not to know truly how many Children he has had by her
of his own getting. It has been many a roating Boys good fortune (as they
say) to kill his enemy in the field, yet it has been his bad fortune to be
hanged for it the next Sessions.

Thus you see your Goddess Fortune has a great predominance over this lower
World the earth: yet howsoever, I will not believe these things happen by
fortune, and the mere influence of the Stars; therefore let all men avoid
them, for this opinion causes many to affirm there is no God.

Astrology no Art but a vanity. Aug. Contra Mathematicos in Capitulo quanto
and in fine Capit^.
Saint Augustine will not allow of your Astrology, but calls it a mere
vanity; and those that profess it, enemies of the Truth: he says, that the
devil first found out this Art, and those that are curious in it are enemies
to God, because it breeds many superstitious opinions in men and women,
especially the ancientest, which they hold as canonical, and as lawful to be
observed and followed as any part of the Scripture, of which I will reckon up
some.

A CATALOGVE OF MANY SVperstitious Ceremonies, especially old men and women
hold, which were first found out and invented by Figure-Casters, Cunning Men
and Women in former ages, yet to this day are held for certain and true
observations.
1 THat if any thing be lost amongst a company of servants, with the trick of
the Sieve and the Sheeres, it may be found out again, and who stole it. 2 That
Toothaches, Agues, Cramps, and Fevers, and many other diseases may be healed
by mumbling a few strange words over the head of the diseased. 3 That by a
certain tuft of hair growing on the foremost part of a man's forehead, it may
be known whether he shall be a widdower or no. 4 That a man may know what is a
clock, only by a Ring and a silver Beaker. 5 That it is very ill luck to
have a Hare cross one in the high way. 6 That to have yellow speckles on the
nails of ones hand is a great sign of death. 7 That when the left cheek
burns, it is a sign some body talks well of you, but if the right cheek
burns it is a sign of ill. 8 That when a man's nose bleeds but a drop or two,
that it is a sign of ill luck. 9 That when a man's nose bleeds but one drop,
and at the left nostril, it is a sign of good luck, but on the right ill. 10
That if a man stumbles in a morning as soon as he comes out of doors, it is a
sign of ill luck. 11 That if a man walking in the fields, find any
foure-leaued grass, he shall in a small while after find some good thing. 12
That it is not good to put on a new suit, pare ones nails, or begin any thing
on a Childermas day. 13 That if a man be drowsy, it is a sign of ill luck.
14 That it is a sign of ill luck to find money. 15 That it is naught for a
man or women to lose their hose Garter. 16 That it is a very unfortunate thing
for a man to meet early in a morning an ill-favored man or woman, a
rough-footed Hen, a shag-haird Dog, or a black Cat. 17 That it is a sign of
death to some in that house, where Crickets have bin many years, if on a
sudden they forsake the Chimney Corner. 18 That if a man dream of eggs or fire,
he shall hear of anger. 19 That to dream of the devil is good luck. 20 That
to dream of gold good luck, but of silver ill. 21 That if a man be born in
the day time, he shall be unfortunate 22 That if a child be borne with a Caul
on his head, he shall be very fortunate. 23 That when the palm of the right
hand itcheth, it is a shrewd sign he shall receive money. 24 That it is a
great sign of ill luck, if Rats gnaw a man's clothes. 25 That it is naught
for any man to give a pair of knives to his sweet heart, for fear it cuts
away all love that is between them. 26 That it is ill luck to have the Salt
seller fall toward you. 27 That if the Beer fall next a man, it is a sign of
good luck. 28 That if a Candle burn blew, it is a sign there is a spirit in
the house, or not far from it. 29 That when the Cat washes her face over her
ear, we shall have great store of rain. 30 That if a horse stumble on the
high way, it is a sign of ill luck. 31 That when a man's nose itcheth, it is a
sign he shall drink wine. 32 That if your lips itch, you shall kiss some
body. 33 That it is a very ill sign to be Melancholy.
These, and a thousand more as vain as these, I could reckon up, were it not
that I should make too long a digression from my matter; with which so many
people are so deeply besotted, that a whole University of Doctors cannot
root these superstitious observations out of their mind: for what an idleness
is it in them, to think that there is either any Bonum or Malum omen in these
things? Bonum and Malum Omen.
what ill luck can there be in it, when a Hare erosseth you, except it is your
ill luck not to catch her, or when you have caught her, to let her go again?
(as the Welchman did,) what ill luck can it be to a man to stumble in a
morning, except he fall down and break his nose? what ill luck can there be
in finding money, except it be counterfeit? but if it be current I cannot be
persuaded if he that takes it up be not as as very a fool as John of the
Hospital (that could not abide money) will take it for ill luck, but if it be
ill luck, God send me that ill luck every day. What ill luck is there in
losing a Hose garter, except it be to put a man to the charge to buy a new
pair? So that I cannot pick out any thing in these observations why they
should be signs of good or badde luck. Therefore I cannot persuade my self,
but you and such Figure-flingers as you, that sow the superstitious seeds in
the hearts of credulous people, is only to get to your selves praise, but
especial money. And you have not only scattered these in or about the City,
but in the Country: for many Towns have been pestered with these Wisemen,
before the Laws prepared whipping Posts, Stocks, and Houses of Correction for
them, for these Rogues before this preparation for them, would appear in the
villages in the likeness of Gypsies, which word indeed is derived from the
Egyptians, but by corruption of the tongue are called Gypsies: and that they
might be thought to come of the issue of that Sunburned Generation, they with
Herbs and Plants for the purpose would venom their skins, and with Oakers
discolor their faces; and then for Bread, Beer, and Bacon, Cheese, especially
for money, would undertake to tell poor Maide-seruants their Fortunes, which
should be sure to be good, because they would be sure of good reward, and these
poor silly creatures seeing them to be black and ill favored people, and it
may be hearing before of some as wise as themselves, of the Gypsies cunning,
would easily believe that they were Cunning men, and do strange things. And it
is a great Folly and Madness of many, who never see a tawny visaged man, with
a black curled head of hair (especially, if he be scholar, or profess
himself to be one) but they will think he is a Cunning man and a Coniurer.

But if they always hold this to be true, they may as well say, that none
dwell at the Kings head but Princes, nor at Queens head but Ladies, none at
the Popes head but Heretics, none at the Bishops head but Divines, none at
the Maidenhead but Virgins, none at the Bull head but Horners, none at the Rams
head but Butchers, none at the Sarazens head but Heathens, and none at the
Nagges head but Horscoursers; all which is most absurd to believe: for if all
those that have black heads or faces were Coniurers, then all Chimney Sweepers
were Negromancers. Therefore I pity the blind ignorance of many Country
people, and warn them to take heed of these Rogues that cosen whole towns
as they come through, This was delivered to me by the mouth of Bell himself,
Iaylor of Ipswitch.
as by this true discourse following shall appear.

Not many years since there came a Crew of these Hedgecreepers trooping
through Essex, telling Fortunes as they went: but at the last, the Constable by
the virtue of his Office, and the Statute against these Rogues, apprehended
them, and brought them before a Justice, who committed them to Ipswitch Iayle,
there to continue while next Sizes. In the mean time, one William Bell (that
in my mind had bin fit to have bin hanged up for his Roguery) being then
Iaylor, knowing the simplicity of many of the Townes-mens wives, daughters,
and servants, and the subtlety of those Rogues under his Custody, came to
them, telling them, that if they would be as private as he would be constant,
he would lay a plot how they and himself would get the best part of twenty
Mark, clear in their purses, A Comp^^^ between a knave and a company of
rogues
before the Sizes; besides, a purchasing of their liberty. These Travelers at
the first doubted, but at condescend to him, telling he should have a full
half share of whatsoever they got by acting that Comedy. Bell upon this drew a
large note of the names of the chiefest men and women in the Town, their
Complexions, Statures, the Color and Fashion of their Clothes they ware, in
what Street they dwelt, at what Sign, what Suitors they had before they were
married, of what estate he was that married any woman, whether he were a
Widdower or a Batchler, how many children he has had by her, how many Girls,
how many Boys, if they had any children before they were married; and
whatsoever worthy of note, (many year before had happened) he set down in that
Bill which he gave to the Queeue of Fairies, I mean, the ancientest of those
she Cunny-catchers to read over, and diligently to peruse, charging them
never to answer to any thing that was asked them upon the sudden, but to
withdraw themselves into a room, through which Bell had made hole with an
Auger, that they might look out and view those that were in the next room,
that came to know their Fortunes; and when they had taken full notice of them,
and what had happened them by the notice of the Bill, then to come openly to
them, and tell them first what had befallen them, which was true; and what
should happen to them, which was most false. Now this Iaylor, this Setter, this
Cunny-catcher Bell* when these forward scholars had learnt this lesson
perfectly went down into the town, as his order was every afternoon to some
Alehouse or other, but now did especially choose one, where a very believing
old woman dwelt, that had given many a Dubble iug of Beer and Ale to such
Rogues that had stopped her mouth full of lies: and long after he had entered
into this drinking School, and after a little discourse with a company of
country Corridons that sat there tippling, he told them, that he had a
company of the strangest men and women in his prison that he ever heard of, for
without any asking they had told him of many things that happened many years
before he kept a prison, and since he kept a prison, how many prisoners he
lost, what men they were, what time of the year they brake out, on what day,
and when he found them again. This begat no small credit in them that heard
him, but especially in the old woman, who as the nature of ancient people is,
could not keep news long, told it to two or three of her neighbors, they to
forty more, so that Bells report in few hours flew up and down the Town,
and took such deep root in the minds of most of the people, thae many of
them could not be at rest while they had seen them, and then under the color
of seeing them, to know their Fortunes. Many repaired thither, asking many
questions of these wise Knaves, and Whores, who at the first would not be
drawn to tell them any thing; so withdrawing themselves into their private
Chamber, where they through the hole made for them a purpose, might take
particular notice of all of them and when according to the direction of their
Bill, did know every man and woman's name there, and what had happened to them,
at the last, they would come stealing out again, and call every man and woman
by their names, tell them where they dwelt, and at what Sign, and whisper the
women in their ears, and make many of them blush, and for the men make them to
laugh; so that these country people hearing themselves named of them that
never saw them before, and told them of things that had been done many years
before, wondered at them, and gave them money, sent them meat every day to
dinner and supper, saying, it was pity such skillful people as they should
not be provided for, so that for the space of five weeks they were visited
more then all the Cunnycatching Knaves about London: for there was not a Maid
that had gotten a clappe before she was married, a young Strippling that had
got a Wench with child, or any Farmer, or Townsman that had lost his Purse, or
Horse, or Sheep many years before, but would repair to those Gypsies, so
that some gave them wrought Handkerchers, Gloves, Purses and Knives, Money, and
more Meat and Drink, then twenty more of them could eat, and when the Sizes
came, by means they made to the Justices, procured their liberty, yet thought
themselves much beholding to them, not dreaming that any of these things were
revealed to them by Bell, who for his share in the space of three weeks, had
got twenty mark clear to himself, which his knavery and the Gypsies roguery
picked out of the Townsmens pockets.

The like roguery does one (that goes under the name of a Captain use, who
with the tricks and sleights of legerdemaine, he does on the Cards fool many
people out of their money, making them believe he can find things out by Art,
that when his own conscience knows is far from the knowledge or grounds of
Astrology, as he from honesty, and if I were to talk or dispute with him, I
would confute him in the strongest arguments he could produce to prove his
skill, and to his face boldly justify that he is but a mere Impostor, and can
do nothing without the aid and help of such a knave as himself, who have
found out many things betwin them before they have been lost; who first lay
plots to have things conveyed away, then take money to find them again. If
you, nor the world will believe this, let them but look into Newgate books and
they shall find he stood in the Pillory for such Rogueries, having this fair
inscription written over his head in Capital Letters, FOR COVSENAGE. But I
will come back again to the matter I treated of before, which was of your
cunning Astrologers, that can do these pretty tricks and sleights by Art.

Augustu libro (...) de do^^^^ Christian^.
Saint Augustine calls your Art a Sacraligious foolery, an unlearned learning,
and a kind of fornication with the Soul.

Saint Jerome makes mention that Pope Alexander the third, finding a Priest
that found out a Thief that had robbed the Church, by the inspection into his
Astralobe, suspended him from his order for that fact for a year together,
saying, it was a most heinous sin for a man of his order, to exercise such an
unlawful study, although it were for the good of the Church.

Thus Sir, you see your Art is forbidden concerning telling of Fortunes, or
finding out things that are lost, etc. And in forbidding the practice of this
Art, is also encluded all those for whom it is practiced, for many people in
these days cannot break his Shinnes, have his Nose bleed, lose a game at
Cards, hear a Dog howl, or a Cat wawle, but instantly they will runue to
the Calculator, and have him turn over his Ephemreides, and his Annual
Calenders, stuffed full of lies and superstitious observations. I will counsel
all those therefore, that would know their Fortunes, ^den^trium ^erum and (...).
to look into that Everlasting Calender, the sacred Bible, for the Astrology
they shall learn there, never tells false, but will certify them that the
cause of their ill fortunes is their sins; and the good, the Mercies of God:
that will tell them of the true Nature of Summer, that is of their Resurrection
and Salvation, and the true condition of Winter, that is Death and Damnation.
If they study this book, they will quickly learn to be excellent Calculators,
and learn what will become of them if they do ill, and what if they live
well, it will tell them the Causes and the Cures of every disease that does
infect the Soul. Yet for all this, it is the true condition, rather
superstition of the world, to put their confidence rather in Astrologicall
fallacies, then in the Holy Ghosts verities, drawing from the Stars the
events of future contingences, ascribing what good soever befalls us to the
influe^ce of some lucky Planet, and not to Gods Mercies; and what mischief
soever the to position of some maleuolent Star, and not to our sins, we put
our confidence in Astrologers, Stars, and Planets for a few experiences, and
never hate them for their innumerable fallacie^^ but this is espetially
heredetary to women, because by succession it came from their mother Eve, Why
women especially follow Figure-Casters.
who by her vice of curiosity or leuitie, or admirable facility rather then
fatuitie, was deceived by the Serpent, in desiring to know future things, which
folly descends naturally to women, who will rather believe a Mathematician then
a Divine; so that these Calculators if among hundred errors they happen but
upon one truth, then without any suspicion they may lie a thousand times after,
yet these foolish, Francis, ^et^ar.
credulous, and Appleeating women will believe them.

Sebastians confutation of Astrologers.
Sebastian that writ bitterly against Astrologers, says, it is an Art against
tke Law of God, and full of deceit and viliany: for says he, Go to any
Doctor of the Mathematickes, and tell him thou have had very ill luck all thy
life time, and desire him to tell thee under what Planet thou were borne, and
no doubt his answer will be, that thou were borne either under malicious Mars;
or that Saturn was Apostaticall and retrograde: when you have been with him,
then go to another and tell him that you have had very good Fortune, and
desire him to tell thee what Star reigned at thy birth, and it will be very
strange, if he do not tell thee as the first did, either under Mars, or
Saturn; who to prove himself an Artist, will turn over huge Volumes, by
which he will show, that it is necessary that you must have good fortune,
being borne under those Stars the first said were ill, and in a Circle drawn
together in every part, by which he will take diverse and sundry occasions to
speak any thing. Now if they chance to miss in their Praedictions, they have
a pretty evasion to shun the suspicion of Lying, which they draw from the
interrogatorie part of Astrology.

The opinion of Astrologers is, when the mind of Man is spurred to the desire
of knowing any thing; that suddenly it cannot be done by election, or
consultation, but the influence of a Constellation that hour consisting in
Heaven. And when any man consults with an Astrologer, by a Figure in Heaven the
hour of Interrogation being found out, the Astrologer can answer truly of any
thing sought for, or demanded: As whether an absent friend be alive or dead;
if a Legate or Messenger, that is sent into any Country, shall return home
again safe and well, and whether he shall dispatch that matter he went about
prosperously, and an innumerable many of other things, that humane curiosity
does doubt of: to which sometimes they may answer truly, although they often
lie, and are never found fault with for it; for they have found out a way,
whereby they can sufficiently excuse themselves to those that are ignorant and
simple in these things. For they say, That if any man, being doubtful of any
thing, does with a natural motion and radical intention ask them any thing,
that then they can resolve them of any Question they ask. Now if they miss,
and cannot answer directly and truly to what was propounded to them, then they
say, that he that asked that Question, did it not with any natural motion, or
any firm or radical intention to be resolved, but only to try their Art.
Thus oftentimes they deceive, and are deceived in their answers; not by any
defect that is in their Art, but by the leuitie of him that did ask the
Question: and thus they excuse themselves. Which are mere tricks for evasion,
and have no ground at all from reason.

Chaldaei Astrologi Nabuch^don sor sommun dicere nequ^^runt.
But I admire what excuse the Egyptian and Chaldaean Astrologers could find,
when among such an infinite number of them, not one of them could truly answer
touching the Dreams of Pharach and Nabuchadnezzar, when Joseph and Daniel
could answer directly? Do you think this was done by any inspection,
Egypttaci Divinatores sommum Pharaonis dicere non pot^^runt.
or peeping into any Astrolobe, or observing any Constellation? No: for it was
done by the revelation of Almighty God; therefore it was past the Rules of
your Art.

There is another neat Delusion, whereby they benefit themselves very much;
which is, by the observations of the Heavens to know, if it be fit or
convenient for a man to travel, or do any other business in: which is most
superstitious and diabolical. For they will not have a man eat, drink, be
merry, take Physic, or travel, marry, join friendship, send forth a
Messenger, buy, sell, put on new Clothes, begin the Alchymists Work, set Boys
to School, go to Law, Hawke, Hunt, Fish, or go to the Bathe, but they will
have them do it under some Constellation, and will set forth Rules when to do
these things, and when not. If they can do these things, I wonder they do not
set forth a Rule, and choose an Hour and Constellation, under which a man may
dye well, and avoid Hell fire, and enjoy the joys of Heaven: but I think
their Art has nothing to do with this.

Yet I will not deny, but that the Influences of the Stars have an operation
in the differences of Bodies: for what is more belonging to the Body, then to
exercise Husbandry, to cut down Timber for Building, while it is not too full
of sap, and to observe the Times and Seasons when they should be done?

But those obseruers of time are to be laughed at, that will not go out of
their House before they have had counsel of their Almanacke, and will rather
have the House fall on their heads, then stir, if they note some natural
effect about the motion of the Air, which they suppose will vary the luckie
blasts of the Stars, that will not marry, or traffic, ^^^^^ca inhibitio 26.
q. c. 7. D^^^na Proui^^^ (...).
or do the like, but under some Constellation. These sure are no Christians:
because faithful men ought not to doubt, that the Divine Providence, from any
part of the World, or from any Time whatsoever, is absent. Therefore we should
not impute any secular business to the power of the Stars, but to know, that
all things are disposed by the arbitrament of the King of Kings.

The Christian Faith is violated, when so like a Pagan and Apostata any man
does observe those days which are called Aegyptiaci, or the Calends of
January, or any Month, or Day, or Time, or Year, either to travel, marry,
or to do any thing in: for whosoever he be that believes these things, has
erred from the Christian Faith and Baptism.

Saint Augustine in his Enchiridion says, That it is a great offense for any
man, to observe the time and course of the Moon when they plant any Trees, or
sow any Corn: for he says, none puts any trust in them, but they that
worship them, believing there is some divine power in them; thinking, that the
position of some Star thought to have an influence in them according to those
things they believe concerning the Natiuities of men. This me thinks is most
simple and ridiculous; for thus I will argue against them.

If this be true which they hold, that it is good to sow Corn under such a
luckie Constellation, what is the reason then, that after the Corn that is
scattered on the Earth by the laborious hands of the Husbandman, that after so
much Grain is come up together, look green together, ripen together, and fit
for the Sickle, that some of it is blasted, some quite choakt up, some devoured
by Birds, some by Beasts, some trodden down, and some of the ears plucked from
their stalks by men that come by that field they grow in? how comes it to
pass then I say, that some of this should go safely into the Barn, and some
of it again be devoured and spoiled? which me thinks should not be, if the
same Constellation under which it was sown, had but one Influence, which
should be good, and not a second, which was bad.

But I will now let these things pass (because I make no doubt but I have
strongly confuted them) and come to the last, but the wicked part of
Astrology; which concerns the making of Astrologicall Images, and to what
purpose they are made: where I will show, they have no force or virtue from any
Star or Constellation, but that the Devil works about them, and in them,
causing them to be made under a Constellation, that the impiety of their
Idolatry may the more secretly be hid.

The vanity of Astrologers about their Images.
THe Fabric of Astrologicall Images are made under a certain Constellation,
either to avoid hurtful things, or to entice profitable things, for to diverse
uses they are made. Some are made for the destruction of some things: as if you
would remove a Scorpion from a place, you must carue the figure of some
Scorpion either in Stone, Wood, or Iron, under some convenient Constellation,
and inscribe on it an effectual Name, signifying the Name of the thing that is
to be avoided, and the Name of the Sign ascending, and of the like in diverse
parts of the Image, with many other observations, which for breuity sake I will
now let pass. For a contrary effect, you must have a contrary Constellation,
and a contrary Operation, as in the like Images pertaining to Love, Enmity,
Health, or the like. And although there are many effects caused by these
Images, Non virtus imaginis sed operatio damonis producit effectum.
as experience teaches us, yet they are miserably deceived, that think it
done by the virtue of any Constellation, when it is done by the mere operation
of the Devil: For not the virtue of the Image, but the operation of the
Devil, works the effect. And learned Auerroi^ writing against Algazel the
Astrologer, says, That these Images have no virtue from the Stars, because
artificial things are not capable of any influence, neither are they any cause
of a natural operation: For Quality is in the Predicament of Actio. An Image
therefore made of any earthly substance, is nothing but a massy Effigies, and
capable of no Action.

A great vanity.
And in like manner, those Images that are buried in the midst of the place
where their operations are expected, are contrary to natural reason. And other
things that are observed in them, show as great vanity: as, when some men's
Names must be written with the left hand, some with the right; some Images must
be buried with their faces upwards, some with their feet upwards: which are all
signs rather of a Compact with the Devil, then any other natural cause; as
in the Negromanticke Images of Angels, or rather of their inscription of
Devils, and other unknown Names and Characters. A Compact with the Devil.
Also, the use of their Suffumigations and Inuocations are signs of a Compact
and League with the Devil.

The prodigious impiety of the Dominicke Friars in the Fabric of these
Images, would make a History bigger then the Iliads: for they have made by
their Magical tricks weeping Statues, by which they wrought many Miracles,
which they learnt of the Priests of the Idols of the Gentiles, who have
deceived many, as may appear by the Alexandrian Statues, destroyed by the
Christians: for when they overthrew the Phane of Syrapis, there were Images
found both of Wood and Brass, whose inward parts were made hollow, and with
instruments were fastened to the Roofes of their Churches and Temples, from
whence they spoke.

And since the time of Popery, there have been found in Churches Images that
have had eyes put in by Art, that would weep and let drops of blood trickle
down their faces, sweat blood, and would twinckle with their eyes to the
people by the help of instruments, and would wrythe their heads and necks
backward and forward, according to the will of the Priests that invented them,
to beguile the people, and to enrich themselves. These Puppets had no Tongues,
but only moved and stirred, making signs to the people, many of which, the
Cardinals erected, and adorned, and commended, to instruct the people: which
were nothing but deceits and tricks of these holy and religious Fathers, still
to detain the people in ignorance, and that they should not smell out their
knauerie.

Also, many of these Scab-shin Friars (when any rich man died, that had left
their Abbeyes and Monasteries nothing to feed their fat guts with) would place
some of their Accomplices in a Vault they had made of purpose under the dead
Man's Tomb: so that when any of his sons or kindred came (as the custom in
those times was) to pray for the Soul of their deceased father, or kinsman,
they should hear a dreadful voice under the Sepulcher, telling him, it was
the Spirit of him that was but lately buried there, and that his Soul could
never be at rest, while such (the Friars had most mind to) were given to the
Monastery; so that the blind people believing this to be the Spirit of their
father, or kinsman, would instantly go home, and confirm those Lands on their
Monastery. Thus poor souls, they were often deluded by such counterfeit
voices of some subtle Friar, or as knauish a companion of their Fraternity.
Therefore if there be any in these days (especially old Men and Women) that
believe the Souls or Spirits of the dead walk, let them but read the
Scriptures, and they shall find it to be most false; for that affirms, that
the Souls of the good instantly go to Heaven, and of the bad instantly to
Hell; therefore their Spirits cannot wander. Again, the Soul that is in
Heaven minds no earthly matter; and it was never known, that any Soul ever
returned out of Hell, for the Poets themselves say, Nullus redditurus ab Orco.

But these Images and Tricks of the Friars do but resemble the Statues of
Negromancers, made with great toil and labor. Friar Bacon. Albertus Magnus.
For Friar Bacon was many years, before he could make his Head speak. And
the Image of Albertus Magnus was to be wondered at, which he made in the full
and perfect shape of a Man, who with the Wheels and other Engines that he had
cunningly and artificially wrought in it, made it speak and pronounce words as
distinctly, as if they did proceed from a man endued with sense and reason.
This Statue, Thomas Aquinas.
when Thomas Aquinas was sent into his Chamber where it lay hid, heard it
speak very articulately: which when he heard, then looking for it, and finding
it, and viewing it very seriously, at last struck it with a Club, and brake it
all to pieces. Which when Albertus heard and saw, he cried out and said;
Thomas, thou have destroyed the work of thirty years labor and pains. Now
can any man judge, that either Bacon or Albertus made these under any
Constellation, or that it spoke by the influence of any Star? if they do,
they are wretchedly deceived: for it was either by a material Engine, or the
Devil that spoke within them, brought into them by their Art. Therefore we
may persuade our selves, that all these Images, made by the Art either of a
Friar or Negromancer, are unlawful to be made of them, or used of any other.

These Images lawful.
But if we must allow any Statue or Image, they must be those of Pasquil and
Morphirius, on whose breasts were written no Lie-Bills, as the Popes called
them, but True-Bills of their villainies. These Statues were of stone, and the
verses carved on their breasts, were bitter and Satyricall, sharply reuiling the
Sorcery, Sodomitry, Symony, Incest, Phil. Can. p. Medita c^n^.
Murder, Witchcraft, Poisoning, and Sacrilege of the Popes and Cardinals,
whereupon the Gentlemen of Rome wittily said; That it was not lawful for men to
speak there vices, the stones did proclaym them. But pope Adrian would have
taken an order, and have them flung into Tyber, Pope Adrian. Suessanus.
if Suessanus the Legate of Charles the Emperor who favored them, had not
prevented him: who said to his Holiness, that if they were flung into Tyber
the Crocodiles and Rats, and other monstrous Serpents would catch them and sing
them: to which answer some report, the holy Father stood as mute as one of his
Cardinals Mules; but some report that he began to be angry at Suessanus answer,
and in a rage suddenly said, that he would have them burnt, to whom the Legate
wittily replied again, saying: If you burn these Images their ashes will not
be blown through the city, but into other countries, so that the people will
take occasion to celebrate and reverence those Ashes for the writing sake, and
so it will come to pass, that they being dispersed through the world, the
sins of Rome will generally be known to all nations. At this second answer,
his Holiness wae more perplexed then before, and seeing he could do no good,
either by drowning or burning, he bid them stand in the Devils name. But I
have made too long a digression, therefore I will return again to our
Negromancers, and now I have spoken of their Images, I will briefly and
plainly lay open the viperous generation of Negromancy, which are Idolatry,
Divination, and vain obseruasion, with all the hellish brood that proceeds
from them.

The damnable offspring of Negromancy.
IDolatry is a Divine Worship, attributted to Idols, which Idols are Statues
or Images which the Gentiles worshipped with Divine Honor, Idolatry the
daughter of Negromancy.
believing there was some divinity in them, by reason of their answers and
wonderful effects the Devil wrought in them. Such were the Images of Hermes
Tresmegistus, otherwise called Mercury, in which they did believe, that by a
kind of Art the souls of Devils and Angels were encluded, under a certain
Constellation, which Divinity and Natural Philosophy does reprehend: for they
hold that a Spirit cannot possibly be vegitable, Notae. Aristotle de Anima.
or can substantially inform artificial bodies: For the Soul, as Aristotle
says, is an Act of a natural body, not artificial: for a man cannot by any
matter, as Herbs, Wood, Stone, Words, or Constellation,, expel a good or bad
Spirit, or being called, that it can come presently and dwell in an Idol,
because corporal things cannot by any natural order have any operation in
incorporall things. There have been some of the Gentiles that have not only
attributed Divine honor to Statues and Images, but believed them to be Gods,
for some virtue or magnitude of their Acts these Statues represented; as to
Jupiter, Hercules, Venus, and the rest, and other monsters of this kind. Also
they did not only honor corporal, but incorporall things, as Intelligences,
Angels, and the Souls of heavenly Bodies, which they call Aeria Animalia, and
they did not separate the souls of men from Divine honor, which is most
devilish. This kind of Idolatry at these days is used among our Antagonists
the Papists, for they pray to Iron, Papists.
Wood, Gold, Silver, and wooden Images, that have neither sight, feeling,
sense, life, or operation in them, and have as small influence in them after
are made, either by the Caruer, or Goldsmiths hand, as they had when they first
were in a massy lump, either in the Tree or Mine.

Divination, the 2. daughter of Negromancie. Isidor lib. octa Etymologia.
The second daughter of superstition is Divination, by which our Astrologers
miserably labor to know of future things, either good or bad. These are they
Isidorus, says, report themselves to be full of divination, who by craft and
device foretell of things to come, by the effects which proceed upon necessity
from causes, unless they are especially hindered of God, certainly proceeding
from the cause of nature: as the eclipse of the Sun and the Moon, and the
effects which proceed from these causes may be foretold of by as probable
conjecture, as well as a Mariner may foretell of a storm that will arise by a
dark cloud, that is either before or behind him. Have not many old women
told by the unhappy conditions of a boy that he would be hanged, and has it not
fallen out right? Have not many grave Matrons foretold, that young wanton Lasses
would prove Wagtails, and has it not come to pass? Have not many men by the
damnable tricks they have seen in Catchpoles, foretold that they would prove
knaves, and has it not been true? yet these are but mere conjectures.
Again, Astrologers boast they can divine, which is most false: for the
Prophets themselves foretelling future things by Revelation of God, did not
divine but Prophecy; for Divination is always taken in the worst part,
because in it the operation of the Devil does always come. For Bonauenture
says: Bonauent. lib. 2.
to ask counsel of the Devil is a great mischief. The species of divination
by which they can foretell of future things are many. Sometimes they do it by
plain invocation of the devil, who with their execrable Exorcismes,
Coniurations, Characters, and Figures, and diverse other ceremonies, Praestigium.
and to speak more truly, sacrifices at diverse times do call the devil to
give them answers, who by diverse manners and forms appear to them, who as
subtly and deceitfully does answer to those questions propounded to them, as
may appear by these examples.

Papa Pater. Polyd. virg lib. 5. de re^u^n inuentione.
Pope Syluester the second, that with small learning had attained to his
Pontificalibus, being greedy long to enjoy that Sea, by this devilish kind of
Coniuration raised up the Devil, and asked his counsel how long he should
live. To whom the Devil answered, that if he did take heed of Hierulasem he
should live a long time. Pope Siluester now thought himself to be long lived,
because he determined never to see Jerusalem: But four year after he came
to his Palace of Sanctae Crucis, he lay in a chamber unknown to himself,
called Jerusalem, then instantly being mindful of the Devils answer, he said
that he should, as he did not live long after.

Also Alexander the sixth, whom the Devil did help to his Popedom, Guicciard.
promising him that he should live December et Octo in his Popedom, upon
composition that he would be his after that time was expired. Now these numbers
were over generally expounded of Alexander touching his years, for he supposed
the Devil meant by Nine and Ten nineteen years, when the Devil meant but nine
years and ten months, Octo and december.
which was much about the time he came to claim his right of the holy Father.

Also Albertus Scotus doubting of his Fortunes, raised up the Devil, Lord of
Placentia.
and asked him concerning the security of himself and his state, to whom the
Devil thus subtly and intricately answered; Domine stes securus, inimici tui
suauiter intrabunt terram et subijcientur Domui tui, which as the words now
lie, bear this interpretation in English. Sir you shall stand secure, thy
enemies shall peaceably enter into thy kingdom, but shall be subject to thy
house. Therefore he did hope well of this answer, and made no doubt of the
victory; but the Devil did not promise him the victory, but the overthrow, and
meant thus. Domine stes securus, so did divide the word Domine into Domine,
again, Inimici tui sua vi ter intrabunt terram et subijcient vr, that is,
Ignem Domui tui; so the Devil did expound it, thus any man else would do the
syllables, being so divided and out a pieces. Thou shall not stand secure at
home, thy enemies three times with their forces shall enter upon thy land, and
shall overcome with fire, and so was Albertus deluded.

Also the Oracles of Apollo were but mere witchcrafts and delusions of the
Devil, Oracula.
giving answers from a hollow place of the Temple, after the Priests had
sacrificed to him, who did most commonly speak nothing but Amphibologias
nodosas et flexiloqua responsa, deceiving many that came to it, because his
answer did still include a double sense: so that if a man did read over all
Chrysippus volumes, concerning the Oracle of Apollo, he should not find one
answer but did include at wofold meaning, of which I think it not impertinent
to remember two or three of them.

Francis Petrarch makes mention in his Moralls that Nero asking counsel of
Apollo at Delphos, Franc. Petrarc. lib. 1. Mora.
desiring to know how long he should live: this answer was made him that if he
did take heed of seventy three years, he should live a long time. When Nero
did hear this answer, such a security did rock him a sleep, that fearing
nothing, he did glut himself in delight, because he thought he should not
die before the prefixed time of the Oracle, so that his mind was ravished
down the swift torrent of an insolent vanity and vain insolency, pampering
himself with high diet, music, and delights that please his senses, but
being in the Meridian of his happiness, in a minute he was flung down into
the dungeon of disgrace, for he heard the popular voice curse the name of Nero,
and celebrate the name of Galba, by whom he was disceptered, and who at that
time was just seventy and three years of age.

But one of the prettiest tricks the Devil playde by his Oracle, Valerius
Maximas makes mention of: Valor. Maxim.
for he reports that a Sophister to make himself merry, came to laugh at
the Oracle of Apollo in Delphos, and asked him if he should find his horse he
had lost. To whom the Oracle answered, that he should find his horse again,
but if he did not take heed, he would take him such a kick that would break
his neck. At this answer of the Oracle, the Sophister went away laughing,
because it promised him to find a horse he never lost. But as he traveled
into his own country, he fell into the hands of king Attalus, to whom in
former time he had done some wrong, and was by him commanded to be set upon a
stone called Equus a horse, ^^i nomen erat Eq^^.
from whence he was flung headlong down and brake his neck, fulfilling the
Oracle of Apollo. Thus much for the Devil and his Oracles, which always were
some such cunning delusions, whose end was commonly mischief.

Sometime you do divine by dreams, Somniu^.
and that is called per Somnia. Natural Philosophy and Divinity do manifest
the cause of dreams: dreams sometime proceed from the fulness of the belly,
sometimes from the emptines of the belly, sometimes by illusion, sometimes by
revelation, and sometimes by cogitation and revelation. Melancholy.
Chollericke. Phlegmatic Sanguine.
Also the diverse habitudes of the body does administer diverse causes of
dreams: so that melancholy men often dream of horrible and fearful shapes
and forms of devils. Chollericke men, of cutting throats, of quarrels, of
stratagems, and firing of Cities. Phlegmatic men often dream that they are
in fear of drowning, and sometimes dream a sweeter dream then this, that
they are eating of honey, which is caused by the Phlegm which is naturally
sweet, distilling to the palate of the mouth. Incubus morbus noctu
qutescentes in festans quum scilicet externa quaeda^ vis quiescentes videtur
euadere and veluti suo pondore pressos graeuare Nascitur hoc morbi genus copia
vaporum ex vorasitare and cruditate in caput redundantium.
The Sanguine complexion, from the abundance of blood, causes men to dream
of the Incubus, which Physicians hold is the cause of a future Apoplexy: And
that is the reason that many ignorant people that are of sanguine complexion,
and feed on flesh, eggs, veale, and drink wine and such like, which causes
blood, that believe that in their sleeps they often feel the Nightmare, or
an Incubus, which is nothing else but a disease arising of vapors, disturbing
those that are at repose in the night, whose external force does seem to
euade their senses, and to press their bodies with their ponderous weight, and
this is the reason that Physicians hold that the Incubus is a sign of a future
Apoplexy, because the Apoplexy is a stupefaction of the Nerves in the whole
body, with a privation of the sense and motion.

Apoplexia, slupefactio neruorum totius corporis cum priuatione sensus and
motus, a verbo Graeco, (...). quod est percuti^ attonitum reddo.
Again, some hold that the cause of dreams arises from the business and
affairs a man is most employed in the day time, so that the impression of them
sticking in the Table of the Fantasy, makes a man dream of those things in the
night which he has done in the day, as for example. Men given to drink much,
often dream that they are in the bottom of some noble man's seller drinking of
healths. And men according to their employments dream of their business over
night. Your Lawyer he dreams of Angels, a most blessed dream, and if he
chance to talk in his sleep, it is most commonly of Demurs, Habeas Corpusses,
Sissararas, Writs, Latitats, and Procidendos. The Physician he dreams of a
great Plague, and if he talks, it is of nothing but Purgations, Vomits,
Glisters, and Pills. I knew a Player dreamt that his brains were beaten out
with the Cork of groate Bottle of Ale, and as he was speaking the Prologue it
hist at him, because he spoke it so scuruily. The Cutpurse and the Catchpole
most commonly dream of a Michaelmas Term, for that is their best time to
pick pockets and cheat in; and so of all the rest according to their
employments: therefore this makes me not of Symonides opinion, who held that
all dreams are sent from God, which all honest men will deny, because they
know that God is not the author of any ill. Again, dogs and kine dream,
especially when they have lost their whelps or calves, who suddenly will wake
out of their sleeps, and run howling and lowing into diverse places to find
them. Nor must we believe these Negromancers in their devilish work of
working in our Fantasies by dreams, that they can do any thing that is true,
as when they cause us dream of gold, or silver, and we chance to find it
instantly, to affirm with many old women that all dreams are true, for this
is but a trick of the devil to bring us into superstition: which trick is
not much unlike that he has put upon the Papists, making them believe that at
the sight of the Cross he cannot be in quiet, but must fly away from it, but
there is no true Christian will think that the Devil is afraid of a piece of
wood, gold, or silver, but flies from the Cross of purpose to draw them into
the superstition of adoring the cross, The Devils trick in flying from the
cross
and kneeling to it instead of adoring him that once hung on the Cross, for
although it be a Cross, yet it has no more virtue and influence in it then
when it was a piece of wood, stone, or silver.

Thus then you see we must trust to no dreams, except they come by the
inspiration of God and the Holy Ghost: of which God spoke in the 12. of
Numbers. I will speak to him in a dream, this was now by a good Angel, that
God warned Joseph to fly into Egypt.

And oftentimes God suffers the Evil Angel to delude the minds of men, The
evil Angel.
so that many times they have been banqueting with gallant Ladies, and by the
fantastical illusion of the Devil, think that they have been in the
company of diverse women that rid on the backs of Cats, Dogs, Hogs, or that they
have been sailing on the maine Sea in ships no bigger then egg shells, and
that in the peace of midnight they have traveled through many parts of the
world. Holy Job prays against such illusions, saying: Thou do terryfie me
by dreams, and do shake me with horror by visions.

There are many Monks as the Golden Legend testifies, S. Dominicus.
that report this of their holy S. Dominicus, that his mother before he was
borne dreamt that she bare a huge dog in her womb, holding a burning firebrand
in his mouth, who entering into the world set it on fire. This dream the holy
Monks did thus expound: that the vision was not vain seeing Preachers in the
Scriptures are called Dogs. But I will give then a truer exposition then this,
not sparing their Holy Order. It was certain that this Dominicke was the
author of one of the four Mendicant Orders, and the first that found out the
burning and firing of the Professors of the Gospel.

Therefore his Imitators have peculiarly challenged to themselves the
Inquisition, and many other such places, to exercise their Fire and Sword. And
so by this was signified the burning Firebrand Dominicus held in his mouth; by
which an infinite company of godly men were consumed into ashes.

Thus by this Dream did the Devil delude Dominicus Mother, and many more that
did believe the interpretation of it by the Monks. But in general, Dreams are
not to be believed: for they are most wicked and odious in the sight of God,
that think so; as may appear in the 19. of Leuiticus, Deutronomie the 23.
Ibidem 18. Ecclesiasticus 24. and many other places of the Scripture. Thus much
for your Divination by Dreams.

Sometimes they do divine by a Spirit; Pythonissa.
and that is called Pythonissa.

Sometimes they answer to that they are called for, by diverse Figures Men or
Women set in polisht Stone, Iron, Brass, Steel, Glass, or the Nails of ones
hand; and this is called by the general Name of Geomancie: Geomancie
And most commonly to such as these, they choose out Women and Children. And I
my self have known many old Women old Dog at this kind of Divination; who
hold, that if the Nails of the Hand grow yellow, it is a great sign of ill
luck, and that specks are the true signs of future ill luck.

If these apparitions appear in the Water, then it is called Hydromancie.
Hydromancie.
These I have heard are very incident to Catch-poies, Bum-baylies, and the
like, when they are duckt under Water at a high Tide at one of the Temples.

If these apparitions are in the Air, Aeromancie.
then it is called Aeromancie.

If in the Fire, Pyromancie. Pyromancie.


If by the bowels of Beasts, offered up on Altars to the Devil, it is called
Aruspicium. Aruspicium.


But if by Incantations the Devil seems to rise and answer to Questions
propounded to them, then it is called Negromancie. Negromancie.
In this worst Superstition, Blood is also used: and the Reason Isidorus gives,
is this, because he desires Divine Worship; for in the Old Law, Blood was
offered up to God.

If by the chattering of Birds, or by the voice of any other Creatures, they
foretell of things to come, it is called Augurie. Augurie.
This kind of Divination is most blasphemous, odious, and against the honor of
God. For they feign, that with a Divine instinct, Birds, and Fowls, with their
Motions, Chatterings, Croakings, Winding, or fore-right flying, portend either
good or bad luck: which the Ethnicks themselves did laughed at, Homer. Iliad.
2. Polydamantus.
and contemn. For Hector in Homer sharply reproved Polydamantus, who delayed
his fight, expecting an Augurie: to whom Hector said, Vnum esse Augurium
optimum, Patriam fortiter defendere; There is one Augurie which is the best,
stoutly to defend thy Country.

Also this kind of Divination was very frequent among the Jews, and was laughed
and crossed by that learned and courageous Jew, Mossolamus: Mossolamus. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 1.
who being in the Wars, was told by an Astrologer, that he should march no
farther, until he had received an Augurie from the next Bird he should see
come flying over his Army. But the Jew scorned the help of the Bird, and
laughed at the skill of the Southsayer, instantly taking his Bow in his hand,
and as the Bird came croaking over the Army, slew it, then spoke these words:
Do thou think, thou superstitious Southsayer, that this Bird, ignorant of
her own safety, could tell of the event of our Wars? if it could have
foretold of things to come, it would never have come nigh this place, to be
slain of Mossolamus the Jew.

If they foretell of things to come, by the moving of diverse Members of
Beasts; Auspicium.
then it is called Auspicium.

Also, when a man speaks any thing to another without any intention, and as it
were in jest: as to say, he will be hanged, drowned, killed, or the like; if
this come to pass, then they call it, Omen. Omen.


If they foretell of things that shall happen by signs that they see in the
Lines of a man's hand; Chyromancie.
then it is called Chyromancie. This Art many old Women are learnedly
experienced in, and will tell any Man or Woman, for meat, drink, or money,
what shall befall them.

If they foretell of any thing that shall happen by the signs they see in the
shoulder-blades of Beasts; then it is called Spatalmancia. Spatalmancia.


There is also another kind of Divination, which is by Lots: which Lots are
made, Sortilegium.
by drawing out points of an uncertain number, with their faces turned toward
the Moon, with other observations to as little purpose as this. The Dutchmen
are very skillful at this, and have cousened the English of infinite Masses of
Money, by their selling of Papers: so that there was not one among forty,
though he came never so merry to the Lotterie, but he should be sure to go
away Blanke.

Thus Sir have I laid forth the Brood of Divination: Now I will come to the
Observations. It is a disputable question, whether by words or deeds the Devil
will be compelled by Negromancers, or whether being called by them, they come,
because of some league that is between them? If Devils appear, forced by
Negromantick Witchcrafes, why do not Negromancers make them come against their
wills? which sure they cannot: which is a sign, that there is a league and
covenant concluded between the Devil and Coniurers either manifest or occult,
why else do Negromancers dedicate their Books to the chief Devils, whose
name they often use, but only to make a covenant with the Devil, that when
they call them by those Names, Charms, Characters, Exorcismes, and the like,
they may appear themselves, or send some of their inferior Devils as soon as
they hear them.

These then are approved signs and marks of a Covenant: And that the Spirits
may show themselves to have a greater power, sometimes they seem very
unwilling to come, either because they would make the Inchanter more zealous,
or that he may delude simple people: for he is a Liar, and the Father of Lies.

And now I hope it will not be impertinent to confute the Opinion of many,
Digression.
who will not believe, that there are any Devils but those that are in Hell:
but I am persuaded, that in every corner there is a Spirit; and besides that,
amongst us there are Fiery, Ayrie, Earthie, and Watrie Spirits.

Roaring Boy, ae Salamander.
The Fiery Devil, is your Roaring Boy, that like a Salamander lives most
commonly by Fire; Smoke is the chiefest nourishment he has: he is a
swearing Rascal, that with the hot Oaths he spues out from the Canon of his
mouth, is able to burn, if not his own, yet their lips that stand by them.
This Spirit is most commonly resident in Tobacco Shops, Hot-Water Shops,
Tauernes, Brothels, and such Places: and the only Negromancer to conjure down
this Devil, is (if he begins to roar or spit fire) some everlasting
Constable, or new-elected Beadle, that desires to be known a Man in his
Office, or rather some Justice of Peace; who can seldom or never make him
quiet, while they have charmed them into the small Circumference of a Compter.

Pick-pocket, a Camelion.
The second, is your fine Mercurian fingered Cutpurse, that like a Camelion
lives on the Air of his Invention, or indeed like the Air fills every place.
This Spirit haunts Play Houses, Cock-pits, Tiltings, Prizes, Westminster in the
Terme-time, and such fertile places, from whence they gleane a fruitful Crop,
to maintain themselves. The only Coniurer to lay this Spirit (if he be too
turbulent) is Porredge, or Pulman, who never leave charming them, while they
have laid them under the Gallows.

Pyrate, a Herring.
The third is your Watrie Spirit, who lives by the salt Water like a Herring;
and this is your Pyrat, that lives on the spoil of all Countries. This Spirit
is resident about Barbary, the Straits mouth, sometimes about the French or
Irish Coasts. The only Charm that must bind this Devil, is a Letter of Mart,
which most commonly brings them as far as S. Thomas of Waterings, or Wapping,
and at the last Cast leaves them.

Usurer, a Mole.
The fourth and last Devil is your earthy Devil, and he is an Usurer, that
like a Mole feeds on the bowels of the Earth, as Silver and Gold. This Spirit
is most frequent in Scriueners shops, putting out money to use, or at the
Paper-Houses of both the Compters, entering Actions: and there is nothing can
lay this Spirit so well, if he begins to be outrageous, as a Privy Seal to
borrow money of him, or a Subpoena out of the Exchequer, for extortion.

Errant qui Diabolos non essentiales spiritus sed prauos hominum affectus esse
fingunt. Quomod^ enim Auaritia, Ambitio, Crud^litas, Perfidia, in Porcos
demigrasse. Matthew, cap. 8.
Besides these Devils, there are infinite many more in the City: as you shall
seldom go into Turne-bole-street, but there you shall see a three-chin'd Bawd
or Whore sitting in an Evening, enticing young men to sin, and is not this a
deuillish trick? You shall seldom go into Cheape-side, Lombard Street, the
Strand, or Fleet Street, but you shall see some Spirits, in the likeness of
Merchants, Goldsmiths, and Silke-mens Wives, wearing most prodigious Horns on
their heads like a half Moon, the emblem of Change and Mutabilitie: you
cannot walk into Hounds-ditch, Charterhouse Lane, or Long Lane, but you shall
see Spirits standing at most of those doors, in the likeness of griping
Brokers. But of all Spirits that are familiar in the City, those that stand
before both the Compters, are the horriblest and fearefullest to men in debt,
who appear in the shapes of Sergeants, alias Varlets.

Many other visible Spirits there are in the World, which for brevity sake I
will omit, because I mean to proceed a little farther, and show, why vnd^^ a
certain Constellation at certain times, and in certain terrible places,
Apparitions appear rather to Women and Children, rather then to Men. Such
matters as Coniurers use, do not compel Devils, but rather are signs of a
league compacted between them: For as S. Augustine says, the Devils take
their habitations in bodies that God, August. lib. 2. (...) C^uit. Dei.
not themselves, created; and are delighted in several bodies for variety
sake, not as creatures with Aliment, but as Spirits with signs, which signs
are delectable in variety: as sometimes by Stones, Herbs, Wood, living
Creatures, Verses, and Rites; and men are often delighted with these things.
Which the Devil perceiving, seduce them either by subtle or crafty means, or
by apparances, in fawning and friend-seeming shows, or beautiful and amiable
shapes, as they have appeared to some men in the forms of Lamiae, Be^^m. de
Origlinguae Latinae.
which are but mere Phantasma's of fair women appearing in that beauteous
shape, fayning themselves to be in love with young men, who have been so often
conversant with them, that at the last they have brought them to destruction.
But I think there are few Lamiae in these days appear, except they be
substantial ones, which are Whores, who well may be compared to these Midnight
Delusions; for they will profess love, and never leave a man, while they have
brought him to some Hospital.

The subtletie of the Devil.
Neither could the Devil do these things, but that he pryeth into the heart of
man, and then feeds them with that which most delights them. Thomas of Aquin
teaches, that by these corporal things they can the more easily bring to
effect that to which they are called, and they desire this, that their Art
might be held more admirable: And for this cause, being called under any
Constellation, they rather will appear.

Fantastical illusions of the Devil.
But why to Virgins, Children, and such weak Creatures do such appearances
show themselves more then to others, but that they may bring them into an
opinion of their Divinity, and that praestigious Witchcrafts and Delusions may
soonest tempt them that have the weakest faith? And to make them afraid, they
appear in the night as it were in hollow Caves and Cauernes of the Earth,
Deserts, dark, and solitary Chambers, whereby the fear of these melancholy
places, and the unseasonable time of the appearance of the Devil, may the more
terrify them. Thus the policy of the Devil still works on the weakest and
silliest kind of people.

Auecine 6. de Natura.
Auecine shows how the senses may be deluded. The general means is this:
Spirits work nothing extra nos, without us; for it is easy for Spirits to
make many bodies of the Air, which earthy bodies may wonder at. In Epicure^.
For Erasmus reports a pretty piece of Magic performed by a Roman Priest (who
had it not out of any place of the Scripture I am sure) that invited a company
of Ladies to a Banquet, bidding them bring good stomachs with them. Natural
Magic.
The Ladies came, were welcomed by him, entertained with delicate Music, and
seated at the Table according to their births. There were such variety of rare
and strange Dishes, that they thought that others, not their own Nation, did
furnish their Table: they eat well, drunk well, and were merry; and which is
better then a piece of Cheese, Pippins, or Carrowayes, to close up the mouth of
the stomach after supper, they were all welcome. When this Feast, rather this
Fast was ended, and (which is not very usual with Courtiers) Grace being said,
they rendered the Priest hearty thanks for their Banquet, and went home. But
they had not bin there at the most half an hour, but their stomachs began to
call upon them for meat, for they were all as hungry as if they had eat nothing
at the Banquet: therefore did much wonder at themselves, that they should have
such a great desire to meat, seeing they did but newly come from such a royal
entertainment. But this quaint delusion the Priest afterward revealed to them:
for although he invited them to a Feast, yet they had never a bit of meat; for
his Art did delude both the Eye, that thought it saw such things, and the
Pallat, that seemed to taste those delicates.

I have seen this done in Cambridge, by a Iugler with a lame leg.
I my self have seen a fellow, that would make people believe, that they saw
Orange trees spring out of his forhead, having Birds sit and sing on the
boughs, which in an instant would vanish away again. This fellow was at
Cambridge drinking at the Dolphin, and made a Drawer that filled him bad Wine,
believe, that he would geld him if he would not bring him of the best Claret in
the Cellar: which the Drawer laughed at, and the more to cross him, fetched of
the worst he could find. This Iuggler swore he would be even with him before
long: but the Drawer went away laughing, bidding him do his worst. But the
Conceit came at the last, like a lest in the last Lines of an Epigram: for when
the Drawer least thought of it, as he was running down stayres to fetch Wine,
he felt something trickle down his thighs, at the first thinking it had bin
some Wine he had spilt on his breeches, but putting his hands into his Hose,
he pulled them out bloody again; so that he came running up stayres, and
with a wide mouth came roaring into the Room where we were drinking, crying,
the lame man had gelt him, and that he was utterly undone. At the first this
Vox exclamantis did beget such a laughter in us, that we were not able to
speak to him: but yet at the last, by giving the fellow good words, and good
Wine, he made him a perfect man again. This was but deceiving of the senses,
and so not done, or if done, the work of the Devil.

Rhodoginus makes mention of one Syreneus, Rhodog. lib. 9.
that would run his Horse a strawes breadth a mile together, and make him amble,
curuet, trot, pace, and gallop within the compasle of a Bushel.

Martin Berrhaus reports, Martin Berrhaus.
that he saw a Dancer carry two men on his shoulders, two on his arms, and one
upon his neck, yet would dance and vaut with such agilitie, that a Baboone with
his drinking glass could not tumble nimbler.

Rhodoginus and Erasmus makes mention of an Indian, Rhodog. lib. 12. cap. 40.
Erasm. Apothe.
that by a trick he had learnt of a Witch, would shoot through the narrow
circumference of a small Hoope-ring, standing a furlong off.

Julius Pascarius reports, Julius Pasca* ^^u^^^. lib. 2. ^^. 2.
that a Dice-player (who commanded, that after he was dead, his skin should be
made a Carpet for Gamesters to play on, his bones Dice to play with, and
Tressels for stools to sit on) by a Magical trick he had, would cheat the
most cheatingst Gamester.

Therefore, if these that are but Mataeotechnia, vain imitations of Art, seem
so wonderful to people beholding them on Stages and Theaters: how less
miraculous is it, if the devil by Elements can make stranger apparances, or by
secret inspirations delude the sense, by framing the Phantasmes of Images, by
which he will deceive men running, sleeping, or walking?

Why may not these Spirits be turned into as many shapes as Diomedes companions
were, Phan^asmata.
that were in the Island called Diomede, not far from the mountain Garganus,
that is in Apulea? Why not as well as Ulysses companions, that were turned into
beasts, and whom Circes the famous Sorceresse enchanted? Why not as well as the
Arcadians, that were turned into Wolves? All these were but fictions or
Phantasmes.
Why may not there be a transmutation in these incorporeall spirits, as in
these terrestrial bodies? And why may not there be as strange Metamorphosis in
these days, as there was in the days of Ovid and Varro? nay I will stand to
it, that in these days there are as marvelous changes and more true, for I
have known a Gallant that at the age of fiueteene, has been a pregnant
witty youth, but before twenty he has been turned into a right Asinego.
There have been many Citizens that have been very hansome personable men in
the morning, who before the Exchange has bin done, has bin turned into
monstrous beasts. There are many tradesme^ that at their first setting up have
been very honest men, but after the third or fourth breaking, have been turned
into most fearful Sergeants. I have known many that have been accounted
wise fellows in the University, that have no sooner peept into the Temples,
or one of the Innes of Court, but have bin transformd into monstrous Asses.
Then seeing there is such a transmutation in earthly bodies, why should we
think it so strange and rare in incorpor? all spiritse Yet these and the like
are not recited as if they were true, but to show how the senses may be
deluded. And the like may appear by those women that oftentimes are persuaded
that they are riding on the backs of beasts.

Yet for all this, I will not grant there is any virtue in the words or charms
of a Negromancer to raise up these forms. Also there is no virtue in those
ceremonial Exorcismes, with which Priests exorcise Wine, Salt, Water, and the
like, which I will manifestly show you.

Three hard bones for Astrologers to gnaw on.
First, in respect of the Matter, for the Matter is but Air, or Water, or Ink;
which can have no virtue in them, for by that reason, every substance of the
like kind should have the same virtue.

Secondly, in respect of the Accidental Form, which is nothing else but a
Configuration of diverse Characters, either in writing or speaking, for
Philosophy teaches that Accidental Forms have no Action of themselves.

Thirdly, in respect of the thing signified, as the word fire to burn this
Paper, or the word Death to kill this Man, or the word God, to save this Soul,
or to raise up any dead body; which cannot be: for the name of God cannot do
it. But God must be inuocated by true Faith, whereby he is often pleased to
grant our requests. Note.
But Coniurers and Astrologers use the name of God in another kind, and other
Ceremonies, which rather drive away divine Grace and Virtue then procure it,
and so much the more they sin, by how much the more they take the name of God
in vain, and to the worship of the Devil. Therefore to conclude this Treatise
of Divination, I will prove both by the Divine, Imperial, and Canon Law, that
it is not lawful to be used.

The Divine Law says: Divine Law. Exodus 22. Leuit. 20.
Thou shall not suffer such Malefactors to live. A man or a woman in whom the
Spirit of Divination is found, let them dye the death: Let them be stoned to
death, and let their bloods be upon their own heads. Also the Holy Ghost in
another place says: Let that Soul that is inclined to Southsayers be slain
in the midst of the people. Imperial Law Canon extra de sortilegiis per tot^m.
Vain observation.
The Imperial Law commands, that they should be beheaded, or be put to any
kind of punishment the Judge shall think most convenient and fitting.

The third daughter of Superstition is vain Observation, which teaches to
know future things either good or bad, as to tell whether a man condemned to be
hanged, shall dye that death or no, which is but a mere roguery and cheating.
For this notorious Art, Ars notoria.
is nothing but a vayn superstition, nay indeed a most notorious piece of
Roguery, working by Figures, Characters, and unknown names: also containing
many speeches, concluding in them strange and unknown significations, which a
man must learn and repeat, always observing a continency in his Diet, and
sometimes to punish and macerate himself, would not do amiss, if he mean to
attain to the perfect knowledge of this science, which Thomas Aquinas does
utterly deny: Quest. 96. Art. 1.
For, he says, he that does use this, can attain to no such kind of
knowledge, and that the Devil inuocated by it, cannot infuse any knowledge, or
illuminate the intellect, although he is able to deliver the rudiments of some
kind of Art: for the Devil does only work to infatuate and befoole them
that exercise or study it. Nor is it available for any Doctor in this Art, to
produce the Examples of Daniel and his fellows, who abstayning from meat and
drink, came to such a perfect knowledge: for they did not abstain from those
meats by the vain observation of this notorious Art, but least they should be
defiled with the meat of the Gentiles, which was forbidden them by God:
therefore not without desert they were endued with knowledge above the rest.
And Solomon begging knowledge of God to govern his people, did obtain it of
the Holy Ghost. Other vain observations of this Art, Divine Augustine has
learnedly confuted. Aug. lib. 2 de Doctrina Christiana.


Corolarium. Sine KOPONIS.
THus you see I have confuted all the superstitions of your Art by Art; beating
down the opinions of many that observe times to travel, merchandise, build,
and the like, have displaid in the liuelyest colors I can your knavery, in
seducing and blinding the ignorant and believing people, set forth your knavery
in casting figures, calculating deaths, and Natiuities, telling of Fortunes,
raising of Spirits, by Incantations, Carminations, Annual Observations, making
Astrologicall Images, expressed the diuellishnesse of your Divination, Idolatry,
and vain Observation. Therefore if you can speak any thing in the defense of
your Art, or more then I have spoken in the offense of it, begin, and I will
hearken to you with a more diligent attention then I think you have done me.
With that he began to rouse himself up, and as I thought would have made his
Apologicall discourse, but that he was interrupted by a loud noise of Officers
that stood beating against the door, mingled with the high voice of a man, that
did nothing but call Rogue, Rascal, Cheater, Impostor, which words I perceived
by the Figure-Casters countenance did not well please him, but at last (forced
by their clamors, much against his will) he opened the door and let them in,
who instantly attached him, by virtue of a warrant, for cousning a poor
Grasier of fiueteene pound, holding him in hand, that he would find out nine
Oxen he had lost at several times in the Country. But to conclude, they
first hurryed him to the next Justice, who upon the complaint of the poor man
was committed to Newgate, but how he spedde, or what mulct or punishment he
suffered, either in purse or person, I leave it to those that will bestow the
cost to look over the Records of Newgate.

FINIS.

