THe defense of peace: lately translated out of laten in to english,



with the kings most gracyous privilege,

AN excellent and a noble warke, which the Author thereof has entytled the
defender and maynteyner of peace (because it does most perfectlye treat, and
clearly dyscusse that questyon, where about great controversy, and contencyon
has been now long time as well, of the just power and auctoryte of the
Emperor, as of the usurped power of the bishop of Rome, otherwise called the
Pope (a work very profitable to dyuynes, laweyers, and generally to all those,
which louen and exercysen the study of good letters, or learning, which
said work was written or made, more then two hundred years ago, unto Lodo wyke
Caesar (which came by lynage of the most noble famyly, and kynred of the dukes
of Bauary) but now first Imprynted and publysshed or sent forth abroad in the
english tongue by Wyllyam Marshall.

The lover of truth, speaks to the book.
GO forth book, all good men gladly shall the reteyne.
With loving embrasynges, and turn the often in hand,
Whose mind is fyxed, right and truth to maynteyne.
And wrong and falsehod styfly to withstand.
Those persons I waraunt as well pleased shall be all.
As wood Rome shall grunte, at the rubbing on the gall.
The translatour to the reader, Good and gentle reader,
There have thou the book intytled in latyne, Defensorium pacis, in english
the defense tuicyon or mayntenaunce of peace, undoubtedly full worthy so to be
called, as ye thing self in the use thereof shall full well and manyfestly
declare and show. Above two hundred years passed, there was a varyaunce,
strife, and controversy, betwyxte the proud bysshoppes of Rome, that Ihon^ ye.
xxii. Benedicte the xii. Clement the. vi.
then were, and the most gentle prince and Emperor Jews of Bauary. The
bysshoppes of Rome (as ancient hystoryes do make me^cyon) were commonly, and
for the more part, before that time, yea and ever syns have been, stout and
stubbourne, proud and presumptuous usurpers, and murderers, traitors and
rebellyons, (contrary to their allegyaunces) not only against their own
natural soueraygnes lords, princes, kings, and Emperors, but also against
all other princes, and peradventure not without the aids, consentes, mocyons,
and cou^saylles, of other foreyn and strange bysshoppes. Now because this
good Emperor Jews moved no less with pity toward his loving subjects,
then with a true love and zele toward the word of god, and his most godly
honor, would not permyt and suffer the said bishops of Rome to consume, wast,
and devour (after ye accustomed manner of their wicked and ungracious
predecessors) therefore (I say) arose betwyxte the said Emperor and the said
bishops a grievous and an intolerable tragedy. For in the defense of the most
just cause of whose imperyall majesty, it lyked the noble and virtuous clerk
Marsilius of Padway, to compyle and endyte this same defense of peace. Now as
touching ye translacyon of Marsilius out of laten, and in teaching him to
speak english, being an Italyan, whether it be done so well as it might or
should have been / I woll not say, but I hertely pray the gentle reader, to
take it in good part, and to correct and amend it where need is. To
dysprayse the doing of it, I iugde it no high point of learning. And to
translate it but meanly, I think it some learning. This dare I be bold to
say, that from the iniust and lyenge carpours, and pryuy detractours, there
comes nothing in to light, neither by preaching, ne yet by writing, yt
sauoureth or has any taste of virtue or learning, I would gladly that such
whysperers and blowers in me^nes ears, would preach, write and set forth
sermons, and books of virtue and good learning and in the same (as well without
making of feigned and untrue escuses) as without their old accustomed crafty
iugglynges truly declare and publysshe the word of god and show themselves,
to be such in their hertes (as of right, and duty, by the word of god) they
should ever have been, and as with their mouths, by their wrytinges, and by
their Seals, they have professed, and sworn / and not (as the old proverb
is) to goldsmythes of their own occupacyons, iniustly, falsely, and secretly,
in corners to slander and belly men. Now good gentle reader I do advise and
counceyll the, to do, as I woll my self, that is to say, in nothing to believe
them, what soever they say, before such time and until they have done as
above is said, and also until they have openly and suffycyently improued and
confuted us. But to make few words, I woll promise and assure the of one
thing (good reader) and admonysshe and warn the of another, and so fare well.
In this book I dare say, thou shalt find wherewith to make just and
inuynsyble answers, yea and wherewith utterly to confute all and every the
obieccyons, fantastycall arguments, reasons, and perswasyons, that by the
papystycall sort can be made, for the setting forth, and extollynge of the
usurped power and auctoryte of the bishop of Rome, ben they never so false,
crafty, and subtyle. And of this I do warn the, that in the translacyon of
this book diverse things ben omytted, and left out, as matters, not so much
profitable, as long and tedyous, as in the laten book at large more pleynly
apperyth / the resydue I committee to thine own dylygence, which in readyng
this book may in nowyse lack. And thus farewell, and pray for the long live
and prosperous preseruacyon of our most gracyous soueraygne lord king Henry
ye eight, of his most virtuous Lady queen Anne, and of the Lady princes
Elyzabeth daughter and heir to them both.

Thus endyth the preface of the translator to the reader.
THe preface of Licentius Euangelus pressed, v^^o the Apologye or answer made by
Marsilius of Padway, for the defense of Lodowyke, (which descended of the
most noble lynage of the dukes of Bauary) Emperor of the Romans, against
the false and untrue Hystoryes of certain persons.

When I do consydre dylygently and closely in my mind, Christen reader, the
most greuouse and ieoperdous or daungerful troubles of those times, in which
is so much sin and myschefe as may be, and sin taken or accounted for no
sin, me thinks a man may reasonably without any offense apply this
prophecye of Dseas, and say cursynge or evil speaking, lyeng, man slaughter,
theft, and adultery do flow as ryuers, and blood has touched blood, there is
no troth there is no mercy or pytie, there is no knowledge of god any longer
in the earth. We all be bocled and made ready to wyckednes, as a horse to
ronnynge, or a lion to his pray. Who now has pytie or compassyon of the poor man? who is moved or styrred any thing with the Injury of the wydowe, or
orphan being through false gyse and deceyte depryued of their right and goods?
where is now any place of Judgment without corrupcyon, or in which true and
vpryght Justice is mynystred? what laws be not now more applied to getting
of money and lucre, then to equity and good conscience? where or of whom (yea I
speak even of the heddes and prelates of the Church) in choosing or making
rulers, overseers and officers of their diocese: is not now a days more
respect and regard had of such things as are better to augment and encreace
their yearly Rentes, riches, and substance / then to keep and retain
innocence and virtue? and to be short riches gives honors, riches gives
frendshyppes, riches gives benefyces, riches gives power, and auctoryte,
riches causes to be regarded and greatly esteemed. The poor man be he never so
good and godly, be he never so virtuous and with out corrupt manners, be he
never so prudent and wise, lies every wherein the dust. If the rich man
speak never so folysshely, all men magnyfie and praise his speech or saying,
even to the clouds / but let the poor man speak never so wisely, no man
gives attendement to him, or does after his saying, Mekenes, humblenes,
lowlynes, sobrenes, discrecyon, and good aduysement / in whom soever it be, is
naught set by, but despised now a days. And on the other side bold
presumpcyon, folysshe hardynes, and unshamefastness asmoche made of, and is
meruaylously prosperous, and florysshynge. Truth in whom soever it be / is
now had in common and open hatred / but on the other side, glosynge,
flaterynge, curryenge of fauell / is pryncypally and chyefly made of, and had
in price. When was ever good mind or virtue, less cared for? When was the
thyrste of most pestylent and poysonfull covetousness greater? Do we not all
from the highest to the lowest, from the greatest to the smallest, follow
covetousness? Who now does defend the innocent man being weak and feeble,
from the injury of the mighty men and of great power? What judge is now a
days so incorrupt, but that he loves gifts and rewards? When was ever
swerynge or oaths less had in reverence or regarded? When was periurye more
boldly used, and accounted small or none offense? What preuarycacyon, or
playenge of both hands, what fraud or gyle / what falshed is there so great,
which is not gayly colored and painted, by the subtylite (I will not say
duplicite) of the lawyers selves, If hope of gylefull money do glystre or shine
from any where, the laws now plainly being turned to mockage? Be they not
daily made mocking stocks, and tryfles for money in judgment / wry^^en and
wrasted and made little worth / mocked and despised after the lust and
pleasure of every lawyer, or pleder of causes? who is now a days / which is
a sueter in the law / but that he can dye sooner, then he can se an end of
his suete? Oh these are worshypfull and goodly laws in deed / these are
excellent and gaye places of Judgment which succoure the pore wretches,
desiring aid and help of them, after such fasshyon and manner / that it had been much better to have lost all that / what soever it is, for the which
they have begone suete in the law / then to have fallen in to so comberous, and
endless labyrynthes or mases of the judgments, from whenso there is no way to
get out again / if a man be ones entrede in to them. Forsothe I have seen my
self certain men which have been lords and owners of no little money / by
such delays, stays and stoppages made in the law, brought to so great
pouertye / that they have be constrained of necessytie to beg and ask their
fode from door to door / and certain other to end their lives in hospytalles
and spytle howses / which before they began to sue, and try the law, had in
their possessyon, substance worth four or five thousands / Is this (as it
is called) to decyde and determyne causes, and to end suetes and stryues? is
this to provide laufully for the quyetnes and profit of the Cytezens or
co^mynalte. But no we passing over the courts and places of Judgment, what
other thing beside is there / other sobre, mesurable / dyscrete and belonging
to temperaunce / or else according to equity and good conscience, which we
now a days do exercise or give our mind unto? When was evermore wastfull
excess and superfluyte of all manner of things? When was covetousness more
fervent and hot? When more ungracious wantonness, and outrage of fornycacyons
and adulteryes. When more styffe and obstynate pride. When more shameless
ambycyon, or desire of honor / and vaynegforye, or praise? When more
unfaithful and false gyle or deceyte. When more lewd plenty of open
robberyes. When more cruelty, or thryste to murder and shed man's blood. when
was ever ye fury or woodnes and rage of wars and bataylles, or the noyaunce
and myscheuousnes of other perelles and dangers, more strong and present? To
what thing (Christen reader) thynkest thou, that we ought to blame this so
diverse, so manyfolde, so contynuall t^reble of all things in the world? The
despysinge and setting at naught of gods word: is the cause of all ye
present euylles i^ the world.
or whereof iudgest thou all this to belong / whereof else, but that we have
grievously offended and hurt the truth of the Gospel. Is not this truth more
hated of us / which be (as we would be accounted and taken) her own children
brone in her own house / then it is hateful to any barbarous hethen men / be
they never so cruel and beastly? For of what auctoryte or reputacyon is this
troth among us / or what majesty can she defend and save to herself now
any longer. Nay rather what thing is now a days more despised, and set at
naught / what thing is more trodden underfoot then it: we have quenched and put
out the light of the world, in ourselves, and yet do we marvel, if like
blind beasts we do stumble and fall every where in to all euylles and
wretchedness? Yea more over (which is a more grievous thing) many of us not
only stumblynge, but utterly perysshynge for lack of knowledge and
understanding, do not perceive that we do perysshe / but rejoice and be proud
of our hurtes, and calamytes, and wrackes, likewise as if we had the victory /
I am truth, and the light of the world (says Christ) who soever follows
me, walks not in darkness. Behold, we despise openly the truth, which is
Christ / and yet for all that, we ron awayes, and forsakers of the truth are
nothing ashamed to pretend royally the name of Christ, calling ourselves
Chrystyans / if Christ be truth as he is in deed: what is a christen man / Is
he not by professyon the dyscyple of truth? But what other thing might
truth teach, but it own self? and what other thing could the Scoler
learn having truth to his teacher / then truth itself? Is it not
conuenyent and according so to be? May the fire be vnhote? or can that thing
which the fire has touched not take heat and wax warm of the said fire?
So christ for as much as he is troth, how is it possible that he has not
taught his dyscyples truth. Therefore we the sons of men / how long will
we be heavy herted leaving and forsakynge the truth, and following man's
judgment / that is to say vanyte and leasing? the doctrine of which truth
is this following. Blyssed are the poor men in spyryte, for theyres is the
kingdom of heuens. Blyssed are the meke persons, for they shall possess the
earth. Blyssed are they which waylen and mornen, for they shall be comforted.
Blyssed are they which hungren and thyrsten after ryghtwysnes, for they shall
be filled. Blyssed are the merciful persons, for they shall obtain mercy.
Blyssed are they / which are clean in heart, for they shall se god. Blyssed
are the peaceable persons, for they shall be called the sons of god. Blyssed
are they which suffren persecucyon for ryghtwysnes sake / for to them
belongs the kingdom of heuens. What of all these things do not seem to us
utterly unsavory / or else plain folysshenes no we a days? To be pore in
spyryte, meke, merciful, peaceable / to be innocent and harmeles / to mowrne /
to hungre and thyrste after ryghtwysnes and to suffer persecucyon for the love
of it / what is more out of use then these terms or words / what more
strange or vnwonte now a days? Who does not now a dayeshysse out / who
does not stamp out these things as it were the dreams of mad men / and
stark folysshe tryfles? say these words to Latomus, say them to Egmondamus,
say them to Hochstratus / which be but freres only (because I will not name
the most holy Fathers gods vycars / and these most reverend Fathers hatted
and mytrede) they shall by and by cast the forth as being a certain
superstycyous person, and an heretyke / turnynge this saying of Christ as it
were an horn against the. Go behind us thou aduersarye, for thou art a
sclaundre to us. I beseech the for the love of that truth / Christen reader in
whom does that true pouertye of spyryte breathe now a days. who shows it
forth in his living? who be they of us now a days / which be not rather
swollen and puffed up with the spyryte of our own wit and judgment,
condempnynge other in comparyson of our selves / as though we our selves were
more holy then they? who be they among us / which if they be never so little
offended or hurt / but the mountenaunce of one hear, are not even stark
wood and mad angry and wroth with our neighbor? who of us does not
thyrste and greatly desire riches, honors, pleasures, even to the contumely
and reproach of ryghtwysnes. A man shall not lightly find mercy or pity now
any where among us? more then a good smell and sweet sauoure in a soil of
durte and mire / I pray you who of us now (I do not say) are clean in heart?
But who does not abhor and hate this clennes of heart / more then the
gentyles or hethen people in the old time did hate any unlucky or abhomynable
augury / yt is to say the flyeng or singing of birds / whereby was betokened
evil hap or myschaunce to follow them? where is now any place left any
longer for peace here in earth? Is she not utterly exyled and banysshed? who of
us now does sustain or suffer even the least dyspleasure or evil will of
any man / which is of power or might / for the ryghtwysnes of god? but rather
which of oureselues do not trede under the foot / does not suppress, and
does not as much as in us lies / to quench and destroy this ryghtwysenes
of god / that we might auaunce and tere up our own ryghtwysenes, and that we
might not be subjected (as the apostle Paul says) to the Justice of god? if
those before rehearsed things were taught of Christ, which is the light of
the world / it is no doubt but that the night and hills darkness has
taught these things / which are diamerterly or clean contrary to those
other. It is therefore no marvel, it is no noueltye or strange thing, if we
suffer punysshement / worthily for our despysynge of the light of the Gospel /
if we be daily tossed more and more, and my serably suffer shypwrake, in the
most thycke darkness of me^nes superstycyous, we be worthily punysshed for the
despysynge of the light of the gospel.
as it were in most grievous tempests or storms / if we be empouerysshed,
oppressed and consumed with wars / if we be obsessed and besette or compassed
about on every side with roberyes, if we be vexed with new strange filthy,
and abhomynable syckenesses and dyseases such as has not ben herd
heretofore / if we suffer great famyne or hungre / if we be oppressed of
tyrauntes / if we be greatly troubled and vexed with monsters and wonders: if
we be noyed with the sudden incursyons and assautes of the wild and cruel
beasts / if we be destroyed with the breaking forth, of floodes and waters /
if we be swalowed in and consumed with the gapynges and openynges of the
earth. Finally and to conclude, which way soever we turn our iyes and our
mind / we shall se or perceive nothing but all cruel, all noysom and
hurtefull, all vengeable, all miserable and wretchedfull. The child wrangleth
/ troubles and stryueth against the aged man / the man of low degree: against
the noble man or of high estate and degree / all things are dysparpled and
scatered / all things are lose, and out of their place / all things troubled
and out of order / all things are like and semen to decay and fall. And the
things which are to come hereafter, are feared and not without cause to be
more grievous and dreadefull / then these which be present. For such pains
such punysshementes / such vengeance does the truth despised / require to
be done to us / such plages requyren the dyscyplyne and learning of light
refused and set at naught / Because we do mock and scorn the pouertye of
spyryte: we have also now cast away and lost the hope and promise of the
kingdom of heuens / setting all our heart and desire upon earthly things.
Because we have ceased to be meke: we do also now worthily not so much
possess the earth, as we do fight for it with murders and cruel blody
bataylles. Because we thyrste after vnryghtwysenes, and now every where do
oppress the ryghtuouse person. Therefore worthily and through our own
deseruynge / we do in a manner no where find any token or prynte of Justice
remaining. And we do each ouertourne and destroy other with doing iniuryes
and wrongs one of us to an other. Because we refuse and forsake doing mercy
to other / we our selves also sometime worthily do mysse and lack the same
toward us. Because we now embrace, and love in our heart / nothing that is
pure and clean: according to our deseruynge / we also do not attain or get
the most pure beam of truth / but being cyrcu^uented and begyled with
falshed and lies / we are fallen away utterly from the faith and the Gospel.
For what other thing is it, (I beseech the good Christen reader) to fall away
from the Gospel: then to use (as it is done daily) in the stead of the leuite
softnes or gentylnes of Christ, arrogancye and presumptuous pride, instead of
virtue and good living, to use wantonness / hatrede in the stead of charity,
war in the stead of peace, domynacyon / rule or lordshyppe in the stead of
humblenes and lowlynes / and to usurp the Empire of the hole world / and yet
nevertheless all this notwithstanding, to stand in our own conceytes, and to
think our selves to have right faith / and to be Christen lyuers? Did christ
in any place teach / that earthely Empyres and lordshyppes in this world,
were to be coueted or desired? did he not teach rather all manner ways / that
these things were to be avoided and eschewed, (which doctrine it is euydent
and surely known, to have been perfectlye observed and kept of his true
dyscyples) when he said? you can not both serve god, and also mammon or riches
/ who soever in old time did believe in him, duly and as they ought to do:
doubting nothing at all, this thing to be true, of their own free wylles
did forsake, and cast from them all their goods and possessions, as being
heuye and wayghty burthayns / and so then being at lybertye and light,
followed the lord of life / the other, which professed them selves to be
guydes of the blind persons, laughing them to scorn for their thus doing.
In the which thing / in this most peryllous time we dread nothing at all,
our selves to follow the Phariseys, more then the apostles saying that it is
most expedyent and chyefly profitable to the church, to have all fat and
rich things, all rentes and profettes to them self / craftily and subtelly
Men of the church now a days at rather the folowers of the phariseys the^ of
ye apostles.
pykynge out, and gatherynge together of all the holy Scripture. A few names
of rich men / by which we may any manner way hold up strength, and
maynteyne our own sentence and sayings, passing by purposely for the nones /
with our iyes fast shytte and closed (as it is wont to be said) six
hondreth places, that makes for the contrary part / and yet shall there be no
little dyuersyte (if a man will dylygentlye mark and take heed) between their
manner of rychenes and ours. First I fear least we have not gotten our
riches and goods, like much holylye and ryghtfully, as Abraham. Isaach,
Jacob, Job, and such other did get their substance / which gatte not that
/ which they had any other ways / then by labors and husbondrye, without
the hurtynge or damagynge of any other man. But as for us (I fear) lest we
have made our selfs rich (without any pains or travail taken of our own
part,) by other me^nes labor: ye oftentimes with the grief, smarte and
sorrow also of other men. Beside this, those before rehearsed persons / did
never esteem these things for riches, neither when they were plentyfull to
them, they did set their heart upon them / so as we do / which do strive
and keep war among our selves / one with an other, for these things more
fercely / than for our very life. I fear therefore (I say) lest there be
very great dyuersytie between them and us / if any man would ponder and
dylygently consydre the manner of the getting, the use, and the affection of
both parts / and that our sentence opinion, or judgment, can nothing at all
therefore be helped or defended / by the examples and deades of them: which
were as far away or else more from this our covetousness (whereby we now
gape gredely after riches) as their time or world / is unlike and far away
from this out time or world, in temperaunce, mesurablenes, contynency or
clean living / when did they so rage among them selves with murders and
daily slaughters for these things only, as we do / when did not they use
these riches or goods as Instruments of benefycence and lyberalytie, even
toward strangers of other nacyons / and those whom they did not know?
where as we most commonly use them, as helpers and aids other to do Iniuryes
and wrongs / or else to exercise voluptuousnes and wantonness: when did not they
so have their riches according to the saying of Paul) as though they had not
had them? contrary wise we, when do we not live so addicted, utterly given,
or bond unto them, that we are found and perceived to be possessed of them /
rather than to be possessours / to be bond servants unto them / rather than
the lords or masters of them? in so much that we do esteem no manner
benefytes of Christ done to us / to be of so great valor / but that we are
very ready to forgette them, for the cause and love of this wretched and
wicked ma^mone (these things are odyouse to be spoken / but it is a more
odyouse thing, that those things may truly be cast again us / and laid to
our charge: and we can not truly avoid them / or clear our selves of them)
do we think, that Abraham would have been loathe, or evil willing to have
lost his riches, were they never so great, for gods sake, for whose love he
was so well willing / and content to forgoo his only begotten sone / whom
undoubtedly he had more pleasure in, than in all the substance of the world?
Do to now, we we do folyshly and madly to defend our covetousness, by the
examples of our holy Fathers.
which folysshely seche defense and mayntenaunce to our covetousness of the
examples of those holy men / Let us compare our mind with their mind
toward these fylthes / and let us than say, (if any shame at all be in us)
such holy men were rich / therefore it is lawful for us, day and night / by
right or wrong, hoke or croke / to clyme and labor up to riches / by the
example of them / who of us of so many rich and gaynefull benefyces / which
we contynuelly with meruaylouse great care and dylygence do heap and sowdre
together at Rome / would be content to forgoo and lack but one half busshell
of beans, for the love of Christ? But those holy men would have slain even
their only begotten sons, with most obedyent mind, for the hope of his
grace and favor. They at his bidding, forthwith without any delay / forsook
their country and all their kynsfolke / we clear contrary to his
commandment, do couple and join, together field to field, house to house,
without any measure or end / and we have gone so far forward, (which I
pray god to turn to good) that we have left more narowe spaces / and rowmes,
and less lands to the lay men, than we have taken from them / and yet
besides this we do not rest, before that we fly upon the resydewe also which
is left to them, and until we have brought all the people with their wyfes
and children in seruytute and bondage to us / and when we shall have done this,
we woll defend and maynteyne it to have been done laufullye by the example of
Abraham and other holy men like to him / Shall not this be (I pray you) a
proper and goodly comparyson or symylytude. From whom did those men at any time
take away wrongfullye / but the mountenaunce of one chekyn? We daily because
of our own profit and advantage, do overthrow and destroy hole howsholdes
/ and yet nevertheless we couete to be accounted the salt of the earth, (full
worthily forsothe) in comparyson of the people. Christ in many places denies
other his dyscyples or else him self also to be of this world, saying these
words. If the world does hate you: know you that it has hated me before
you / if you had been of the world: the world truly would have loved that
which was belonging to it self / now because you are not of the world /
But I have chosen you from the world / therefore the world hates you. Behold
here, how that man, whom Christ has chosen / is not of They are not of this
world whom christ has elected.
this world / and therefore Paul says. if I did please the world / I should
not than be the servant of Christ / And yet we now fight with all manner
Armies and hoostes, for worldly domynyon / and rule none otherwise, neither
after any lyghter fasshyon, than did any hethen men, in their life time,
other Alexandre, or Julius (from the names of whom we do no whytte refrain)
Yes this to be meke, according to Christ's teaching and commandment? is
this to be pore in spyryte? is this to be merciful? is this to hungre and
thyrste ryghtwysnes? Is this to be consenting and at agreement shortly with
thine aduersarye by the way? is this not to resyste evil? is this, when one
stryketh the on the right cheke to hold forth also unto him thy left cheke?
Yes this (I say) when one is willing to take from us our coote, to deliver
unto him also our gown? is this to love our enemies / and to do good to them
which does hate us? dare we be bold to deny that Christ taught his
Dyscyples these things or may we do so without most euydent crime of
preuarycacyon? what is more manifest / what I pray you is more known than
those things. But that we may avoid this, and escape out by some craft and
subtylyte / we do say. These things are not to be understand thus after the
lyterall or gra^maticall cense / Ye moreover / we fercely pronounce him to be
an herttyke forthwith / who soever shall Judge or think that the true cense
and meaning of scripture is rather to be defended and maynteyned / then the
coacte cense imagyned of us / Affyrmynge that he ought to cleue and lean to
the exposycion and declaracyon of holy Fathers, (that is to wit of M. dunce,
of Thomas, of Sylnester / of Catharinus and such other of the same sort)
Seeing than / that it is not lawful to give credence to the scripture of hit
self / in any thing. But that we must every where embrace the cense which the
exposytor makes / for the most true cense: what other thing is this, I pray
you / than to be compelled against our will / to give credence to men (and that
to certain of them but very tryflers) and not to give credence to god? Nay
rather what other thing is this / then to anulle and make void the law of
god and to bind the christen people to the lust and appetyte or pleasure of
man / and openly so to fare and do in this behalf / as though the church
could no longer know any certain Gospelles / have no certain apostels and
prophettes? for now the wyckednes of some men is bold to affirm and say
(which to think The wykydnesse of some papystes.
is abhomynable sin) that the church should have been much better / without
the gospels / and therefore that it had been expedyent / that they had neither
ben written / neither received at any time. O tongue worthy to be tamed / and
holden under with brennynge fire / and brymstone / Christ says to his
apostels / Going in to all the world preach you the gospel to every
creature / the wicked man says it had been better that the gospel had never
ben spronge up or ben begone. This, To give christ buffet, or blow.
this is to give christ a buffet or blow upon the cheke. This thing (I
think no man doubts of / but is euydent to all men / that there is nothing
almost now left or remaynyng in the holy scripture / which has his own
true natural and propre cense or understanding left or saved to hit self / we
have wrested and applied al things in ye scripture / to our own pomp / to
our own ambycion, to our own power / feed my sheep / follow me / give for the
and me / thou being ones converted / conferme and strength or comfort thy
brethren / here be. ii. swerdes / to the woll I give ye keys of the kingdom of
heuens / whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, it shall be bounden also in
heuens. etc. Which of all these sayenges, is not now so applied yt it serves
rather our sensual appetytes and lusts / then the intencion and purpose of
Christ? And albeit, the cense or meaning of all these is open and very
manifest, and clear to be perceived and seen, even of blind men / if a man
woll consydre the hole hystory of the gospel. Yet nevertheless, we contend,
and say styfly / that they are so to be taken and understood, as it shall be
most for our profit, and make best for or purpose, to abuse them. In like
manner who of us can suffer now / or abide it, that these sentences following,
be otherwise understood, than according to our mind and pleasure / who
takes not his own cross, and follows me, he is no worthy or mete dyscyple
for me / do you not gather treasures to your selves, in the earth / where
theuys may dygge them out, and moughtes and worms may eat and consume them.
And princes and rulers of the gentyles uses domynyon over them / and those
which be greater: exercyseth power and auctoryte upon them / it shall not be
in like case among you: but who soever is willing to be greater among you /
let him be your mynyster. And who soever is willing to be chyefe among you
/ he shall be your servant / even likewise as the sone of man has not
common to be mynystred unto / but to mynystre unto other / we can not in any
wise by these sentences fortyfie and strength the prymacye and auctorytie of
the Bishop of Rome, The bishop of Rome.
(whom we do defend) unless that we can by craft and subteltie so lay a
color upon them, and cover them over with hard plaster to keep under the
truth / that it may not freely and at liberty put forth or show it self, at
any time. For else, without this, it shall appear more clearly than the son,
that humylytie and lowlynes is there commanded of Christ to us prestes, when
he says it shall not be so among you: and on the contrary part, superyoryte
(as they call it) of bearing rule, to be utterly forbidden. Are these words,
there shall be no lords or masters I pray the good reader, attend and take heed how goodly these things agree together.
among you so as the kings and rulers of gentyles use domynyon and exercise
auctoryte upon their subgettes / asmoche for to say (I beseech you) as this?
Be thou Peter with thy successors heir for ever of the Empire of Rome. O
exposycyon (because I woll say no thing more greuouse) worthy to be condemned,
and as the proverb is, to be marked with a little rod or dasshe made with a
pen in token of dysalowynge. Furthermore, that which follows, I came to
mynystre, and not to be mynystred unto, to serve, not to be served (ye god
wot) is asmoche to say as this. The Emperors and kings or rules of the
earth, let them fall down on their knees, and with great veneracyon kiss the
fete adorned and garnysshed with precyouse stones, of the, and thy successors,
sitting solemply in a seat or chair of astate, more gorgyouse then any
kings seat. Moreover, that saying he that woll be cheiffest among you, shall
be your servant / and he that wylleth to be greater than other among you:
let him be your mynystre / sygnyfeyth or betokens nothing else, but this /
we only have power and auctorytie to command / and all the resydue of the
church must nedely obey. O Peter, if thy master meaned this by his words /
why than dydest thou, when thou was made the chyefe capytayne and head of thy
brethren / say these words thine own self. Be you subgettes to every man
for the love of god / whether it be to the king / as to a more excellent
person / or to dukes as persons sent by him. But here a certain one of our
most holy fathers / grievously rebukes and says with loud voice / that thou
Peter dydest not speak these words to thy self / but only to thy subgettes. O
how conuenyently, and metely has he found this startynge hole to help him
self with all. As who should say / that what soever Peter taught he did
reach it only in words (as we do no we a days) and not rather and much
more did teach it, by his works or deades / and by contynuell example /
following in this point also / the custom and manner of his master Christ /
of whom the euangelyste Luke says / Ihesus began to do / and teach / Likewise
Paul also says. Be you the folowers of me? as I am the follower of Christ /
for which cause / the same Paul also commands the doer or worker of the
word, not him which is only the hearer or teacher of it / except yt
peradventure it besemed Peter to teach only and not to do / and so by a
custom begone and brought up by him it becomes other his successors to do
the same / I knowledge plainly (such is the dulnes of my wit) that I do not
perceive or understand this theologye or dyuynyte. Beside this, why did than
ye same Peter go to Samarye with John^ Nota. Peter by the commandment of ye
Apostles went to Samaria.
when he was bydden so to do of the other apostels, or why were not than the
apostels, asshamed to abuse the prerogatyue and prehemynence of their hedde and
ruler to this mynysterie or service / or why I pray you, does he him self not
show forth nor take upon him any such manner pretogatyue, and auctoryte, and
dygnyte at all, above other in his epystles saying. I one of the fellow
bishops my self, and equal with them / beseech the bysshoppes, which are
among you. I pray the good reader, can thou perceive any where in these
words / any tutle or point belonging to prymacye? what could be spoken more
mekely, or in more lowlywyse? what more symplye or plainly. First in calling
him self fellow bysshyp, he chalengeth to him self / or takes upon him, none
excellence or prehemynence above other / but makes him self fellow like with
them. When he besecheth them, in so doing, he chalengeth to him self no rule,
no domynyon, no prymacye, no power or auctoryte upon them. And forsooth, if we
woll harken and give credence unto Peter, to Paul him self, and to other /
which speak to us in the holy scripture of god, both profyttes and apostels,
rather than to our own dreams and fantasyes / certainly we shall perceive and
find, that they do call them selves no thing else but mynysters, and their
power naught else but a mynysterye / having their minds far away from all
kind, ye apparaunce of honor: not only from the ambycyons desire of
prymacye, superyoryte. Does not our lord and master him self, (for this is
often times to be rehearsed) say, I am not common to be served / but to
mynystre, and serve. And shall it not be suffycyent to the servant to be as
his lord and maystre is, but does he desire to be greatter than his master,
what needs it to make any more words. With our scholyes, gloses co^mentes,
and interpretacyons, we have taken away and That with our gloses well nere all
dyuyne scripture is clean taken away.
destroyed well nere all the whole scripture of god. Srypture is not
peraueuture ouertourned and destroyed / but being as it were dombe, in a manner
speaks no more / neither may do any more under us tyrauntes, then may the
child: which is under the rod or correccyon of his governor or master:
that is to say, nothing but only that, which shall be very liking and
pleasant to us / as domynyons, prymacyes, chyefe rulers, kingdoms.
Notwithstanding that in the mean season (our tryflynge and vain ymagynacyons
and fantasyes taken away (she does put us in mind and remembrance of
nothing more, chyefly in every place / than that we should despise and set at
naught all these things / cryeng out plainly, and openly: that empyres, riches
and gold, are vile stayle and transytorye things. Peter said to Simon magus
the enchauntour / offering gold to him / keep thy gold to thy self to
perdycyon. The wise man says in his book entyled Ecclesiasticus. Gold is the
wood or tree of offensyon / woe be to them / which coueteth and follows it.
And yet we (good lord) what hokes, what wyles / what nets, do we not make
contyuually now a days, to catch this so evil or myscheuous a thing? what
do we not enterprise or take in hand boldly and swyftly for the love of money
power and auctoryte / what place of the scripture do we not adulterate /
counterfeyte / and cortupte. By these few words (lohere be. ii. swerdes) we
have wrythen and wrested the sword / and empire of the world out of the
Emperors hand / and stoutely and manfully god save us, challenged it to the
church / Albeit yt Christ him self does say and affirm / that his kingdom
is not of this world / and Paul also his sworn orator and Ambassadoure
cries out, saying. Our wepons and armor are not carnal / but strong, Our
armor or weapons are not carnal
and mighty in god. And because that no point of boldness / and presumptuous
pride should be wantynge in us / we have our selves made a foundament and head
of the universal church. Hereof came up those strange names (which in old
time were not known any thing at all of the holy men) general vycar /
greatest bishop / and many such other / yet far more strange then these /
of which Names of dygnyte.
we do not read in all Peter's epystles, that ever he usurped or took any one to
himself / Paul knows no head of the church, but only Christ. But we make
ourselves a head both of the church, and also of the empire / how great
tragedyes and troubles, we have for this cause raised up hitherto / to the
church, how many of us have stryuen after a lay manner with Emperors about
this name and title It were to long an hystorye, to rehearse / among which
emperors, Lodowyke The injuries and contumelyes done by the Popes of Rome to
Lodowike of bauarye the emperor.
of Bauarye / that noble and reno^med emperor, the beautye and worship of the
most honorable stock of the dukes of bauarye, and which was inferyour to
none of the princes in his time, in gentle courage of mind in mercy and
pytie, in devotion or holiness, in all virtues to be used / other in peace or in
war, and to conclude, in all qualyties or propertyes which are commendable,
in any emperor / whose defencyon we have put to here following (for the which
we would that he should be beholden to a germayne borne rather than to an other
of an out nacyon) was so proudely, and presumptuously handled and entreated,
and also so dyspytefully, and co^tumelyously. First of John^ the. xxii. of
that name / and after that of Benedicte, the. xii. and last of all of Clement
the syxte, being al three bishops of Rome / that it is not possible to have
hanled any man in more proud or dyspytefull manner. And that for no grievous
offense / as baptista Egnatius himself also does confess (albeit in other
things he is well nere to to great a favorer of the bysshoppes of Rome) but
for this only / that he durst be bold to take upon him the name of an
Emperor, without the assent and agreement of John^. This seemed to the holiness
of that bishop of Rome a reasonable cause and suffycyent. Wherefore he should
not only interdicte so excellent and so noble a prince from the Sacraments
and alldyuyne service* ^ut also denounce and publysshe him (though he were
fautles (to be an heretyke, by preachers sent forth a broad by him in to al
places for the same purpose. And moreover for the intent and purpose to raise
and stir up rebellyon of his subgettes against him / he did absolve al yt
were sworn to him by any manner of oath, whatsoever it were / from their said
oaths and their allegeaunce. And beside this, vexed him with war and bataylle
/ choosing Cardynalles and Abbottes for to be the chyefe and pryncypall
capytaynes in the same Cardynalles and Abbottes capytaynes i^ war.
war. And Clement also did procure Charles king of Boheme, aduersarye to the
said Lodowyke / to be named and made Emperor of the princes electours / to the
end, that so much the more dyscorde and murder might be kendled among the
Christen princes / which is the only craft and subtyle practyse / whereby
they have always hitherto maynteyned thus their power and auctoryte / which
has caused so much blood to be shed: and so many lose their lives in the
world. If any vycar of Christ may be of such manners and condycyons, truly
I can not se / why any manner tyraunte of the world, may not also be the vycar
of christ. But if he ought not to take vengeance / if he ought to pray even
for his persecutoures, and to do good also to them / which hate him, if he
ought to refuse / and exchewe erthely kingdom / if he ought to absteyne from
all manner covetousness, if he ought to walk after the spyryte / and not after
the flesh: than I can not se, but that there is exceeding much dyfference
and dyuersyte, between the aforesaid manners / and the ordinance of Christ.
Neither it is unknown to me what dyspleasure here I purchase to myself, whiles
I stir and trouble in this pomp of their abusyon and abhomynacyons. But in
the mean season farewell they, I say farewell they, who soever they be, ye
though they be priests: whose favor I can not retain, except that I woll
renounce and forsake the truth which truth itself has said and told
before this that the world should come when the one brother should deliver the
other brother unto death, and the father the sone, and when moreover the sons
should rise up against their fathers, and put them to death. So far it is
away, that other I may or ought to be friend to any man / which is not
himself friend to the truth: that I ought not to believe any man / or to give
place to him, be he never so nere of natural kynne unto me, no neither yet to
any angel of heaven, if he preched any thing contrary to the An angel is not
to be believed speaking against the gospel.
gospel. Seeing than that this truth (which only gives true peace and
charity to men) do the fearfully warn her scolers away every where, in so
many places and by so many manner of ways from worldy kingdom, rehersynge and
iteratynge so often: My kingdom is not of this world and ye be not of this
world / And except a man renounce all that he possess. Item it is more easy
for a Camel to enter in through a nedles iye, than a rich man to enter i^ to
the kingdom of heue^s / Moreover you can not both serve god and Mammon all at
ones. Also the perable of the rich gloton buried in hell) and of that other
rich man dreamynge of the enlargynge of his barnes. Also that most sharp and
sore co^myncacyon or thretenyng against rich men / woo be to you rich men,
which have here your consolacyon and comfort. Woo be to you, which be full
fed: for you shall be hungry / woo be to you, which do laughe now: for you
shall wayle and weep Are not these so many sayings of Christ ye sone of god,
euydent tokens enough How he would have his dyscyples and servants minded to
ward these erthely things. And yet this notwithstanding, Benedicte the. xii.
when at Mylane at Verona, at Vicentiu^, at Mantua, at Rhegiu^, at Carariu^, at
Padway, at Ferrarye, at Mutine, at Argent / he did instytute and make the
Mayres and governors of the said places, in the Emperors Lodowykes absence,
his own vicars or deputyes, (co^maundynge a certain trybute to be paid
yearly of them) Because christ is king in heaven / therefore the pope is
Emperor or hedde ruler in earth / is not this a goodsy reason. Two solucyons.
by his craftefull apostolyke spoylynge Lodowyke of the possessyon of Italye?
he said that all the power and rule of the Empire was his own / for asmoche as
who soever is the successoure of Peter, is the only vycar or deputy in earth,
of Ihesu christ the king of heaven. Is this I pray you to walk after the
spyryte? or is this not to entangle them selves in secular and worldly busynes?
according to the commandment of Paul writing these words to Tymothe, Let
no man that warreth no gods part / entangle him self with seculate busynes
/ that he may please him. etc. But here is ready at hand for us two solucyons
or answers the one that the bishop of Rome is not bounden to the words of
Paul, for as much as the inferyor person has no power or auctorytie over or
upon the superyour / the other, that to him self alone belongs both the
swerdes to which solucyon the third is put unto in the stead of an Auctarye
to make heaped measure / and it is this / that all things is the said bishops
/ because that Christ did say these words. All power and auctoryte is given
to me both in heaven and in earth. Of these words we have gotten forth to our
selves absolute and perfyte power / hereof have we taken to our selfs both
the swerdes hereof, we do attrybute to our selves auctoryte above all the
councels, ye and also above the very gospels / hereof have we challenged
empire, and we have caught and snatched to our selves domynacyon and rule /
never to have end or rest / upon the kings and emperors / albeit that
Christ has taught us clean contrary things / that Men of the church should
be mynisters and not lords.
is to wit, that we should not gather treasure here in earth: but in heaven /
that we should bear our cross: and not to bear a threfolde cowne on our head
of gold garnysshed with precious stones / that we should mynystie and serve:
not be fordes and rulers / This is the manner and fasshyon of our living now a
days / thus the scripture is expounded after our mind and pleasure. Thus now
we learn and rcceyue and take the sense or meaning imagyned by men, in the
stead of the true sense and meaning of the scripture / and the spyryte of
men, in the stead of the spyryte of god, we harken to man, we believe man, we do
obey man. But as for Christ's words: who of us now any where does harken, or
who does believe? And yet he said my sheep knows my voice, and I again of my
part do know them. A stranger they do not here, but run away / if than
the sheep of Christ here the voice of him only, and flees or ronneth away
from a stranger: how can we (I pray you) prove ourselves to be his sheep:
which in this most wretched time, not only do not here his gospel: but
moreover do hate it and would have it clean destroyed and tydde out of the
world / saying that the church should be better (oh abhomynable impyetye)
without the word or gospel of Christ / which in every place teaches us so
often, that his words only his commandments alone, are to be observed and
kept / saying / he that has my commandments, and keapeth them / he it is
that loneth me / contrarywyse, what other thing does he more sharply lay to
the Jews charge and rebukes them for more grievously, than for this yt they
regarded not his words, nor would do after them / when he says / if you shall
abide in my words. you shall be truly my dyscyples / and you shall know the
truth, and the truth shall deliver you again a little after / he yt is of god:
hereth ye words of god / but therefore you do not here / because you are not of
god / if thou seche dylygently and ransake the holy scryture (good christian
reader) from the beginning that man was created: thou shall find that all
those which are therein rehearsed to have pleased god / did always teach men
the word of god, and not their own. When I pray the) did ever That neither
the prophetts neither the apostels, did speak or teach to men, any other
thing / than the word of god.
Moses, when Heliseus, when Helias, and so forth in order unto the last
prophette, say after this manner? These things do I Moses say / these things
do I Helias say / and not rather at all times. These things says your lord
god? when did ever Peter? when did Paul preach other their own gospel, or
else of any man, and not the gospel of Ihesu christ? does not Paul plainly and
openly witness and record, that ye gospel which he did teach, was not of man
/ but of Christ? and he boldly curses him: who ever he be (ye although it
were an angel from heaven) which would presume to teach any other gospel,
than that of Christ? Beside this these four golpelles which the church
does only allow Ezechiell did se before (the spyryte of god showing them unto
him) about. vi. C. years before christ was incarnate / expressyng perfytefy ye
Prophesye of the. iiii. gospelles, by the symylytude or lykenes of. iiii.
sensyble creatures of ye which the first was of a man, the second of a lion,
the third of an ox, the fourth of an Egle, in each one of the which. iiii.
lykenesses, is fygured one mystery of Christ. In ye lykenes of man, was fygured
ye bodily natyuyte of him / in the shape of a lion: was sygnyfyed the rorynge
or great sound of the preaching of the gospel, or ye mysterye of his
resurreccyon / In ye figure of an ox was betokened his ever lastyng presthode,
in the symylytude of an Egle: was fygured the mysterye of his dyuynyte and
godhed to be uttered and showed to the church, which should be sprede abroad
through out all the world. Shall the church lack or want ye gospels of
them whom the holy ghost self / gave euangelystes and gospellers to his own
church? Matthew when he was a publycane and called to his office, of Christ
self (who can doubt hereof) wrote and set forth first the gospel in the
Hebrew language, for the Jews which were converted to Christ, Marcus
gospel, is the gospel of Peter / to whom specially christ did say, feed my
sheep. And so like wise, the gospel which Luke wrote: is the gospel of
Paul, the doctor of the gentyles / which attained and understood the
secresies and pryuyties of god, which is not lawful to any man to speak / of
the which paul praise is given to the same Luke, in the gospel through out
all congregacyons / John^ which deserved to here of Christ hanging on the
cross these words. Behold thy mother: at the contynuall and fervent request,
and instant desire of all the bishops of Asye, and their Ambassadors wrote
the gospel last of all. iiii. And yet he durst not enterprise or take that
work in hand, before such time, that they had purchased the mercy and favor
of god, by fasting openly bydden or commanded to the people, and by prayers
also / Shall we think perauenture, that the church (if it had pleased them)
might have forsaken and left this gospel, which to be written, they obtained
with so many intreatynges and desires, with so many ambassages, moreover with
processyons and fastings openly commanded? wherefore let him (who soever he
be) the more scasely and more seldom obiecte against us, yt these gospelles
were received of the church as though it had been in their choice or liberty
also, not to have received them / and to have rejected and refused the word
The church had not so auctoryte to approve the gospelles that it had lie
likewise in their power to dysalowe ye same
of truth. Therefore that the church has approved and allow these gospelles,
is not thus much to say, as the church has given auctoryte to them, which
auctoryte, if it had pleased them, ye same church might also have taken from
them, as the workers of Plato and Aristotyle has been hitherto approved and
allowed, by the consent of all learned men, and yet no man lyghtlye would be
bold to dye for the truth, of the same works. But to say, that the church
has approved and allowed the gospels, is nothing else, but yt the church
has inseperablye cleued to the vndoutable truth of the said gospelles, as
it were to the word of Christ speaking presentlye before our face / for the
which truth, she ought also to dye, if that she woll be saved. Should the
church presume, and be bold, How the sentence of them is to be under standed
that say, that the church has approved and allowed the gospel.
to take unto herself such auctoryte and censure over the word of him, by
whose mercy she is saved: as that she might dyssent and dysagree from any
(even the least) title thereof, and not rather ought to honor and worship it
all manner ways? But it is not thought suffycyent now a days, to ascrybe this
ouermoche liberty to the church, that she may judge and give sentence of the
gospel of Christ, in to whether part she please other approuynge, or
dysprouyng, but there ben also certain which affirm, that it had been best
the gospel never to have be made or written. And than ergo it should be best
that thing not to have been written at all, which no man (except he be to
tomoche wicked, does deny, to have be written by the inspyracyon of the holy
ghost, to the erudycyon and consolacyon Take heed and mark this wicked
blasphemye.
of the church? And ergo the euangelystes were then both pernycyouse, and
noisome and hurtefull to the church? And ergo the apostles / which first
taught the world this gospel so hurtefull, were no teachers to ye church,
but destroyers of the truth? And ergo christ himself, which gave them in
charge and commandment to preach it, did not command that which was best,
but which to have forbidden had been best. O good god, what a monstruouse thing
is this to say, that it had been expedyent, for the vtilyte and profit of the
church, that no gospels had ever ben written? And I pray you for Christ's sake,
what manner a church should it have been of christen men, without the word of
christ? upon which word alone as upon a sure stone, it is grounded and
builded. Should we think, that it should have been a church, or else rather some
synagoge of Satan, without the gospel of Christ? why has the church self
instytuted and ordained, no Mass to be celebrated, no sermon to be made,
without the gospel? why do we rise up reverently, according to the manor and
custom, when the gospel is read or song, if there be no profit thereof, at
all in the church? Behold, what manner tragical troubles and great busynes or
strife is raised and styrred up now a days, and all for the intent that we
might make one wretched man egall and pete to Christ, in power and auctoryte /
which we do not hope, that it may be brought any other ways to pass, except
we under the pretense of the name of the church, do challenge and ascrybe to
him auctoryte also to forsake or put down the gospel, if he lysted. But
Christ says he that is of god: hereth the words of god therefore you here not
because you are not of god / if this saying be true: than who soever does not
here ye gospel, that was showed by the inspyracyon of god, (which thing no
man woll deny, but the devil him self as I have said heretofore who soever
affyrmeth or says that it is pernycyous and hurtefull to the church he is not
of god, but of the devil his father, whose desires he coueteth to perform and
fulfill / if you shall abide and continue in my word: (says the same Christ our
sauyoure) you shall truly be my dyscyples, and shall know the truth, and the
truth shall deliver you / who soever therefore shall not continue and abide
steadfastly in his gospel: shall not be the true dyscyple of Christ / of whom
than? of Antechryste? Neither he shall know the truth / what shall follow
than? he shall work the lesynges or lyenges of his father the devil / neither
shall he be deleuered by the truth / what shall he suffer than? he shall be
set on the left hand, with the kyddes, that is to say with wicked men. But
now not forgetting our beginning, to return again to the pryncypall and
chyef point of our matyer or purpose: Seeing that the truth, that is to say
the belefe of the word of god, only does deliver from death, and incredulyte
or lack of belefe does destroy / why do we doubt yet, but that we do
sustain and suffer these present euylles, and that we shall daily suffer more
grievous calamyties, for that we have on every side cast out and bannysshed
this truth? Our lord said by the mouth of Ieremye the prophet, I have
planted the a chosen vyneyarde, all true sede, how fortuneth it than, that
thou art turned to me in to a crooked and evil one, thou vyneyarde of a
strange kind? Behold, he has planted all true sede in his chosen vyneyarde
/ But we have turned the true sede, in to evil and noughtye / therefore also,
we be not the chosen vyneyarde of the lord / but a strange one and of an
other kind / why so strange and of an other kind? because we do adulterate
and corrupt his word / he said, you shall not put any thing to the word
which I speak to you: neither shall you take away any thing from it. But we
nothing dredynge or ferynge this his threatenynge, in the stead of his holy
word we compel his church being oppressed, to receive our sense and
Judgment / affyrmyng with asseueracyon: that, which we speak, to be the word
of the lord: nothing reme^brynge, that fearful saying of the prophet / woo
be to you, which are wise in your own iyes, and which are prudent in the
sight of your selves / woo be to you which call evil good, and good evil /
making darkness light, and light darkness. But what other thing do we,
applyeng the scripture to our own will / and lust, or appetyte / than make
our own words light / and the words of god darkness. Therefore Ieremye
worthily vpbreydyng and rebukynge us, says these words / the prophet and the
priest, be polluted / and in my house I have found the wyckednes of sin of
them, says the lord. Therefore the way of them shall be as a slypper ground or
place in darkness / for they shall be driven and shall fall in hit / for I
shall bring euylles upon them, the year of their vysytacyon, says the lord /
Peter also has given us warning of the same, sayng Petri. 5.
these words / it is time now, that the Judgment begin at the house of god
/ and if it shall begin first at us, what shall be end of them which has
not given credence to the gospel of god? But they speak these things to us
all in vain / and no more fruit comes thereof, as touching our part: than
should come, if one told a tale (as it is commonly said) to deaf men / for
we are utterly hardened and styffe minded against the truth / and as it were
ye deeffe serpents called Astoides we obstynatly stop our ears, to speak
out the voice or sound of scripture, enchauntynge, and charmynge us to our
porfyte. Farewell christian reader, and sorrow thou, and syghe with me, (seeing
that in a manner there remains nothing else that we may do) for the decay of
the ecclesiastycall discyplyne and good order, which daily appears, and
waxes worse and worse. The year of our Lord. M. CCCCC. xxii.

To god only be honor and glory.
Against the usurped iurisdiccyon of ye bishop of Rome, ye book of Marsilius
of Padua, treating of the Emperors and the popes, power which book is
entitled. Defensor pacis / and is divided in to. iii. parts, which the Author
thereof calls diccyons. And this said book was written and dedycated to the
most valiant emperor Lodowyke of Bauaria (which had been handled after
ungoodly manner, and suffered many iniuryes done to him by three bysshoppes
(called popes of Rome) about the year of our lord god. M. CCC. xxiiii.

Of the sumarye and general intencyon of the things which shall be treated
and spoken of in this work, and of the cause of the intencyon, and purpose,
and of the dyuysyon of the book,
The first Chapter,
TRanquyllyte is the thing doubtless which is to be desired of every
Tranquyllyte is the mother of arts and scyences.
realm and comynaltie / as in which both the people goth forward and
increases. For the vtylyte or profit of nacyons is kept and maynteyned. For
this is the beautefull mother of good arts and occupacyons. This tranquyllyte,
multyplyeng and encreasyng the kind of man by repetable succession: enlarges
their possessions and goods, and beautefyeth their manners. And he is known to
be ignorau^te of these so great things: who soever is perceived, not to have
sought after this said tranquyllyte / By these words and (...) now before
recyted. Cassiodorus in his first book of Cassiodorus
epystles, has expressed the vtilities, profytes or fruits, that grows, of
the tra^quyllytie or peace of Ciuyle regymentes / to the intent, that he by
these best fruits The suffycyencye of manneslyfe is the best fruit yt comes
of peace.
expressing and declarynge the best thing, that belongs to may (that is to
wit the suffycyencye of his life) which no man may attain without peace and
tranquylytie / he might excyte, provoke, and stir up, the wylles and desires
of men to have peace, and this tranquyllytie among them selfs, one with an
other wherein he spoke conformablye to the saying of blyssed Job, which in
the. xxii. chapitre said / have thou peace, and by it thou shall have very
good fruits. This peace christ verily the sone of god decreed therefore to be
the sign or token and the In the birth of christ, tidings of peace was
brought by angels unto me^
messenger or shewer of his new and strange birth, when in his said birth he
would by ye oracle and voice of heavenly angels this song to be song Gloria in
altissimis do et in terra pax hominibus bone voluntatis. That is, Glory and
praise be to god in heuens: and in earth peace be to men of good will. For this
cause also, the same christ very oftentimes wysshed peace to his dyscyples /
wherefore it is written in the gospel of John^. Jesus came and stood in the
mids of his dyscyples and said / pax vobis / that is peace be to you. He also
geuynge them monycyon Christ whysshed peace to his dyscyples
to observe and keep peace one with an other: and said as it is read in Mark /
pacem habete inter vos / that is have or keep peace among you. And not only he
taught them to keep peace among them selves, one with an other. But also he
taught them to wysshe the same peace unto other men / wherefore it is read this
in The apostles wyssheth peace. Peace was y^ inherytaunce of christ's disciples.
Matthew. And when you enter in to ye house: salute it saying, peace be to this
house. This same peace also was the enherytaunce which christ, when the time
of his passion and death approached: by his testament left to his dysciples,
when he said to them in ye. ix. of John^ / peace I leave unto you / my peace I
give unto you. And after the manner of christ, the Apostles also as being his
verey heirs and folowers, wysshed this said peace unto all those persons, to
whom by their epystles they did dyrecte the documentes and monycyons or
counsayles of the gospel as men that knew right well the fruytes of peace to be
most good, as it has been alleged of Job, and by Cassiodore more largely
declared. But because of contrary causes, contrary effects naturally and
necessaryly are brought forth / therefore of dyscorde, which is contrary unto
tranquyllyte, there shall grow unto every real me or cyuyle regyment most
evil fruytes and hurtes, as men may suffycyently se, and well nere to every
man is euydently known / by the realm or cyuyle regyment of Italye / for
whiles the inhabytauntes thereof lived together peaseably: Example of the
kingdom of Italye.
they received of long time pleasauntly ye before rehearsed fruytes of peace. And
by these and in these fruytes they prosperyd and went forward so greatly that
they have subdued all the habytable parts of the world, unto their domynyon
and empire. But after that dyscorde or strife was ones risen or spronge up
among them: their kingdom or co^munytie and empire has been vexed with
manyfold and sundry manner inco^modyties and euyls / and has been subdued and
brought under the empire and domynyon of other strange and hateful nacyons.
And moreover again the country of Italy is by the reason of strife and
dyscorde so torn on every side, and in a manner losed and utterly feblysshed,
that it is no hard thing or mastrye, for any man that list to win it, and
is any thing of power at all, to enter thereunto: And that it has thus
chanced or come to pass, it is nothing marvel worthy, for as Salustius
witnesses, where he makes mention of Catylyne. By unity and concord: small
things grow and increase, through dyscorde and debate: very great things
fallen away and goen to naught, By the reason of this said dyscorde verily the
Italyens, being seduced and led in to The hurtes or euels that grown of
discord.
the bypath of error: are depryued and berefte of their suffycyent living.
And in the stead of quyetnes and rest, which they sought for: they do
contynuelly suffer and abide more and more greuouse labors and pains. And in
the stead of lybertye, they are contynually subdued and brought under the hard
and cruel yokes of tyrauntes / and so in conclusyon are made more miserable
and wretched then other nacyons and peoples which live a cyuyle and honest
life, and are common to that point that their patronymyke name, which was
wont to give glory imunytie and liberty to all that called on the said
name: is now vpbrayded and cast in their tethe of other nacyons, and turned in
to the cause of sufferynge ignomynye and dishonor. Thus than the wretched
Romans are carried hedlonge in to these darkenesses, by the reason of the
dyscorde strife and debate among them selves, And likewise as that man or
sensyble creature, is known to be out of frame which is troubled with syckenes
/ even so is y^ dysposycion order, common weal, and cyuyle regyment of Italy
known to be out of tempre, fascyon and crooked, by the debate and strife that
is among them. Of the which said dyscorde or intranquyllyte albeit that there
are many prymytyue causes, and that not a few, yea and such as well nere all
that are possible to happen or chance after the wont manners and fascyons, the
chief of all phylosophere Aristotell in his ciuyle science or polytykes has
descrybed: yet is there for all that be side them a certain special and very
pryuey or hyd cause, through which the empire of Rome has of long time ben
vexed and dyseased, any contynually is vexed / which cause, as a syckenes
excedyngly contagyons, is as ready to crepe or sprede in to all other cyuyle
co^munyties and realms. Ye moreover through it gredynes has already assayed to
invade a great many of the said realms and co^munyties. And this cause or the
beginning or kind of it neither Arystotell neither any other of the
philosophers being in his time, or before his time, could se or espy or
perceive. For the cause that I do mean is a certain perverse and lewd
opinion, that is and has been in men (which we shall open and declare here
after) which opynyo^ occasionally was taken of a meruaylouse effect or work,
which long after the time of Aristotell was brought forth or wrought by ye
most high cause (that is to wit by god) contrary to the possybylite of the
inferyour nature / and contrary to the wont operacion or workyng of the
inferyour causes in the world. For this sophistycall opinion cloked with the
viscene and face of honestye, and profit / is utterly pernycyous to the kind
of man / and if it be not stopped or let: it shall at length and conclusyon
gendre and be the cause of intolerable noyaunce and hurt to every realm and
country. Thus than (as we have said) the fruytes of peace and tra^quyllytie are
very good / and of dyscorde or The hurtes that comes of strife or
intolerable.
strife which is contrary to it there comes intolerable hurtes and damage.
Wherefore we ought to desire peace / and when we have it not / to seche for it /
and get it / and when we have gotten it, to keep it / and with all our
enforcement to eschew and put away the contrary, strife and dyscorde / And
hereunto all brethren, and so much more colleges and co^munyties, are bound
to help each other, both by Christen me^ are bound to those things, which
apperteyneth to peace.
affection of godly charity, and also by the bond or law of humayne socyetie
/ which thing Plato also teaches us / as Tulle witnesses in his book be
officiis, which said / we are not borne for our selves only / but part of
our birth our country does challenge / and part also our friends / after
which sentence of Plato. Tulle forth with adds these words following / and
after the mind and opinion of the stoyke philosophers and all other things
which are gendred on the earth, are created to the use of men: but men are
gendered for men's sake (that is to wit one to help an other) In this thing
we ought to follow the gydynge of nature / and to bring forth common
vtylyties. And because it is no little common vtylytie, but moreover also great
necessytie, to open the sophyme of this said synguler cause of dyscorde, which
threateneth to all realms and co^munyties no little noyauuce or harms: every
man is bound to give watchefull care and dilygent labor hereunto, that is
wylllynge and able to se the common profit / for except this sophyme be
opened and declared, this pestylence or myschefe in no wise may be eschewed or
avoided / neither the pernycyous effect of it can be perfetely cut away from
realms or cyuyle co^munyties. And no man ought to be Let no man for fear
spare to speak ye truth.
neglygent in this behalf or to refuse this said care / through fere or
slouthfulnes, or through any other spyryte of malygnytie / for as saint Paul
says in the second epistle to Tymothe, and in the first and second
chapter. God has not given to us the spyryte of fear or dread, but of virtue
or Boldness and of love / of boldness (I say) and of love, to publysse and
sprede abroad the truth wherefore the apostle in the same place consequently
says in this wise. Be not therefore ashamed of the testymonye the truth, for
the Bearing of which testymony, christ said that him self came in to the
world / when he said in the. xviii. Christ came in to ye world to bear wytnes
unto the truth.
of John^ / herfore was I borne, and for this have I commen in to the world:
that I might bear witness to the truth / that is to say to that truth which
guydeth or leads mankind to eternal salvation. After the example therefore
of christ to teach the truth whereby the aforesaid myschefe of Realms and
ciuyle regymentes may be ceased, namely from the sort of christen men / to
teach the truth (I say) which guydeth or leads to the wealth of ciuyle life
/ and also is not a little auayleable or helpful to the eternal salvation: he
is more bound to give his dylygence, to whom the gyuer of graces has more
largely inspyred the perceiving or understanding of these things. And who
soever has cunning and They that are wytty and full of know lage are bound
to defend the truth.
habilite to do this, and leueth it undone: he as being unkind, offends
greatly / as witnesses I ames in the. iiii. chapitre of his canonical
epistle, when he says / who soever knows, how to do good, and does it not,
it is sin to him for this wicked myschefe, the commune enemy of mankind,
can not by any other mean, be perfytly cut up / neither the pestylent and
pernycyous fruits which it has hitherto brought forth can otherwise dry up,
except the iniquite of the cause or rote thereof be first openly showed, and
reproved / for by this way, and none other, may the coactyue power of princes
and governors saffely begin and go about, finally and utterly to overcome
and destroy the froward and styffe maynteyners and defenders of this malice.
I therefore, which am a patauy an borne, regardyng and obeyenge the aforesaid
monycyons and counsayls of christ, of saints, and of philosophers / of the
spyryte of intellygence or understanding of these things (if any grace has been lend to me) and of the spirit of confydence, and boldness mynystred to me
from above (from whense as James witnesses in his first chapter of his
canonycall epistle) comes all goodness / when he says / every best gift and
every perfyte gift is from above, descendyng from the father of lyghtes, for
the reverence of him that has given it to me / and for the love of
publysshynge and showing openly ye truth / and for the fervent charity and
love that I have to my country and brethren / that is to wit for pytye and
reseruacyon of them that are oppressed / and for the reuocacyon and calling
back again of them that are the oppressors, from the bypath of artoure / and
for the excytacyon and styrrynge up of them / which suffers these things to
be done, and yet ought, and are also of power to resyste, and withstand them /
having also a synguler respect unto the as unto the mynystre of god, which
shall give to this work that end, which he desires in outward being. O most
noble Lodo wyke emperor of the Romans, in whom by old and in a manner by a
certaynespecyal right or title of blood and eke by thy synguler heoroycal
nature, The praise of Lodo wyke the emperor
and excellent virtue, is graffed and fast roted a desire and love to cut up
heresies from the rote, and utterly to destroy them, to auaunce, to keep and
defend the catholyke veryte, and all other virtuous dysciplyne and learning /
to kyllvyces / to promote and set forward the studyes and exercyses of
virtues / to quench debates and stryues / to sprede abroad and to norysshe
every where peace or trans quyllyte. I have after the time of dylygent and
intent searching made, put the sum of these sentences following in writing /
because I do suppose and Judge, that by them some help may happen or come to
your dylygent majesty and grace which intends and sets his mind, to
provide for the above written fautes, and other that do happen may happen and
chance / and also for other publyke and common vtylyties. It is my purpose
therefore, god helping, only to declare, and show openly this synguler and
special cause of strife / for it should be superfluous to iterate and recounte
the nombre and nature of those causes, which has been assygned by Arystotell
/ but of this cause, (which neither Arystotle could se, neither any other man
after Arystole which might se it, yet has taken upon him the determynacyon of
it) I will so open the covering, and set it forth to the ease of men: that
from hensforth it may easily be excluded from all Realms and cyuyle
co^munyties / and that when it is excluded: virtuous princes and subgiettes
may the more without fear or dread live in quyete and tranquyllyte / which is
the thing desiderable purposed in the beginning of this work and necessary
to all those that ought to enjoy cyuyle felycytie / which felycytie seems
to be the best of all things that is desired and may happen to man in this
world, and also to be the end of all the Acts or operacions done by men. And
this matyer now rehearsed purposed or intented of me I wylldyuyde what the
author wolwryte in the first dyccyon.
by three dyctyons. And in the first of the said. iii. I will prove my
purposes by sure ways found out by me^nes wit / and by demonstracyons made
of such proposycyons, which are euydently known and undoubted to every man,
whose mind is not corrupted by nature, custom, or else through some crooked
affection. And in the second dyccyon, such things as I shall suppose ben
proved by The argument or matters of the second dyccyon.
demonstracyons: I shall confyrme with the substacyall and perdurable
testymonyes of eternal veryte / and by the auctoryties also of the saints,
which has been the interpretours or exposytours of the same truth or
scripture / and also of the other approved doctors of the christen faith / to
the intent that it may be substancyall enough of it self, nedynge none
other extrynsecall probacyon / That done, I shall afterward also impugn the
falsyties, which are contrary to my determynacyons / and shall open and
dyssolue the combrous sophystycall arguments of the adversary part, and
utter the deceyte that is hid in them / In the third dyction I shall infer
certain conclusyons or very profitable documentes, The contents of the
third dyccyon.
to be observed both of Lyuyle governors and subgiettes, which conclusyons
haven euydent certayntie of the things before determined in the other two
dictions. And every one of these. iii. dictions I shall deuyde by chapitours /
and each chapitre I shall depart and deuyde in to certain parts, other moo
or fewer in nombre, after the quantytie of the chapitre / And of these said
deuysyons of this warke, one profit that shall come thereof shall be the
easynes or redynes of finding out the things that shall be sought for / for
the fyndyng of which, the reader of this work shall be remytted and sent from
the hyndermore dictions and chapitres, to the formere / of which also shall
follow the second vtylytie, that is to wit the abbreuyacyon and shortenynge
of this volume and work / for when it shall happen or chance us in our latter
saynges to take any veryte or true proposycion other for it self, or for any
other things to be proved by hit, the probacyon or certaynte of which verytie
has been suffycyently showed in the former say enges or chapitours: without any
superfluous iteracion of any probacyon of the said verytie, we shall remytte
and send the reader to the dictyon and chapter, and also to the part of the
chapitre, in which the probacyon or certayntie of such veryte was showed /
that so by reason thereof, he may easily find the certayntie of the thing,
that he secheth for.

Of the pryncypall questyons to be determined in this book / and the distynccy
on and assygnacyon of the diverse sygnyfycacions of this word Regnum.
The second Chapter.
ANd now at the beginning or first setting upon the things purposed and
intented of us, we will show and declare, what is the tranquyllytie or
i^tra^quyllytie of a Realm or co^munyte / and first of the. ii. what is ye
tranquyllitie / for this being not known: it can not be chosen, but that we
must needs be ignorant, what is intranquyllytie. And for as much as both
these, that is to wit tranquyllyte, and intranquyllyte, seems to be
dysposycyons of a city or Realm, (which thing let it be supposed of
Cassiodorus, and it shall also by and by be declared of us) we woll
consequently show and declare, what is a city or Realm or co^munyte, and for
what end it is ordained. Whereof also the descrypcyons of tranquyllytie, and of
his contrary intranquyllyte, shall the more largely appear / we therefore
wyllyng according to the order premysed and before written, to descrybe the
tranquyllyte of a city or Realm: lest by the reason of the equyuocacyon and
manyfolde sygnyfycacyons of the nownes in our purpose, any ambygnyte or
doubtfulnes might happen: we ought first to know, y^ this word Regnu^ in one
of his sygnyfycacions, betokens a pluralytie or multitude of The first
sygnyfycacyon of regnum.
cities or prouynces contained under one regyment and governance. And after
this accepcyon or taking, this word Regnu^ dyffereth nothing from Ciuitas in
ye kind of Civil governance: but rather the one dyffereth from the other in
qua^tytie because regnum is greater and larger in quantytie than Ciuitas / and
so regnum may be Englysshed a realm or kingdom and ciuitas a city. In an
other The second.
sygnyfycacyon this word Regnum betokens a certain manner or kind of civil
regyment or temperate governance, which Arystotell calls Monarchiam
temperata^ / and after this accepcyon of this word, Regnum may be as well in
one city alone, as in many cities even so as it was about the first
beginning of Civil co^munyties, when for the most part there was in each one
city one governor. which was called Rex, that is a king. The third
sygnyfycacyon and the most famous of this word, is composte or made of the
first and the second sygnyfycacyon Joined together in one. The fourth
sygnyfycacyon or accepcyon of this word, is a certain common thing to all
kinds of Temperate regymente and governance. whether it be in only one
city, or else in many cities / after which sygnyfycacyon Cassiodorus used this
word Regnum in his oracyon or speech, which we have made the beginning of
this our book. And in this sygnyfycacyon also we woll use this nowne, in the
determynacyons of our purposes / Now than we owing to descrybe tranquyllyte,
and the contrary of it intranquyllytie: Let us suppose with Arystotell in
the first and the fyfte books of his Politikes, in the second and third
chapytres, that a City is as it were a certain natural living and sensyble
creature / for in like what city or co^muitieis.
manner as a beast or any sensyble creature, which is well dysposed or ordered
according to nature, is made of certain proporcionate parts ordered or set
in an order among them selves, and each of them co^munycatynge their works to
A symylytude.
the other among them selves, and also to the hole even so after the same
fascyon, a city or co^munytie is made of certain such manner parts, If it be
so, that it be well ordered and instytuted according to reason / such manner
comparyson therefore, as is of a beast or a sensyble creature, and of this
parts unto hell the, even after such manner comparyson shall it seem to be of a
co^munytie, and of his parts, unto tranquyllytie. And that this illacyon is
true / we may take a sure probacyon of that / that all men comprehend as
touching both of them / that is to wit both of health / and tranquyllyte. For
health al men iugen to be the best dysposycyon of a sensyble creature /
according to nature. And so also they Judge What saint or health is. What
tranquyllyte is.
tranquyllyte to be the best dysposycyon of a co^munytie / which has be
begone and instytuted according to reason. And health (as the most cu^nynge
natural Philosophers do say descrybynge it) is a good dysposycyon of a
sensyble creature, by which every one of his parts may perfytely work the
operacyons conuenyent and agreynge to their nature / according to which
Analogye, tranquyllyte shall be a good dysposycyon of a realm or co^munytie,
by which every one of the members or parts of the said co^munytie may
perfytely do the operacyons conuenyent and fytte for them / according to
reason and to their instytucyon. And because whosoever dyffyneth things well /
does at one time give knowledge of both contraryes. Intranquyllyte shall be a
crooked or evil dysposycyon or order of a realm or co^munytie / likewise as
infyrmyte or syckenes is a What intranquyllyte or discord is. What infirmite
or syckenes
crooked or evil dysposycion of a beast or sensyble creature / by which other
all or some of his parts are let to do the operacyons and works co^uenyent
and sitting for them / other I say to work them utterly or any whytte at all
/ or at the lestwyse they are let to work them perfytely / Of tranquyllyte
therefore and of the contrary intranquyllyte let it be thus spoken of us
fyguratly. Of the orygynall and first beginning of the cyuyle co^munytie.

The third Chapter.
How for as much as we have said, that tra^quyllyte is the good dysposycyon
of a co^munytie to the workynge of the parts thereof consequently we must
consydre what is a city or co^munytie / and for what end it is ordained
pryncypally / and which, and how many be the pryncypall parts thereof /
moreover what is the conuenyent operacyon of each one of those parts.
Furthermore of the causes, and order of the said parts among them selves /
for these things are very necessary to the profit determynacyon of
tranquyllytie / and of his contrary intranquyllyte. But yet for all that before
we do treat of a city, which is a perfyte co^munytie / and of the diverse
kinds or manners thereof: we ought first to bring in and declare the orygynall
beginning of cyuyle co^munyties, and their regymentes and manners of living /
from which as being less perfyte, men did proceed to perfyte co^munyties /
and to the regymentes and manners of living used in them / for both nature,
and also art or craft, which counterfayteth and follows nature do always
Sure knowledge of a thyngeis had de / when the causes of it are known.
proceed from the less perfyte things, to the more perfyte. And men do not
think, that they have the sure knowledge which is called science of any thing
any otherwise / but only when they shall have known ye first causes and the
first pryncyples of it, even to the very orygynall causes of it which are
called eleme^ta. We therefore procedynge according to this manner, ought to know
and perceive, that cyuyle co^munyties / according to diverse regyons and sundry
times began of a little thing / and so by little and little taking encreace, at
the last has been brought to co^plement or perfeccion / likewise as we have
said yt it happens or comes to pass in every operacyon or work of nature
or craft / for the first and which was the first co^munytie.
the least co^bynacyon or co^munytie of all humayne co^munyties, and out of
which all other co^munyties or socyeties has spronge was ye copulacyon and
socytie of man and woman / as the chyef of al philosophers Arystotell says in
the first book of his Polytykes / and the first chaptre / and the same
appears also more largyle of his oeconomykes / wherein he treats of the
gouernynge and ordrynge of an house or howsholde / for of this co^bynacyon or
copulacyon of man and woman verily men and women were brought forth and
multyplyed, which first replenysshed only one house of whom mo such manner
combynacyons or copulacyo^s being made so great ppagacyon and increase of men
was made that one house could not be suffycyent to receive them. But it was
necessary to make many howses the pluralytie or multitude of which howses
being joined together / was called in the Laten tongue vicus or vicina in
English a street / and this was the first co^munytie of men / as it is written
in the place before alleged. But as long What is a street.
as men were but only one house: all their acts and deeds, namely such acts
which we shall hereafter call cyuyle acts, were set in order by him that
was most ancient and most aged among them / as being most dyscrete and
wise / but yet without any law or custom: for because laws and customs
could not yet be found out or devised. And not only the men yt were together
all in only one house / were governed after this manner / but also the first
co^munytie called a street, was governed well nere after the same manner /
though in some things they were governed after a sundry manner / for albeit
that the gouernoure or good man of only one house might forgive or punysshe
the domestycall iniuryes and trespasses done within his house, all manner ways
even after his pleasure / and as he list him self / yet for all yt it was not
lawful for him to do the same / that was the presydent and ruler of the first
co^munytie called a street / for in this co^munytie it was necessary, that he
/ which was most ancient and aged: should dyspose and order ryghtwyse and
profitable things / by some reasonable ordinance or law in manner natural /
because it seemed so conuenyent unto all men by a certain equity without any
great searching forth only by ye common Judgment of reason and a certain
duetye of the humayne socyetie and fellowship. And the cause of this diverse and
sundry manner of regyme^t or governance in one house and in an hole street? is
and was for that that if of only one house, and of the first oeconomye or
domestycall famylye, one brother had slain or otherwise hurt or offended an
other brother / without any danger or Ieoperdye thereof happenynge or following
the gouenour or good man of the house might lawfully if he would, not have
punysshed the trespasser with extreme ponysshement / that is to wit with death
/ partly because the iniurye or offense seemed to be done only to the father /
which did forgive it / and partly because of the fewness and small nombre of
men that were at that time. And also because it was less loss and heaviness to
the good man of the house, to lack one sone / then to want two / which thing
also our first father Adam seemed to do. when his first begotten sone Adam
punysshed not chain that slew his brother: because of the pancite and small
no^bre of men at that time.
Chayn slew his brother A bell / for there is not properlye cyuyle Justice of
the father to the sone / as it is written in the. v. book of Etykes / where
treatise is made, of ryghwysnes. But in ye first co^munytie called a street,
neither it was lawful neither is lawful to do so / because of the dysagrement
and vnlykenes of the aforesaid things / ye moreover except vengeance or
equalytie of the iniuryes done should have been or be made by ye most senyour or
ancient / there might have happened, or now might happen by the reason thereof
fighting and seperacyon of neighbors. But after that streets we multyplyed,
and the co^munytie made larger, (as it must nedely be, ever as men and women
were multyplyed by propagacyon, yet were they governed stylle of one man /
other through defaute and lack of many wise men: or else for some other
certain cause / as it is written in the third book of the Polytykes; and the.
ix. chaptre / but yet of him which was counted most aged, or best of all
other / howbeit by ordynacyons less imperfect than those, by which they were
ordained or governed in a street. And yet had not those first co^munyties so
great a distynccyon or order of parts, or so great a su^me of necessary
crafts, and of rules of the manner of living, as was afterward successyuely
found one after an other, in the perfyte co^munyties. For in the old time
otherwhyles the same man was a prince or goueruour, and an husband man The
same man a governor, and an husband man or a keeper of sheep.
or keeper of sheep. As Abraham, and many other moo after him / which thing
for all that neither is expedyent neither might well be, in perfyte
co^munyties. But after that in process of time co^munyties were augmented, the
experyence of men also was augmented / Crafts, occupacyons / and more perfyte
rules and manners of living, were found and devised / and the parts of
co^munyties also were more largely distyncte, departed, and, dysseuered one
from an other / and in conclusyon those things, which are necessary to life,
and to a good life: by the reason and experyence of men, were brought to
perfeccyon / and a perfyte co^munytie was instytuted and begone / and called
in the laten / ciuitas / in the English a city or a common weal / with the
dystynccyon of the parts of the same the determynacyon whereof we shall
forthwith take in hand / of the orygynall beginning of a cyuyle co^munytie,
let thus much as we have spoken, be suffycyent at this time.

Of the fynall cause or end of a city or cyuyle co^munytie / and of the
distinccyon in general of the parts thereof.
The fourth Chapter,
A City, after the mind of Arystotle in the first book of his polytykes, A
city is a perfect co^munytie.
and the second chapter is a perfyte co^munytie having in it self all
things necessary to the suffycyencie of life, and ordained not only for men
to live in, but pryncypally to live well in. In the which defynycion Arystotle
sygnyfieth the perfyte fynall cause of a city. For men living cyuyllie, do
not only live (which thing beaftes also or bond men does) but also they live
well / that is to wit, gyuynge their mind to lyberall and honest works / as
ben the works of the virtues, both of the practyue and also of the speculatyue
soul. Now The end of cities or commonweals is a good life or to lyuewel
then after we have thus determined a city to be ordained for living and well
living, as for the fynall end of it, we must now first treat of living
or life, and of the manners thereof. For it is the thing (as we have said) for
whose cause a city was instytute or begone / and it is the necessytie of all
things, which are and be done by the co^munytie of men, in the said city /
let us therefore ground upon this, as upon a pryncyple of all things here
after to be proved, being naturally had and believed, and wyllyngly granted of
all men: that all men having their wits and being not otherwise impedyte or
let / naturallye what al men desire haui^ge their wits.
does desire a suffycyent life. And moreover also does refuse and eschew
noisome or hurtful things / which thing also is not only euydent of men:
but also of al other kinds of beasts or sensyble creatures, according to the
mind of Tully in his first book / de officiis and the third chapter, where
he says thus. First of all to every kind of sensyble creatures this propertye
is given of nature, to save and defend themselves / their own body, and life
/ and to eschew those things which semen to be noisome and hurtful unto
them self / and to purchase and get all those things, which are necessary
and needful to the preseruacyon of their own life / which thing also every
man may perceive euydently, by sensyble experyence, in the kind of sensyble
creatures. But the life and good life conuenyent and syttyng for men: is after
two manners. There is one life: which The wordly life and the heavenly life.
is wont to be called a temperall or wordly life / and there is an other life:
which is wont to be called an eternal or heavenly life. And because the hole
university of Philosophers could not by demonstracyon or reason prove this
second life / that is to wit the eternal life, neither it was a thing
euydently known of hit self / therefore they busyed not them selfs, neither
gave any great force to each these things, which are necessary for the
getting and obteynyng of the said life. But of life and living well, or good
life after the first manner that is temperall and wordly / and of the things
which are necessary for it: the glorious and proud Philosophers comprehended
and perceived by demonstracyon the matyer in a manner complete / wherefore for
the obteynynge of this life, they concluded that a cyuyle co^munyte was
necessary / without which said cyuyle co^munytie this suffycyent life in no
wise can be obtained or had / Among which Philosophers, he that is the
pryncypall, that is to wit Arystostle, in his first book of the Polytykes,
and the second chapitre said that all men are desirous of a cyuyle co^munyte /
and naturally have an appetyte unto it herefore / which thing albeit that
sensyble experyence does teach: yet that notwithstayndyng, we woll induce and
bring in the cause of it, which we have said, more dystynctely saying* that
because a man is borne naturally made of contrary elements, by reason what is
the cause of man's corrupcyon.
of the contrary accyons and passions of which said elements, in a manner
contynually somewhat of his substance is corrupted: And again because he is
borne naked, and unarmed and vndefenced apt to suffer and be corrupted and
destroyed of the excess of the air, wherein he lives: and of the other
elements, (as it has been showed in natural Phylosophye) he had need of
crafts and occupacyons wherefore ma^nedeth arts or crafts.
of diverse kinds and manners to auoyed, and put by the aforesaid inco^modyties
or annoyaunces / which arts and crafts, because they may not be exercysed
but of great multitude of men, neither they may be had, except the said
multitude do co^munycate and keep socyetie among them selves one with an other
it was necessary, that men should congregate them selves together for the
winning of that that is co^modyouse and profitable, and for the avoiding of
harm or evil, by the said arts or crafts. But for as much as among men so
congregated and gathered oftentimes chances contencyons, bralles and
stryffes, which, except they be strengthened and ordered by the rule of
Justice, might cause fyghtes, bataylles, and seperacyon of men / and so in
conclusyon might be cause of the destruction of the city, It was necessary in
this co^munycacyon and common society of men to ordeyne a rule of Justice /
and one to keep and execute the said Justice. And because this keeper, defender,
and executer of Justice ought to ponysshe iniuryouse trespassours, and to keep
of other men, other being within the same co^munytie, or in any other out
co^munytie, which either trouble any synguler persons, or go about to
oppress the co^munytie, it was necessary that the city should have somewhat in
it self, whereby it might resyste these said persons Moreover because a
co^munyte has need of some co^modyties reperacyons, and custodyes of certain
things, and yt not always one / but in the time of peace of one manner, and in
the time of war, of an other manner. It was necessary, that in the said
co^munytie there should be purueyours of such manner things / that when it
should be expedyent or necessary, some succoure and help might be redye to the
common necessytie / But beside these things which we have now spoken of,
which only are succurrynge and helping to the necessytie of this present
life: there is an other thing which they that live in a cyuyle co^munytie
have need of as being necessary for the state of the world to come, promised
unto mankind by supernatural reuelacyon of god, the which thing is also
profitable why the honournnge of god is necessary to men.
for the state of this present life / And this I mean to be the honourynge,
and worshyppynge of god, and the gyuynge of thanks unto him, both for the
benefyte received of him in this world, and also for those that are to be
received in the world to come. For the teaching whereof, and for to dyrecte
men in the same: it was necessary, that the city or cyuyle co^munytie should
determyne assygne Doctors or teaches ar necessary to cities or cyuyle
co^munyties.
and appoynte certain doctoures or teachers. Of all these things and eke of
the other aforesaid, we shall exquisitely and perfytely speak in the treatyses
following / both what they be and of what nature. Men therefore (as I have
said) were congregated for a suffycyent life, being able to get unto
themselves these necessary things before reherced, and co^munycatyng them
selves one with an other / And this congregacyon so made perfyte, and having
in it self The beginning or cause of a city.
allthyng necessary to a suffycyent life, was called Ciuitas / a city. The
fynall cause whereof, and of the pluralytie or multitude of the parts thereof:
has been somewhat showed of us already / and in the chapter following more
largely and dystynctely shall be treated and spoken of. And for because that
diverse things are necessary to them that desire to live well / which al can
not be procured and done by men of one order or office: it was necessary that
there should be diverse and sondrye sorts, ordres and offices of men, in this
cyuyle co^munytie / which might exercise and procure such diverse things,
which men neded for the suffycyencye of their life. And these diverse and
sondrye ordres or offices of men, are nothing else than the pluralytie,
multitude and dystynccion, of the parts of a city. Than what a city is / and
for what fynall cause such a cyuyle co^munycacyon and society was begone and
made / and also of the dyuysyon of the parts of the said co^munytie: to have
thus fygurallye passed through. Let it be suffycyent at this time.

Of the dystynccyon and assygnacion of the parts of a City or cyuyle
co^munytie / and of the necessytie that such parts should be, and also that
they should be dystyncte and separated one from an other for an end possible
to be assygned by man's inuencyon.
The, v, Chapter,
AFter that we have now spoken generally of the parts of a City, in the
perfyte operacyon of which parts, and common conuersacyon of them selfs each
with other, being not let of any extrynsecall thing, we have said the
tranquyllytie of a city or cyuyle co^munyte to stand consyste and rest: to
the entente that by the more large determynacion made of them, as well of the
works and ends of them, as of the appropryate causes of them, the causes of
tranquyllytie and of his contrary intranquyllytie may the more largely be
showed, declared, and opened, now beginning again to speak of the said
parts, let us say / that the parts and offices of a city or cyuyle
co^munytie are of six kinds or sorts / as The syx partesor offices of a
city or ciuyle co^munytie.
Arystotle said in the. vii. book of his Polytykes and the. viii. chapter /
that is to wit, husbandrye or tyllynge of the ground, handecrafte,
chyualrye, marchau^dyse, sacryfyce, and Judgment / Which said parts or
offices are exercysed of syx sundry sorts of men / that is to wit of husband
men / of Artyfycers, of men of war, marchaunte men, of priests, and of Iuges
of necessary and profitable Husbandrye crafts men, knyghthode marchau^dyse
preesthode, lawyers.
things / Of the which six parts, three / that is to wit preesthode,
Chyualry and Judgment are simpliciter pertes of a city / which also in cyuyle
co^munyties they are wont to call the honorable or worshypfull of the city.
But the other at called parts after a large manner of speaking / as because
they are offices necessary to a co^munytie or city according to the mind of
Arystotle in the seventh book of the Polytyks and ye. viii. chapitre. And the
multitude of these men, is wont to be called the common sort or rascal of
the city. These six than at the most famous parts of a City, co^munytie or
Realm, unto which all other parties may conuenyently be reduced. The
necessytie of which said parties albeit that it has been spoken of, and
showed somewhat in the chapter before gone: Yet woll we speak of the same
again more dystynctely / supposyng this first as a thing proved euydently,
that a city is a co^munytie begone to the end yt men might live, and also live
well in it. And of living well or good life, we have determined A city or
cyuyle co^munytie was Instytute to the end that me^myghte live well in it.
before, that it may be after two manner of fascyons / one way it may be
understand of the life of this would, that is to wit of the temperall or
wordly life and an other way it may be understand of the life of an other
world to come that is to wit of the heavenly life. Of which two manners of
life or living, which are desired of man as ends: we shall assygne the
necessytie of the dystynecyon of the parts of a cyuyle co^munytie or city.
The life of man, or to live after the fryst manner, that is to wit wordly or
temperally, otherwhyles is taken for the being of men living / as it is said
in the second book de anima diuere wordly life.
vuientibus est esse, that is life to living things is their being, after
which manner life is nothing else then anima / otherwhyles life or to live is
taken for the act, or for the accyon or passion of the soul or life. And
again both of these may be taken two manner of ways / for other they may be
taken or understand Vita is taken for anima.
in eodem esse naturali, orelles in consimili esse, which they do call esse
specificum. And though life taken after either other of these said ways, as
well life proper to man, as the life common to him and to other synsyble
creaturs, does depend and hang of natural causes: yet the present
consyderacyon of life or of accyon or passion of the soul is not of it, in
that it comes or is caused of them / for such manner consyderacyon is had or
made in that part of natural Phylosophye, which treats de planets et de
animalibus / but our present inquysycion or consyderacion at this time is of
them, after as they do take or receive complemente and perfeccyon of craft and
reason, by which the kind of man lives. And therefore we must attend and
note well, that if a man ought to live and to live well, it is necessary and
needful, that his accyoris be done and well done / and not only his accyons:
but also his passions / I say well done / that is to say inconuenyent when a
man lives well.
temperament. And because we have not received of nature perfytely and in every
point those things, by which these temperaments are made complete and
perfyte. It was needful to man, beyond or over the natural causes, by reason
to form and fascyon or make some things / by which the operacyon and
conuersacyon of his accyons and passions both as to wchynge the body, and
also the soul, might be made complete and profit. And these are the kinds
of works and workers, procedyng, caused and brought forth of virtues, arts
and scyences, both practyue and also speculatyue. Furthermore of the accyone
of man, Two manner of accyons and passions of men.
and also of his passions: some common and are brought forth of natural
causes, without knowledge reason and understanding / as ben those which are
done or caused through or by the contrarytie of the Elements, whereof our
bodies at composte and made, by the reason of the permyxcyon or mynglyng of
them together one with an other. And of this kind, all the accyons or
operacyons of the nutrytyue part or power, may conuenyentlye be said to be.
Of the same sort also be all the accyons, that the Elements do cause which
do conteyne our bodies, or wherein we do live, by the alteracyon of their
qualyties / of which kind are also the alteracyons which are caused of ye
things entering in to me^nes bodies / as of meats, drynkes, medycynes,
poisons, and other things like un to these. And there be other accyons and
passions caused of us, and in us, by our intellectyue and appetatyue powers of
the which certain are called actiones Actiones immanentes.
immane^tes, that is intrinsecall or inward operacyons: because they do not
pass forth in to any other subject or body from the doer or worker of them
/ neither they are exercysed by any the exteryour organes or members being
moved as to wchynge to mocyon local / as ben the thoughts of men / and also
their desires or affeccyons. Other there be, and they are called actiones
transeuntes outward Actiones tra^seuntes.
operacyons / because that other one way or other of these aforesaid, they are
contrary in their manner and fascyon to the accyons last spoken of / that is
to wit to the inward accyons which are called actiones immanentes / for the
temperynge therefore of all these accyons and passions, and to make them
complete and perfyte in that thing to which nature can not bring them:
diverse kinds of crafts and occupacyons has been found and devised, And of
other virtues also why crafts were diuysed.
as we have heretofore said, and men of diverse offices has been instytuted
ordained and appointed to exercise them for the supplyeng of man's Indygence
and need / which ordres of men are none other thing, than the parts of a
city before rehearsed and rekened up / for to tempre and to save the acts and
operacyons of the nutrytyue part of the soul (which ones crassynge, it
could not be chosen but that the sensyble creature, whether it be man or else
any other be must needs utterly be corrupted and destroyed, both as to
wchynge to the syngulares / and also as to wchynge to the hole kind)
husbandrye or tyllynge of the Husbandrye.
feldes, and the keeping and ordering of beasts and catall, was Instytuted
and ordained. Unto ye which two kinds conuenyentlye may be reduced all the
kinds of hunting of beasts, living in the land or in the water, or flyenge
in the air / as of four foted beasts / fysshes and fowls, and also all
other beasts, by which norysshement or food is gotten by any co^munycacyon
or change / or else is dyghte and made ready to be daten: to the end that by
the said norysshement, in conclusyon, that thing may be restored which is
lofte and consumed of the substance of our body / and be conserved and kept
in his immortal being to continue evermore: so farforthe as nature has
granted man to why arts mechanycall were found or devised that is to wit
such crafts which are wrought both with wit and hand.
be immortal. But to measure and tempre the accyons and passions of our
body, which are outwardely caused of the Elements, whereof we be made / and
of their impressions: there was found and devised the kind of mechanycall
arts as Arystotle in the. vii. book of his Polytykes calls them / as ben
the making of all manner clothe for the use of man's body, with all things
apperteynynge thereunto / which all Aristotle comprehends under this one
word lauificiu^ / Coryers craft, shomakers, and taylours craft. And all
kinds of Carpenters craft / and certain other mechanycall crafts doing
service to other offices of the city medyatly or immedyatlye / and not only
those that tempre the accyons or passions of these. ii. senses touching and
tastynge: but also of the other senses or wits / which arts are more for
pleasure and to live well, than for the necessytie of man's life / as paynters
craft, with such other like / of the which Arystotle in the third book of
his Polytykes and the. iiii. chapitre says in this wise And of these
mechanycall arts or crafes: some must needs be of necessytie / and other some
apperteyne and are ordained only for pleasure / to the deckynge and adornynge
of our life / under which kind also is comprehended the practyse of
lechecrafte.

ANd to measure and tempre the excesses of the acts or operacyons, which
ardon^ or caused of the motyue powers local by knowledge or understanding,
Consules et iudices.
and by appetyte or desire (which acts we have called before actus
transeuntes, outward Acts, and which are possible to be done to the profit
or good, or else to the dysprofyte, iniurye, or hurt of an other person
dystyncte from him that is the doet or worker, for the state of this present
world / then was necessarily ordained in a city a certain part or office,
by which the excesses of why iuges and rulers were i^stytuted and ordained.
such manner acts should be corrected or amended, and be brought to equalytie
/ or due proporcion. For else if there should not have been ordained such an
office by the reason of these excesses there might be caused fighting / and of
it separacyo^ of the Cytyzens / and so in conclusyon might follow corrupcyon or
destruccyon of the City, and the pryuacyon of a suffycient life. And this
part is called of Arystotle pats iudicialis or pryncypans / and consultiua /
that is to say the part or office of Judges or Rulers / with other that do
service or help unto it / to which part or office it belongs to dyrecte,
Rule, and order the things concerning the common ryghtes and vtylyties. But
for as much as a suffycyent life can not be led the Cytyzens being
oppressed or brought in to seruytude or thraldom by extrynsecalloppressours
of their co^munyties, and again because it was necessary, that the sentences
of the Judges should be executed against iniuryous and rebellyous persons
within the said co^munytie by coactyue power: it was needful to ordain in a
City an other part, which is called / Pars Chyualrie or the craft of Arms.
miliataris or propugnatiua / that is to say the office of men of Arms and
defenders of the City / to which part also many of the mechanical Crafts do
service / for a City is ordained because that men might live and live well, as
it was said in the chapitre before gone / which thing is impossyble to be done:
the Cytyzens being brought in to seruytude or bondage and thraldom. For this
thing that is to wit to be in seruytude: the most excellent of all the
Philosophers affyrmeth to be against the nature of a City or cyuyle
co^munytie. Wherefore Bondage or thraldom is contrary to a city or cyuyle
co^munytie.
in the. iiii. of the Polytykes and the. iiii. chapter, assygnynge and
showing the necessytie of this part he says these words following. The. v.
part of a City is defenders or men of arms / which part is no less
necssarye to a city: than any of the other parts before rehearsed if they woll
defend their liberty against them, that do invade them / and not be brought
in to thraldom / for it is imposyble that the co^munytie which is worthy to be
called a city, should be by nature thrall or bond / for a city is of it self
suffycyent / but that thing / which is thrall or bond: can not be suffycyent
of it self. And the necessytie of this part because of rebellyous persons
intrynsecall or within the same co^munytie which must be compelled to obaye
rulers is had of Arystotle in the. vii. book of his Politykes and the. viii.
chapitre. But we have left out his words here / for cause of shortness or speed
/ and because we woll bring them in, in the. xiiii. chapitre of this diccyon
and the. viii. part of ye same chapitre / moreover because in ye years of this
world The treasure of a city.
sometime is fertilytie and great plenty of fruits / and otherwhyles there is
sterilytie and scasete again because a city is sometime peaceablye dysposed,
and at unity or concord with ye other cities or co^munyties being nere unto
it: and sometime other wise disposed toward them: and also because there are
common exortunyties or co^modyties of a city, whereof it has need: as the
making and reperacion of ways and bryges / with the setting up and
reperacions of other buyldynges / and such other like co^modyties, which it is
not mere but were to redyous and long for to rehearse here. It was needful for
the procuring of these said co^modyties, in conuenyent time to ordeyne in a
city, the pte or office called ptem the saurisantem of Rich men gatherynge
treasure, which of Arystotle is called pars pecuniatiua / for this part
gathers and keeps money / corn / wynes / oils / and other necessary
things / and procures and secheth from all places such things / as are
profitable to the co^munytie: to succoure and help them in their necessytie
and need hereafter to come / unto which also certain of the other parts do
service. And this part Arystotle calls partem pecuniatiuam: because that in
the keeping of money seems to be the treasure of all things for that that all
things are turned and changed in to money. Now it rests for to speak of
the necessytie of Preesthodeor the office of priests.
the power and auctorytie or priests or preesthode / of the which necessytie,
all men were not so agreeable in opinion, as of the necessytie of the other
parts of a city And the cause hereof was, for that that the very and
pryncypal necessytie of this part could not be comprehended or perceived by
demonstracyon, or proved by The necessytie of priests can not be comprehended
by demonstacyo^
reason / neither it was a thing euydent of it self / yet that
notwithstanding, all gentle nacyons agreed in this, that it was conuenyent to
instytute the office of priests, for cause of the worshyppyng and honourynge
of god / and of the profit following thereof, for the state of this world, or
of the world to come. For very many of the laws or sects do promise to well
doers reward, and to euyldoers pain or punysshement, which reward and
punysshementes shall be dystrybuted by god in the world to come. But beside
the causes of making laws which causes are believed without demonstracyon or
proof: Philosophers consydred and noted very conuenyentlye an other (in a
manner) necessary cause, even The necessary causes of dyuyne laws.
for the state also of this world, of the tradycyon or gyuynge of dyuyne laws
or sects. Among whom was Resiodus, Pythagoras, and very many other of the
old Philosophers. And this cause was the goodness both of the monastycall and
also of the cyuyle acts of men, of which acts the quyete or tranquyllytie of
co^munyties and fynallye the suffycient life of this present world in a manner
does hole depend / For albeit that some of the Philosophers, which were the
fynders out or deuysers of such manner laws or sects, have not thought or
believed the resurreccyon of men to come / and that life which is called the
life eternal or everlasting / yet that notwihstandynge they did feign or
Imagyne, and brought the people in belefe, that there is such a life / and
that in it there are delectacyons or pleasures / and sorrows or pains,
according to the qualyties of me^nes works or deeds done in this mortal life
/ that by the reason hereof they might induce men to the reverence and dread of
god, and to desire of eschewynge vices and of loving and exercysynge virtues /
for there be certain acts, which the law maker can not rule and strayghten
by man's law / for as much as it can not be proved yt any man has such
acts, or else yt he is without them / which acts for all yt can not be hyd
or unknown to god, whom they did feign to be the maker of such laws and the
co^mau^der of the^ to be observed and kept under ye co^mi^cacion of eternal
pain to euylldoers, and of eternal reward to well doers / wherefore they
said of dyuersemen, which had been virtuous whiles they lived in this world:
that they were placed or set in the fyrmament of heaven. And hereof peradventure
came the names to certain of the sterres and constellacyons or fygures
celestyall. And The Images or fygures of sterres or constellacions.
of those that wrought vngracyously, whiles they lived in this world they said
of some, that their souls entered in to diverse bodies of brute bestes / as that
in to the bodies of hogs entered the souls of them which had been glotons,
and inte^perante in things apperteynynge to tastynge / as meats, drynkes, and
such other things. And that in to the bodies of gotes entered the souls of
them which The souls of men to enter in to ye bodies of vrute beasts.
had been lecherouse, and intemperant in things apperteynynge touching, and
flesshely lust / and so semblable the souls of other men, in to the bodies of
other beasts / according to the proporcyon and lykenes of me^nes vices unto
the damnable and vile properties of the brute beasts. After the same manner
also they assygned diverse kinds of torments ordained for the wicked or evil
works of men / as for example, to intemperant Tantalus perpetuallhongre and
thyrst having water and fruit present and nere unto him, whereof he may
neither The fable of Tantalus.
eat ne drink, because ever as he makes any profre toward them, they do
flebacke from him, farther than that he may reche to them. They said also that
there is a certain place of such torments, both deep and full of darkness:
which they called Tartara / in english it may be called hell / descrybynge
such manner torments, after the most terryble and hateful fascyons that they
could Tartara hell
Imagyne / by reason of the fear of which torments: men eschewed to do evil
and vycyouse works / and were excyted to do virtuous works of charytie,
mercy or pytie / and were also well disposed and ordered them selfs and other
men And by the reason of these things many contencions and iniuryes were
ceased in the co^munyties / by reason whereof, both peace and the tranquyllytie
of cities and the suffycyent life of men for the state of this present world,
was withlesse dyffycultie, and the more easily kept / which was the thing
fynallye intented of those wise men, by the making of such manner laws or
sects. The office therefore of the hethen priests among the gentyles was the
gyuynge and teaching The priests of ye gentyles
of such manner precepts / for the teaching whereof: they ordained in their
co^munyties temples in which their gods were worshypped / and did appoynte
thereto teachers of the said laws or tradycyons, whom they called Sacerdotes
priests / because they meddled and had the ordrynge of the holy things
apperteynynge to the temples / as of the books / of the vessels / and of
such other things which what manner men were instytuted to be priests among
ye gentyls.
served to the honourynge and worshyppynge of gods. These things verily they
ordered semyngly and syttyngly according to their faith, custom and usage /
for they did not instytute and admytte all manner of men to be priests / but
only they instytuted certain virtuous and approved Cytyzens to be priests
which had been of the office of Chyualrye, or of the office of Iuges /
Cytyzeyns I say which had forsaken or given over secularie or wordely busynes
/ and which were no we excused from cyuyle offices and works, because of
their great age. For of such manner men than being separate and free from
passions and to whose sayenges the more credence was given because of their
age, and the grauyte of their manners. It was semely and according that the
gods should be honored Of wat manner men god is to be worshypped.
or worshypped, and the holy things of them to be handeled and ordered and not
of handy crafts men, hired laborers, or other which had exercysed vile and
filthy offices / wherefore Arystotle in the. vii. book, and the. ix. chapter
of the Polytykes says these words following. For neither an husband man,
neither an artyfycer or handye crafts man, is to be made or ordained a
preeste. But for as much as the gentyles, with all other laws and sects of
men, which are no we or have been in times paste, besides the catholyke
Christen faith, or besides the belyfe of the holy fathers, which was before
the christen faith / and to speak generallye, for as much as all that are or
has been without or beside the tradycion of those things, which are
contained in the holy Canon, called the Bible, had not the right opinion of
god, which ought to be had of him The laws or sects of the gentyles had not
right opinion of god.
in that they followed the wit of man, or false prophets, masters and
teachers of errors / and therefore also neither their opinion was right of the
life to come neither of the felylytie or myserye of the same, neither of the
true and very preesthode instytuted and ordained therefore / yet nevertheless
we have spoken of their vsages and ceremonies, to the intent that the
difference of their preesthode from the true preesthode, that is to wit from
the preesthode among Christen men / and to the intent also that the necessytie
of the part or office of priests to be had in co^munyties may the more
euydently appear.

Of the fynall cause of a certain part of a city or cyuyle co^munytie, that
is to wit the office of priests / which cause may be proved by the
tradycyon or imdyate relacyon and scripture of god: but it is impossyble to be
proved by man's reason.
The, vi, Chapter,
How it remains, to speak of the fynall cause, wherefore the very and true
office of priests has been instytude in the co^munyties of christen men /
This fynall cause was to moderate and govern man's acts and appetytes as
well inward as outward by knowledge, to the end that they so moderated and
temperated by knowledge, mankind is ordained to the best life of the world to
come. And therefore we must attend and consydre well, that albeit the first
man Adam was created pryncypally for the glory of god as other creatures were:
yet for all that he was created after an other synguler manner and a special
diverse fascyon from all other kinds of corruptyble and mortal creatures / for
he was created and made to the Image and symytude of god, to the end that he
should be apt to receive and be part Adam was created to the image of god
taker of eternal felycytie after ye state of this present world he was made
also in the state of Innocence or of orygynall Justice, and also of grace (as
some saints do probablye say and certain also of the cheyfe doctoures or
teachers of holy scripture) In which state verily if he had co^tynued neither
he neither any of his posterytie should have neded the instytucyon or
destynccion of cyuyle pertes or offices / because ye nature should have brought
forth to him all things mete co^uenyent what manner was the fall or offense of
Adam, and what manner one the punissheme^t thereof
and pleasurefull to the suffyciencie of this life, in paradyse terestryall or
in the gardyne of pleasure without any manner pain or werynes of him. But
because he corrupted and destroyed his innocence or orygynall Justice and
grace by the eating of the forbidden fruit, and therein transgressynge and
breaking of the commandment of god sodaynelye he fell in to sin, mysery
and pain / the pain I say of the pryuacyon and loss of eternal bliss and
felycytie unto which he with all his posterytie was finally ordained by the
benefyte and goodness of almyghtie god. He deserved also by the transgressynge
of the said co^mau^demente: to propagate all his succession in flesshely lust,
in which also and with which every man afterward has been conceived and
borne / by the reason hereof Original sin.
contractynge or gatherynge a spotte or sin, which in the law of christen
men is called orygynall sin / only Christ. Jesus excepted, which without
all manner sin, flesshely lust or pleasure was conceived by the holy ghost
and Christ was free from orygynall sin
borne of Mary the vyrgyn / which thing was wrought and done, when one of the
three persons in deite, that is to wit the sone, being very god, in ye unity
of his person, and as (dyuynes do speak) in vnitate sui suppositi, took unto
him the nature of man. And through this transgressyon of our first parents
all the succession and posterity of mankind was made sick, and is borne
sick, as towchynge the soul / which before the said transgressyon was created
in the state Man was made sick in soul by orygynall syn^e.
of perfyte sayntie and health / and of innocence and grace. And through the
said trespase was also berefte and depryued his best end, that is to wit
eternal felycitie: whereunto he was ordained. But because it is properly
belongyng unto god: to have mercy and pytie upon mankind his creature, and
made to his own Image, and whom he had before ordained to blyssed and eternal
life. It pleased him, and was his will, which never does any thing in vain,
neither fails in necessary things: to exhybyte and show the remedy of
man's fall / by gyuynge certain precepts of obedyence to be observed of man
which as being contrary to the transgressyon, should heal the syckenes of
sin, that came of the said transgressyon. And in gyuynge of those precepts
he like unto a cunning Physycyan or leche proceeded after a very good order
from the more easy or lyghter things, to the harder things, for first he
commanded to men the ceremonies, and manner of making sacrafyces, which were
called holocausta / that Ritus holocastorum.
is to say of brennynge the hole beasts in sacrafyce, and of offering up the
first fruytes of the earth, and the first begotten of all sensyble
creatures, as one would say to prove the repentance and obedyence of man /
which ceremonies the old fathers kept and observed to the reverence of god,
faith / obedyence / a gyuynge of thanks to him: even until the time of
Abraham. To whom according to that we have aforesaid: he gave an other more
hard and grievous precepte of Circu^sycyon / (that is to wit of cuttynge
every male child in the Circu^sycion.
top of his preuey membre) as if god would seem, again to prove the
repentance and the obedyence of man. And these precepts were observed and
kept by some The law of Moses.
men, even until the time of Moses / by whom god gave afterward to ye
people of Israel a law / beside the aforesaid things he ordained greater and
moo precepts, both for the state of this present world, and also of the
world to come: and ordained also the priests and the leuytes to be mynysters
of the said law. Sacerdotes acleuite.
And the vtylytie or profit that came to the obseruers and fulfyllers both of
all those precepts, and also of the law of Moses: was this a certain
purgacyon and clensynge of sin, both orygynall, and also actual and
wyllyngly committed / and The utility of the law of Moses.
a certain escapynge and preseruacion from the eternal a temperali penasensus
alterius seculi sensyble pain of an other world / How beit by the obseruacyon
of them, men did not merit eternal felycyte or bliss. But because our most
merciful god had ordained mankind to his said bliss, willing to reduce
and restore him after his fall unto the same again after a conuenyent order,
last of all by his sone Ihesu christ being very god, and very man in
vnitate suppositi, (that is to say in the unity or fyngularyte of personage)
he gave the law of the gospel contaynynge the promyses and precepts of
things to be believed the precepts of things to be done, of things to be
eschewed / and the counsaylles appertaynynge to the same. By obseruacyon and
fulfyllynge whereof men are not only preserved from a sensyble pene, as they
were by the observing of the formore precepts, but also (such is his
gracyous ordinance) by such things (in the blood of Christ) they do merit
or deserve of a certain congruytie or conuenyencie eternal felycytie. And
therefore it is called The law of grace.
the law of grace or favor / partly, because through the passion and death
of Christ, mankind is redeemed from sin, and from the pain of the loss of
eternal bliss, which he was bound to, by reason of the fall or sin of
our first parents / and partly, for that by the obseruacyon of this law and
by the receyuynge of the Sacraments instytuted with hit, the grace of god is
given to us / and after it is given: it is coroborated and confyrmed in us /
and when it is lost it is by the same means recovered and gotten again / so
that by the merytes of Christ's passion of a certain congruytie, as we have
said our works or deades why our works are called merytoryous
are made merytorye of eternal felycytie. And by the merit hereof, that is to
wit of the passion of Christ, not only those that have bensyns the time of
the said passion, have received grace, whereby they may merit and descrue
eternal life: but also the obseruers and kepers or fulfyllers of the first
precepts, and of the law of Moses, through the same blyssed passion have
gotten the grace of eternal beatitude, which they had not before but
remained in a place, which men do call Limbus patrum until the co^myuge of
Christ, and his passion / death / Until the coming of christ ye fathers
remained in Limbo.
and resurreccyon / by whom they received the repromyssyon and promise of god
long before given or made unto them. Albeit that the promise of such manner
grace / was given to them in the first precepts of the prophets, and of the
law of Moses, under an obscure and dark manner, in shadows and fygures / for
all things chanced to them in figure / as saint Paul says in the first
chapter to the hebrews. And this deduccyon, process and order used of god,
was very conuenyent, for beginning at the less perfyte thing: from it he
proceeded to the more perfyte / and in conclusyon to the most perfyte of all
things being conuenyent for the salvation of man. Neither is it to be thought
herefore, but that god if he had would might forthwith at the beginning have
given the perfyte remedy of man's fall, and have restored him again / but he
did use such an order why man was not restored forthwith after his fall.
as we have said, because it so pleased him / and so was conuenyent to be
done, man's trespase requyrynge it / lest if he had been over redye and easy
to have forgyuen man: it might have given occasyon unto man to have trespassed
more largely again. And to be teachers of this said law / and mynisters of
the Sacraments according to the same law: certain men were instytuted in
the co^munyties, which were called priests / and deacons or leuytes / whose
office is to teach the precepts and counsaylles of the Chrystyane law of the
gospel / in those The office of priests and deacons.
things which are to be believed to be done / and to be eschewed / to the end
that we mayegette and obtain the blyssed state of the world to come / and
avoid the contrary state of the same world, that is to wit eternal
myserye. The end therefore or the fynall cause of the instytucion of the office
of priests: is teaching The end or fynall cause of the office of priests.
and gyuynge instruccyon to men of such things, which according to the law
of the gospel / it is necessary for them to believe, to do / and to leave
undone: for the getting and obtaynynge of eternal bliss and salvation / and
the avoiding of everlasting dampnacyon and myserye. And unto this office
conuenyentlye appertain all dyscyplynes found out and dyuysed by man's
wit, both speculatyue and practyue, which do moderate, tempre and govern
the Acts of of men, as well the inward as the outward Acts, proceadynge of
appetyte and knowledge / by which dyscyplynes a man is well disposed and
ordered in his soul, for the state as well of this present world / as of the
world to come / for all these dyscyplynes well nere we have of the tradycyon
of the meruaylous philosopher, and of other glorious men. Yet have we left out
the rehersayle of them here for breyfnes / and for that that the necessytic of
such manner dyscyplynes appertey ne not to our present consyderacyon. But we
ought to understand by this chapitre, and the other next following after this
yt there are other causes of the offices of a city, as touching to every
kind of them, in that they are offices of a city and other causes of the
same, in that they are qualyties of man's body or mind: for the fynall causes
of them in that their qualyties of the body or soul of man / The fynall causes.
be the works which proceed or are brought forth immedyatly of them / as of
the ship wryghtes craft, the fynall cause is ye ship / and of cheualrye, the
fynall cause is the use and occupyenge of armor or fyghtyng / and of
preesthode the fynall cause is the preaching of the law of god, and the
admynystracyon of the sacraments according to the same law / and so
conformably in all other offices, and pertes of a city or cyuyle co^munytie.
But the fynal causes of them taking them as they are offices determined and
instituted in a city, are the co^modyties and sufficyencies which do make
perfyte the accyons and passions of men and do proceed, or are brought forth
and caused by the works of the said qualyties / which suffycyencies can not be
had without the said qualyties / as for example, of fighting or battle,
which is the act, work, and end of chyualrye: liberty is caused or brought
forth, and also is kept in a city / which liberty is the end of all the
acts and works of chyualrie. So likewise of the work or end of the
carpenters Liberty is ye fynall cause of war.
craft, that is to say of a house: there comes or is brought forth to men
or to the city, defense from the impressyons of the air which are noisome /
as from excessyue heat / cold / moystnes / or drynes / which defense truly
is the fynall cause, wherefore the office of carpenters craft was ordained in a
city or cyuyle co^munytie. And after the same manner of the obseruacyon of
gods law, which is the end of preesthode: comes forth or grows unto
men eternal felycytie. And after the same manner also we ought to Judge of the
other parts or offices of a city. And after this same manner or like: the
other kinds of causes of y^ said offices are dystyncte and dysseuered one from
an other of them / that is to wit the materyall cause / the formal cause / and
the effectyue cause of them / as it shall appear of those things which
hereafter does follow. Of the nombre than of the parts of a city, and of the
necessytie and also the dystynccyon of them for cause of the fynall
suffycyencies to be gotten by them let thus much as has been spoken of us be
suffycyent.

Of the other kinds of causes both of the being, and also of the seperacyon
and dystynccyon of the offices and parts of a city / and of the dyuysyon of
every kind by two manners apperteynynge to the present purpose.
The. vii. chapitre.
How after the premysses: it follows consequently to speak of the other
causes of the offices or parts of a city / and first we shall speak of the
causes materyall and formal / and than afterward we shall make inquysycyon
and search of the effectuell cause of them. But for as much as in things
which receive perfeccyon, the matier is existent or has his being before the
form: Let us first speak of the materyall cause / And here we do say,
that the proper matyer or materyall cause of diverse offices, in that the said
offices do name or sygnyfye to us the qualyties of the soul: are men by their
natyuytie or generacyon inclyned to diverse crafts or dysyplynes. For in as
much as nature does not fail in necessary things, as being always most
careful and dylygent about the most noble creatures, which verily is
mankind above all other corruptyble things, of which said kind of man
(being made perfyte by diverse Arts or dysyplynes) as of the matier or
substance, It is necessary to constytute a city, and to dystyncte and dyseuer
parts in it which are necessary to the getting or obteynynge of the
suffycyencie of this life: (as it has been showed in the. iiii. and. v.
chapytres of this dyccyoy) nature her self began this dystynccyon of the said
parts, even about the generacyon of men / bringing forth some men in their
natural dyspocysyons apt and inclyned to husbandry / and other some to
Chyualrie / and other men to the kinds of other Arts and dysyplynes / but yet
diverse men to diverse dysyplynes / And she has not inclyned only one man to
one kind of Art or dysyplyne: but she has inclyned many men to one and the
same kind of craft or dysyplyne / Of what manner men judges ought to be made.
as the necessytie of the suffyciencie of man's life did require / She
brought forth some therefore Apt to prudencye / because the part of the
judges or of counseylours in a city ought to be made and instytuted of wise
men. And some men she has brought forth apt and mete to strength and
boldenes: because of such manner of men is made the part of warryours, or men
of Arms in a city. And so likewise she has made other men apt and mete to
the kinds of practyue and speculatyue habytes or scyences / which are
necessary and conuenyent to live and to live well, to the end, that by this
dyuersytie of the materyall inclynacyons of men to diverse kinds of habytes or
scyences and crafts: she might perform and make up that which was needful
to the dystynccyon or dyuersytie of the parts of city or cyuyle co^munytie.
But the materyall causes of the offices of a city, as touching to yt, when
they do name or betoken, to us the parts The pertes of a city at me^
profitable to the commen weal.
of a cyuyle co^munytie: is in a manner euydent already. For they are men
habytuated or endued with diverse kinds and manners of arts and dyscyplynes,
of whom diverse ordres and parts are ordained in a city for cause of the
fynall suffycyencies which grows and comes / of their arts and
dyscyplynes / and after this manner the parts of a ciuyle co^munyties are
properly called officia quasi obsequia because the said parts considered as
they are so ordained and instytuted in a city: are ordained to the obsequie of
man, or to do man pleasure or service. And the formal causes of these said
offices considered as they are abytes or permanent qualyties of the mind of
man: are none other but the very qualyties selves / for the said qualyties are
forms of the hauers of them making complete and perfyte the inclynacyons of
men, which are in them given by nature. Wherefore in the. vii. book of the
Polytykes and the last chapitre it is written every craft and dyscyplyne
intends to supplye and perform that, which is wantynge unto nature. But the
formal causes of the offices considered as they are parts instytuted in a
city are the precepts of the mounet or effectyue cause taught or imprynted in
them, which ar deputed and assygned in a city to exercise certain
determynate works. And the motyues or effectyue causes of the offices
considered as they do name or sygnyfye to us qualyties of the soul, are the
minds and wylles of men by their cogytacyons and desires / other seuerallye,
or ioyntlye, indyfferently. And of certain of the said offices: the mouynge
and the exercise of the organes or instruments of the body, is the motyue or
effectyue cause, beside the minds and wylles of men. But the effectyue cause
of the said offices considered as they are parts of a city or cyuyse
co^munytie is the humayne law maker commonly for the most part / albeit that
in old time, very seldom, and in verey few the immedyate cause effectyue of
some one or mo of them was good without any determynacyon of man / as it shall
be said in the. ix. chapter of this dyccyon, and in the. xii. and. xv. shall
appear more largely of them. But as touching to preesthode or the office of
priests: there is a certain diverse and dystyncte manner of the instytucyon
thereof / of which it shall be spoken suffycyently in the. xv. and. xvii.
chapytres of the second dyccyon. Of the parts therefore of a cyuyle
co^munytie, and of the necessytie of the instytucyon of them, by the other.
iii. kinds of causes, let this determynacyon at this time suffyce.

Of the. ii. general kinds of Regymentes / that is to wit de Regimine
temperato et viciato of the temperat governance and the corrupt governance /
and of the dyuysyon of them in to the more special kinds contained under them.
The, viii, Chapter,
Now for as much as in the premysses we have somewhat showed, but yet must
show more certainly and euydentlye, that the instytucyon and dystynccion of
the parts of a cyuyse co^munytie is made or done by some cause motyue or
effectyue, which in the last chapter before gone, we have called the law
maker, and because ye the same law maker does ordeyne, separate, and dysseuer
these parts, one of them from an other, workyng in like manner to the nature of
a beast or sensyble creature, yt is to wit first formynge instytutyng one
part in a cyuyle co^munytie, which in the. v. chapitre of this diccyon we
have called parte^ principante^ sieve iudiciale^: the part or office of
governors or judges / and by this part does instytute ye other parts, as it
shall be declared more largely in the. xv. chapitre of this diccyon it is
co^uenyent therefore for us, first of all to speak somewhat of the nature of the
said part / for in as much as it is the first and pryncypall or cheyfe of
all other as it shall appear of those things which hereafter follows / the
declaracyon first had of the cause effectyue of this part: we shall
conuenyently from it enter to the declaracyon of the instytucyon and actyue
distynccion of the other parts of a city or ciuyle co^munytie. And of the
part principatyue, Regymentes or gouernau^ces there are two sorts / the one
is a regyment well tempered / the other is a corrupt or intemperate regyment /
I call that kind of Regyment, a right and well ordered common weal after the
mind of Arystotle in the third book of his Polytykes / and the. iiii.
chapter, in the which the hedde governors governs to the common profit,
that is to say not right or evil ordered by the consent and will Regimen
te^peratum. Aegimen vitiatum.
of his subjects. And I call that regyment vicyate, corrupt intemperate or
ill or dered in which it is other wise than so Again of these. ii. kinds,
either of them is dyuyded in to. iii. special kinds. The first, that is to
wit regymen temperatu^: is dyuyded in to these. iii. in Regalem monachiam /
in aristocratiam / et politiam. And the other that is to wit Regimen
viciatum: is dyuyded in to. iii. contrary kinds / which are called Tyrannica
monarchia / olygarthia / and democratia. And every one of these said special
kinds has again certain diverse whereof to treat or speak exquysytely it
belongs not to our present busynes and purpose / for of these Arystotle has
spoken suffycyentlye in the third and fourth book of his Polytikes. But to
have more large knowledge of these said kinds which knowledge is somewhat
necessary and needful for the declaracyon of those things which hereafter
do follow / let us descrybe each one of the said special kinds of rulynge
and governance according to the mind of Arystotle / saying first that
Regalis Monarchia is a temperate Regyment or ryghtfull governance, Monarchye
Regal. Tyranny.
in which there is but only one gouernoure rulynge according to the comune
profit and with the will and consent of his subjects. And tyranny the
contrary to it is a vnitate, intemperate and unrightful regyment in which
only one man governs and rules having respect all together to his own
proffyte or pleasure / and contrary to the will of his subjects. Aristocratia
Aristocratia.
is a temperate regement in which only the best, or worshypfull men of the
City govern and rule, according to the will and constute of the subjects,
and to the comune vtylytie and profit, Oligarchia which is contrary to
Aristocratia: Oligarchia.
is a viciate or corrupt manner of Rule and governance, when some of the
Rycheste or most mighty men govern and rule having respect all together to
their own profit, and contrary to the will of the subjects / politia all
Politia.
be it that in one sygnyfycatyon it is a certain common thing to all kinds
or sorts of Regymentes or gouernaunces: yet nevertheless in one sygnyfycacyon
it betokens / a certain special kind of Temperate governance and power in
which every Cytyzene or each manner person of the cyuyle co^munytie is somewhat
part taker of the pryncipatyue state, by course according to the degree
faculty, condycyon, and estate of the person that is to say, when the
multitude governs to the common profit also and by the will and consent of
the cytyzens Democratia the contrary to it: is a kind of rule or governance,
wherein the rascal co^munes, Democratia.
or the multitude only of pore men and nedy does govern and rule / contrary
to the will and consent of the other cytyzens / and not utterly to the common
profit according to co^uenyent proporcyon. Now which of these well tempered
Regymentes is best, and which of the vytyate or intemperate regymentes is the
worste, Also to speak of the order of other Regymentes in goodness or euylnes,
it belongs not to this present consyderacyon. But yet to have spoken thus
much of the dyuysyon of regymentes in to their special kinds, and of the
dyscrypcyon of them: Let it be suffycyent at this time.

Of the manners of instytutynge regal monarchy / and of the assygnacyon of the
perfeccyon thereof / and of the manners also of Instytutynge other Regymentes,
polities or gouernaunces both temperate and vitiate.
The, ix, Chapter.
These things thus determined: it rests consequently to speak of the manners
of making and instytutynge the part or office of princes, governors and
rulers / Exipsorum namque natura meliori veldeteriori prouenientibus hinc
civilly regimini tamque actionibus arguere oportet causam agentem, a quam tam
ipsi quam pars principans peripsos ad politiam vtilins debeant peruenire. But
because we do intend in this book to speak of the causes and actions, by
which the part or office of Princes or governors ought to be created, we
woll before speak of the manner and cause by which this part has been allredy
created, though seldom / to the intent that we may dyscerne this manner or
accyon and the cause immedyate of it / from the manners or accyons and the
immedyate causes of them, by which such manner part regularly and for the most
part ought to be created / which accyons with their immedyate causes we may
also conuynce or prove by humayne demonstracyon or sillogisme / for
comprehensyon or perceiving of the manner whereof we speak formaste: can not be
had by sure or undoubted demonstracyon. And this manner or accyon and the
immedyate cause of the said accyon, by which the part of princes and
governors, and the other parts of a cyuyle co^munytie, has been allredye
formed or created and instytuted, and namely preesthode: was the will of god
immedyatelye co^maundynge hit by the termynate oracle or speech The will of god
is the cause of Regal preesthode.
of some synguler creature, or else peradventure by it own self alone
i^medyatlye after which manner god instytuted and oppoynted the governance and
rule of the people of Israel unto the person of Moses, and of certain other
Iuges after him. And he instytuted or appointed preesthode also in to the
person of Aaron / and of his successors. Of which said cause truly, and the
free Accyon of it, to teach or show why this thing was so done or otherwise,
and that thing not so done: we can say nothing by demonstracyon / but we
know it by simple credulytie or belefe without reason. But there is an other
instytucyon of governors, which is caused of man's mind immedyatly: though
it comes of god as of a far cause, (and as they call it tanque a causa
remota) which grants also all wordely power or governance (as it is had in
the xix. of Ihon^ and the Apostle says openly in the xiii. to the Romans /
and saint Augustyne also in the. v. book De ciuitate dei and the. xxi.
chapitre) but yet he does not this always immedyatly but for the most part
and well nere every where he instytuteth and makes the said powers or
governors the minds of men, to whom he has granted the Arbytryment of such
manner instytucyon. And of this cause: what it is / or by what manner accion, it
ought to instytute such manner things It may be assygned and showed by
humayne certytude or demonstratyue sillogisme taken of the vtylytie or hurt of
the common wease. That manner therefore of Instytutynge princes and rulers,
which can not be certyfyed by demonstracyon, being ouerhypped, we will first
treat and speak of the manners of the instytucyon of governors done by the will
of man immedyatlye and afterward we woll show, which of the said manners is
the most sureand most simple manner or way of instytutynge princes or
gouernoures / Afterward of the best nature of that manner, we shall argue or
prove the motyue or effectyue cause, of which cause only it ought and may be
brought forth or caused / of which things consequently shall appear also the
cause / which ought to move the best instytucyon and determynacion of the
other parts of a city. And last of all, we shall speak of the unity of a
prince or governor / by reason of which unity. It shall appear also, what is
the unity of a city or Realm. Now than persecutynge these Monarchy.
things purposed / first of all we shall reken up the manners of the
instytucyon of Regal monarchye, speaking of the orygynall beginning of them /
for this kind of governance seems in a manner cousyn or natural unto us, and
very nere or next to domestycall iconimie or the governance or ordrynge of an
household / as it appears of those things, which has been said in the
third chapitre. And the determynacyon of this / it shall appear consequentlye
of the manners of instytucyon of the other dyuysions or sundry kinds of
governance and rule. The manners or instytucyons of regat monarchy, be five in
nombre after the mind of Arystotle in the third of the Polytykes and the. x.
chapter. The first manner is, when the ruler or gouernoure is ordained or
appointed to some one determynate 1
work, but yet concerning the regyment or governance of co^munyte / as unto
the guydynge or capytayneshyp of an host, outher he with the succession of the
same kynted: or else for the time of life of only one person / after which
manner Agamennon was instytuted capytayne of ye hooste by the greeks. And this
office is called in the co^munyties of these days, capytayneshyp or
conestableshyp. And this capytayne or ruler of the hooste or army, meddled not
with any judgment in the time of peax, but yet whiles the host did war or
during the time of Battle he was lord having power and auctorytie, to kylle
or otherwise to punysshe transgressoures. The second manner is, that manner
after 2
which certain men are Rulers or governors in Asia / having domynyon or
rule after their predecessoures by succession / but yet gouernynge more to the
profit The manners of gouernoures in Asia.
of him self than to the common profit. And this verelye is a kind of
Regal monarchy / yea and such a kind that as concerning the successoure
there can be none better, but yet it is somewhat Tyrannycall: because the sawes
of it are not made utterly or only to the common profit / but all together
to the profit of the king or governor. The third manner of Regal
governance or power is, when one man is made governor by eleccyon, not by
successcyon of hynted, 3
or because his fathers or auncytries were governors before him / but yet
gouernynge according to the law, which is not made to the common profit
only / but more to the profit of the governor, and is in a manner a
tyra^nycall law For which cause Arystotle in the aforesaid place calls it
electam tira^nidem. i. Tyranny made by eleccyon / he calls it tyranny:
because of ye domynacion of the law / and he calls it electam because it is
not against the will of the subjects. The fourth manner is when any man is made
prince or governor by eleccyon, with all yt succeed of his kynred or blood,
according to ye laws, which are made utterly 4
to ye common profit. And this manner of instytutynge governors: they used
about the heroycall times, or times of the noble men which were called
heroesas he says in the same chapter. And those times were called heroycall,
other because than ye co^stellacyon brought forth such manner men, which were
believed to Heroycall times.
be heroes (that is to say divine or godly persons) for their excedyng virtue
or else because such manner men were made princes or rulers and none other, for
their exceeding virtues and benefytes / as because they gathered the multitude,
which lived Who were heroes.
sparpled one from another in to ciuyle co^munytie / or else because by manlynes
and boldness or strength in fight and battle, they did dylyuer their regyon or
country from the oppressors of it / or else because peradventure they bought
the regyon, or else gat it by some other conuenyent manner / and dyuyded it
among the subjects / and to speak all at one word, for their excellence
above the other multitude in virtue, or else for the greater benefytes done or
given of them than of any other, they were instytuted or made princes or
gouernoures with all their posterytie or successors of blood / as Arystotle
said in the. v. book of his Polytykes and the. x. chapter / and under the
kind of monarchy peradventure Arystotle comprehends that kind unto which
any man is elected or chosen only for his own hole life / or for part of his
life / or else he causes us to understand that by this, and by that which
is called elect tyranny for it takes part of either of them. The. v. manner
is and has been that by which the prince or gouernoure is made lord of all
those things which are in the co^munytie / dysposynge 5
and ordering all manner persons and things so after his own will, as the
steward or orderer of a house dysposeth and orders all things which are in
his own house, as he fyste him self. But yet that these saynges of Arystotle
may be made more euydent and open, and also yt all the other manners of
instytutynge other governors may be reduced to a chapter or to a general
su^me / we shall say, yt all manner power or governance either it is over them
that wyllyngly are subjects or else over them that are subjects against their
will / the first of these. ii. is general to all well tempered powers or
gouernaunces / the second to all viciate or intemperate and unrightful
gouernaunces / And each one of these. ii. general kinds is divided in to.
iii. special kinds / or manners / as it has been said in the. viii. chapter
of this dyccyon. And because regal monarchy is There are. ii. sorts of
princes or governors the one over voludtarie subjects / the other over
inuoluntarie subjects.
one of the special kinds of well tempered gouernaunces / and peradventure
the most perfyte of them all, therefore now making recolleccion of ye premysses
let us begin our speech or process at the manners of it / saying that Rex or
Monarcha that is to say a king other is instytuted by the eleccyon of the
inhabytau^tes or cytyzens / or else he has the power and auctorytie of
gouernynge ryghtfully and duly without their eleccyon / if he be prince or
gouernoure without their eleccyon, other it is because either he did first
enhabyte the regyon, or else his predecessoures of whose lynage he descends or
else because he bought the land and Iurysdyccyon / or else wan it by ryghtfull
battle / or else gatte it by some other lawful manner or way / as for example,
by a gift made thereof to him, for his good service done. And if it be so that
the king or prince that governs has been instytuted by the eleccyon of the
inhabytauntes, it is conuenyent that it be done by some of these manners
following, for either he is instytuted gouernoure with all the posterytie and
successors of blood, or else not / if he be instytuted governor, but not with
all his posterytie / this may be done many manner ways / for either he is made
governor for all the life time of one man only: or else for the life time of
one man and also of some one or else mo than of one of his successors / or else
he is not instytuted for the hole life time of any man neither of him that is
first, neither of any of his successoures / but only for some determynate
part of time, as for the space of one year, or of. ii. or for longer or for
shorter space / and again he is instytuted either to exercise all manner
Iudycyall office: or else to exercise but only one Iudycyall office / as to be
the guide or capytayne of the host and so forth.

Of the dystynctyon or dyuersyte, and the assygnacyon of the sygnyfycacyons of
this nowne lex / and of the most propre sygnyfycacyon of this word, and
which is intended and meant in this book.
The, x, Chapter,
FOr as much as we have said, that election is the most perfect and the
best form or manner of instytutynge gouernoures and rulers: it shall do very
well to serache forth the effectyue cause of it / that is to say who ought
to be the electoures, or doers of this election / or of whom it ought to be
made, as touching the complement of the goodness thereof / that is to say, if
it should be a perfect good election / for of this, it shall also appear,
which is the factyue or effectyue cause of the elected gouernoure, and
likewise of the other parts or offices of the Lyuyle Co^mynalte. But for as
much as the Prince or gouernoure ought to measure and rule the Lyuyle acts of
men, (as we have showed in the. v. chapter of this dictyon) and that by or
according to a rule, which is and ought to be the form or formal cause of
the Prince of Gouernoure in that he is gouernoure: it is necessary first to
serache out, whether there be any such manner rule / then afterward what it
is, and wherefore, or to what end it is ordained / for peradventure the same is
the effectyue cause of this said rule / which is the effectyue cause of the
Prince or gouernoure. we therefore supposing this a thing euydent lie known
by experience in all perfect Co^mynaltes, that there is such a rule, which
men do call an ordinance or custom, and by ye common name a law. First we
shall show, what this rule is / and afterward we shall show the fynall cause
/ wherefore it is necessary to be had / and last of all we shall determyne
by demonstratyue sillogisme, to what person or persons, and by what manner
actyon, it belongs / to ordained and make this said rule / which thing
shall be nothing else, but to serache out the law gyuer, or the cause
effectyue of the law unto which cause, we suppose, that the electyon of
Princes and gouernoures also does belong / and we will prove that it is so,
hereafter by sure and substancyall reasons or demonstracyons. Of which things
it shall also appear, and be open or euydent, what is the matter or subject of
the aforesaid rule, which we have called the law / for the matter or subject
of it (to use the scole terms) is the Princes or gouernoure / to whom it
belongs for to measure and streyghten or rule the Polytyke or Lyuyle acts of
men. Now therefore procedyng to the determynacyon of these said things,
least peradventure by the reason of the manyfolde sygnyfycacyons of this word
lex, any Ambignite or error might happen to any man: it shall be co^uenyent
and according, first to show the diverse intencyons or sygnyfycacyons of this
nowne lex. For this word being of the nombre or sort of him. Which be
called equinoce dictiones / that is to say, words This word lex has many
signyfycacyons.
having many diverse sygnyfycacyons / in one of his sygnyfycacyons betokens
a natural sensitive inclination to some action or passion. And in this
sygnyfycacyon the Apostle used this word in the. vii. chapter to the Romans
when he said / I se an other law in my members / repugnaunt and stryuynge Lex
is put for an inclynacyon.
against the law of my mind / and in an other accepcyon or sygnyfycacyon,
this nowne Lex law is said of every practyue habyte / and generallye of all
manner form of any thing to be wrought, which form is in the mind / out of
which as out of the example or pattern and mesure all the forms or fascions
of things made by craft, are brought forth or caused. And after this manner
sygnyfycacyon of this word, it is said in ye. xliii. chapitre of the prophet
Ezechyel. Hec ergo lex domus, iste autem mensure altaris. This therefore shall
be the law of the house and these shall be the measures of the altar. In his
third sygnyfycacion this word lex is taken for a tule containing monitions
of the imperated or volutarye actions of men, as they be ordained to glory or
to pain in the world to come. And after this sygnyfication: the law of
Moses was called a law as touching to some part of it, and so also the law
of the gospel as touching to it self hole is called a law. Wherefore ye
Apostle speaking of these two laws to the Hebrews: says thus. The preestode
being translated / it is necessary, or it must needs be, that a tra^slacyon
is made of the law / So also the doctrine of ye Gospel is called a law in
the first chapter of saint James epistle, where he says thus / But who
souer shall look in to the perfect law of liberty, and shall continue in it.
etc. that man shall be blyssed in his deed. And in this accepcyon or
sygnyfycacyon of this word all sects also be called laws / as for example
the sect of Machomete, or of the Persians, either as touching to them selves
hole / or else as touching to some parts of them. Albeit that among all
these, only the law of Moses, and the law of the Gospel / that is to wit
the christen law, done conteyne the veryte. And after this sygnyfycacion also
Arystotle called sects laws: when he said in the second of his Phylosophye
/ How great Lex is put for a sect.
virtue or strenght custom is of: the laws done show / and again in the.
xii. of same / Reliqua veto fabulose iam adducta sunt ad persuasionem multorum
ad leges et conferens. i. The other things were ymagyned and brought in for to
persuade many men to the laws or sects, and to their profit. Fourthly this
nownelawe and most famously betokens the knowledge or doctrine or universal
judgment of the things which are ryghtuous and profitable in a cyuyle
co^mynalte, and of the contrary things. And this word lex taken in this
sygnyfycacyon may be considered two manner ways / one way as touching to it
Law may be taken two man^ of ways.
own self, as by it only is showed, what is right or wrong / what is
profitable or what noisome or hurtefull / and thus the science or doctrine of
the right / is called the law / An other manner of way it may be considered,
after as a precepte is given of the obseruacyon or fulfyllynge of the said
law, under a pain or reward to be dystrybuted to the fulfyller or to the
breaker of it, in this present world / or else after as it is given by the
manner of such precepte or commandment / and this word considered after this
manner / is most properly of all other sygnyfycacyons called a law / and this
word taken in this sygnyfycacyon / Arystotle does defyne, in the. x. book of
his Ethikes and the. ix. chapter when he says thus. The law has power to
compel, which is a speech made by some wysdom and reason / that is to wit
by polytyke reason, which can order and dyspose of the ryghtuous and
profitable things, and of the contrary thyn ges / and the law has coactyue
power, for as much as there is a precepte or co^maumedement given, that the
law should be observed, which precepte men be How ye laws is acoactiue
precept.
compelled to keep and observe / or else because the law is given by the manner
of such precepte. Wherefore not all the true cognycyons or knowledges of the
things, that be ryghtuouse or profitable in a cyuyle co^mynalte, are laws
oneles such a coactyue precepte or commandment be given of the obseruacyon
of them / or else it be so, that they have been given by the manner of a
precepte. Albeit that such true knowledge of the said things, is necessaryly
required to a perfyte law. Yea moreover otherwhyles falss knowledgs or
judgments of rightwyse and profitable things, ar made laws when there is a
commandment given that they should be observed / or else if they be given by
the manner of a precept / as it appears in the regyons of certain barbarous
people, which do cause this to be observed as a ryghtuouse thing, that a
murderer or manqueller shall be quiet and absolved from cyuyle blame and the
cyuyle pain or punysshement, so that he do pay money or some other thing of
value, for such manner offense, and yet for all that this thing is plain
utterly right / and so consequently the laws of them are utterly imperfect.
For the case put and granted that the said laws have a due form, that is to
wit a coactyue precepte of their obseruacyon / yet for all that they do want
or lack due condycyon that is to wit, due and trueordynacyon of ryghtfull
right. And under this accepcyon or sygnyfycacyon of this word lex / are
comprehended all the rules of Cyuyle ryghtes and vtylyties which rules have been instytuted by y^ auctoryte of man / as customs, statutes, ordenaunces or
acts made by the co^mens / decretalles / and all other like rules, which as
we have said are grounded upon the auctoryte of man / But yet we ought to
know, that as well the law of the gospel as the law of Moses, and
peradventure the other sects dyuersely considered, and compared in the hole or
in the part of them unto the Acts of men for the state of this present
world or of the world to come: otherwhyles does belong or has belonged
hitherto, or shall belong to the third sygnyfycacyon of this word lex / and
otherwhyles to the last sygnyfycacyon of the said world / as it shall be
opened and declared more largely in the. viii. and the. ix. of the second
diccion. Certain of yt said laws or sects as touching or according to the
truth, and other certain of them after or as touching to a false
Imagynacyon or fantasye and a vain promise. Thus then there is a certain rule
or a law of the Cyuyle acts of men / and what it is: it appears euydently of
these things, which we have no we said.

Of the necessyte of making laws taking this word in his most proper
sygnyfycacyon / and that it is expedyent, no Prince or governor be he never so
much virtuous and ryghtu ous: to govern without laws.
The, xi, Chapter,
How that we have thus dyuyded this word Law in to his accepcions or
sygnyfycacions: we will show the fynall cause where The necessytie of making
laws is declared.
fore it is necessary, that Laws be hadde-takynge this word in his last and
most propre sygnyfycacyon. The most pryucypall cause is the Cyuyle right and
the common vtylyte or profit / the next cause to this: is a certain securyte
of the Princes or gouernoures / specially of and namely of those, which are
gouernoures by inherytaunce and succession of blood / and also the diuturnite
or long contynuaunce of their governance and power or auctoryte / That it is
necessary to have laws for the former cause, that is to wit for the Cyuyle
right and common profit. I prove it thus / for it is necessary to ordeyne that
thing in a common weal or cyuyle co^mynalte, without which Cyuyle
judgments can in no wise be well given, and by which they be given duelye,
and so as they ought to be, and by which also they be preserved from defalte
as much as is possyple to the Acts of men. But such manner thing the law,
when the governor is appointed to give cyuyle judgments according to it /
ergo the instytucyon or making of a law is necessary in a common welthe. The
first proposicion of this syllogism is in a manner euydent and known of it
self / and very nere unto the first pryncyples (as they are called) which
can not be proved by any thing more euydent, then they be them selves / the
certentie whereof also ought, and may be taken of the. v. chapitre of this
diccion, and the. vii. part thereof. The second proposycion of this
demonstracyon shall be made euydent by this / saying that to the completeme^t
of a judgment in goodness, (that is to say, to this that any judgment be
perfectely good) is required right and incorrupt affection of the judges / and
also true knowledge of the things that be to be judged / the contraries of
which two things done corrupt cyuyle judgments. For the crooked wrong and
lewd affection Judges be corrupted through evil affection.
of the judge, as hatted / love or covetousness: puerteth ye desire of the
judge. But al these things be kept away from judgment and judgment is
preserved from these / when the judge or governor shall be appointed or
assygned to give iugementes, according to the laws / because the law is
without all perverse affection / for it is not made only for the friend, or
for the enemy, or for him that does good, or him y^ does hurt / but it is
made universally or generally for him who soever he be yt does Cyuylye well or
cyuylye evil / for all the other things ar but accidental to the law and
without the law, but they be not so without the judge / for the persons
which be set to be judged may either be friends, or enemies profitable or
noisome persons to him, that sytteth as judge by gyuynge or promising somewhat
either good or evil to him. And so likewise in all such intencyons, which
may cause in a judge affection peruertynge or corruptynge his judgment / For
which consyderacyon, no manner judgment (as much as possible is) ought to be
committed and put all together to the arbytrement or will and pleasure Derye
few things be to be co^myted to the pleasur of the Judges.
of the judge / But ought to be determined by the law, and sentence or
judgment to be pronounced and given of them, according to the same law. And
this was the sentence of Arystotle in the third of his Polytykes and the. xi.
chapter, wherein purposynge to search out, wherther it is better for a common
well to be governed of the best man without any law, or else of the best
law he says in this wise, that thing is better to govern, or to be judge,
which has no passion at all, that is to say no manner affection which may
peruerte the judgment, than that thing which has passions in hit self by
nature, but the law is without all such manner passion or affection, and the
mind of every man must needs have passions in it, he says of every man,
exceptyng no man be he Man's mind is not without synyster affeccyons.
never so virtuous, which sentence he repetynge again in the first book of
his Rhetorikes and the first chapter says thus. Omnium quidem maximu^
quer^tur scilicet nihil asque lege iudicandum relinque debet arbitrio
iudica^tis. etc. That is to say, of all things it is most necessary that no
thing be left to the arbytryment or pleasure of the judge, to be judged
without a law, Quia iudicium legislatoris. No thing is to be judged without a
law.
etc. for the judgment of the law maker (that is to say the law) is not
made for any pertyculer person, but it is of things to come and of general
things, but the offycer and the judge sitting in judgment do judge of
things present and of determynate or pertyculer things (and to these, that is
to wit, to the governor and iugde) is oftentimes annexed love or hatred and
desire of their own synguler profit / so that they can not yet suffycyently
se the truth or right in judgment: but does regard, and has respect in
judgment to their own propre pleasure and profit, or else their own
dyspleasure and dysprofyte / and this also he says in the same first book and
the second chapter, when he says thus, we do not give like manner iugementes,
when we be glad or merry, and Iugementes are given after diverse manners.
when we be sad or sorye, when we do love and when we do hate again / the
judgment is corrupted otherwhyles by reason of the ignorance of the judges,
all though they be of good affection or intencyon which evil or defaute: is
taken away and is supplied by the law: because in it is determined in a manner
parfyghtly, what is right / and what is wrong / what is profitable, and what
is noisome or hurtful / as touching to every one of the cyuyle acts of men.
But this thing could not be suffycyently done by any one man alone / nor yet
peradventure all the men of any one time could not be able to find out and
deuyse or to keep and hold in rememberaunce all the cyuyle acts, which are
determined in the law / ye moreover all that ever the first fynders out / or
deuysers and The law which at the beginning is imperfect, is finysshed and
made perfyte by the addicyons of them yt come after.
also all the men of the same time which obseruyd and marked the cyuyle acts
of men, did say of them was but a very small thing and an vnperfyghte /
which afterward was made perfyghte and fynysshed by the addycyons of those
men, that came after their time, which thing it is easy enough to perceive,
by the experience that we have had / as in that that some things have been
added to the laws, and some things taken away from the same / and other
whiles how the laws has been changed in to the contrary, according to the
dyuersyte of ages and also according to the dyuersyte of the state of times
even in one and the same age / and hereunto Arystotle bears witness in the
second book of his polytykes and the third chapter when he said thus / this
thing we ought to know that we ought to have respect and to look unto long
time and to many years Long delyberacyon is to be taken before that any
sentence or law be pronounced.
aforegone / in which years we must know whether these things have done
well, or else no / that is to wit, these things, which ought to be instytuted
and ordained as laws / the same he says also in the first book of his
thetorykes and in the first chapter. Afterward he says, geuynge of laws
are made of things, which has been considered and had in delyberacyon a long
season. And this thing is confyrmed by reason, for the making or gyuynge of
laws, requires and needs prudence and wisdom / as it appeared heretofore of
the descrypcion of this word law, and wisdom requires long experyence /
and experyence requires Prudence requires long experyence.
long time / wherefore in the. vi. book of the Ethikes and the. viii. chapter,
it is written thus. A token of this which we have said, is this / for many
young men are geomatricions and mathematycans and wise or having knowledge in
such things / but not therefore even by and by prudent / and the cause hereof
is, because that prudence is of synguler or pertyculer things: which are made
known by experyence / now a young man wants experyence / for it is long
what makes an expert man.
contynuaunce of time: that causes or makes experyence / And therefore that,
which one man alone fyndeth out or may know by him self alone, as well in
the knowledge of things which are ryghtuous and profitable in a cyuyle
co^munyte, as in other sciences: is very little or else no thing / Again also
that, which Arts are not made perfyte by one man alone.
the men of one age or time can observe or mark: is but an vnperfyghte thing,
in comparyson of that thing, which is observed or marked of men of many
diverse ages or times / and therefore Aristotle treating of theinuencyon and
finding out of the troth, as touching to every art or dyscyplyne and
science, in his second book of Phylosophie and the first chapitre, says thus
/ as concerning the inuencyon of any art or science devised by one man's wit
only, little or no thing of the assured truth in the same science can be
found by him / but yt that is gathered together in the same science by the
wits of many men, may draw to some quantytie of truth. But after the
translacyon out of the arabical tongue this text is more open and plain / the
meaning whereof is this / and each one of them, that is to wit, of the deuysers
and fynders out of any manner art or dyscyplyne perceived outher very little,
or else nothing of the verytie or truth. But when all those things shall be
gathered together, which al men has comprehended, and observed or marked:
than the hoole shall amounte to su^me quantite or greatness / which thing may
be most euydentlie perceived by the science of Astronomye / so than by the
help that men have had among them selves each one of other, and by the
addycyon of the things afterward found, unto the things How or where of
crafts has taken their perfeccyon.
before found: all crafts and dyscyplynes has received they: pefeccyon /
which thing Arystotle fygurallie by an example declares in the same place,
about the inue^cyon or finding of Musyke, when he said / if Timotheus had not
ben we should not have much melody, or we should lack a great part of musyke
/ but if Phrynes had not ben: Tymothe should never have been so perfyghte in
melodyes: Who were the first inuentours of musyke.
that is to wit if he had not had the things invented before by Phrines /
which words Auerois expoundynge in the second co^mente says thus / And that
which Arystotle says in this chapitre: is euydent and manyfeste / for no man
may or is able by him self, to inuente or find out the practyue or
speculatyue scyences, for the more part / for they are not made complete or
perfyghte: but by the help which he that was before-hath left to him that
follows or comes after. And the same he says in the last chapter of the
second book of the Eleuches of the inuencyon of Retoryke, and of all other
scyences how soever it be of the inuencyon of Logyke / which Aristotle
ascribes perfyghtlie and holy to him Arystotle bosteth him self alone to have been the first inuenter of logyke.
self alone, without ye inue^cyon or help of any other man yt was before his
time wherein he seems to have been syngulare among all other / but this he
says in the. viii. book of the Etikes and the first chapitre. Two men
ioynynge them selves together, may or are able to do and to perceive more /
understand thou, than one man alone. But if it be so, that two men may do and
perceive more: much more than moo than two, both together. and also
successyuelie, may do and perceive more than one man alone / and this is it
which Aristotle says concerning this present purpose in the third of the
politikes and the. xi. chapitre. But perauenture it shall seem to some man
against reason that one man should perceive and dyscerne better, judging with.
ii. iyes and. ii. ears / or else that he should work better with his. ii.
feet and. ii. hands: than many men with many iyes / ears / feet / and
hands / for as much therefore as the law is an iye made of many iyes / that
is to say, a comprehencyon or knowledge examyned of many comprehensyons, The
law was signyfyed of the old wise men by the iye.
to the avoiding of error about the cyuyle judgments / and judging right
or well: it is the more sure way and less ieopardouse, that such judgments
be done according to the law, than according to the arbrytrement or will and
pleasure of the judge / And for this cause it is necessary, that a law be
made and set / if common weals should be very well ordered as touching to the
cyuyle ryghtes and vtylytyes of them / for by the law, the cyuyle judgments
are preserved from the ignorance, and from the perverse or crooked affection,
which else might be in the judges / And this was the second proposycyon and
the minor (as they call it) of our demonstratiue sillogisme, by which from the
beginning Why and wherefore laws at necessary.
of this chapter, we have gone a boute to prove, that it is necessary, that
laws be had in a common weal / but how, and in what manner a strife or
cyuyle cause and controversy risen, which is not determined by the law,
ought to be defyned and determined or judged / it shall be showed in the.
xiiii. chapitre of Let the judge determine nothing without a law.
this diccyon. To conclude than, laws are necessary for the excludynge of the
malice, and error or ignorance of the judges, from cyuyle judgments or
sentences / And for these consyderacyons Arystotle counsayled, that to no judge
or governor should be granted arbrytrement or fre liberty, to judge or
command of cyuyle matters without a law, in such things, wherein the law
might have determined / wherefore in the. v. book of the Etikes and the syxte
chapter Arystotle treating of justice and iniurye: says in this wise / for
this cause we do not suffer a man to govern and rule, but acordyng to reason /
that is to wit, according to the law / And he assygneth the cause here before
alleged / that is to wit, the perverse and crooked affection which may happen
or chance to be in him. Also in the third book of the politikes and the. vii.
chapter he says thus By the answer to the first doubt or questyon / it is
euydent and open, that none other thing ought so much to govern and rule: as
the laws which are well made / that is to say, as they which governs and
rules according to the laws. The same also he says in the same. iii. book
and the. xii. chapter in this wise / who soever therefore byddeth or wylleth
the law to govern and rule: he seems to bid or will, god and the laws to
govern / but he that byddeth or wylleth, a man to govern: understand without
a law after his own pleasure: he joins or puts to also a beeste / and he
shows the cause why he so says a little after, saying / Propter quod sine
appetitu intellectus lex est, as who should say, that A goodly sentence.
the law is understanding and knowledge or reason without appetite or lust /
that is to say without any affection / and this same sentence he repeteth also
in his first book of retorykes and the first chapter, where he says thus /
it is most conuenyent therefore, that the well made laws do determyne all
things, what soever does happen or chance / and to committee very few things
to the arbrytrement of ye judges: and he assygneth there the before alleged
causes / that is to wit the exclusyon or avoiding of the malice or ignorance
of the judges, from the cyuyle judgments / which said malice or error and
ignorance can not chance to be in the law likewise as they may in the
judges / as it has been showed here before. And Arystotle speaks more
largelye than thus, openly in the. iiii. book of his politikes and the. iiii.
chapter, saying in this wise / where the laws do not govern and rule: that
is to say where the princes and rulers do not govern according to the laws:
there is no common weal / understand thou temperate, or well ordered / for
the law ought to be gouernoure and ruler over all. Now it rests or
remains to show, that all princes and gouernoures ought to govern
according to the law, and not without or beside it / and namelye most of all
other, these princes or kings, which are made governors with all their issue
or ofsprynge / that their kingdom or power may be more sure from all manner
ieopardye or peril: and also may endure and co^tynue the longer / which was
the secondarie fynall cause of the necessyre of laws to be had, assygned of
Hus in the beginning of his chapitre / and first it may be proved by this /
because to govern and rule according to the laws, preserves the judgments
of the said gouernoures from the defaulte, which might happen by the reason
of the ignorance or perverse affection in them / by which laws they being
guyded and well ordered in their own selves, and toward their co^munes or
subjects: do less suffer sedycyons and so consequentlye do less suffer
solucyons or destruccyons of their kingdoms, which might happen or chance to
them, doing lewdlie according to their will and pleasure / as Arystotle says
openly in the. v. book of his polytykes, and the. x. chapter. Regnum (says
he) that is to say a kingdom: is very seldom or little destroyed of those
things, which are extrynsecall and without it self / but of it self and of
intrynsecall causes it chances What thing destroys kingdoms.
very often to be corrupted and destroyed / and that. ii. manner ways / the one
is when sedicyon ryseth between them which are partyners of the kingdom. The
second way is when they begin to rule and govern tyrannously, desiring and
wyffynge to be fordes of many, and contrary to the law / But perauenture some
man will obiecte against me, and say that the best man or a very good man is
without ignorance, and perverse or crooked affection. But let Hus make answer
and say: that this comes to pass very seldom / and though it chance one
very good man to be without passions: yet is he not so much without them as ye
laws is / as we have showed heretofore by the auctoryte of Arystotle, by
reason / and sensyble experyence / that every man's soul or mind has other
whiles some synystre affection / which thing we may believe by yt which is
red in the. iiii. chapter of Danyel / where me^cyon is made, yt there came.
ii. priests of a wicked mind and purpose, against Susa^na / yt they might put
her to death and they The hystorye of Susanne.
were old men, and priests, and the judges of the people yt year / which all this notwithsta^dynge yet gave false testymony and witness against her,
because she would not consent and apply her self to their wicked and fylthie
co^cupysce^ce and lust. Now therefore, if they that were priests / and aged
men (of whom a man would little think it) were corrupted through catnall
concupyscence, and how much more than through covetousness and other vices:
what is to be thought of other men? doubtless that no man* be he never so
virtuous: can be without perverse or corrupt affection, and ignorance: so as
the law is. And therefore it is most sure way, that the cyuyle judgments be
dyrected by the law: than to be committed to the arbytrement or will of the
judge, be he never so virtuous a man. But to the case put and admytted (which
for all that is a very seldom thing, and in a manner impossyble) that there
were a prince or gouernoure so heroycall and passing virtuous, that there
could be neither passion, neither ignorance in him: yet may it be that his
sons shall be subject to some synystre and evil affection, whereof the
rulynge according to their wylfull affection, without any certain law or
order, may ensue much inconuenyence to the which if ye will replye, saying yt
their father being so good a man as is before supposed peradventure will not
deliver his power or auctoryte to them / I answer that such saying is not to
be beleaued or regarded / partlye, because it lies not in him to depryue them
of his succession or inherytaunce of his kingdom. for as much as it is due,
and belongs to the successors or issue of that kynred: and partelye, because
although it were in his power to translate the regal power unto whom soever
he list: yet would he not dysheryte his own sons, were they never so lewd
and ungracious as the thing whereof co^menlye he has no knowledge / wherefore
Arystotle in his third book of politikes and the xi. chapter, answering to
this obieccyon: says in this wise / it is not easy to believe this: that is to
wit, that the father will dysheryte his own sons of his kingdom and power /
for it is an hard thing: and of greatter virtue than belongs to the nature
of man / wherefore it is expedyent to the princes or governors, to be rather
ruled and determined by the law / than to give cyuyle judgments after their
own will and pleasure for in doing according to y^ law / they shall do
nothing, that shall be otherwise than well, or worthy reprove / by the reason
whereof, their kingdom and power shall be made the more sure from all danger
and also more contynuall and durable. And this was the cause the counsel of
the most excellent philosopher Arystotle, unto all princes and governors
(whereof for all that they take little head) in his fyfthe book of ye politikes
and the. xi. chapter, when he said thus The fewer things that they have
power over (understand thou without a law) so much the longer time every
kingdom or power must needs continue / for they that is to wit, the princes
and governors selves / are the less lordely / and are made more demure in
their manners / and also are the less enuyed at of their subjects / and by and
by after he brings in the testymonye of a certain wise king or gouernoure
called Theopompus / which gave from him part of the Theopo^pue.
power and auctoryte granted unto him / wherefore we have judged it conuenyent,
to bring in here the text and very words of Arystotle: because of the
syngularyte and excellent virtue of this prince, such as never in a manner has been herd by the space of many hendreth years, to have been in any other prince.
The words of Arystotle are these. And afterward Theopo^pus measur ^^ge, that
The example of Theopompus.
is to say mynysshynge or bringing more to a mean his power, which
peradventure semyd to excede measure: added the office or auctoryte of them
which were called Ephory, in deed mynysshynge the power: that is to wit his
own power / but yet making the regal power more, and increasynge it in time
/ that is to say making it more durable / wherefore after a certain manner he
made it not less / but more so as men say, that he answered to his wife, when
she asked the questyon of him, whether he were not ashamed, to leave the regal
power less to his sons: than his father had left him / no verily says he /
for I leave it now to them much more durable O heroycallvoyce of Theopompus,
procedynge of his metuaylous great wisdom / and greatly to be noted of them
which without the laws will use fulness of power over their subjects / which
sentence many princes and gouernoures nothing markynge or taking head of it /
have had a fall, and have been destroyed. And we our selves have seen It is not
lawefull for a prince to grieve his subjects with any eyaccyon contrary or
beside and without the law.
now in our time for lack of taking head hereof, not the least kingdom of
all in a manner hole like to be destroyed: whiles a certain prince or
gouernoure thereof, would have charged his subjects, and laid upon their
necks a certain vnwonte exaccyon, and contrary to the law. So than of these
things which we have said it is euydent open / that laws are necessary in
common weals. if they ought utterly to be well ordered, and the kingdoms or
regal powers to co^tynue long and endure.

Of the effectyue cause of the laws of man / both of that cause, which may
be proved by demonstratyue sillogysme: and also that cause, which can not be
proved by demonstracyon / which thing is naught else, but to search out the
law maker.
The, xii, chapter,
How it follows consequentlye, to speak of the effectyue cause of laws /
which cause may be showed by demonstracyon / for of that instytucyon of laws,
which is possible to be made or has been made imedyatly by the work or
reuelacyon and oracle of god, without man's arbytrement or will (after which
manner we said a fore the law of Moses to have been instytuted, even also as
touching to those precepts of cyuyse acts which are in it for the state of
this present world) I entende not here to make assygnacyon / but only of
that instytucyon of laws, and of princes or governors: which is made, or
brought forth and caused i^medyatly of the will and arbytrement of the mind
of man / unto which assygnacyon we no we beginning to enter in / let Hus
say, that to find out the law taken as it were materyallie and according to
this third sygnyfycacyon (that is to wit, the knowledge of the things
ryghtuouse, and the things profitable in a common weal or cyuyle co^munyte)
may belong and appertain to any The dyscrypcyon of the law
manner cytezen or person of the cyuyle co^munyte / albeit that this
inquysycyon may be more conuenyentlie done by the obscruacyon of them that may
intend to such inquysycyon / as of the most aged men, and having most
experyence of cyuyle acts, whom they do call predent or worldly wise men /
than by the consyderacyon of artyfycers or handycraftes men, which must
intend, and dylygently apply them selves to their works and occupacyons, for
to get the things necessary to the sustentacyon of their life. But because
the true knowledge or inuencyon of the things ryghtuouse, and of the things
profitable in a cyuyle co^munyte, and of their contraryes, is not a law
according to the last and the most propre sygnyfycacyon of this word, by
which it is made the measure of the cyuyle acts of men, unless it be, when a
coactyue precepte shall have been given of the obseruacyon thereof, or else that
it has been given by the manner of such precepte, by him, by whose auctoryte
the trangressoures ought and may be ponysshed / therefore it is conuenyent and
according, to tell or show, to what person or persons the auctoryte
belongs of gyuynge such manner precepte, and of ponysshynge the
transgressors of it which thing is nothing else: but to make inquysycyon,
and to search out who is the gyuer or maker of the law / And let us say
according to the troth, and to the counsel of Arystotle He means here of
those laws which do pass by act of parlyament.
in the third of his politikes, and the syxte chapter, that the law maker or
the chief and propre cause effectyue of the law: is the people or the hole
multitude of the cytezens inhabytauntes / or else the byggest part of the
said multitude, by their eleccyon or will by words expressed in the general
congregacyon parlyamente or assemble of the co^munes co^maundynge or
determining any thing to be done, or to be left undone, about the cyuyle
acts of men, under a temporal pain or ponysshement / the bygger part I
mean the quantyte considered in that co^munyte (upon which that law is
given) whether the hole multitude aforesaid of the people in that co^munyte,
or else the bygger parts thereof do this by their self imedyatly / or else
shall have committed it to some person or persons, to be done of him or them /
which person or persons are not, neither may be utterly and holly and
generally the maker of the law: but they are only after a certain manner /
and otherwhyles / and by the auctoryte of the pryncypall law maker / and
consequently to this I do say / that by the same pryncypall auctoryte, and by
none other / the laws, ought to take their necessary approbacyon / Moreover I
say, that of the same auctoryte the laws, ought to take addycyon, or
dymynucyon, or their hole mutacyon / interpretacyon / suspencyon accordyngly as
the places and times, and other cyrcumstances does require: to which any of
these aforesaid things shall be mete or conuenyent, for the commune profit /
and by the same auctoryte also, the laws ought to be publysshed or proclaimed
after the instytucyon of them / left any man, outher cytezen, or stranger,
trespassynge against them: might be excused by the ignorance of them. And a
cytezen or co^muner (which in the latin word is called ciuis) I call him,
according to the mind of Arystotle in the third book of his politikes, How
the promulgacyon of laws is to be made.
and the first / the third / and the. vii. chapytres, which is in habylytie
to be part taker in the cyuyle co^munyte of the publyke power and auctoryte of
counsaylynge of judging / and gouernyng / or bearyng office / according to his
degree / by which description, children are excluded and bondmen / strangers /
and women / from ye name of cytezens or co^muners / though after a diverse manner
/ for ye children of cytezens The dyscrypcyon of a cytezen. etc.
or co^muners and fre men, are ciues in potencia propinqua / that is to say in
a nyghe possybylyte: wantynge nothing but only suffycyent age and dyscrecyon.
And which is bygger part of the cytezens: we must consydre and judge
according to ye honest custom and usage of ye cyuyle co^munytes / or else we
ought to determyne it / The auctoryte of makige or gyuynge laws.
according to the mind of Arystotle, in the. vi. book of his politikes, and
the third chapy^. Now therefore after we have thus determined what is a
cytezen / and what is the stronger and bygger party of cytezens or co^muners:
let us now return to our purpose intended / that is to wit, to show by
demonstracyon, that the humayne auctoryte of making laws appertayn to the
hole multitude of cytezens, or co^muners, and fre men or else to ye bygger part
of them assembled in the parlyament which we shall go about to prove, first in
this wise: for unto them belongs the first and very pryncypall humayne
auctoryte of ye making and instytucyon of humayne laws / of whom only the
best laws may proceed and be brought forth / but such is the hole multitude
or congregacyon of cytezens, or the bygger part of it, which represents the
hole multitude / for it is hard or impossible, that all the persons in a
common weal should agree unto one sentence / and be all of one mind / because
of the imperfect nature of certain men, outher of malice, or else through
ignorance, dyscordynge and dysagreynge from the common sentence or judgment
/ for all whose unreasonable contradyccyon and gaynsaynge, the common vtylytes
or profytes ought not to be let or left undone / wherefore it may be
concluded, that unto the hole congregacyon or multitude of cytezens or fre men,
or else to the bygger part of them gathered in the parlyament: belongs the
auctoryte of instytucyon or making of laws / The first proposycyon or (as
they call it) ye mayor of this demonstracyon, is in a manner euydent enough of
it self, and very nere to those which are called pryncyples albeit the
strength and uttermost certaynte of it, may be taken of the. xi. chapter of
this dyccyon / and the second proposycyon called the minor, that is to wit,
that by the hearing and commandment of the hole multitude only, the best
law is instytuted or made I prove, supposing with Arystotle in the third of
his positikes and the. viii. chapter. that law to be best, which is given
to the common profit of the cytezens / wherefore he said in this wise those
laws are right or good which egally and indyfferentlye have respect to the
vtylyte of the hole cyuyle co^munyte, and to the common welthe or good of all
the co^munee, or inhabytaunce of the said co^munyte / And that this may be
done best only by the hoole multitude The best law is that which helps to
the common profit.
of the cytezens, or by the byggest part of it (which from hensforthe let
it be supposed to be both one) I prove thus / for the veryte or truth of
that thing is more suerly judged, and also the common vtylyte of it is more
dylygently consyde red and marked, unto which thing the hole multitude of
cytezens gives head with all their wit or reafon, and also affection / for
the greatter the multitude is the better it may perceive the defaulte that is
about the law which is purposed to be made or instytuted than may any
patre, what soever it be, of the said How and of whom ye law is to be given.
multitude. For as much as every bodily thing being hole / is at the least
wise greatter in quantyte and virtue: than is any part thereof by it self.
Again the common vtylyte of the law is more considered and regarded or taken
head of of the hole multitude / for as much as no man wyttynglye does hurt
his own self, but there every man may consydre, whether the law purposed do
more declyne or lean to the profit of any certain person or persons, than
to the profit of the other, or of the co^munyte / And also may speak against
it, to the contratie / which thing could not be done, if the law were given
or made by any In all this long tale he speaks not of the rascal multitude,
but of the parlyament
person, or else a few certain persons, regarding and having respect more
to their own propre vtylyte / than to the common profit / And to this
sentence helps well all those things / which we have said and spoken
concerning to the necessytie of laws to be had, in the. xi. chapter of this
^sent dyccyon. Now again to the pryncypall conclusyon I reason thus. The
auctorite of making or gyuyng laws, belongs only to that person or
persons by whom they being made or given, are better or else utterly
observed / but such is only the hoole multitude: ergo to the hole multitude
only, belongs the auctoryte of instytutynge or making laws. The first
proposycyon of this sillogisme is a manner euydent of it self, and very nere to
the pryncyples / for the law should be void, and serve for nothing / if it
were not observed / wherefore Arystotle in the. iiii. of his politikes and, the.
viii. chapter, says thus it is no good instytucyon of laws: if there be
laws well made or set, but not obeyed. And again in the. vi. book of the same
politikes, and the. viii. chapter he says thus / it avails nothing at all,
to give sentences or judgments of ryghtfull things / if they be not put in
execucyon / and the second proposycyon of this sillogysme I prove for that
law is better observed and kept of every manerman of the city / which every
man seems to have made by the hearing and by the precepte of the hole
multitude of the co^munes / ergo. etc. The first proposycyon of this last
sillogysme is in in a manner euydent by it self. For in as much as a city is
a co^munyte of fre men, as it is written in the third book of the politikes and
the. iiii. chapter / every cytezen A city is a common society of fre me^.
ought to be fre, and not to suffer or bear the seruyle domynyon of an other
man But this could not be brought to pass, if any one man or else a few
persons of the cyuyle co^munyte, did give or make a law by their own pryuate
and propre auctoryte over the hoole multitude of cytezens / for so they that
did make the law / should be lords of the other / and therefore the other
cytezens, that is to wit the more part, should be grieved and myscontente
with such law / were it never so good / or else perauenture would in no wise
receive that law / but because they were contemned and despised, and because
they were not called to counsel at the making of the law they shall speak
against it and in no wese observe or obaye it / But the law which is made or
given by the judgment or consent of the hole multitude although it were less
profitable each one of the cyuyle co^mnnyte should easelye observe and be
content with it for as much as every man should seem to have ordained or made
that law to him self / and therefore he ought not to speak against it but
rather to suffer it with a quyete mind. Now again to the pryncypall
conclusyon I reason thus / for that agyble or operable thing in the due
instytucyon whereof consysteth and rests the most part of the common
suffycyencye of the cytezens in this life and in the evil instytucyon whereof
most common hurt is lykely to ensue or follow ought only to be instytuted by
the hole multitude in the cyuyle co^munyte but such manner thing is the law
ergo the instytucyon of it belongs only to the hole multitude. etc. The
first proposycyon of this syllogysme is so euydent of it self that in a manner
it is as undoubted as any pryncyple and it is grounded upon the immedyate
verytes which has been put in the. iiii. and. v. chapytres of this dyccyon for
men came together and assembled to the cyuyle socyete for profit and the
suffycyencie of life to be gotten and ye contratie to be avoided. Those things
therefore which touches the common or dysprofyte of all men ought to be
known and herd of all men that they may get the profit and avoid the
contrary. But such manner things are the laws as we said in the second
proposycyon of this syllogysme for in the laws well made or in the well
making of the laws consysteth a great part of all and the hole suffycyence
of man's life / and under unjust laws is naught else but the bondage and
oppressyon and myserye into llerable of the cytezens by reason whereof in
conclusyon chances destruccyon of the common weal / And again this is as
it were an abbreuyacyon or some of the demonstracyons before gone / Duther the
auctoryte of making laws appertains to y^ hole multitude as we have said,
or else to one man or to a few men. But to only one it does not for a truth
belong, for cause of those things which has been said in the. xi. chapter
of this dyccyon / and in ye first demonstracyon which we brought in for ye
same purpose, for he might by ye reason of ignorance or malice or else both
make an evil and unrighteous law / by lokyng more to his own peculyer
profit than to the common profit, by reason whereof it should be a tyra^nycal
law, and for the same cause also it belongs not to a few men for they might
do amysse in making the law as we have said to the syngulet or party culet
profit of a certain few persons and not to the common profit, as we may
take example in those co^munyttes where a few mighty men does govern and rule
wherefore to conclude the making of the laws appertains to the university or
hole multitude of cytezens, or to the bygger part of the said multitude, of
whom it is far other and contrary wese / than it is of one person alone, or
yet of a few / for in asmoche as by the law all men of the cyuyle co^munyte
ought to be measured, according to due proporcyon, and for as much as no man
wyttyngly does hurt or will wrong to his own self therefore of necessytie
where all or else ye most part shall will to make a law, it is not to be
thought that they will make any but such as shall be conuenyent to the common
profit of the cytezens or co^mones, that is to wit to them selves / and by the
same demonstracyons only the less extremyte as they do call it, that is to
wit this term making or geuynge of laws, changed: it may be proved that
the approbacyon, interpretacyon, suspencyon of the law and other things
purposed or reherced in the third part of this present chapter does
appertain and belong to the auctoryte of the law maker or parlyament.

Of certain obieccyons that may be made against the contents of the chapter
last before gone, and of the solucyon of the said obieccyons and more large
manyfestacyon or declaracyon of the present purpose.
The, xiii, chapter,
But peradventure some man shall doubt of these things which we have said,
dysputynge and reasonynge that the auctoryte of making of the instytucyon of
laws, does not appertain or belong to the hole mustytude in a cyuyle
co^munyte. First because that thing which is evil or crooked, and without
wysdom or dyscrecyon, for the most part ought not to instytute or make a law
/ for these. ii. fawtes ought to be excluded from the law maker / that is to
wytmalyce and ignorance / For the avoiding of which. ii. fawtes in cyuyle
judgments, we proved the law to be necessary in the. xi. chapitre of this
dyccyon / but such manner one is the people or hole multitude of cytezens. For
the most part of those men are evil and folysshe, as it is written in the
first chapter of Ecclestastes. The nombre of fools is infynyte / again
because hit is very hard or impossyble that many lewd and unwise men shall
agree together in their sentences and judgments, which thing is nothing so
of a few, and those virtuous men / wherefore hit appears to be more profitable
that the law be made orgyuen by a few men, than by the hole congregacyon and
the superfluous multitude of cytezens or persons in ye cyuyle co^munyte. Again
there are in every cyuyle co^munyte but few wise and co^nynge and well learned
men in comparyson to the other unlearned multitude. For as much than as the
law is more profitable made by wise and well learned men, than by ignorant and
unlearned men / it appears that the auctoryte of making laws appertains to
a few and not to many or to all. Again that thing is in vain done by many,
which may be done by a few / saying than that the law may be made by wise
men which are but a few in nombre as it has be said of us / the hole
multitude or the greater pte of it should in vain be occupied about ye making
of it / wherefore to conclude as it appears y^ auctoryte of making laws does
not appertain to the hole multitude or to ye bygger pte of them. Of yt which
we have supposed heretofore as a prynciple of things to be proved in this book
/ that is to wit, that all men done desire the suffycyencie of life, or a
suffycyent life and does eschew or avoid the contrary, that is to say
insuffycyencie of life, we have proved by demonstracyon and concluded the
cyuyle co^munytie of them to be necessary in the. iiii. chapitre of this
dyccyon / for that that by such cyuyle socyetie they may get and obtain this
suffycyencie a foresaid and without they can not / For which cause Arystotle
also in the first book of his politykes and the second chapter says / There
is in all men by nature an appetyte and desire to such manner co^munyte that is
to wit cyuyle / of which veryte there follows an other necessarelie, and it
is had in the. iiii. book of the politykes and the. xii. chapter / that is to
wit that the part of the co^munyte which wylleth and desires the common
weal to stand / continue / and to be preserved ought to be taken and had of
more might and strength, than that part which wylleth not the common weal to
stand and to be preserved. For nature be kind and of herself desires or
wylleth no thing for the most part that may be to her corrupcyon or
destruccyon / for than such desire should be void or in vain / ye moreover
who soever are not willing that the common weal should continue, are counted
among bond men, not among cytezens or fre men of the cyuyle co^munytye as
are certain strangers / wherefore in the. vii. book of the polytykes and the.
xiiii. chapter it is said thus / All they ben to be nombred amongst bondmen
and no good cytezens which will live insolentlie, wantonly, or lawles and it
follows imedyatlie after. And that there should be so many or so great a
multitude of them in the governance of a common weal / that is to wit of
those that are insolent or care not to live cyuylie: that they should be bygger
or stronger than all these / that is to wit which are willing to live
cyuylie, it is one of the things that are impossible / and why it is
impossible it appears and is euydent for if it were so than should nature do
amysse or fail for the most part / if than the bygger multitude of men does
desire the preseruacyon of the common weal and wylleth it to stand, as it
appears before to be well proved, then must it thereto of necessytie will and
desire that thing also without the which the common weal can not be
preserved or continued / and that is nothing else save a rule of ryghtuous and
profitable things given with a precepte or commandment called the law / and
that because it is impossible that a city governed of the best men according
to virtue should not be ordered by good laws / as it is written in the. iiii.
of the polytykes and the. viii. chapter, and we have proved it by
demonstracyon in the. xi. chapter of this dyccyon. The bygger multitude
therefore of a cyuyle co^munyte desires and are willing to have a law or else
there should happen to be defaute and want or imperfeccyon in nature / for the
most part and most co^munelye / which thing to be impossible let it be
supposed of natural phylosophye / This thing also which is as they call it a
common pryncyple, I take beside the aforesaid euydent and manifest veryties
that every hole thing is more or greater than the part of it and this is
true, both as touching quantyte or bygnes, and also as touching actyue power
or virtue and accyon / wherefore it is euydentlie inferred or concluded by
necessyte, that the hole multitude of cytezens or the bygger part of it,
which are to be taken both for one, may better dyscerne and judge what is to
be chosen or taken, and what is to be despised or refused / than may any part
of it by it self what soever it be / these things than supposed as open and
euydent veryties it is easy to make answer and put by the obieccyons, by
which some man would go about to prove and conclude that the auctoryte of
making laws apperteyneth not to the hole multitude or to ye bygger part of it
in a cyuyle co^munyte but to a certain few persons. To the first obieccyon
therefore, where it is said that to that thing which is leude or evil
belongs not the auctoryte of making laws: this proposycyon I grant / and
when it is added that such is the hole multitude of cytezens: this is to be
denied / for the pluralite or multitude of cytezens is neither evil or lewd
neither indiscreet, in that respect, that they ben many, or a multitude, for
all or the most part of them are of right mind and reason and of right
affection or apetyte to the governance of the common weal / and to those
things which are necessary to the preseruacyon and contynuaunce of the
common weal, as to the preseruacyon of good laws / statutes, and costomes,
as it has been showed heretofore / for though not every man or the greatter
multitude of cytezens is a fynder out or the deuyser of laws: yet for all that
every manner man may judge of the things invented and purposed to him by an
other man and dyscerne what is to be added or mynysshed or else to be changed /
wherefore if in the mayor or first proposycyon by that which he calls
indiscreet be understood or meaned that which by it own self can not
invent or deuyse a law and ought not therefore as touching to the mo parts or
particular and synguler persons in it ought not to instytute a law than that
proposycyon were to be denied as which is euydentlie false as witnesses both
sensyble experyence and also Arystotle in the third book of his politykes and
the. vii. chapter. First I say induccyon or sensyble experyence bears
witness for many men do judge well of the qualyte of a pycture or house or of a
ship and of other things made by craft, which yet of them selves for all
that could not invent or find out and deuyse such things / And Arystotle
also bears witness to the same in the place before alleged making answer to
this present obieccyon by these words following. For in certain things
(says Aristotle) not only he shall judge neither yet judge best which has
made or wrought them: but also other men, and he declares this by example in
many kinds of handycraftes, doing to understand the same also of other
things / Neither it makes any thing against us where it is said that wise
men which are but Not only wise men ca^discern what things are to be done.
a few in nombre may rather or better dyscerne the agyble or operable things
which are to be instytuted and ordained than the other multitude: for though
we do grant this to be true yet for all that it follows not hereof that wise
men can better dyscerne the things which are to be instytuted and ordained,
than can the hole multitude, in which both they and also the other less
learned or less wise are comprehended / for every hole thing is greatter than
is the part of it, both in workynge, and also in dyscernynge or judging. And
this was undoubtedly / the sentence and mind of Arystotle in the. iii. book
of his polytykes, and the. vii. chapitre: when he said / Quare just domina^s
maiorum multitudo / that is to say, the hole multitude or university of
cytezens or the greatter part thereof which he means by this word multitudo
ought of right to rule, concerning the greatest things which are in a common
weal / and he shows the cause why / for of the hole multitude: the
co^mentie, the learned counsel, and the worshypfulles or headde officers, are
but each of them a part of a co^mume weal and the substance, richesse,
worship, wit, wisdom, judgment, discrecyon, of all them to gyther: is
greatter, than it is of any one of them by himself, or of any few of them,
which do receive or take upon them the mynystracyon of the greatest offices /
or dygnytes / his intent is this / to say, that the multitude of all companyes
and orders of the common weal being taken together / and so consequently
that the judgment of them together is more sure and without ieopardie: than is
the judgment of any part by it self / whether that part be the rascal or
poor commons (which he sygnyfyed hereby this word co^cilium) as husbondmen /
artyfycers / and such other, or else whether it be pretorium, that is to say,
they which in judgment are officers helping the prince or governor: as
advocates / men of law / and notaryes, or scrybes and regestres / or whether
it be honorabilitas, that is to say, the order or company of the best and
most worshypfull men: which are but very few in nombre, and which only are
conuenyently elected and chosen to bear the greatest offices or dignytyes in ye
cyuyle co^munyties, what soever part it be, taken seuerallye by it self /
Again though we do grant (as it is true in very dead) that some unlearned
men can not so well judge of the law or of any other agyble thing which is to
be instytuted or ordained, as can so many learned men: yet for all that the
no^bre of unlearned men might be made so great: that they being so great a
multitude might judge even as well of these things, ye Even unlearned men also
may dyscerne of laws to be made.
or else better, than the learned men being but a few in nombre. And
Arystotle said this same in the place before alleged, willing to confyrme and
strength or fortyfye this sentence / if the multitude (say the Arystotle) be
not over dull, ygnorante, and seruyle, albeit that each one of them by him
self can not judge so well as they that been learned or wise, and has
knowledge / yet for all that all they together shall judge better / or at the
least wise not worse / And to that auctoryte How this auctorite stultorum
infinitus est munerus is to be taken and understood.
taken of the first chapter of ecclesiastes, that the nombre of fools is
infynyte / we ought to say, that by this word stultorum, in englisshe fools,
is to be understood unlearned men / or which gives not their mind to
lyberal works which for all that has understanding and judgment of things
to be done, though not so much as they which give their mind to such
things / or else perauenture by fools, in that place, the which man
sygnyfyed or meaned infydels: as saint Iherome upon that place / which
infydels or myscreantes, ye have they never so much cu^nynge and knowledge in
worldely scyences / yet are they very stark fools / according to that
saying of saint Paul in the third chapter of ye first epistle to ye
Coryntheans / ye wisdom of this world, is foolysshnes before god / the second
obieccyon is of small strength / for albeit yt it is more easy for a few men,
to agree in one sentence or mind, than many: yet is it not hereof concluded,
that the sentence of a few, or of part, is better, than the sentence of the
hoole multitude, whereof ye said few are a porcyon or part / for these few
could not, ne would so well dyscerne and judge the common profit: as could
and would the hole multitude of cytezens / ye moreover it were ieopardouse (as
it has appeared of the things aforesaid) to committee the making of the law
to the arbytrement or judgment of a few men / for perauenture they in making
of the law would have more respect to the partyculer profit of some
persons, or of some company / than to the common profit / which thing
appears euydently in them The makers of ye decretals had respect all together
to their own synguser profit.
which were makers of the decretalles of clerks or the clergy / as we shall
show also suffycyentlye in the. viii. chapter of the second dyccyon / for
hereof should begyuen certain occasyon, and a way opened to the regyment
called Olygarchia / likewise as when the power of making laws is granted to
one man alone: an occasyon is given to tyranny as we have brought in and
alleged heretofore in the. xi. chapter of Arystotle in the. v. of the Etykes
in his treatise de iusticia / The third obieccyon may easily be put by, and
answered unto, by those Oligarchia is declared be fore in ye. viii. chapter.
things which has been said all redye / for albeit that by wise men laws may
be better made than by unlearned men / yet for all that it is not concluded
hereof, that laws be better made by only wise men, than by the hole multitude
of cytezens / in the which multitude the aforesaid wise men are also included
/ but the hole multitude of all these gathered together, might, and would
better dycerne the common vtylyte or profit, and the common justice: than
any of these parts taken seuerallye by them selves / yea though it were of
never so great wise men wherefore they say not true, who soever says, that the
unlearned multitude does hinder or let the eleccyon, and the apporbacyon of the
truth and common profit or good / for rather they are a great help in this
thing: when they are joined to them, that are more cu^nynge, and which has
more experyence / for albeit that they can not by them selves and of their own
wits inuente and find out the true things, and the profitable things,
which are to be instytuted and ordained / yet for all that they may dyscerne
and judge the said things being invented by other men, and purposed or moved
unto them, whether if any thing do seem for to be added / or mynysshed / or
utterly changed / or despised and refused in the said things put for the and
moved to them / for a man perceyueth many things, and also may do or help to
the fynysshynge or making perfyte of many things, after he has hard an
other man speak: to the beginning or inue^cyon of the which things, he
could not have come by him self, or by his own wit alone / for the inuencyon
or first finding out of things / is very hard / wherefore Arystotle says
in the second book of Eleuches and the last chapter / it is a very hard
thing, to find out the first beginning of the troth, in any The begynni^ges
of things are very hard to be found out.
manner dyscyplyne or scye^ce / but ye begynni^ge being ones found out / it is
an easy thing to add or put to the resydue / wherefore to find out the
begynnynges or pryncyples of scyences, and of arts, and of other tradycyons:
it appertains not but unto men of best and most sharp wits / but to those
things which are invented all ready / men of more course or gross wit may
add more / which for all that are not to be called herfore indiscreet or
fools, because they can not inue^te or find out such things by them selves
of their own wits / but rather they ought to be accounted in the nombre of
good men / as said Arystotle in the first of the etykes and the. iiii.
chapter / That man is best / which knows all things That man is best which
of him self koweth what things are to be done.
of him self, and needs no teaching / and he again is a good man / which
does obey him that says well, and gives him good counsel / that is to say
which harkeneth to him: and does not say against him without reason or a
cause. And therefore it is conuenyent and very profitable, that it be committed
to wise and expert men, by the hole multitude of cytezens / to search or to
find out and to examyne the rules of the common cyuyle justice and vtylytes
or dysprofytes and of such other like things, which rules are to be made
laws or statutes / so and after such manner that outher of every one of the
pryncypall parts of the cyuyle co^munyte, which were reakened up in the. v.
chapter of this dyccyon and the first part thereof / be certain elected or
chosen, but yet according to the proporcyon of every one of those parts / or
else that of all the cytezens gathered together all the aforesaid expert or
wise men be elected / And this shall be a conuenyent and a profitable manner of
assemblynge or coming together for the inuentynge The manner of inuentyng or
finding out laws.
or deuysynge of laws, without the noyaunce or harm of the other multitude /
that is to wit of unlearned or less wise men, which should do but little help
or furtheraunce in the searching out of such manner rules or laws, and should
be troubled and let from their own works and necessary occupacyons,
which thing should be chargeable and paynefull both to each one severally /
and also to all in common / but such rules being invented and dylygently
examyned, which are to be made laws / ought to be put forth for to be approved
or reproved / allowed or dysalowed, among the hole multitude of the cyuyle
co^munyte being congregated or assembled together / that if to any of the
co^munes it shall seem, that any thing ought to be added to them / or to be
mynysshed and taken away from them / or to be changed / or to be utterly
despised or refused / that he may tell it, and show his mind / for by the
reason hereof the law may be the more profytably instytuted or made / for as
we have aforesaid, the cytezens which are less learned or wise, may
otherwhyles perceive somewhat that is to be amended about the law purposed /
which for all that could not have invented or found out that law. And
because the laws to given by the judgment and consent of the hole and
universal multitude / shall be better observed and kept / neither any man
shall have any cause to speak or else to grudge against them / and after that
the said rules, which are to be made laws, are publysshed and openly
declared among the hole and universal co^gregacyon of the cytezens, and after
that they which would speak or say any thing reasonably concerning the
said rules have been hard speak and say their minds, than ought there again
to be chosen such manner men, and after the manner which we have aforesaid / or
else the aforesaid men to be confyrmed / which representynge ye stead and
auctoryte of, ye hole multitude of cyteze^s, shall approve or dysalowe ye
aforesaid rules sought forth and purposed, in the hole or in ye part of them:
or else ye hole multitude of the cyteze^s together, or ye bygger part of it
shall do ye same: if they list. After which approbacyon made: than the said
rules are laws, and are worthy so to be called, and not before / And these
also only of all humayne precepts, after the publycacion or proclamacyon of
them do oblygate and bind the transgressors of them to cyuyle offense or
blame and to cyuyle pain. So When laws does bind.
than, that the auctoryte of the making or instytucyon of laws, and to give a
coactyue precepte of the obseruacyon of them, does appertain or belong only
to the hole multitude of cyteze^s, or to the bygger part thereof, as to the
effectyue cause / or to him or to them, to which or to whom the said
general multitude shall grant this auctoryte: I think that we have
suffycyently declared and showed it by the things now aforesaid.

Of the qualytes and dysposycyons or properties belonging to a perfyte
governor to y^ end yt it may be known, what manner of person a prince or
governor ought to be, and of what qualyte / whereof also it appears, what is
the conuenyent matter or subject (as they call it) of the laws of man.
The, xiiii, chapter,
HOw after the premysses we entende breyfelie to declare what manner of person
he ought to be, which should bear the office of a governor. There are. ii.
intrinsecall habytes or qualytes and, propertyes belonging to him that shall
be a perfyte gouernoure / which. What qualyties he that shall be a price or
governor ought to have in him.
ii. qualytes can not be departed or dysseuered the one from the other / that
is to wit, prudence, and moral virtue / namely justice or ryghtuousnes. The
one, that is to wit prudence, is necessary to the end that the mind and
understanding of him may be dyrected in gouernynge or exercysynge his office /
wherefore Arystotle in the third book and the third chapter of his polytykes
says thus. Prudence alone is the propre virtue of a ruler or governor / for
as touching other virtues they seem to be common, as well to the subjects:
as to the rulers or governors. The second or other qualyte or habyte is
necessary to the end, that his affection may be right that is to wit moral
virtue / and pryncypally among al other justice or ryghtuousnes / wherefore in
the. v. book of the Etikes and the. vi. chapter Arystotle says thus. The
heed offycer or prince and governor is the keeper, maynteyner and defe^der of
justice and right / wherefore to conclude prudence is necessary to him that
shall be a gouernoure / for by it he may be dyrected very well in to his
propre work, that is The propre work of a prince or gouernoure.
to wit, in the judgments of the cyuyle ryghtes and vtylyties / for in these
cyuyle acts, wherein the act it self or the manner is not determined of the
law / the prince or judge is dyrected by prudence, in judging and also in
doing execucyon of the act, or the manner, of both of them / in which it
might chance and happen him to do a mysse, without wisdom or prudence / for
as it is red in Saluste Catifine with his accomplices were ponysshed of Cicero.
in the hystorye of the battle that Catilyne made against the Romans, If
Cicero, which was at that time consul, had ponysshed the complyces of
Catiline being cytezens of Rome and noble and mighty men, which had conspyred
against the common welthe, and therefore were worthy death / if he had (I
say) ponysshed them according to the law, in the same place / and time and
after the Place, time, and order in execucyon may at some season upon good
polycye be altered.
same manner and order before his days used and customed / by all lykely hod
there would have risen by the reason thereof a cyuyle battle among their own
selves / which should have dystroyed the common weal / there was such a
sedycyonreysed and styred up in the people by these said conspyrers and
traitors, against the counsayles and the other heed officers and rulers. This
ieopardie Cicero, which was consul or one of the ii. chief rulers and heed
officers of the city, escaped and avoided by his wisdom or prudence: when he
delivered the said malefactors The wisdom of Cicero. Tullianum
to them yt do execusyon or hangmen, and commanded them to be killed in the
place of the prison, which perauenture therefore is called Tullianum. So than
by wisdom, the counsayles or purposes, and the manners of agyble things are
dyrected / wherefore Arystotle in the. vi. book of his Etikes and the. v.
chapter says thus. Prudencia est habitus verus cum ratione actibus circa
hominis bona vel The descrypcyon of Prudence.
mala / prudence is an practyue habyte or qualytie / by which a man works
with true reason, as touching to those things which are good or evil to
man. Understand thou, in that he is man / and the cause hereof is, for those
are agyble things: about which, and of which for the most part laws are
made, according to which laws the prince or gouernoure ought to dyspose and
order the cyuyle acts of men. And because it seems not possible always, to
determyne by the law all the manners and cyrcumstances, which may happen
about the doing of the said acts, by reason of the great varyetye and
dyuersyte of them according to the dyuersyte of regyons and times / as open
experyence teaches, and also Arystotle witnesses in the first book of the
Etikes and the third chapter when he says in this wise. The honest things
and the ryghtuouse things, whereof the moral philosopher makes consyderacyon,
has so great dyfference and error / that they may seem to be such only by
the law, and not by nature that is to say only because men will so statute
and ordain of them / and not because the nature of the agyble things is
determynate: that is to wit, that this thing is right, and that thing wrong.
And he expresses the same more largely in the third book of his polytykes and
the. xii. chapitre: when he says thus but because certain things may be
comprehended in the laws, and certain may not / therefore it is that we ask
the questyon and make doubt, whether it is better to be governed of the best
man or of the best laws / for it is impossible that a law may be given of
those same things (understand thou of all those things) which may be matters
of consultacyon and whereof men may take counsel together. And therefore it was
necessary to committee the judgment of some certain doubtful things, which
does happen or chance in the cyuyle acts of men / unto the arbytrement and
descrecyon of the princes or judges / that is to wit, such things, which
outher as touchyuge to them selves, or as touching to some manner or
cyrcumstaunce of them / are not determined by the law / for in such things,
as are determined by the law / the prince or gonernoure ought The prince or
governor ought to follow ye law
to follow the determynacyon of the law. And this was the mind or sentence of
Arystotle in the third book of his polytykes and the. vii. chapter when he
said in this wise / and the princes or governors, whether it be one, or else mo
than one, that governs and rules / ought to have power and auctoryte in
those things, whereof the laws can not suffycyently and exactlye speak, or
make mencyon expressly / because it is an hard thing in a general speech
(such as the law is) to co^prehende every partyculer case that may happen /
which sentence he rehersynge again in the. xii. chapter of the same book,
says thus / And there are also now governors or heed officers, which have
power to judge of some certain things without the law / for in such things
whereof the law can not determyne, the judge or gouernoure shall give judgment
/ as if the law couldenot have given precepte very well of the said things /
for of such things, whereof the law may determyne / no man would doubt.
Prudence therefore is necessary Prudence is necessary to a prince.
to a prince or gouernoure, for the judging of such manner things / which
can not be determined of the law / And this sentence of Arystotle, being very
nere to the pryncyples, which are euydent of them selves / who soever list,
may certyfie it, by demonstratyue sillogisme or reason, by those things,
which has been said in the second chapter of this dyccyon. Again moral
goodness or virtue, A prince ought to be just or right tuouse.
and specially justice or ryghtuousnes, is necessary to a prince or governor
for if he be a perverse or an evil person as touching to his manners / the
common weal or cyuyle governance is greatly hurt by him, be it never so
well instructed or appointed with laws / for we have said, that it is hard,
and not possible, to determyne all manner cases that may happen, in the laws /
but some things must needs be committed to the arbytrement and will of the
prince and gouernoure / in which thing he may hurt the common weal, if he
be a man of perverse affection. And this was the sentence and mind of
Arystotle in the second book of the politikes and the. viii. chapter: when he
said thus. For they that are set in great power and auctoryte, if they be vile
and of no valor (that is to say) if they be crooked or naught in their manners)
they do much hurt / and has done much hurt as have some done allredy to
the city of the Chalcedomianes / and because princes are preserved from doing
of hurt by moral virtue, and namely justice / therefore it is conuenyent (if
we may call that conuenyent which is necessary) yt noman, which shall be a
prince or governor, do want moral virtue, and namely justice / among all
other virtues. To the which virtue of justice, it is conuenyent in him that
shall be a gouernoure, that a certain virtue be assocyated called Epicikeia /
by which virtue the judge is dyrected to equity, mekenes, gentylnes, and from
extremytie, and cruelnes specyallye and cheyfly, in those things / wherein the
law is insuffycyent and imperfect and gets no plain determynacyon /
wherefore Arystotle in the. v. book of his etykes and the. x. chapter says
thus / this is ye nature and office of the virtue Epicikeia (which as I esteem,
the lawers will call Equite) to amend the law in that part or be half,
wherein it is imperfect, and makes no express mencyon suffycyently as
touching to any partyculer thing because it speaks only generally / for
this Epicikeia or equity is a certain favorable interpretacyo^ or moderacyon
of the what Epicikeiais and of his nature.
law in some case, which the law comprehends under the generalyte of
rygoure / in which thing the law is said for so much to be vnsuffycyent or
imperfect / because it has not excepted the said case from the rule / which
for all that it would have excepted from the generalyte of the rule, other with
some moderacyon, or else utterly / if it had considered that such case
should have so fortuned or chanced / and again beside the aforesaid things,
there is required There is req^red in a price love to ward the common weal.
in him, that shall be a prince or gouernoure / a certain synguler love or
benevolence toward the common weal / and the cytezens / For by the reason
of this love or benevolence the accyons or deades of the prince or gouernoure
are intented or done the more dylygentlye, and the better, to the common
profit of the hole multitude together / and also to the pertyculer profit of
each one by him self. And beside these said habytes and dysposycyons (as they
call them) or qualytes there is necessary to a prince or gouernoure a certain
extrynsecall instrument / that is to wit a certain nombre of men of arms,
by which he may execute his cyuyle sentences or judgments upon rebels and
dysobedyent persons, by coactyue power / wherefore Arystotle in the. vii. book
of the polytykes and the. viii. chapter says thus. They that live together in
a cyuyle co^munyte, it is necessary for them to have arma (that is to say a
multitude of men of arms) to compelle those that are rebellons and dysobedyent
persons, to obey the heed officers or governors / for else the laws and
cyuyle sentences should be idle and serve for naught / if execucyon of them
might not be done and performed. And this armed power of prince or governor
had need to be so great that it do excede the power of any one subject under
him or of a great many of How many and what manner men of arms ought to be
about a prince and for what cause.
them / and yet he ought not by the reason of so great armed power, to vyolate
or break the laws / and to rule imperyouslye or lordely, beside or contrary
to the laws. And Arystotle in the third of the polytykes and the. xi.
chapter says in this wise. A king or gouernoure ought to have so great
power, that he may be greatter and more of might and strength than each one of
the co^munes by him self / or than many of them together. Wherefore I say
there ben three things which they ought to have, that shall take upon them the
pryncypall and most high offices. The first is, that they do love the
present state of the common weal. The second is, that they have great power
to execute those things, which their office requires. The third is, that
they have virtue and Justice, by virtue, here he understands Prudence / which
is the bond and the maystres and teacher of all virtues / wherefore Arystotle
in the. vi. book of the Etykes and the last chapter says thus. In whom
soever Prudence is, which is but one virtue / in him is also with the said
prudence all virtues / and Arystotle in the said sentence did set Prudence and
moral virtue both under one in the same part of the said deuysyon / because
they are not separated or dysseuered at any time the one from the other of the
which mind and sentence it seems that he is in the same book and the same
chapter when he says thus. It is manyfeste therefore and euydent of the
premysses, that it is not possible a man to be properly or pryncypallye good /
without Prudence. Neither a man to be prudent / without moral virtue / And
Arystotle in the. v. koke of the polytykes and the. ix. chapter writes the
things, which we have here entreated of to be conuenyent and necessary to
him that shall be a prince or gouernoure / perauenture in contrary order as
they ben necessarelye required to be declared. Of the premysses than it
appears, what is the propre subject or matere and materyall cause of the
laws of The propre subject of ma^s laws.
men. Truly a prince or governor which shall be suffycyently prepared with
wisdom or prudence, and moral virtue, namely Justice. Than what manner person
a prince or gouernoure ought to be / and what things are conuenyent and
necessary to him / let it be determined in this wise.

How yt prince in a co^munyte and kingdom is as the heart in a sensyble
creature / and ye without a king or prince no co^munytie or kingdom can
stand / and partly of a princes duetye.
The, xv, chapter,
THe heart of a sensyble creature which is first fourmed: is more noble and
more perfyte in his qualytes and dysposycions, than all the other parts of the
sensyble creature: for in it natura genera^s has set and ordained a power and
an instrument, by which the resydue of the parts of a sensyble creature are
fourmed of co^uenye^t matere or substance and are also separated and
dysseuered and ordered each in co^paryson to other and are kept in their
dysposycyons and qualytes / and are also by it preserved from noyaunce or
hurt, as much as nature does suffer him to be preserved. And when they are
fallen from their own nature / by the reason of sycknes, or any other
impedyment / they are repaired and restored to their own nature again by the
virtue and power of this part. Proporcyonatly and much like unto these
things we must co^sydre in a cyuyle co^munyte being instituted co^uenye^tly
according to reason / for all the soul or mind of the hole multitude of
cytezens or co^munes, or else of the bygger part thereof: is fourmed or ought to
be fourmed in a cyuyle co^munyte one part first being proporcynated or like
unto the heart in a sensyble creature. In which part it sets or ordayneth a
certain virtue and power, or a certain form with actyue power and
auctoryte, to instytute the other parts of the cyuyle co^munyte. And this
part whereof we do mean is ye prince or head governor / whose universal
virtue or power in causalite, is the law / and whose actyue power / is the
auctoryte of judging / of co^maundynge / and of executynge the sentences
concerning the cyuyle ryghtes and vtylytes / wherefore Arystotle in the. vii.
book of his polytykes and the. viii. chapter, said this part to be most
necessary of al other parts in a cyuyle co^munyte / and the cause hereof is,
for that the suffycyencie which is had by the other parts or offices of a
cyuyle co^munyte, all though the said parts or offices were not at all:
might be suffycye^tly had by other means, and without a prince or governor a
realm or common weal cannot continue
of other things, though not so easily. But without a prince or governor, a
cyuyle co^munyte can not continue / or long co^tynue and endure, for it is
necessary and can not be otherwise, but that offencyous and evil occasyons
shall chance (as it is said in the gospel of Matheue) which offendicles (as
the scripture calls them) are co^tencyons risen among men for iniuryes done
of them one to an other which if they should not be judged or measured by the
rule of ryghtfull things or justice, that is to wit by the law, and by the
prince or governor, whose office is to measure such things according to the
law / there might chance happily by A prince ought to surmount all other in
virtue and prudence.
the reason thereof fyghtyng, and a seperacyon of the men being congregated in
a cyuyle co^munyte, and the priuacyon or lack of a suffycient life. The pyrnce
also in a cyuyle co^munyte ought to be more noble and more perfyte in his
dysposycions or qualytes, yt is to wit, in prudence and virtue moral: than the
other parts of the cyuyle co^munyte And that for this reason, that the cause
effectyue of a cyuyle co^munyte that is to wit, the soul and will of the hole
co^munyte have given to this pryncypall and first part and has put in him a
certain general virtue or power in causalyte, that is to wit, the law /
And also an auctorytye and power to work and to do execucyon of the said laws
/ And as the natural heat of the heart as being the subject, by which heat
the heart or the form thereof performs all his accyons / is dyrected and
measured in workynge by the form or virtue and power of the heart, and else
it should not work to the due end: again also, as the heat, which they
call co^munelye the spyryte, as being the instrumente to perform and fulfill
the accyons or operacyons, is governed through out the hole body, of the same
virtue or power, for else neither outher of these heates should work unto the
due end, for fire works worse than the organs or instruments, as it is red
in the second book de generatione and deanima / even so and in like manner the
auctoryte of rulynge or gouernynge given to any man being proporcionated and
like to the heat of the heart as being the The coactiue power of a prince or
gouernoure, is like to ye heat or spyryte i^ man or beast.
subject / and even so the armed or coactyue power isntrumental, being
proporcyonate and like to the heat, which we have called the spyryte / ought
both to be ruled and measured by the law, in the gyuynge of judgments / in
co^maundynge / and in executynge the cyuyle ryghtes and vtylytes / for else the
prince or gouernoure should not work to the due end / that is to wit, to the
conseruacyon of the cyuyle co^munyte / as it has been said and proved in the.
xi. chapter of this dyccyon or first part. Again, according to the said
virtue or power, that is to wit, according to the law and auctoryte given to
him / the prince or gouernoure Men of wisdom are to be appointed of the prince
to be officers and not hare brayned fellows and men of small co^scye^ce and
less descrecyon.
ought to instytute and ordain diverse and sundry parts or offices in the
cyuyle co^munyte, of conuenyent matere / that is to wit, of men having
arts, habytes or qualytes conuenyent, mete, or according for the said
offices. For such manner men are the matere conuenyent of the parts or offices
of a cyuyle co^munyte / as it has been said in the. vii. chapter of this
diccyon. For it is mete in a cyuyle co^munytie well instytuted, to appoynte or
assygne such men to the offices of the common weal / which have the
operative or practyue habytes mete and conuenyent to the said offices / And
such as has not the conuenye^t habytes and qualytes, as for example young
vnexparte men: to ordain and appoynte them to learn such habites or crafts
and scyences, unto which they are naturally most inclyned / And this was the
sentence and mind of Arystotle, A good law and little kept in some place
when he said in the first book of his Etykes and the second chapter, in this
wise what science or dyscyplynes ought to be in cities or cyuyle co^munytes /
and what manner scyences each man ought to learn / and how much or how
farforth: this moral philosophy, that is to wit, the polytycall prudence or
the prudence of making It belongs unto princes or governors, to ordain and
appoint, what art or scye^ce each one of ye young men ought to learn for ye
common vtylyte.
laws, does ordain and instytute / and so consequently does he also, which
orders the common weal according to the law / that is for to say the
prince or gouernoure. This same also he said in the. vii. of the polytykes and
the. xiiii. chapitre / by these words / he therefore that is law maker or that
gives the law ought to have respect to all the aforesaid things / both to
the parts of the cyuyle co^munytie / and also to the accyons of them. The same
also he said in the. viii. book of the polytykes, and the first chapter, when
he said thus. That the law maker had neade or ought to be very dylygent, and
to take very great head as touching to the ordrynge and dyscyplyne of young
men, no man verily will doubt / For if this thing be not very dylygentlye seen
unto in cyuyle co^munytes: it shall hurt much the common weal / thus than of
these premysses it appears that to ye law maker or universal multitude in ye
parlyame^t assembled by ye princes commandment for the same purpose
apperteyneth and belongs the determynacyon He means of such offices as ye
prince or king will have in stytuted by act of perlyament else all other
officers and degres it lies i^ yt kings absolute power to appoi^te at all
times.
or instytucyon of the offices and parts of a cyuyle co^munyte / and that the
judgment / the precepte or co^maundynge / and the execucyon of the said
determynacyon, does appertain to him, that is prince or governor according
to the law. And also by the same demonstracyons or syllog^sticall reasons this
may be proved: by which we proved in the. xii. chapter of this dyccyon or
part that to the said universal multitude belongs the auctoryte of gyuynge
laws. Wherefore it is not lawful for any man, to take upon him any office in a
cyuyle co^munyte at his own pleasure / and namely strangers / for not every
man ought, neither reasonably may at his own pleasure turn him self to
exercise ye offices of a man of arms, or of a priest / neither ye prince or
governor ought to suffer this / for by the reason hereof might chance
insuffyciencie, to the cyuyle co^munyte, of those things / which must ^edes
be procured by the other offices / But the prince or gouernoure ought to
determyne and assynge the persons to such manner offices / and also to
determyne the quantite and qualyte of the said parts or offices, as touching
to nombre / to power / and such other Where soever he speaks of such
multitude he meneth when it is assembled in ye perlyamente, remember this to
avoid captyousnes.
things / lest by reason of i^moderate excess of any of them, it may happen
or chance the common weal to be destroyed / wherefore Arystotle in the. v.
book of the polytykes and the third chapter, says in this wise / There are
made destruccyo^s also of common weals / by the reason of excessyue increace
of any part or parts, contrary to due proporcyon. For as the body is made of
his parts / and the said parts ought to grow together each one according to
their measure, that the due proporcyon and co^mensuracyon of the body may
remain and be saved / and unless it be thus: it is destroyed (as for example
when the feet is. iiii. cubytes long, and the resydue of the body is but. ii.
spannes long / other whiles also it may be turned in to the figure or shape
of an other beast: if there should be made unmeasurable increace not only in
quantyte: but also in qualyte) so Let ye prince restrain the excessive
multitude of priests, and of poor folk.
likewise a cyuyle co^munyte is made of parts / of which some one other whiles
preuelie encreaceth excessyuely / as for example the multitude of poor men in
ye common weals / where the people does rule and govern / and the multitude
of priests, in the christen law or sect and relygyon. The same thing also he
said in the third book of the polytykes and the. vii. chapter / the text
whereof I leave out here / because of breyfnes / Again his part, that is to
wit, the prince or gouernoure / ought by his auctoryte, according to the law,
to command such Priests and poor men, Let a prince or governor command
honest and ryghtfull things both by his work, and also by his words.
things which are ryghtuouse and honest / and to forbid the contrary things
as well by his work, as by his words / rewardynge them for their good deeds
which do observe the legal precepts / and ponysshe them for their evil
deeds, which do transgress or break the said precepts / by which mean he
shall conserve every one of the parts of the cyuyle co^munyte in their due
estate or being and shall preserve them from noyaunces and iniuryes / and if
case be, that any of the said parts, outher does, or else suffer wrong /
he that does y^ injury or wrong, ought to be cured or healed, by the accyon or
operacyon of the prince or gouernoure, causynge him to sustain or suffer pain
or ponysshemente therefore. For a penalyte or ponyssheme^t is as it were a
certain medycyne of the crime or trespase / wherefore Arystotle in the second
book of the Etykes and the third chapter says thus. And that it is as we
have said / it may be perceived by the penalytes or pains, which are made
and ordained herefore / that is to wit, for the delectacyons and pleasures,
which are taken or had in evil doing or in evil saying / for the penalytes
are certain medycynes or remedies) and he that suffers the iniurye or wrong
/ shall be cured or healed by receyuynge or taking amends / and by this mean
all things shall be brought again to conuenyent egallyte or proporcyon.
Moreover this said part of the cyuyle co^munyte, The prince or governor
helps the other parts of the cyuyle co^munyte.
that is to wit, the governor, conserueth the other parts of the cyuyle
co^munyte / and helps them in the exercysynge of their works both propre
and also common. Propre works I call those which are caused or brought
forth of the propre offices of the said parts. The common works I call the
co^munycacyons or common dealings of the said parts among them selves, one
of them with an other / which works both propre and common, should be
troubled and let / if the operacyon of the prince or governor did cease
from the correccyon or ponyssheme^t of vyolent persons. And for this cause the
accyon or workynge The prince or governor ought never to cease from his office
or duty doing
of the prince or governor ought never to cease in a cyuyle co^munyte /
likewise as the accyon or workynge of the heart in a sensyble creature never
cease / For albeit that the accyons of the other parts of a cyuyle co^munyte
may sometime cease without noyaunce or hurt to any syngulare person / college
/ or co^munyte: as for example, the operacyon of the men of war may cease in
the time of peace, and so likewise of the operacyons of the other parts / yet
for all that the accyon or operacyon of this part, that is to wit, of the
prince or gouernoure, and of his virtue or power, may never cease without
noyaunce or hurt / for at all times and alhoures it is necessary, that the
precepte and the common custodye of lawful things and forbidden things
according to the law, do endure and continue. And when soever any unlawful
or unjust thing is done: the prince Letthe laws always and contynually
endure.
or head governor ought perfytely to measure and strengthen such things / or
at the least wise to exercise those things, which are preparacyons to the
tulynge and strengthnynge of such things. Of the premysses may suffycyently
appear the order of the parts of a cyuyle co^munyte, among them selves: in
co^paryson one to an other / for the princes or governors cause, and to him as
to the pryncypall of all: all the parts of a cyuyle co^mnnyte are ordered, for
the state of this present world / for that part is the first and pryncypall
of all in a cyuyle co^munyte, which ought to instytute and to determyne the
other parts / and to conserne them in the state and for the state of this
present world, or for the cyuyle end / but such manner part is the prince
or he that is governor according to the law made by man, as we have
concluded and proved already by probable reason and by demonstratyue syllogysme:
wherefore we conclude, that the prince or governor is the first and pryncypall
part of all other / and that the other are or dred to him. Of the effectyue
cause than of the eleccyon of the prince or head governor / and also of the
instytucyon of the resydue of the parts in a cyuyle co^munyte / and of the
order of them among them selves one to an other / let it be determined in this
wise.

That is most expedyent to the common weal, to have only one certain man to
be prince or governor, him self with all his posteryte / which they call
co^munelye the succession of kynred or blood,
The, xvi, chapter,
THat it is most conuenyent and profitable for ye common weal to have a prince
and governor which shall enjoy the crown by succession of blood with all
his posteryte and ofsprynge, and not by eleccyon as the emperor is chosen by
electours in Germany is proved by. xi. strong and inui^cyble reasons. The
first is, because it appears, that he which 1
comes to the kingdom or crown by enherytaunce and succession of blood shall
be more dylygent and careful to se unto the common weal, as being in a
manner propre and heredytarie to him self, and which he shall leave to his
heirs after him / than shall that prince or governor, which is not sure and
out of doubt, that his own heir shall govern after him / wherefore in the
second book of the polytykes and the second chapter about the mids of it
Arystotle says in this wise. Very little head or dylygence is given to that
thing which is common and belongs to many / for men do care most for their
own propre and several things and as for common things: they do care much
less for them than they do for those things which belongs severally to
each one by him self. And again in the same chapter about the end he says
thus. There are. ii. things which induces and moves men to take care for
any thing, and to love it / the one is propr^um / that is to say, if the
thing be propre, and severally belongs to their own self. The second
thing is affection / that is to say affection toward the said thing. Again
in the third chapitre of the same book he says in this wise / it can not be
expressed or spoken lightly, how much it forces or skylleth to delectacyon or
pleasure / that a man do think or co^sydre, any thing to be properly his
own. An other reason why it is most expedye^t for ye common weal to have a 2
governor by enherytaunce or succession of blood is this / for they that come
to y^ crown by enherytau^ce (as it seems) shall not rule so imperyouslie and
lordly over their subjects, as shall they that be now elected / by the
reason that they are wont to govern and rule, and are acquaynted there with /
And because they shall not think that any new thing is chanced to them:
wherefore they ought to be more high in mind, and to despise their subjects /
but it is seen most co^monlie / that Men lately made tyche, and so likewise
that they be new elected to be kings or gouernoures at proud for the most
part.
they which are new elected / do wax proud / even likewise as they do,
which are newely made tyche / wherefore in the second book of rethorykes / and
the xxiiii. chapitre, Arystotle says thus. All men may easily or lightly se
the manners, which follows of riches / for they yt do possess riches / are
made contume / lyouse or proud / high minded / and dysdaynefull / as if they
possessyd all good things.

An other reason is this to the pryncypall purpose / for the multitude of
subjects does more obey the Princes or governors, that come to the crown
by inherytaunce or succession of blood: by the reason that they are wont and
accustomed to obaye the predecessors of the said princes or governors /
wherefore in the last chapter of the second book philosophy prima it is
written thus / as we be customed so we be affectionate / And in the second of
the polytykes and the. vi. chapitre nere unto the end, it is written in this
wise / he that shall go about to amend and to change every faughtes of the
lawmakers and of the head officers, shall not do so much good to ye common
weal / as the accustomynge or wontynge of men to rebelle and to be dysobedyent
against their princes and superyours shall do hurt / with other things which
shall be said concerning customs and usage in the. xviii. chapter of this
dyccyon and the syxte part thereof. 4


An other reason may be put to the same purpose is this / for that it
happens otherwhyles some kynred or stock to have given or done some manner or
so great a benefyte to the other multitude or so greatly to excelle and
surmounte the other co^munes in virtue that for the one of these. ii. causes,
or else for both to gyther, they yt be of that kynred or stock, are worthy
always to be governors or rulets, and never to be subjects / wherefore in the
third book of polytykes and the. x. chapter Arystotle says in this wise.
The. iiii. kind of monarchy, or regal power is such, as those was in the
heroycall times / that is to wit, voluntary and according to the manner and
custom of the country, and according to the law / for because of the
benefytes done by the first of that kynred to the people, outher by arts / or
by battle / or for the congregatynge of the people together in to a cyuyle
socyete / or for because they purchased or gate ye regyon: ye regal power and
the auctoryte of rulynge and gouernynge was offered or given to them, by the
people of their own fre will and accord, and to their successors / which
thing also the said Arystotle more expressly does say, in the. xii.
chapter of the tame book in this wise. Therefore when it chances or comes
so to pass, yt he be one kynred or stock, or else some one person does so
excelle and surmou^te the other in virtue, that the virtue of that one kynred
or person alone is greatter than the virtue of all the other: than it is
right, that this kynred by the regallor stock, and do govern / and that this
one person be king and all the successors of this said kynred or person /
which same thing he repetynge also in y^ v. of the polytykes and the. x.
chapter he says in this wise. The regal power, or auctoryte of a king was
made / instytuted / and begone, for the defense and aid of excellent and good
men, and the person that is instytuted or made king is one of the excellent
ryghtuouse and good men / by or for the excellencye of his virtue, or of his
acts procedynge of virtue / or for the excellencye of the kynred or stock
that he comes of.

Again the prince or governor that comes to the crown by inherytaunce 5
is best / because such manner men are more inclyned to virtue, for so much as
they common of more noble and virtuous parents / wherefore Arystotle in the
first book of his polytykes and the. iiii. chapter, bringing in the words
of a certain poet called Theodectus / says in this wise / shall any man
suppose that men worthy Theodectus poet.
to be called a bondsman or servant / which comes of a goodly stock on both
sides. etc. and a little afterward, he says. For they do suppose, that
likewise as of a man comes a man / and of a beast is brought for the a beast
/ even so of good and honest pare^tes is ge^dered and brought forth good and
honest children. And also because the prince or governor by succession is for
the most part guyded and led by better custom / wherefore Arystotle in the
first book of his rethorykes and the. xiii. chapter says thus / it is like to
be very true, that he which comes of good and honest pare^tes / shall be a
good man / and that he which is norysshed and brought up among good folk /
shall prove like unto them.

Again it appears that the best prince is had by succession of blood /
because 6
there chances not to be such or so great dyffycultyes about the prince
succedynge by inherytaunce, as are always about him yt is new elected for
about the prince which is to be newlye elected, there happens dyffycultye,
to have It is necessary, but very hard to find electours to a good eleccyo^.
virtuous electours / which are necessary to be had, but hard to find, to a
good eleccyon. Again when such virtuous and good electours are found / it is
hard for them to agree all in one / and not to dyscorde one from an other / and
if they do so dysagre among them selves / it is doubtful and ieopardy, least
by the reason thereof the hole common weal be brought in to sedycyon / as it
is seen by experyence, in the new eleccyon of the prince or emperor of the
Romans / Again also because the minds of men for the most part areprone
and inclynynge to evil / wherefore outher for love, or hatred, or for money, or
through intreatynge or prayer, or for hope of profit, or some dyffycultie:
the electours shall not at all times, but perauenture very seldom, elect and
chose him that is best and most mete to be gouernoure.

An other reason to the pryncypall purpose is this / because it is more easy
for 7
the co^munes and counsaylers to know the manners and co^dycyons of him that
succedeth by inherytaunce, for as much as he is but one and a determynate or
known person: than of him, which is newly to be elected / which is not
determynate / for there be many cytezens or persons in the common weal,
whom it is possible by eleccyon to be taken to wear the crown or to be
governor / but it is more easy to know the manners or condycyons of only
only one man: than of many. Now it is expedyent to know of old, the manners
and condycyons of the prince or gouernoure, to whom some thing must be
persuaded by counsel / and which must be dyrected by counsel otherwhyles,
be he never so wise / wherefore in the first book of rethorykes and the. xi.
chapter it is written thus. It is much necessary to know the manner of every
man that shall be a prince.

Again to take a prince or governor by succession of kynred or blood, it
seems 8
to take away all occasyon of ambycyon / temeryte or presumpcyon in the
subjects / and also all occasyon of sedycyon that might be raised or stereo up
among them / for in as much as they subjects do know, that the crown or
regalauctoryte or office is never due to them, and that they may never
reasonably come unto it: they do not desire or labor to get it / neither they
do commonly work or go about any evil or unlawful thing for the obtaynynge
thereof / which things otherwise for all that is done of them full besely /
which outher may or do suppose that they may come reasonably to it / as it is
seen to happen otherwhy les among them, which choseth always their
governors each one after other, by new eleccyon wherefore Tullye in his first
book de officiis says thus / it is a pain or grefe, that in men of most great
minds, and of most excellent and royal nature, are most commonly the desyrers
of honor / of rule and domynyon / of power / and of glory for such men
thinking their selves worthy of the crown or to be heed governors, for some
excellent virtue or virtues / do procure the favor and voices of the
electours to them selves, by prayer / or money / or else by some other
unlawful way.

More over also commonly the prince elected / which shall not leave the crow
ue 9
or kingdom to his successors / dare not be bold to execute justice upon
mighty men / all though they do transgress the law / namely by putting them
to death or otherwise putting them to ponysshement in their bodies / for as
much as he does feate, lest by the reason of so doing, great hatredes / or
enmytyes / and iniuryes or dyspleasures might grow to his own hayres, which
perauen ture shall not reygne or govern after him / but the prince, that
obtayneth the crown or kingdom by inherytaunce and succession of blood,
needs not to doubt or fere any such things / wherefore he shall boldly
exercise perfyte justice, against all manner transgressors of the laws, who
ever they be.

Again that manner after which most governors are instytuted, and in most 10
regyons and peoples / and in the time of most men / is the most perfyte way
or manner of instytutynge a prince or gouernoure (for that way that is most
natural / is most perfyte / now that is most natural / which is used in
most things for the nature of things is that / which is in most things /
and in most time as it is written in the third book de celo et mundo / and in
the second book of the physykes / and the same also is euydent by induccyon
and experyence in each manner thing) but such is the way or manner of taking
one to be gouernoure by succession of blood, in comparyson of that way, whereby
the governors that should succeed, are always taken by new eleccyon each one
after other: as it is euydent to se in the most part of kings / of Regyons /
and peoples / and also the hystoryes of things done in diverse times, that is
to say the Chronicles, does declare the same.

And last of all, because the governance of the king or gouernoure that
comes 11
to the crown by enherytau^ce or succession of blood / is more like to the
manner of regyment or governance of the hole world / for as much as in the
hole world is always but one governor, without any change / as it is written
in the second book of phylosophye and the last chapter. And it seems to
come in very like manner to pass, and much like manner of governance to be
where the sone succedeth his father in regal power. First because of the
unity of the kynred or stock, and also because the father and the sone are
counted both as it were but one person.

How it is necessary that there ben but one prince, king, or heed gouernoure
in a cyuyle co^munytie, unto whom all other heddes and officers must be
obedyent and subjects.
The, xvii, chapter,
IT follows now consequently after the premysses, to speak of the unity of
the prince, or of the office and power of the prince / whereunto now entering,
let us say / that in only one city or only one realm there ought to be but
only one gouernoure or ruler / or if there be many in nombre or kind, as it
seems to be expedyent in great cyuyle co^munytes, and namely in a realm, as
this word Regnum is taken in the first sygnyfycacyon / there ought to be
among them one in nombre, which shall be highest or heed of all them, to whom
all the other may be reduced / and by whom all the other may be dyrected and
ruled, and their errors or faults if any chance, also may be corrected and
amended. And this most soueraygne and highest auctoryte or office above all, I
say of necessyte ought to be but one in nombre and not many: if the realm or
cyuyle Let there be but one king or heed gouernoure.
co^munyte ought to be well governed and ordered. And the same I say also of the
gouernoure according to the same highest office or auctoryte, that he ought to
be but one also / not meaning hereby, that it is necessary that one synguler
person or one man alone ought to have the said heed and highest auctoryte /
but I mean, that the heed gouernoure or heed governors ought to be but one as
touching to ye said office / for there is some one regyme^t in no^bre, and yt
bei^ge a ryghttuous Many men may be heed governors being al as one in office.
and well ordered manner of regyment, according to which mo men than one are head
rulers or governors i^ y^ rule of Aristocratia and Politia of which we have
spoken in the. viii. chapter of this dyccyon / but those many are but one heed
gouernoure in nombre, as touching to their office / by the reason that every
accion or work that is done of them / is but one in nombre / as for example al
they give but one judgment / or sentence / or precepte / for such manner
accyon may proceed or be caused of any of them severally by him self / but
what soever such thing is done, it is done by the common consent and decre
of them all / or else of the bygger part of them / according to the laws
statuted and ordained in the same regymentes. And by ye reason of such numeral
unity of ye accyon so procedynge and brought forth of them: it is, and is
called but one regyment or highest power in nombre: whether it be only one
man, or else mo than one, which governs according to the said power or
auctoryte / but such numerable unity of the accyons or works, is not
necessarelye required to be in any one of the other offices or parts of the
cyuyle co^munyte / for there may and ought in every one of the other offices,
many accyons like, or diverse in kind, be brought forth of diverse persons in
them, severally. Yea moreover such numerall unity of accyon or operacyon in
them (that is to say, if all should work but one thing) should be
intolerable and noisome to the hole co^munyte, and also to every partyculer
person of the same co^munyte. Thus than the unity unmerall of the highest
office or power, and of the heed gouernoure being thus understood and taken
now we will prove, that outher there is but only one gouernoure or ruler in a
cyuyle co^munyte or realm, or if there be mo than one / yet that the heed and
most soueraygne auctoryte or office, and the heed and highest gouernoure of
all, is but only one in nombre and not many. And this we will prove / first by
this reason / for if there were many pryncypall auctorytes or offices, and many
heed governors in a cyuyle co^munyte or realm, being not reduced and in
order under some one as highest: there might fail the judgment / precepte /
and the execucyon of the cyuyle vtylytes and ryghtes / and by reason hereof,
the iniuryes being vnponysshed: there should follow fighting and the
seperacyon of men / and in conclusyon the corrupcyon or destruccyon of the
cyuyle co^munyte or realm. But this is an inconuenyent most to be eschewed and
avoided. i. ergo. And that this inconuenyence should ensue of the pluralyte of
princes or heed governors: it may be euydentlye showed first because
transgressors of the laws can not reasonablye be ponysshed, except they be
called before the prince or gouernoure, to the examynacyon of such things,
which are laid against them / but this supposed that there were many
governors and rulers not reduced unto some one heed and highest gouernoure and
ruler. so as our aduersarye does say: no man that is called before the ruler
or gouernoure may suffycyently appear / for I put the case, that (as it
chances oftentimes) some man for some transgressyon of ye law be called to
make answer of many rulers or governors being not one under an other / and
that at one and the same time / for by the same reason by which one ruler or
governor is bounden and may call or somone any man to appear before him: by ye
same any of the other may do the same / and by the same reason by which the
person so called is bound to make answer before one of the said governors,
left he be accounted a rebel and dysobedyent person: by the same reason he
is bound to make answer before the other, as many as be of them. Now I reason
in this wise, outher ye person so called of many governors, shall appear
before them all together at ones / or else before none of them all / or else
before one he shall appear: and before an other of them he shall not appear?
Before them alltogyther, and at one time, he can not appear / for it is
impossible to be done outher by nature or craft / for one and the same body
can not be together at one time in diverse places / and speak or make answer
all at ones, to many men asking and demanding perauenture diverse things
all at one time. Again this admytted and granted (though it be impossible)
that he which is called or somoned, might appear at one time before many rulers
or governors / and outher hold his peace or make answer to them all, at one
time, asking and demanding diverse and sondrye things of him: perauenture
by one of the said rulers or governors he shall be cast or condemned of the
same crime / and by an other of them he shall be quytte or of the same
delivered / or if he be condemned by them both: yet perauenture not egally or
like much of the one as of the other / wherefore he shall be bound to make
amends, and he shall not be bound to make amends / or if he shall by the
judgment of both be bound / he shall be bound to make amends in so much,
and in more or in less / and consequently in so much, and not in so much /
wherefore outher he shall do. ii. contradyctorie things together at one time,
which is impossible: or else he shall make none amends at all / for there is
no more reason why he should obey or observe the precepte of one gouernoure:
than of the other / or why he should more appear before one of the said
governors: than before the other there is no reason at all. And yet if he did
appear before one of them the other beyngedyspysed and not regarded, and
perauenture by that one gouernoure be absolved and quytte from the cyuyle blame
and ponysshement / yet that notwithstanding by the other governors he shall be
condemned for his contumacye and dysobedyence / so than the person so called
or cyted and somoned neither shall appear at one time before them all / neither
he may co^uenyently appear before one, and before an other not appear / wherefore
it is left only, that the person so called or cyted ought to appear before
none of all the governors / and so consequentlye it follows, that he can not
be corrected or ponysshed according to justice. Therefore to conclude, it is
not possible that there should be a pluralyte of such governors and officers
being not one ordered under an other, in a cyuyle co^munyte or realm: if the
cyuyle justice and the common profit ought to be conserved. Again this
supposed, many heed governors or cheyfe rulers to be in a cyuyle co^munyte, as
for example many kings to be in one realm / the common vtylyte should be
troubled / for Many princes or heed governors are pernycyous to a cyuyle
co^munyte, or realm.
in as much as princes ought often times to command a co^gregacyon or
assemble to be made of the co^munes and subjects, namely such as have
co^uenyent leisure and may intend it, for the inquysycyon and determynacyon to
be had about the common vtylytes or profytes, or else for the eschewynge or
avoiding of harms or dangers rysynge, as for example to avoid and dysapoynt
them which outher being within the same co^munyte, or in any other outward
co^munyte, are willing and gothe about to oppress the common lybertye / And
by what reason the cytezens or subjects are bound to come together: when they
are called, at the commandment of one of the said heed governors, and to
the place, and at ye hour lymytted and appointed by him, by the same reason
they are bound to assemble and come together at the co^maundment, and to the
place and at the time lymytted of any other of them / now it may so chance
perauenture, that they both do appoynte them one hour, but diverse places /
and moreover that thing which the one of them wylleth or intends to move or
put forth the other perauenture intends to put forth the contrary thing to
the same / by the reason therefore that the subjects can not possyblye be in
diverse places at one time, neither give their mind and intend to diverse
things at ones / the commune vtylyte should be troubled and let as we have
said.

Again by the reason of such pluralyte of princes or heed governors, there
might ensue and follow dyuysyon / or strife / fighting / and seperacyon of the
cytezens / and fynallye corrupcyon of the cyuyle co^munyte / whiles certain of
them shall be willing to obey one of the said princes / and other certain
of them, willing to obey an other. Again there may follow dyscorde and
strife between the governors and princes selves / whiles each one of them
shall go about to be above and ouergo the other. And also between the
governors and the subjects refusing to be obedyent unto them / and moreover
the governors being at debate or stryuynge one of them with another, and
lacking a judge, superyoure to order all things between them according to
justice / ye aforesaid euylles or hurtes should rise and grow thereof. Again
this pluralyte of heed governors supposed, one of the greattest things
according to reason and craft shall be idle or superfluous / for by only one
prince or one heed governor all cyuyle vtylytes may perfytelye be had / what
soever may be had by many princes or heed governors / without any such
co^modytes or hurtes, as do follow the pluralyte of the said rulers or
governors. Again such pluralite supposed of princes or heed governors / in
city, or realm, shall be but one / for it is called one city or one realm /
because of the unity of the prince or heed governor, to which, Why a city or
realm is called one.
and for which, all ye other parts of the cyuyle co^munyte are ordained / as
it shall appear of those things which we shall say here forthwith. And also
there shall be none order of the parts of the cyuyle co^munyte or realm / when
soever that they are not ordered to any pryncypall or heed part / because they
are not bound to be subject unto any man / as it has been euydentlye showed,
and does appear by ye reasons before gone / And there shall be a co^fusyon and
dysordre of them and of the hole cyuyle co^munyte / for each man shall chose to
him self, what soever office he list, outher one or mo / no man rulynge or
seperatynge them one from an other / so many inconuenyentes also should follow
hereof, that it is hard or impossible to nombre them / as for an example in
beast or sensyble creature being well ordered according to nature, the first
and pryncypall cause motyue, which moves and caryeth it locallye from place to
place, is nor can be but one cause motyue only / as it appears euydentlye in
that book which is entytled De motibus animalium / for if there were many such
pryncyples or causes, and the same mouynge the beast to contrary or diverse
mocyons all at one time / it could not be chosen, but that the beast or
sensyble creature outher should be carried or moved to contrary places at one
time, or else should rest and be nothing moved at all / and lack or want
such things necessary or good for it, which are gotten to it by mocyon
local or mouynge from place to place. And even so and in like manner it is in a
cyuyle co^munyte being well ordered / which said co^munyte we have said in
the. v. chapter of this dyccyon, to be proporcyonated and like to a sensyble
creature being well fourmed or made according to nature / And therefore as in
a beast or sensyble creature the pluralyte of such prynciples or causes should
be superfluous, yea and moreover noisome: even so likewise we ought surely to
think, it for to be in a cyuyle co^munyte or realm / The same also, who list
to take heed, may be seen and perceived of the pryncyple or cause of alteracyon
in a beast: likewise as of the pryncyple or cause mouynge the beast locallye /
and semblablye in all ye hole order of the causes mouynge, and of the things
moved / but let us pass over these things at this time / for it belongs
more to natural phylosophye / And as much as it is suffycyent to the present
consyderacyon / we have spoken of them, Again art or craft perfourmeth and
fynyssheth some things, which nature can not, and in some things / it
counterfayteth or follows nature / as it is written in the second book of the
Physykes / seeing therefore that in the nature of things, and in the whole
world, there is but one pryncypall gouernoure in nombre, and not many (for
natural things will not be evil ordered, as it is said in the. xii. book of
Metaphysykes) ergo there shall be but one prince or pryncypall governor in
nombre instytuted according to the reason and art of men. And beside these
aforesaid reasone, all men may se this to be true, expedyent, and necessary,
by sensyble experye^ce / for in what soever place or prouynce or congregacyon
of men the unity of the heed governor fails or is wantynge so as we have
said / it seems impossible yt prouynce or congregacyon to be well governed or
ordered / as it appears euyde^tlie well nere to al men of the kingdom or
empire of the Romans / and was partlye showed in the proheme or preface of
this work / but whether it be conuenye^t, that there should be but one heed
governor or prince in nombre, of the vnyuersali multitude of men living
cyuyllie, and in the whole world / or else it be more co^uenyent, in diverse
plages or parts of the world being separated in places the one far from
the other, and cheyfly in those parts which are nothing agreynge in language,
but can not understand one of them an other / nor like in manners or co^dycyons
/ and far dystaunte in co^uersacyon to have diverse and sondrye such manner
princes or heed governors at a time, the celestyall cause also perauenture
mouynge or counsaylynge unto the same, left superfluous propagacyon of men
should be made: this may be reasonably serched and inquyred / but it
appertains nothing to our present purpose or intencyon / for perauenture it
would seem to some man, that nature has moderated or measured the propagacyon
of men and of other beasts, by bataylles or fyghtes, and by pestylences or
murryons falling and chau^synge other whiles among them so that the earth or
land is suffycyent to the nourysshynge or bringing up of them / but yet now
retournynge again unto our purpose intended of us / let us say / that of the
premysses it does somewhat appear, what is the unity numerall of a city or
realm / for it is an unity of order, and not utterly an unity but a pluralyte
of certain men, which pluralyte or which men are called, one thing in
nombre / not because they are one in nombre formallye by one form: but they
are truly called one in nombre: because they are referred to one thing in
nombre / that is to wit, to the heed gouernoure and highest power to whom, or
for whom, they are ordered and governed / for a city or realm is not made of
things, which are one by any one natural form, as of composycyo^ or of
co^myxtion / for the offices or parts thereof, and the persons and the men or
parts of these parts or offices, are many in very deed / and are separated in
no^bre one of them from an other formallie / for they are separated in place
and also in their subjects / wherefore neither they are one by any one thing
formallie inherente / neither by any one thing tow chynge, or contaynynge them
all as we se yt a wall is one thing framed and ha^gynge together / For Rome
with Means and other co^munytes or cities and towns, are one kingdom or one
empire in nombre / but yet none otherwise save only because each one of these
co^munytes are willing to be under one highest gouernoure and under one regal
power in nombre. After which manner welnere it is said, the world to be but
one in nombre, and not many worlds / not because of any one numerall form
formallie It is called but one world because of one god.
inherent to all things that are in the world / but only because of the
numerall unity of the pryncypall causer or gouernoure of all things, which is
god: therefore all things, are called but one world / for that that every one
of the natural things is inclyned and hangs or depends of the said
pryncypall cause which is god / wherefore when it is said that all things
being, are one world in nombre, it is not to be understood, neither it is
meaned, formallye of any unity numerall being in all the said things: neither
of any common phrase of speech, but it is a pluralyte of certain things / and
is called one: because it is referred unto one, and for one / so likewise the
men of one city or prouynce, at called one co^munyte or realm: because they
are willing al to have one heed gouernoure A kingdom is called one because of
one king or head governor.
in nombre. And yet for all that they are not therefore one part in nombre of a
city: which are one realm or one cyuyle co^munyte in nombre / for though
they desire one heed offycer in nombre, by the reason whereof they are called
one city or one realm: yet for all that, because they are referred to this one
heed gouernoure in nombre, by diverse and sundry instytucyon both actyue and
passyue, which diverse instytucyon is naught else but a diverse precepte or
commandment given to them by the prince or heed governor, by which they are
ordained and appointed to diverse offices / and by reason of ye dyuersyte of
this precepte, formally also they are diverse, or sondrye parts or offices of
a city, or cyuyle co^munyte. And every one of y^ said offices is called one
office in nombre, or one part of the cyuyle co^munyte in nombre
(notwithsta^dynge the numeral pluralyte of y^ persons in the said offices or
parts) not by any one thing in no^bre inherente to all the said persons:
but because they are referred unto one actyue precepte of the prince or heed
gouernoure / according to the determynacyon of the law.

The. xviii. chapter we have left out all together as nothing appertaynynge
to this realm of England,

Of the causes which makes tra^quyllyte, or unquietness in a city or realm /
and of the cause which troubles realms / and of ye co^tynuacyo^ or ioynynge
together of ye first dyccio^ or pte of this work, unto ye second part of the
same,
The, xix, chapter,
How remains and is behind, the last chapter of this first dyccyon or
part, of the before written determynacyons to infer and conclude the causes
both of tranquyllyte, and also of intra^quyllytie the contrary in a city or
realm. For this was the pryncypal questyon according to the inte^cyon
purposed of us, from the beginning. And first of all, we shall show these
causes ingenerall: presupposynge the syngulare and special determynacyon of
them, which spryngeth or ryseth after the common or wont manner which
Arystotle makes in the. v. book of his polytykes, consequentlye after these,
we shall treat and determynatlye speak in especyall and pertyculerlye, of the
strange and vnwonte cause of dyscorde or intra^quyllyte, of all civil
gouernauncs or co^munaltes, which in our prohemye or preface / we said to have
a great while dystroubled and yet co^tynuallye to vex and trouble daily more
and more the good order of the co^munalte of Italye, but here it is needful to
our purpose for to resume and rehearse again the dyscrypcions of tranquyllyte,
and his contrary intranquyllyte, which are before written in ye second chapter
of this part. The descrypcyon of a quiet and a peaceable city.
Tranquyllyte is ye good dysposycyon or ordering of a city or realm, by
which every part or member thereof, may do the works conuenyent and according
for it, according to reason, and their own instytucyon and ordinance, of the
which dyscrypcyon, appears the nature of it. For when it is said a good
dysposycyon: there in is noted or marked the intrensecall quiddyte general of
it. But in this, that by it is said, that every membre of that co^munaltye
may do the works to it self conuenyent and appertaynynge, is betokened the
fynall cause or end of it, which causes us also to understand and perceive
the propre quiddyte or dyfference of it. And for as much as it self is a
certain form or dysposycyon of a city or realm, and no more one, than we
have said a realm or a city to be in the. xvii. chapter of this first
dyccyon, in the. xi. and. xii. parts thereof, it has no cause formal. For a
formal cause properlye apperteyneth to things composed, or made of mo parties
than one. And the cause actyue or effycyent, thereof we may, easily perceive, by
these things which were spoken and said / in the. xv. chapter of this part,
and by other things which shall nedely follow it in a city or realm, and
they by these the conuersacyon of the cytezens each with other, the
co^muneratynge or part taking among them selves one of an others works, the
succourynge or helping one of them an other, and generally power or lyberte
without any outward impedyment or lettynge to exercise their own and the
common works, and partakynge also of the common profytes or co^modytes, and
of men after the measure co^uenyent and agreynge to every one, and with these,
other co^modytes and good things, worthy to be desired which have been
heretofore expressed in the oracion of Cassiodorus, which oracion we made the
beginning of this book, the contraryes of all the which co^modytes, or else of
certain the chefest of them, shall ensue and follow intra^quyllytie or dyscorde
being the contrary to tranquyllytie. For as much than as the dew operacyon or
workynge of the cheyfe gouernoure and ruler is the cause effycyent or maker,
and also co^seruer of all cyuyle co^modytes or weal, and of the aforesaid
things, as it has been showed and declared in the. xv. chapter of this book,
in the. xi. and the. xii. parts thereof, it also shall be the cause effectyue
and maker of tra^quyllyte / and undoubtedly this was Paul's mind and me
anynge, when he said to Timothe the. ii. chapter of the first epistle.
Therefore we ought to pray for heed officers that we may live in peace.
I beseech and desire, obsecracyo^s and prayers to be made, for kings and
rulers, and for all men which be in high auctoryte, that we may led a quiet
and a peaceable life. And what soever thing shall let the dew accyon or
workynge of this part that is to say of the heed, of that thing spryngeth and
comes forth intra^quyllytie or dyscorde as of the cause effectyue, which
cause of intranquyllytie seen and co^sydered in general, though it be varyed
and made diverse by many partyculer kinds and manners (of the which kinds or
manners, how they be caused or come forth of a wont or accustomed accyon
Arystotle has given suffycyent understanding and knowledge, in his fyfte book
of cyuyle science or governance of a common weal / which we have called
polytyke science) yet notwithstanding, there is a certain strong and vnwonte
cause of intranquyllyte or dyscorde of cities, realms and co^modytes, which
cause is taken occasyonallye for the effect brought forth of the deuyne
cause, beside all his wont or accustomed operacyon or workynge in things,
which cause, as I remember that we touched before in our prohemye, neither
Arystotle / neither any other of the philosophers in his time or a fore his
time or after his time, could se or perceive, and this cause a long season
heretofore, and now also co^tynually, more and more, lettynge the dew
operacyo^ or workynge of the heed ruler in the kingdom of Italye, has
spoiled or bereued, and does spoil and depryue it of peace or tra^quyllyte,
and other co^modites ensuenge and following the same, also of the co^modyties
now rehearsed, and has vexed and does vex the said co^munaltie, with all
hurtes and inco^modytes / and has, as a man would say, replenysshed and
filled it, with all kinds of myserye and iniquyte. The nature of the which
said cause fore lettynge and hurtynge by reason of ye usual custom of preuy
malygnyte, we owing in special or perticulerly to determyne, according to
our intencyon proposed from ye beginning must nedely call to remembrance,
those things which we have said heretofore in the. vi. chapter of this book,
that is to wit, that the sone of god, one of the. iii. persons, very god, to
make satysfaccyon for the offense of our first parents dysobedyently
transgressynge the commandment of god / and consequently to repair ye fall of
the hoole kind of man, has taken upon him the nature of man, a good while
after Arystotles time, being made very man, and the same being god also,
whom, called Jesus Christ, faithful christen men do honor and worship,
Jesus christ.
this christ, I say the / blyssed sone of god both god and man in one
person, was conuersaunte among the people of the wicked Jews, of whom he
took his beginning as touching his bodily substance / and he began to teach
the veryte and troth of things to be believed, of things to be done and
wrought, of things to be avoided and eschewed, to y^ end yt men might get and
obtain everlasting life, and avoid or escape everlasting mysery / And for
these things, at the last through the malice and woodnes of the Jews, he
suffered passion, and was done to death, under ponce Pylate / presydent, or
depute to the emperor of Rome / and rose again from death to life the third
day after his death, afterward ascendynge and going up in to heuens. But yet
before that time, whiles he yet lived by a corruptyble life, that is to say
before he suffered passion, for the health and the salvation of mankind, he
chose and took to him certain men which should be fellows in ye mynysterye of
teaching the troth, whom men call apostles, and at the time The apostles of
christ.
of his ascencyon he gave them in charge and commandment to preach that
truth through out the whole world, which he had taught and instructed them
in / wherefore he said to them after his resurreccyon, in the. xxviii. and last
chapter of Mathewe. Go you therefore, and teach all nacyons, baptyzynge them
in the name of the father, and the sone, and the holy ghost, teaching them to
observe and keep all things what soever I have commanded and charged you. By
these apostles, I say whose names are suffycyently known among the faithful
christen people, and by certain other persons, christ wylled the law of ye
gospel to be written, as The law of the gospel.
by certain instruments mouyd and dyrected to the same, imedyatly by the
power of god, by the which law or gospel written, we might in the absence of
christ him self, and of his apostles, yet have perceiving and knowledge of
the precepts, and counsayles belonging to everlasting health / In the which
law, and according to the which law, he has appointed, and ordained the
sacraments, whereby orygynallye The sacraments of ye church.
and actual syn is cleansed, whereby the grace of god is obtained and co^serued,
and whereby the same grace lost may be recovered again / and whereby the
menystres of this law are instytuted and made. And first of all, he did
instytute, ordeyne, and make the said apostles, teachers of this law, and
mynystres of ye sacraments according to the same law, gyuynge to them by ye
holy ghost, auctoryte of this mysterye, which christen people calls the
auctoryte of preesthode, by the which he gave to the same, or to the
successors of them in this office, and to none other, power, under a certain
form of words said of them, or of any one of them, to turn the substance
of bread and of wine, in to the very body and blood of The sacrament of the
altar The power of the keys.
him, and beside this, he gave also to the same, auctoryte or power to bind
and to lose men from sins, which auctoryte they are wont to call ye power of
ye keys and to substytute and make other under them selves, having the same
auctoryte / The which auctoryte also the apostles gave to certain men, yea
god gave it by the apostles, through prayer, and putting of their hands upon
them. And after the same manner have other taken power and auctoryte also, to do
likewise, and consequently so they have done, does and shall do, even unto the
end of the world after which manner also, the apostle Paul did instytute
Timothe, Titus, and other mo teaching them also to instytute other likewise,
wherefore in ye. iiii. chapter of y^ former epistle written to Timothe he says.
Do not despise or set light by the grace which is in the, which is given the
through prophesye, with ye layenge on of the priests hands / and in the
first chapter of the epistle to Titus for this cause I have left the in Crete
land, that thou should correct and amend such things which yet wants,
and that thou should constytute, ordain, and make priests through out
every city, as I have taught and charged the and this auctoryte of preesthod
and of y^ keys, whether it be only one auctoryte or else many, is The karact
of holy order.
a karact or a figure or mark i^prynted in ye soul by ye i^medyat worki^ge of
god. Beside this there is a certain other auctoryte belonging to preesthode
given The primate ship of y^ spyrytuall comes of man
by the grant of men, after that the nombre of them was multyplyed for to
avoid all occasyon of slander or offense, and this auctoryte, is the
preemyne^ce which any one of them has above the other, to dyrecte them in the
temple, to the worshypynge of god, and to the doing of the deuyne service: in
dew form and manner, and to destrybute certain temporal goods, which has been ordained to the use of the before said mynystres. Of the power and cause
effectyue of the which auctoryte and where hence it began and came forth,
itshall be suffycyentlye declared in the. xv. and in the. xvii. chapytres of
the second dyccyon or part. For this auctoryte of the prymateshyp of the
clargye is not made i^medyatly by god but by the will and mind of men,
likewise as other offices of a common weal be.

Thus than, the orygynall beginning of the ecclesyastycall mynystres and the
power and cause effectyue of their office, being rehearsed and somewhat
declared, we must attend and give head more over, that among the apostles of
christ aforesaid there was one, whose name was Simon Peter which was the
first that received of christ the promise of the keys / as says the gloss
after saint Auste^s mind in the. xvi. chapter of Mathewe, upon this oracle or
answer of christ. And to the I shall give the keys of the kingdom of
heuens. Upon this text says the gloss, he that confessed that Jesus christ
was the very sone of god has the keys given to him before other, for this
said apostle, after the passion the resurreccyon, and the assencyon of christ
in to heaven, came to Anteoche / and there Peter the bishop of Anteoche.
was made bishop by the people as euydently does appear, by the hystory of him
and from thense as the foresaid hystory shows, what soever cause has be
over hyppyd and lefteout, for of this is there diverse and sundry opynyons /
afterward he went to Rome / and there was he bishop and ouersear to
christen people and in co^clusyon, for the professyon of christ, and for his
godly preaching, he was beheded and dyed / and with him, in the same place and
at the same time, y^ apostle Paul also, according to the aforesaid hystory /
of the prerogatyue than which this dyscyple or apostle seemed to have, in
comparyson of the other apostles, in that the keys were first promised to him
before the other, for the words of scripture heretofore brought in and
rehearsed, and for certain other things spoken of christ to him syngulerly,
which shall be rehearsed here after: certain bysshoppes after him, in the
apostolyke or epyscopalsee of Rome, and namely syns the time of Constantyne the
emperor of Rome, say and challenge themselves to be above all other bysshoppes
of the world, as touching all manner auctoryte of iurysdyccyon / yea and
certain of the same, which has been of latter time, not only does challenge
to be above all other priests and bysshoppes / but also above all princes of
the world, al co^munaltyes, and al manner persons / albeit, they do not
express this egally of all, neither do say it plainly and openly, as of the
prince and ruler of the Romans called the emperor, and of the prouynces,
cities, and persons subjects to the same emperor / albeit, that the synguler
expressy on of such domynyon or coactyue iurysdyccyon over this prince
(according to the very troth) seems to have taken face and first
beginning, of a certain gift or grant which certain men says, to have been made by Constantyne The donacyon or gift of Co^stantyne.
emperor, to saint Syluester bishop of Rome: yet because this is not clearly
expressed in that grant or pryuylege, or else because perauenture it has been dysanulled by other made afterward, or else because it was weak or of
small stre^gthe: the virtue of the said grant, extends itself to the other
lordshyppes and gouernaunces of the world, and not to the empire of the
Romans in all puynces And therefore afterward the bysshoppes of Rome of
latter time, have challenged and taken to themselves this iurysdyccyon coactyue
universally upon ye hole world, by a certain other title, comprehendynge all
men, that is to wit by the fulness of power and auctoryte, which they say, was
given by christ to saint Peter, and to his successors in the epyscopall see
of Rome, as being Christ's vycares or debytes. For christ (as they say and
truly) was the king of kings, and lord of lords, yea and of all the hole
world both persons and things (how be it of this does not follow that
thing, which they would infer and conclude, as shall appear more certaynely
and undoubtedly in those things, which shall be spoken here after) this than
is the meaning of this title among the bysshoppes of Rome, that likewise as
christ had the fullness of power and iurysdyccyon above all kings, princes,
co^munaltyes, companyes, or felysshyppes, and alsanguler persons: so in like
manner they, which calls themselves the vycars of christ, and Peter, have
also the same fullness of coactyue iurysdyccyon, determined by no law of man.

An euydent token yt the bysshoppes of Rome intend this to be the meanynges 8
which we have rehearsed, of this title, that is to wit of the fulness of their
power / is this, that Clement the. v. of that name, bishop of Rome, does so
use it in a certain Clement ye. v
decretall, which he made. Desen. et re iudi. in the. vii. book, to Henry the.
vii of worshypfull memory last emperor / of Rome of that name, whiles in
reuokynge a certain sentence or judgment of the same Henry, he utters
certain order of words, expressing that, which we have said, as touching
their sense and meaning about the foresaid title, which words we leave out
and pass over here, partly because the matter as known well enough, and
partly for cause of shortness, and because we shall bring them in more for the
purpose in the. xxv. chapter of ye second dyccyon the. xviii. part of the
same chapter. Seeing than Christ was not the governor of ye emperor of Rome.
that christ neither is, neither has been, more king and lord of the emperor
of the Romans than of any other king, or prince and ruler, who soever he be,
but rather as much or more king and lord of the other: because that in
christ's time the prince or emperor of the Romans was in a manner lord and
only chief heed, through out all the world / it is open and euydent that the
sense and meaning of this title, by the virtue and strength of one, and the
same rote is extendyd to all kingdoms, lordshyppes, and rules / which sense
or meaning also to be intendyd by the same title, of the bysshoppes of Rome,
the contencyons, attentacyon and enterprise of Bonyface the, viii. bishop of
Rome against Phelyp of Bonyface y^ maker of decretalles.
famous and worshypfull memory king of France, and the decretall of the same
Bonyface, thereof ensuynge manyfestly does teach, which same decretall shall be
brought in of us, in the. xx. chapter of the second dyccyon, the. viii. part
of the same chapitre / by which decretall he defyneth and determyneth, that
this is to be believed A good article of our faith, and worthy for sucha bishop

The abuse of exco^munycacyon.


of the necessyte of everlasting health and salvation, that all manner men be
subjects by coactyue iurysdyccion to the bishop of Rome. Than by this mean
the bishops of Rome entering in to these things, first under the color
and aperaunce of sechynge peace among the faithful christen people, certain
they did exco^munycat, which would not obaye their sentence, and judgment and
afterward geuynge sentence and judgment against them, both real and
personal, that is to say / both in their goods and in their personage,
against some more expressly, as such which were less able to resyste or
withsta^de their power as for example against y^ synguler persons and
co^munytes of the Italyo^s whose kingdom being divided and torn a sonder in
all his pertes, may ye more easily and sooner be oppressed / and against other
some more slackely, as kiges, whose coactyue power they do fere and dread.
Howbeit they do crepe by little and little, and contynuallye assaye and
enterprise to crepe even unto these heads also, in the vsurpacyon of
iurysdyccyons, being very hardy and bold to invade all together. For the
which cause ye preuarycacyon of these bysshoppes craftily and preuely coming
in, has hitherto ben unknown and hyd from the princes and rulers of the
Romans, and from the peoples, subjects to them. For the bysshoppes of Rome
by little and little have caughte unto them selves one Iurysdyccyon after an
other, namely when the imperyall see has been vacant, but yet se that now
they say that their selves have all the imperyall iurysdyccyon coactyue, above
the same prince and emperor, among all which said bysshoppes of Rome, the
bishop that now is, has written most large and most manyfestlye, to the
emperor of Romans / as well in the prouynces of Italye as of Germanye, and to
all the inferyour princes and rulers of the said prouynces, to the co^munytes,
companyes or felysshyppes, and synguler persons of the same of what soever
dygnyte, condycyon, No man can make the people to believe this abhomynable
p^sumpcyon and pride.
or estate they be, that him self has highest and chief iurysdyccyon upon
them / and al their temporalles and ascribing openly to him self, power to
give and to translate their kingdoms and offices, from them to other men / as
clearly and euydently it may appear to all men, by certain wrytynges of the
same bishop, which he callethe wrytynges decrees or sentences. Therefore this
wrong exystymacyon, opinion, judgment, and perauenture perverse affection or
desire of domynyon or chief rule, which they challenge to be due to them
selves, by The bysshoppes of Rome with their desiring of domynyo^, has been ye
causers of dyscorde and wars.
the title of the full power and auctoryte given unto them by Christ (as they
say) is that synguler and special cause, which we have said to be the maker
of intranquyllytie or dyscorde of a city or realm / for this perverse
affection being prone and ready to crepe in to all realms and kingdoms, as it
was said in our prohemye with his noisome and hateful accyon or workynge, has
of long season vexed the realm of Italye, and has kept, and contynually
does keep it from it tra^quyllyte or peace, in that it lets and forbyddeth
with all enforcement the promocyon or instytucyon of the chief ruler, that is
to say of the emperor of the Romans, and his operacyon or workynge in the
said empire for lack and want of the which accyon or work, that is to wit
of the iustyfycacyon of the cyuyle acts and deeds: wrongs and contencyons or
stryfes, easelye and lightly does chance and rise / which wrongs not
measured by the rule of Justice, or of the law, because the measurer is
absent: causes fyghtynges / by the reason whereof, seperacyons of the commons,
and inconclusyon the breakynges or lousynges of the common weals in Italye,
has chanced as we have said / through this opinion than and perauenture
affection and desire of domynyon and bearing chief rule, whereof we have
spoken: the bishop of Rome enforces and labors to make ye emperor of the
Romans subject to him, by coactyue or te^porall iurysdyccyon / which
emperor neither ought by right, as it shall be plainly and openly showed by
those things which here after shall follow, neither Coactyue iurysdiccion
apperteyneth to no spyrytual mynystre of the church, as concerning he is a
spyrytual mynistre
is willing to be subject to him in such judgment. For the office of
coactyue Iurysdyccyon, is not a greynge or conuenyent neither to the bishop of
Rome neither to any other bishop, nor to any spyrytuall mynystre, in that he
is a spyrytuall mynystre, neither is it conuenyent that he have any such
iurysdyccyon, over any man, or person of what soever estate or condycyon he be,
or over any co^munytye, or company or fellowship, as it has been determined in
the. xv. and. xvii. chapytres of this first dyccyon or part. And of this
mind is Arystotle in the. iiii. of his polytykes.

And because this pernycyous pestylence or myschefe utterly contrary to the
quyetnes and rest of men, and also to al their welthe and felycytye, through
the fault of the said corrupt rote of ambycyons, affection to reygne over
all, might infecte and poysone the other kingdoms or realms of the world,
cheyfely of chrystendome: I think it most necessary and needful of all, to
repel and drive it back / as we said in our prohemye / first by opening the
covering or closer of How to oppress ye usurped power of the man of Rome.
the aforesaid opinion, which is as the rote of all the cuylles which have been done alredye, or else hereafter shall be done / and afterward by keeping
under with exteryor and outward labor and dylyge^ce, the ygnoraunte or
vnryghtuouse bryngers up and deuysers, and also the froward defenders of the
same. To these things are all men bound, which outher have knowledge or be of
might and power to withstand it / which thing who soever outher does not
regard, or leneth it undone: they are unjust and vnryghtuouse / witness
Tully in the first book De officiis, the. v. chapter when he said. There are
two kinds of i^iustyce They which does not resyste cuyl me^ are unjust
persons.
or unrighteousness / the one of them which does iniurye or wrong to other men
/ the other of them which does not withstand and drive back iniurye and
wrong from them to whom it is done, if they be able and of power. Behold
than, that according to this notable sentence of Tully, not only they be
vnryghtuouse persons, which does iniurye and wrong to other: but they also
which has knowledge and be able to forbid and let them, which does iniurye
to other, and does not prohybyte and let them / for every one of us is bounden
to do this to other by a certain (in a manner) law natural / yt is to wit, by
the duty of frendshyp, and socyete and fellowship of man / which law (left I
should wyttynglye transgress it, I might at the least wise seem to my self,
for to be unjust and vnryghtuouse) I suppose to put by and drive away this
pestylence or myschefe, from my brethren the faithful people of christ,
first by learning, and consequently by mine outward labor and dylygence,
such as I shall be able to do / for as much as it is given to me from above
(as me think I perceive vndoubtelye) to know the sophysme and subtyltye
thereof and power to open it, unto the which sophysme or deceytefull cautell,
the perverse and crooked opinion, and perauenture also the perverse affeccion
united thereunto, of certain bysshoppes of Rome heretofore and at this present
time also being, and their co^plyces (which is their mother and cause of all
the aforesaid slanders and hurtes) have lived and trusted hitherto and
contynuallye labors to be sustained or maynteyned and holden up by the same.

Thus ends the first book,
The second dyccyon or part of Marsilius of Padwaye, of the power and
auctoryte of the Emperor and the Pope.
Of three Impedymentes, manners and ways, to contrary and say against the
veryties, contained in this dyccyon / of the intencyon of the things which
here shall be treated of, and of the manner and form of procedynge.
The first chapter.
How therefore being about to take in hand, and to set upon so hard and
high a thing, albeit I do not doubt, that no thing can be objected against
us, which may be grounded upon the truth, yet that natwithstandynge, I do
se wars and bataylles to be prepared / and made ready against this work, by.
iii. hate Of the first aduersarye against the truth.
full and mortal enemies of the truth / the one is, the persecusyon of the
vyolent and serce power of the bysshoppes of Rome, and their complyces / for
they shall endeuer them self / and labor all that ever they may, to
destroy this work and the publysshers and declarers of it telling the
truth, as being dyrectlye contrary to their purpose of witholdynge and
possessynge wrongfullye temporalles, and also being against the fervent
desire, which they have, to have domynyon, and to beat rule / from the which
said purpose and desire, it shall be a hard thing, and a great maysterye, to
revoke them and to call them away, by any speech of truth: be it never so
manifest, plain, and opyn. But yet I pray The charytable desire of marsilius.
god, that of his mercy, he will by his grace vouchsafe, to revoke them, and to
abate and keep under the vyolent power of them, and that his faithful people
both princes and subjects may tame and hold under the same power, to the
tranquyllyte and quietness of all the which princes and subjects, they are
fooes and enemies.

The second adversary, which no less prepares battle against this work, Of
ye second adversary to truth. Custom to here lies.
is the old enemy in a manner of every verytye or truth / yt is to wit, the
custom of herynge false lies, and gyuynge credence to the same / false lies I
say, which have been of long season, by some priests or bysshoppes, and
other their suffraganes, sown and roted in the sowles of very many simple
christen people / for these priests by certain their speches and also
wrytynges, has entangeled and wrapped in, the sentence of god, and of man,
with diverse implycacyon of the acts and deeds of men, as well relygyouse, as
lay or temporal / and very laboryouse to be explycated and declared /
insertynge and concludynge afterward (though vnduelye and untruly) of such
wrestynge and wrythynge of sentences, certain senses or meanynges, by which
they have brought in their unjust and wrongful domynyon and lordshyp, over
and upon the faithful people of christ, gyuynge credence through their own
symplycyte, by certain deceytefull and crafty arguments of these priests,
and a certain co^mynacyon or thretenynge of everlasting da^pnacyon, yt they
are bounden by ye ordinance of god, to ye obseruacyon of such sophystical
saye^ges and wryti^ges in / which often times they trespass and do amysse,
inferrynge a conclusyon of such things, whereof it does not dewelye follow /
For the true meaning, of the things whereof the questyon and dysputacyon is
made, and of their true and simple begynnynges, being wyped out of the minds
of men, and false vndersta^dynges being brought by little and little in to their
minds, in the stead of them: now the dyscernynge of both, is hyd from very
many men / For this custom of herynge false and untrue things, in what soever
dyscyplyne it be: troubeleth and leads men greatly away from the truth as
Arystotle witnesses in his last chapter of phylosophye / By reason of the
which said custom, the readers and hearers of this book also, shall greatly
be troubled and let in the beginning, cheyfely such as shall be vnskylled
in phylosophye, and vnexercysed in holy scryptures / from the perceruynge and
understanding, and also perfyte beleuynge of the verytyes in this book
contained.

The third and last hateful and noisome enemy of the truth, shall be a
great The third aduersarye to truth. Envy.
impedyment and lettynge to this doctrine also / and that is the envy of them
also / which, albeit they shall believe, that we have said and spoken the
troutheyet that natwithsta^dynge because, they shall perceive, an other man to
have been the declarer and setter forth of this true sentence before them
selves: they being mouyd thereunto, by the most wicked spyryte of brennynge
envy, shall set them selves as adversaries against the same declarer outher
tearing him with the secret and preuye to the of backebytynge and detraccyon,
or else with the clamorouse barkynge of presumpcyon.

But I will leave or cease from my purpose, neither for fear or dread of the
vyolente power of priests, which otherwise then they ought to do, fervently
desire domynyon and lordshyp, whom I speak to in these wrytynges / for as
much as the maker of the psalms says. The lord is my helper, and I will not
fear what man can do unto me. Neither I will leave of, for the obloquyes of
enuyouse detractours, to express that thing which being declared, and
opened, may as much profit and do good to all men: as it might do hurt to
all men, if it were neglected, and not regarded and taken head of / And as for
these foresaid enuyoue persons shall also with their envy, freatynge and
vexynge or tourme^tynge their minds: do most harm unto them selves. For
envy, as says Vgutio, Envy.
very well descrybynge it* is a thing retournynge to the auctoure thereof, in
that it is the tormentynge of a mind, consumynge and wasting away, because
of an other man's welthe or good / and as for the custom, which before we said
to be enemy to us: shall suffycyentlye be resysted, by the euydence of the
verytes which hereafter shall be said and spoken.

And this shall be the manner of my process in the second dyccyon or part of
The order of procedynge in this dyccyon or part.
this book / First I shall bring in auctorytes of the holy Canon, with
certain feigned, and strange, or unmeet interpretacyons of certain men, by
the which peradventure it might seem and appear, that it might be proved, the
highest of all iurysdyccyon coactyue, and cheyfest rule and domynyon, to be
dew of right to the bishop of Rome / namely in the law of christen men, as
well above the prince and emperor of the Romans, as upon al other kingdoms,
lordshyppes, co^munyties, companyes or feloshyppes, and syngulare persons,
even seculers / and so much the more over priests or bysshoppes, deacons, and
the collegyes or feloshyppes of them, and syngulare persons / of what estate
soever they be. For if by any necessyte, this iurysdyccyon may be concluded by
the virtue and strength of the words of scripture, over any one of these,
outher seculers or clerks: by the same, it may in comparyson of all the
resydewe / Consequentlye after these auctorytes, I shall bring in certain as
it were polytyke reasons, very apparent, to the confyrmacyon and fortefyenge of
this said purpose, grounded upon certain verytes of the holy scripture,
which also every one of them to be true: and agreeable all men would
peraue^ture suppose / These reasons (I say) I will bring in, to the inte^te, yt
I may so openly dyssolue them, and make answer to them: that no man from
hensforthe may by them, or other like, be deceived or begyled / and that by the
solucyon of them: the infyrmyte, and weakness or feebleness of the aforesaid
opinion, may the more appear / to ye which of long season hitherto, they have
given the color and face of probalyte and lykelyhod. After these things done
than shall I of the contrary part, bring in certain verytes of the holy
canon, with the exposycyons of the holy interpretours thereof, not feigned, not
strange or false, but agreeable, and mete and properly belonging to the same /
which said verytes does show openly and plainly, yt the bishop of Rome
called the pope, or any The bishop of Rome has no iurysdiccyon over priests.
other priest, or bishop, or spyrytuall mynystre, jointly, or sonderly, in
that they be such mynystres: neither has, neither ought to have any
iurysdyccyon coactyue of any man, real or personal, over any priest or
bishop, or deacon, or any college or feloshyp of them / and therefore so much
ye less, he or any of them, co^munely, or severally, has any such manner
iurisdyccyon, upon any ki^ge or prince, or upon any realm, co^munalte, company
or feloshyp, or any syngulare person seculer / except only, yt such manner
iurysdyccyon by some man maker of the law, in yt prouynce, shall be granted
to some priest, or bishop / or to some college or feloshyp of them. To the
demo^stracyon, and confyrmacyon whereof there may and ought to be brought in /
when any man shall se oportunyte / certain cyuyle or polityke demo^stracyons
or reasons / whose propre prynciples or begynnynges are contained in y^ xii.
chapter of the first dyccyon the. xv. and. xvii. for I am not dysposed to
rehearse them again, because of shortenynge of our speech / consequently, aft
these things I shall show, what, and how great is the power and auctoryte of
preesthod, and of the keys given by christ to the bishop of Rome, and to
every priest / for of the manyfestacyon and declaracyon of these things,
ha^geth the solucyon of many doubts, which solucyon gives entrance and
coming in to the verytie and end, which we seche and labor to bring forth
/ and afterward, it shall be very profitable, to say somewhat and make answer
to certain questyons, rysynge of the aforesaid things / with the which, we
shall also say somewhat, of the pryuyleges of the emperors of Rome, which
has been granted to the said bysshoppes of Rome which thing shall be very
expedyent and profitable, to our busynes purposed and intended. For of these
pryuylegyes, the vsurpacyons, occupacyons, or withholdynges of iurysdyccyons
coactyue, which now they ascrybe properly to the auctorytie of the bishop of
Rome: accasyonally took their begynni^ge / and by customeor rather abuse,
afterward has taken strength / namely the emperyall seat being vaca^te.
For by these pryuylegyes, at the beginning and by nothing else the bysshopes
of Rome has been vpholden, in the purchasing or getting coactyue Note this.
iurysdyccyons and in the co^seruacyon and keeping of the same. But afterward
outher because through their demerytes they have been depryued of the same
pryuylegies / or else left the debylytye and weakness of the occasyons, and
the truth of this iurysdyccyon vndewely and wrongfully taken unto them, might
appear / and to cover and hyde their unkindness / or else perauenture (as we
showed it to be very like to be true in the last chapter of the first dyccyon)
because they intend and purpose the occupacyon / of y^ coactyue iurysdyccyon
of all realms, to the which, the before rehearsed pryuylegyes could nothing
help them, or make with them: therefore they do not use the same pryuylegies /
but an other universal title before rehearsed, to make all princes or rulers,
and all men yt lives cyuyllye, subjects to them selves: that is to wit the
fullness of power and auctoryte / by the which fulness of power / given (as they
say) by christ / to saint Peter, as to his vycate and debyte: now every
bishop of Rome, in that he is the successoure of Peter, says that his self
has the highest coactyue iurysdyccyon of al men, and all prouynces. The
resydewe and remenau^te of this dyccyon, shall be to show, that the auctorytes
of ye holy Canon, against that sentence of the troth and of the scripture,
which we have said before: does nothing make for the aforesaid error / but
rather does make against the same / as it shall manyfestly appear, by the
exposycyons of certain saints, and also of other approved doctors of the
christen faith / by the which also, it shall plainly appear, that the
exposycyons, nay rather, and to speak more truly, the fyccyons and feigned
ymagymacyons of certain men, going about to wrethe and wreste the scripture,
to the mayntenaunce and fortefyenge of the sense of their false opinion
aforesaid: are vyolent in terpretacyons, crooked, contrary to the scripture, and
dysagreynge to the sentence and mind of the holy and also learned doctors of
the christen faith. And finally, and last of all, I shall dyssolue, and make
answer to the arguments and reasons, which being as it were cyuyle or
polytyke reasons, I said before, did seem and appear, somewhat to defend and
fortefye that false opinion, oftentimes before rehearsed.

Of the diverse sygnyfycacyons, of the nownes or dyccyons and words, of the
which, the questyons here be determined, or made.
The second chapter,
VEt before we do dispute and reason of these things purposed lest by the
reason of the manyfolde sygnyfycacyons of the names which we shall use in our
pryncypall questyons, any ambygnyte may chance, and inplycacyon, or
entangelynge, or combrousnes of the sentence, which we are willing to declare
and open: we shall first of all, show the diverse sygnyfycacyons of the said
words / for as Arystotle says in the first book of Eleuches who soever are
ygnorant of the sygnyfycacyon and strength of nownes or words: are deceived
and begyled, both when their selves dysputeth, and also when they here other
dysputynge and the names or words, whose many and sundry sygnyfycacyo^s we
purpose to show: are these. Church. Judge Church. Judge. Spyrytuall Temporal
Spyrytuall. Te^porall. For because, by our inquysycyon which we purpose hereto
make: we desire to know, whether it does belong to the bishop of Rome, or to
any other bishop, or priest, deacon or any company and feloshyp of them, which
are wont to be called men of the church, to be a coactyue Judge of the
temporal men, or spyrytuall, or of both, or else they are such manner judges
as touching nouther of these. Therefore we in persecutynge these things: let
us first say, that this nowne Ecclesia, in latin, Church in english, is a
word according to the This word church / what it betokens
use of the Greeks / betokenynge among them, in those works which has
comen to us, the congregacyon of people contained under one governance, and
one ruler / and in this sygnyfycacyon Arystotle took the said word ecclesia,
in the. vii. chapter of ye second book of his polytykes. But among latin
men, this word according to the common and famous calling, in one of his
sygnyfycacyons betokens a temple or a house, in which co^munely, and most
oftentimes, god is honored and worshypped of the faithful people / for thus
the apostle Paul of the church, in his first epistle to the Corynthyans,
the. xi. chapter, saying have you not houses to eat and drink in, or do you
despise the church of god? where the gloss after saint Augustynes mind says
/ do you despise ye church of god? that is to wit the house of prayer. And
within a lytse after, says the same gloss this thus / The daily use of
speachynge has optayned / that he is not said to come forth of the church,
or to flee for socour to the church: but which does come forth, or flee for
socoure to the very materyall place of stone it self, and to the walls. But
in an other sygnyfycacyon, this word church bctokeneth those mynystres,
priests, or bysshoppes, and deacons which be mynystres and rulers in the
metrop ofytane or pryncypall church of all churches / likewise as the church
of the city of Rome has of long season obtained this / whose mynystres and
rulers be the pope of Rome, and his cardynalles / which now by a certain
usage and custom, has obtained to be called the church / And it is said
that the church has done / or received any thing, or ordained any thing:
when the aforesaid persons has done, received or ordained it / Again,
according to an other sygnyfycacyon, which is the most true and most propre
sygnyfycacyon, The proper sygnyficacio^ of this word church.
and most according to the entencyon of them, which first began and brought
up this word church, it is said and spoken (though not so famously according
to the usage of these days) of the university and general congregacyon of all
faithful beleuers, and callers upon the name of Jesus christ / and of all the
parts of this said universal congregacyon, in what soever co^munytie of
houses or parysshe it be / And this was the first sygnyfycacyon of this word,
and the accustomed usage of it, among the apostles, and in the prymytyue
church / wherefore the apostle Paul in the first chapter of the former
epistle to the Corynthyans, says. To the church which is at Corynthe,
sanctyfyed in christ Jesus, called saints, and to all other which calls on
the name of our lord Jesus christ and / where the gloss, according to Ambrose
mind, says sanctyfyed, by baptysme and in Jesus christ / and according to
this intencyon spoke the apostle in the. xx. chapter of acts, to the priests
of Ephesus when he said / Attend you and take you head unto your selves and
to the hole flock, in which ye holy ghost has set you bysshoppes or
overseers / that you should govern the church of god, which he has
purchased with his own blood / and therefore according to this most true and
most propre sygnyfycacyon of this word church, all faithful christen All true
christen people ben men of ye church.
men are and ought to be called men of the church / as well those, which be
not priests, as those which be priests / because that christ purchased and
hatheredemed all with his own blood / as it is expressly said in the gloss
upon that saying in the. xxii. chapter of Luke / this is my body which is
given for you / for you (says the gloss) betokens not, that the body of
christ was given, and For whom christ suffered his passion.
his blood shed for ye apostles only: but for ye whole nature of man's sake /
so then ye blood of christ was not shed only for the apostles / whereof it
follows, yt they were not purchased only, by it / and so consequentlye, that
the priests or mynystres of the temples, successors to them in office, are
not only, purchased by his bond / and therefore that they alone are not the
church, which christ purchased with his own blood. Neither for the same
cause, ar those mynystres, bysshoppes, or priests, and deacons alone, the
church, which is the spousesse of christ / but a part of this spousesse /
for christ for this spousesse gave himself / wherefore the apostle says, in
the. v. chapter of the epistle to the Philipianes / young men love your wives,
even so as christ has loved the church, and has given himself for it /
But now christ gave not himself for the apostles alone, or their successors
in office, bysshoppes, or priests and deacons: but rather for the whole nature
of man. Therefore it follows, yt they, or the congregacyon of them only are not the spousesse of christ / thouge a certain congregacyon of them abusing
The sponsesse of christ.
this word, for toget dysceytfully and gylefully their own propre and
te^porall profit and advantage, to the dysuauntage or harms of other men:
does call them selves sygulerly the spousesse of christ / This same sentence,
may we perceive and take, of the words of the apostle, in the last chapter,
of the former epistle to the Corynthyans / and in the. iiii. to the Lolossyans
/ and in the first chapter to Phylemon / For in all those / said places, ye
apostle uses this word church, in that propre sygnyfycacyon, which we have
said here before, to be his ppre and most true sygnyfycacyon. Now
consequently, must we show ye manyfolde sygnyfycacyons of these nownes
temporal and spyrytuall. This word temporal in one of his sygnyfycacyons
most famous and co^munely used, is said of all other Temporal
corporal thiges beside man, which being any wise in his power or
governance: are ordained in the state, and for the state, of this worldly
life, to his use, and to supple the needs and pleasures of him / Likewise as in
an other general sygnyfycacyon all things are wont to be called temporal
that begin or end in time. For these things (as says Arystotle in the. iiii.
book of his physykes) properly are. and be said to be in time / In an other
sygnyfycacyon, this word temporal is said of every manner habyte or qualyte,
every accyon or passion of man, wroughte by man toward him self, or toward
any other, for the end of this world or life present / yet also beside this,
this nowne temporal in a more special sygnyfycacyon, is said of the
voluntarye accyons, or passions of man, going or tournynge to ye profit, or
disprofyte of an other sundry person from him, which has done that accyon or
passion, of the which accions and passions, the makers of man's laws most
intends or means. But now I will show the inte^cyons Spyrytuall.
or sygnyfycacyons of this word spyrytuall / which in one sygnyficacion is
said of all corporal substances, and their operacyons / and in an other
sygnyfycacyon, it is said of all humane accyon or passion, of his power
intellectyue, or appetytyue / that is to say / of all the doings or
sufferynges of his knowledge or understanding, and of his appetyte, abiding or
contynuynge within him according to the which sygnyfycacyon, also certain
accyons or operacyons of bodily things, apperynge to the senses of man, are
wont to be called spyrytual, and without matter / as the images, lykenesses,
phantasyes or ymagynacyons, of things / which said lykenes are in a certain
manner cause of knowledge to the soul / of the which kind and sort some men
judges the accyons and operacyons of sensyble things to be also in a
substance having no life / as the generacyons of lyghtes, and of certain like
things. Again, and more to the purpose. this nowne spyrytuall is said of the
law of god, of the teaching and learning of the precepts and counsayles,
according to the same law, and by it under the which sygnyfycacyon, also are
comprehended all the sacraments of the church, and the effects of the same /
all the grace of god / all Theologycall virtues / and the gifts of the holy
ghost / ordering us to eternal life / For in this sygnyfycacyon, and very
properly / and metely, the apostle Paul uses this nowne spyrytuall, in the.
xx. chapter to the Romans / and in the. ix. chapter of the first epistle
to the Corynthyans / when he said / if we have sown spyrytual things to you
/ is it a great thing, if we reap your carnal things / where the gloss after
the mind of Ambrose, says / spyrytuall things, yt is to say such things,
which quickens your spyrytes or else which be given of the holy ghost that is
to wit the word of god, and the mynysterye of the kingdom of heuens /
Moreover accordige to an other significacion, this nowne spiritual is wo^te to
be taken for every manner voluntarye accyon or passion of man / wrought as well
to him self as to an other / for the merit or deserui^ge of ye blyssed life /
in ye world to come / of which kind and sort / be all y^ co^templacyons of
god / ye loving of him and of our neighbors / abstyne^ces / marcyes or deeds
of pytie meke sufferynges prayers oblacio^s for honourynge of god /
hospitalytes / pylgrymages / chastysynges or ponysshynges / of our own bodies
/ the dyspysynge and eschewynge of carnal and flesshely pleasures / and
generally, all like things, down for the end aforesaid. yet beside these
sygnyfycacyons, this name spyrytuall is said (though not properly and metely,
as in the second and third way) of the temple, or church taken in his
second sygnyfycacyon / of all the vessels / iewelles / and ornaments /
which are in it, ordained for the worshyppynge of god. And last of al,
certain men very vnconuenyently, and improperly, stretche this nowne
spyrituall, to be taben for voluntary accyons exteryour of priests, or
bysshoppes, deaco^s, and other mynystres of the temple, and for the omyssyons
of the same works, which works ben to the profit or dysprofyte of an other
sondrye person from him yt works them / for the state of the life in this
world. They do extend / and streche also again, and that more improperly,
the same name spyrytuall to the possessions of the said persons, and their
temporal goods, moveable, and immovable, and to certain prouences or
revenues of temporal things, which they call tyethes / that under the
color / and cloak of this name: they may be exempte from the rule of the
ciuyle laws, and princes or rulers. But forsooth they do openly abuse this
word, in these sygnyfycacyo^s / against the truth, and contrary to the
entencyon and usage of the apostle and of holy men / which have called such
manner things, not spyrytuall things: but carnal or temporal / wherefore
Paul says in ye. xv chapter to ye Romans / for if the gentyles have been
made parttakers of their spyrytuall things: they ought also to mynystre to
them in carnal things the same. More expressly says in the. ix. chapter
of the first epistle to the Corynthyans / if we have sown spyrytuall things
to you: is it a great thing, if we do reap your carnal things? where, the
gloss after Ambrose mind says / for if we do sow to you spyrituall things,
yt is to say, those things which quyckeneth your spyryte, or the which be
given of the holy ghost, that is to wit the word of god, and mystery of the
kingdom of heuens: is it a great thing, if we do reap to our sustentacyon,
your carnal things, that is to say, those temporal things, which are
granted to ye mayntenaunce of life and yt cherysshynge of the body? Behold
here, that those outward goods, with the which the preachers Paul went
never to ye canon law and therefore he knew not ye nature of this word
(Spyrytuall.
of the gospel ought to be sustained, in meat, drink, and clothing: ye
apostle, and Ambrose, expressly calls carnal or temporal things / and in
very dead so be they / whether they be tyethes / orla^des, advantages, or
almoses, or colleccyons / ye cause whereof, saint Ambrose has told / because
they are granted and given to the life, and cherysshynge of the flesh / that
is to say of the corruptyble life. The same thing is to be thought and judged
undoubtedly, of certain accyons / or works and deeds / of priests /
bysshoppes and deacons / For not all their works are spyrytuall / neither
ought so to be called / but rather many of their deades / are cyuyle / The
mynystres of the church may sin.
contencyons / and carnal / or temporal / For they may lend / borowe,
deliver to keep / bye / selle / stryke / kylle and s^e / steal co^ymtte
fornycacyon and adoultrie, be extorcyoners and brybers / be traitors / bear
false wytnes / backebyte / flou^dre / fallin to heresy, and committee other
sins / crimes / and co^tencyons / as sooneas lay men and such as be no
priests / wherefore it is to be axed and demanded co^uenyently of them /
whether such manner works or deades (which we have be foresaid / and
rehearsed / may possible be done of them) be spyrytuall works or else ought
so to be called of any man, which is in his tyght mind? And it is euydente and
plain, that no / but rather, that they ought to be called carnal works and
temporal. Wherefore the apostle Paul, in ye third chapter of the first
epistle to the Corynthya^s, speaking of such manner accyons or works,
indyffere^tlye to all men: says / when there raygneth among you envy, and
contencyon: are you not carnal? and walk after man? seeing than, yt sure and
undoubted experyence does show, among the priests selves, one of them to an
other / and also between them and seculers, angers, enuyes, and contencions, to
chance of the aforesaid and other like acts / it is manifest and open, that
such manner deeds, of priests or bysshoppes, are carnal, or temporal / and
according to the truth, that neither they be, neither ought to be called,
spyrytuall acts / A sign and a token, that this is true which we have
said, even according to the sentence and mind of priests also: is this,
that to the taking away of such manner contencyons and stryues, many
ordynau^ces of man, which they call Decretalles, has been made why the
dectetalles were made.
by the bysshoppes of Rome / and before them, the laws of the emperors,
concerning the same co^tencyons / And in deed many voluntarye accyons, going
or tournynge to the profit or dysprofyte / the good, or harm / of an other
man, for ye state of this present life: be done, and may be done, by deaco^s,
and priests or bysshoppes / and therefore such manner accyons ought to be
measured by the law of man: as it was said, in the. xv. chapter of the first
dyccyon or part / and shall be said again, more to the purpose / in the.
viii. chapter of this dyccyon or part.

Now there remains, and is behind to deuyde this word / Judge / and this
word Judgment (which betokens the accyon and work of a judge) in to their
diverse sygnyfycacyons / for these words are of the nombre of them, which has
manyfolde sygnyfycacyo^s / and which by reason thereof, might cause great
ambygnyte or doubtefulnes, and also do great lettynge, in the determining of
our pryncypall questyons. This word Judge, in one sygnyfycacyon, is said of
every Judge.
man, which dyscerneth or has knowledge, cheyfly according to any qualytie,
which is called an habyte or science speculatyue, or operatyue and practyue.
And this nowne Judgment, is said of the knowledge, or dyscernynge / which
such Judgment.
men have / after which manner speaking, ye geometrycyon is a judge / and
judges of fygures / and of the accydentes or things belonging to them / and
the physycyon also, is a judge and judges of hole men and sick men / and the
wise man is a judge, judging of things to be done, and things to be avoided
or eschewed / and the carpenter judges of howses, how and in what manner they
are to be builded / and in this manner also, every man which has any
knowledge, or is expert in any thing is called a judge / and judges of the
things pertaining to his science and speculacyon, or else pertaining to his
operacyon or practyse / and in this signyfycacyon, Arystotle used these names,
in the first chapter of the first book, of his ethykes or moralles / when he
said / every man judges well those things, which he knows / and is a good
judge of those things / Again this nowne judge in an other sygnyfycacyon, is
said of him / which has knowledge of the polytyke or cyuyle law / which by
the common and accustomed appellacyon or namynge, is called an Advocate /
though in many prouynces and namely of Italy, he is called Advocate.
a judge. Again also, this name judge, is said of the gouernoure or ruler /
and this nowne judgment, is said of the sentence given by such prince or
ruler / whose auctoryte is, to judge of just and ryghtfull things / and
things profitable, according to the laws and customs, and sentences given
by him self, to command, by power coactyne / after which manner of speaking,
a certain book is called ye book of judges which is one pte of ye Bible / and
i^ this significacyo^ Aristotle speaking of a judge or ruler in the first
chapter of his first book of rethoryke said. The gouernoure and judge, now
judges of things present, and determynate / And meaning still after the
same manner, of the judgment of the gouernoure and ruler: he says shortly
after. To whom, that is to wit to the governor or judge, is annexed
oftentimes both love, and hatred, with propre and syngulare auau^tage. so that
they can not yet suffycyentlye perceive, and se the troth but attend only
and take head to that thing, which is delectable and pleasant, or else
bitter and dyspleasaunt, to their own selves. And perauenture, there be other
sygnyfycacyons of the nownes aforesaid, but I think and suppose we have
showed and marked forth the most famous, and co^munelye used sygnyfycacyons,
and those which be most necessary to the inquysycyon purposed here of us.

Of the oracles and auctorytes of ye holy scripture, and certain other
argumentacyons, by which it seems that it may be proved that bysshoppes or
priests, in that they be such manner persons: ought of duty to have power and
iurysdyccyon coactyue, yea without the grant of any temporal prince or maker
of laws / and yt the highest of all such iurysdiccio^s, is dew to ye bishop
of Rome called the pope.
The, iii, chapter,
Now than, ye diverse inte^cyons or sygnysycacio^s of those nownes or words
(about which the most part of our inquysycyon shall be occupied) thus
suffycye^tly declared and showed: we co^mi^ge nere more boldly to our purpose
pryncypally intended, shall first of al bring forth ye auctorytes of holy
scripture, by the which it might appear to some men, that the bishop of Rome
called the pope, is the highest judge (according to the third sygnyfycacyon
of this word judge or judgment) over and upon all the bysshoppes, or
priests, and other ecclesyastical mynystres of ye world / and also over all
princes, and governors of this would, all co^munyties / co^panyes / or The
first auctorite of scripture which seems to make for the popes power.
feloshyppes all synguler persons / of what soever estate they be. And of al
these auctoryties, let us first put the order of words, which are had in the.
xvi. chapter of Mathewe / where christ speaking to Peter, says. To the, I
will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven / and what soever thing thou
shalt bind upon earth: it shall also be bounden in heaven / and what soever
thing thou shall louse upon ye earth: it shall also be loused in heuens / For
of those words, certain bysshoppes Whereof ye pope has taken to himself
auctoryte to reygne and rule
of Rome have challenged and taken to them selves, the auctoryte of highest
iurysdiccion aforesaid / For by ye keys granted to saint Peter by christ they
will to be understood, ye fulness of power of al worldly governance and rule
to be given unto them selves / which fulness of power as christ had in
co^paryson of all kings princes, and rulers: even so he granted it (say they)
to saint Peter, and his successors in ye epyscopall see of Rome as ye vycars
of christ in this world. The second text of scripture to this purpose, is
taken of ye words of christ i^ ye. xi The second auctoryte.
chapter of Mathewe / when he said / al things are given to me, of my
father. And again in the. xxiii. of the same euangelyste / when he said / all
power is given to me in heaven and in earth / seeing than that saint Peter and
his successors in the epyscopallsee of Rome, have been, and be the vycars and
deputyes of christ (as they say) it appears that all power of fulness of
auctoryte, is given to the same / and consequentlye, the auctorytie of all
manner iurysdyccyon.

The third text or auctoryte to the mayntenaunce of the same, is taken of ye
The third auctoryte.
viii. of Mathewe / and the. v. of Mark / where it is said / and the deuylles
prayed him (yt is to wit, christ) saying if thou canste or drive us forth:
send us in to ye flock of hogs / and he said to them go you / and they
going forth of the man went in to the hogs / and lo sodaynely, all the hole
flock went hedlonge in to the sea / and were dead in the waters / of the
which words, it appears that christ did dyspose and order temporal things,
as being all his own / for else he had done amysse in dystroyenge the flock
of hogs. But it is abomynable to say, that christ has sinned or done
amysse, whose flesh never saw corrupcyon / For as much than, as saint
Peter with his successors bysshoppes of Rome, be, and has been the cheyfe
vycars or deputyes of christ (as certain men says) they may dyspose of all
temporal things / as being judges in the. iii. sygnyfycacyon, and has full
power and domynyon of them, even likewise as christ self had. Again the same
is showed, by that which is had in the. xxi. of Mathewe / in the. xi. of Mark
/ and in the. xix. of Luke where it is said in this wise. Than sent Jesus. ii.
dyscyples, saying to them go you in to the castle, which The fourth auctoryte.
is over against you, and forthwith you shall find an ass bounden, and her
fool with her, or the colte tayed to the ass, upon the which never any man
had sytte yet (as it is red in Mark and Luke) louse them and bring them to me
/ of the which words, the same conclusyon may be inferred, and by the same
manner of argumentacyon, which was inferred of the auctoryte of scripture,
i^medyatly here before rehearsed.

Moreover the same thing is reasoned of the. xxii. of Luke, where it is red in
The. v. auctoryte.
this manner. Lo here be. ii. swerdes, said the apostles, making answer to
christ. But he answered / it is suffycyent or enough / By the which words,
after the interpretacyon of some men, ought to be understand the. ii. powers
or auctorites of this present world / the one ecclesya stycall or spyrytuall,
the other temporal or seculer. Seeing than that christ dyrectynge his speech
to the apostles, did say it is suffycyent / that is to say it is enough for
you to have the. ii. swerdes: by these words he appears to have sygnyfyed,
that both the swerdes ought to appertain and belong to the auctoryte of them
/ namely of saint Peter, as being the pryncypall / and cheyfest of them / for
if he had not ben willing, that the temporal sword should belong to them:
he ought to have said, it is to much, and more than enough.

Again the same thing seems to be believed, by that which is had in the.
The. vi. auctoryte.
xxi. of John^ where christ speaking to Peter, said / feed my sheep / feed
my lambs, feed my sheep, rehersynge one sentence three times, as we have here
brought in / Of ye which some men gather this sense / yt saint Peter, and his
successors bysshoppes of Rome, ought without any excepcyon to be governors
and rulers over all the saythful sheep of christ / that is to wit. christen
men / and among these: specyallye and most of all, over priests and deacons.

Yea and moreover, this appears openly to be the sentence and mind of saint
The. vii. auctoryte.
Paul in his. vi. chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyans / when he
said / Do you not know, that we shall judge angels? how much more than
seculer things? Hereof it appears, that ye judgments (according to his
third sygnyfycacyon) of seculer things, does appertain to priests or
bysshoppes / and among them, pryncypallye to the bishop of Rome, cheyfest of
them all. Again the apostle seems to have meaned the same, in the. ix. of the
first to the Corynthyans / when he said / have we not power to eat. etc. The
same again in the third of the first to the Thessalonyans / In which words,
he seems expresselye to intend and mean, that power was gynen to him, by
god, over and upon temporal goods of christen men / and so consequentlye
iurysdyccyon also of them.

Furthermore the same thing is showed, of the first epistle to Tymothe the.
The. viii. auctoryte.
v. chapter / to whom the apostle said. Against a senyoure or priest,
receive none accusacyon: but under. ii. or. iii. witnesses or records. By this
than it appears, that a bishop, at the least wise has iurysdyccyon over
priests, deacons, and other mynystres of the temple / seeing that it belongs
to him for to here accusacyon of them / as for any probacyons of ye old
scripture or testament, which seems to make for the conclusyon purposed, or to
make against it: we will not bring in here / the cause whereof, we shall show
in the. ix. chapter of this dyccyon. By these foresaid auctorytes than, and
other like of the holy scripture, and such manner interpretacyons, and
exposycyons of them, it might seem, that the bishop of Rome, ought of duty to
have highest auctoryte and iurysdyccyon of all. No we consequentlye after these
things, it is conuenyent, to bring in certain, as it were, polytyke or
cyuyle arguments and reasons, which perauenture might cause to some men, a
phantasye and believe of the aforesaid co^clusyon. Of the which, let this be
the first / Likewise as the body is to the soul, in The first natural reason
the same manner is the ruler of bodies, to the governor of souls / but the
body is under the soul, as a subject to his gouernoure / wherefore it
follows, that the ruler of the bodies, that is to wit the seculer judge, ought
to be under the domynyon and governance of the judge or ruler of sowles, and
cheyfly under the domynyon of the bishop of Rome, the highest of all such
judges or rulers.

Again to argue, even as it were from the same ground. Likewise as bodily
The second.
things ben in comparyson to spyrytuall things, even so is the heed of
bodily things in comparyson to the heed of spyrytuall things. But it is
undoubted and of certain, that corporal things are more base and vyler of
nature, and far underneath the spyrytual things / it follows therefore, that
the ruler of bodily things, that is to wit the seculer judge or gouernoure
ought to be far under and subject to him which is ruler of spyrytuall
things.

Moreover look what comparyson is between one fynall end, and an other,
between The third.
law and an other, or between the maker of one law and the maker of an other
law. Even like comparyson or dyfference is between him that governs
according to the one of them, and him that governs according to an other of
them. But the fynall end, whereunto the ecclesiastical judge dyrecteth or
guydeth, outher priest or bishop / and the law according to the which he
dyrecteth and the maker also of that law, are superyours, and more perfyte
than the end the law, and the law maker, to the which, and according to
the which, the seculer judge dyrecteth: therefore the ecclesyastycall judge
bishop or priest, and namely the cheyfest of them, that is to say the Pope, is
superyour and above: what soever judge seculer it be / for the end, to the
which the ecclesyastycall judge dyrecteth or leads is eternal life / the
law according to the which dyrecteth: is the law of god / and the law
maker, is god i^medyatlie / in whom it is not possible any error or malice
to be. But the end to which the seculer judge intends to dyrecte: is the
suffycyencie of this worldly life / the law, after the which he dyrecteth: is
the law of man / the maker of that law, is man i^medyatly, or else men in
whom it may chance error and malice to be. Therefore are these things
inferyours, and more vile or unworthy things, than the aforesaid things /
wherefore it follows, that the seculare judge / yea even the highest / is
inferyour, and of less dygnyte than the highest preeste.

Again whose accyo^ or work of it self, is ye more honorable: he of him
self The. iiii.
is most to be had in honor / but the accyon or work of a bishop or priest,
is the most honorable of all, which may be done by man in this present life /
that is to wit, the consecracyon of the blyssed body of christ: it follows
therefore / that every priest is more of dygnyte, than any one who soever he be,
that is no preeste / For asmoch than, as the more worthy or excellent thing
ought not to be under the less worthy, but to be above it as ruler: it seems,
that the seculer judge or governor ought not to be above a priest, in
iurysdyccyon / but vnderneyth him / and most of all underneath the highest
preeste, the pope (as they call him) of Rome.

The same thing may be showed and proved more apparently, of the prince and
gouernoure of the Romans, called the emperor / by this reasan. He is
superycure The. v.
to the prince and ruler of the Romans (as touching to judgment in his
third sygnyfycacyon) which has auctorytie to instytute and make the said
prince or gouernoure, and to translate thempyre from nacyon to nacyon / but the
people says, that he has this auctoryte: for he has translated this
governance or empire, from the Brekes to the Bermaynes, as it is expressed in
the. vii. of his Decretalies, in the title De iure iura^do / and also the
bysshp of Rome that now is, says the same more expressly, in a certain
decree of his, to Lodo wyke duke of Bauarye, chosen and taken to be governor
and emperor of the Romans.

Moreover again, for the same purpose / it seems a great inconuenyence, yt
christ's up care, the bishop of Rome, and other successors of the apostles,
that The. vi.
is to say bysshoppes, ought to be under the iurysdyccyon of any prince
seculare and that for asmoche, as the seculare prince may sin and trespace,
against both the law of god and man, whereof he is to be corrected by some man.
But he which is the highest of all seculer princes, has neither any egall or
superyour person to him self which may take upon him to correct him (for a
pluralyte of cheyfe rulers is reproved in the. xviii. chapter of the first
part) wherefore it shall appear that iurysdyccyon coactyue over him
appertains to the bishop of Rome and in no wise the iurysdyccyon coactyue
over the bishop of Rome, to the emperor. Thus than me thinks I have showed
here suffycyentlye, both by what auctoryties of holy scripture, and also by
what certain argumentacyons of man, and as it were polytycall reason, it
appears, that it might be proved, the byssoppes or priests to have coactyue
iurysdyccyon / and that the highest rule and governance of all this world, is
dew to the highest and cheyfest of them that is to wit, to the bishop of Rome.

Of the canonycall scryptures, of the commandments, counsayles, and examples
of christ, and of the holy and approved exposycyons of the law of the
gospel: by the which it is showed euydently, that neither the bishop of
Rome, or any other bishop or priest, neither any person of the clargye, may
by the virtue of the words of scripture, challenge, or ascrybe any manner
coactyue domynyon or contentyouse iurysdyccyon at all, to them selves, over any
clarke, or lay man / much less then they can not challenge the highest
domynyon or iurysdyccyon of al / and how by the example and counsel of
christ, they ought to refuse such manner domynyon or iurysdyccyon, namely in
the co^munytyes of christen men, if it were offered or given to them, by him
that had auctoryte so to do. And again, that all bysshoppes, and indyfferently
all that are now called clerks, ought to be underneath the coactyue judgment,
governance and rule of ye temporal prince, namely being chrystened prince or
gonernoure
The, iiij, chapter,
Now consequentlye, we shall bring in of the contrary part, the verytes of
holy scripture, co^maundynge orcounsaylynge expressly both by their lytterall,
and also mystycall sense, according to the interpretacyon of saints, and the
exposycyon of other approved doctors of the christen faith, that the bishop
of Rome called the That ye pope is not aiudge nor governor seculare
pope, or any other bishop, priest, or deacon ought to have no domynyon,
judgment, or coactyue iurysdyccyon, over any priest, governor, co^munaltie,
college, or any synguler person, of what estate soever he be / understanding
by coactyue judgment, that, which we have showed in the second chapter of
this part, to be betokened by this word Judge or judgment in the third
sygnyfycacyon. But for this our intencyon and purpose more euydently to be
declared, we ought to know, that by this inquysycyon, we do not search or
ask, what power and auctoryte, christ which was both god and very man, had
and has, in this world neither what, or how much power, and auctoryte, he
might have given to saint Peter, and to the other apostles, and to the
successors of them, bysshoppes or priests. For of these things, christen
people do not doubt, in the questyon here purposed / But we will, and we ought
to inquyre and search, what power and auctoryte to be exercysed in this world,
christ was willing to give unto the said mynystres of the church, and what
power he gave to them in very deed / and from what power he did exclude and
prohybyte them, by his counsel or precepte / For we are bound to believe,
that they had so much power and auctoryte what manner power ye pope has.
of christ as may be proved, by the words of scypture / and none other
auctoryte nor more but only that / For this is undoubted to all the faithful
people of christ, that christ, which was both very god and man, might have
given not only to the apostles, but also to any other manner men, auctoryte or
iurysdyccyon coactyue in this world, above all the princes and rulers, or
domynyons, and all other synguler persons / and a greatter power perauenture
than this, as to make creatures, to dystroye, and to repair or make again
heaven, and earth, and those things, which be in them / and also to rule and
command angels / which power, for all that, christ neither gave them,
neither purposed to give them / wherefore saint Augustyne in the. x. sermon of
the words of our lord, upon Mathewe says in this wise / learn you of me,
not to frame or make the world / not to create vysyble and inuysyble things /
not to work miracles or wonders in the world / and to raise dead men / but
learn of me because I am meke, and humble or low in heart. And therefore
according to this present intencyon, it is suffycyent to show, yea and I will
show / First that christ self That christ came not to be a lord or ruler
came not in to the world, to have domynyon or lordshyppe over men / neither
to judge them by judgment taken in his third sygnyfycacyon / neither to be a
temporal prince, governor te^porally / but rather to be subject, according
to y^ state and co^dycyon of this present world / yea and moreover, yt his
will was to exclude, and he did exclude him self, and also his apostles and
dyscyples, and consequently the successors of them, bysshoppes or priests,
from all domynyon / or worldly governance of this sort, that is to wit
coactyue / both by his example, and also by his doctrine, that is to say, his
counsel or commandment / And I will show also that the cheyfe apostles, as
the true folowers of christ: have done the same thing them selves, and also
have taught their successors to do the same / and furthermore, that as well
christ, as the apostles selves, were willing to be underneath, and were in
deed contynuallye underneath the coactyue iurysdyccion of princes and governors
of the world, both reallye and personallye / and that they taught all other,
to whom they preached the law of truth, outher by word of mouth or else
by writing: to do the same / and thereto commanded them, under pain of
everlasting dampnacyon / And afterward, I will make a chapter of the power
or auctoryte of the keys, given by christ to the apostles, and to the
successors of them in office, bysshoppes, and priests, that it may appear,
what, of what manner, and how great is this manner power and auctoryte / as well
of the bishop of Rome, as of other / For in deed the ygnoraunce hereof, has been hitherto, and at this present time is, the orygynall cause and beginning
of many questyo^s, and hurtful stryfes, among christen people / as it was
somewhat towched, in the first chapter of this dyccyon.

we therefore prosecutynge these things purposed, will show that from the
office Christ did exclude him self and the apostles, from worldly ki^gdome or
governance.
of being governors, or of coactyue iurysdyccyon or governance, or any manner
coactyue judgment in this world: christ wylled to exclude, and did exclude
him self and the apostles, both as touching his purpose or intencyon, and
also his doctrine, and operacyon or workynge / This appears undoubted lie,
first of all, by the order of words, or text, in the gospel of John^, the.
xviii. chapter for when christ was accused to Ponce pylate, the emperoures
vycare or deputy in Iurye, of this, that he had said, him self to be king of
the Jews and Pylate did axe of christ, whether he had said these words, or
whether he did say him self to be a king: christ among other things
answered these words to Pylates questyon or demand / My kingdom is not in
this world John^. xviii.
that is to say, I am not common to reygne by temporal governance or
domynyon, after which manner, kings of the world do reygne / The probacyon
whereof christ him self puts afterward, by an euydent sign or token, when
he said / if my kingdom were of this world my mynystres or servants
doubtless would strive, that I should not be delivered to the Jews / as if
christ had made this argument or reason / If I came in to this world, to have
raygned by worldely or coactyue governance or rule: without doubt, I should
have mynystres of the same governance, which should fight for me, and
punysshe the tra^sgressours, likewise as other kings have / but I have no
such manner mynystres, as thou thy self may manyfestlye se / whereof the
gloss interlyneare says it appears in that no man desendeth / and this is it,
that christ rehersynge again The kingdom of christ.
says / But now my kingdom is not of this world / that is to wit the
kingdom whereof I am come to teach / which verytyes or true textes of the
gospel, saints and the doctors expownynge, say thus / and first of all
blyssed Augustyne, by these words, saying / For if when Pylate asked or
demanded, he had made answer forthwith, he might have seemed not to have
answered also the Jews, but only the Gentyles, having this opinion of him /
But after the answer of Pylate than more conuenyentlye, and more metelye, he
answered to the Jews and to the Gentyles / as if he had said, harken you
Jews and Gentyles I do not let your domynacyon and rulynge in this world,
what would you have more? Come you now by faith and believe to the kingdom,
which is not of this world, Now what is christ's kingdom, but those that
believes in him? Behold, of what kingdom he came to teach, and to dyspose /
verily of the acts or works by which men does come to the everlasting
kingdom / that is to wit, works of faith, and of the other Theologyall
virtues / and yet notwithstanding, co^pellynge or constraynynge no man to that
kingdom of faith, as it shall playnelye appear hereafter / For two coactyue
domynyons in respect of one multitude, being not the one of the powers
subject to the other lets them selves / as it was showed in the. viii.
chapter of the first dyccyon / But christ came not to let the domynyon of
these men, as saint Augustyne said / wherefore upon that saying in the same
chapitre of John^. Thine own people or nacyon / and thine own bysshoppes have
delivered the to me, what thing haste thou done? he shows suffycyentlye
(says saint Augustyne) the chalengynge of worldly domynyon: to have been laid
to christ's charge for a crime, as if he should say / if thou denyest thy
self to be a king, what thing have thou done, that thou should be
delivered to me? as though he would say, what marvel is it or should it be,
that man to be delivered to the judge to be punysshed: which did say him
self to be a king / Behold here according to the mind of saint Augustyne,
that christ should have been doubtless worthy to be punysshed: if he had said
him self to have been a seculer king namely to them, which know not him to be
a god / and that he denied him self to be a king and of what kingdom or
governance he meaned / that is to wit, of governance, coactyue of the
transgressors of the law, in this world / it appears, in the same chapter
of John^ upon this text, speak thou this of thy self, or else has other
men told it the? which words (says Theopompus) of christ to Pylate, were
all one, and as much in understanding, as if he had said to him / Pylate, if
thou speak this of thine own mind: show forth the tokens of my rebellyon
/ but if thou have herd this by the report of other men: make ordynarye and
dew inquysycyon / But christ ought not to have said this, which Theopompus
says, that is to wit, that Pylate should make ordynarie inquysycyon of him,
but rather he ought to have said, that this inquysycyon did not appertain or
belong to him / and that because christ according to the opinion of our
adversaries, was not of right subject, neither would be subject to Pylate, in
iurysdyccyon or judgment coactyue / Again upon that text. My kingdom is not
of this world / says Chrysostom / he does not depryue or bereave the
world, of his prouydence, prelacyon or preemyttence / but he shows, his
kingdom not to be worldly, transytorye, or corruptyble / But every one of the
kingdoms coactyue of this world, is humayne, transytorye and corruptyble.
Moreover, upon that text of John^, in the same chapter / Thou sayfte that I
am a king / saint Augustyne says that Christ did not so answer for fear or
dread, to confess, and knowledge or grant him self to be a king / but he so
te^pered his answer, yt neither he did deny him self to be a king, neither
yet did grant him self such a king, whose kingdom might be supposed to be
of this world / for these words / Thou sayfte, were spoken, as if he had
said / Thou a carnal man, speak carnallye of carnal governance, and
acts temporal, co^tentyouse, and carnal / according to the third
sygnyfycacyon of this nowne temporal / for such acts the apostle called
carnal, in the third chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyans / It
appears than, of the before rehearsed things, that christ came not in to this
world, neither to teach, neither to dyspose of carnal or temporal
governance, or coactyue judgment / but of the spyrytuall Christ did speak
of spyrytuall kingdom or governance.
or heavenly kingdom, and heavenly governance / For of this only he did
speak, and in a manner preach always, as it is euydent and open, by the text
of the gospel, both in the lytterall, and also in the mystycall sense thereof
/ And for this cause we read very often times, that he said / The kingdom of
heuens is like to. etc. but as for the worldly kingdom, outher he did speak
very seldom of it, or else in teaching he did despise it / In the heavenly
kingdom, he promised, that he would give rewards or punysshementes,
according to men's good works, or evil works / but he never promised, that
he would do such things, in this world / but rayther does and works
contrary wise, to the princes or governors of this world / For most
co^munelye, he scurgeth and punyssheth just men, and the workers of good
deades, or else suffers them to be afflycted in this world / and so brings
them to the reward of his kingdom / For all men that ever please god: have
gone through many trybulacyons / as it is written in Iudyth the, viii. chapter
/ But the princes of this world, or the judges of the worldly kingdom or
governance, do, and ought to do clean contrary wise to the order in gods
kingdom, in keeping and observing justice / For they do destrybute in this
world rewards to the kepers of the law / and pains or punysshementes to
transgressors and malefactors / and it is so to be done / for if they did the
contrary: they should trespass both against the law of man. and also of god
/ Now again to our pryncypall purpose, by that, which christ showed by his
work or example / we read in the. vi. chapter of John^, that when Jesus
knew, that they would come to take him, and make him king he fled again
him self ^^one, in to the mountain / where the gloss interlyneare says /
from the which mountain he came down to feed the multitude teaching by this
his deed, to fle and eschew the prosperyties of the world, and Christ fled
and eschewed ye dygnyte of a king.
to pray against them / This is undoubted than / that christ fled and
eschew to governance and rule or else he should have taught us nothing by
his example / which sense also the exposycyon of saint Augustyne helps and
confermeth, which says, that faithful christen men are the kingdom of
christ, which now is boughte with the blood of christ / And this kingdom
shall ones be manifest and open, when the glory of his saints shall be
openly showed, after the judgment done by him / But the dyscyples and the
multitude beleuynge in him wened, that he had come, to raygne even than.
Behold, that saints and holy men by the kingdom of christ in this world,
never did understand temporal domynyon, or judgment of contencyous acts or
deades, or execucyon by coactyue power, upon the tra^sgressours of the laws in
this world / But by his kingdom which he took upon him in this world: they
understood the doctrine of faith, and a kingdom governed by the same,
leadynge to the kingdom of heaven / The which kingdom saint Augustyne says,
shall be manifest and The kingdom of heuens.
openly showed: after his judgment, in an other world / Again he says, to
wene or trow that he would than raygne, so as the people did suppose or wene:
was to pluck him, that is, to draw him vnsemynglye, and to have an vnsemynge
opinion of him / where Chrysostom says also / And he, that is to say,
christ, was than a prophet among them, and they would have set him in the
kings seat, only for a glotonous sake, because he had fed them / But
christ fled, teaching us, to despise worldly dygnytes / Furthermore, the same
is showed most euydentlye, by the word and example of christ, in the. xii.
chapter of Luke / where it is red in this wise / and a certain man of the
multitude said to him / Maystre, say to my brother that he deuyde the
inherytaunce with me / But he, that is to wit christ, said to him / Thou
man, who has ordained or made me judge or deuyder over you? as who should
say, I am not come to exercise this office, nor yet sent for these purposes /
That is to wit, for to depart Christ would not be judge or vmpyre.
or end cyuyle suits or stryues by judgment / which thing, for all that, no
man doubts to be the work most properlye: appertaynynge to the gouernoures
or judges of this world / And albeit, in very dead that the text of the
gospel more euydentlye does contayue, and show our purpose, than the gloses
of holy men, which our adversaries knowing that as we have said they make
right manyfestlye against them, every where did turn them selves more to the
allegorycall or mystycall sense: yet that notwithstanding, we have brought in
those gloses also, to the greatter confyrmacyon and fortefyenge of our purpose
/ and lest it might be said of our adversaries that we do expound the
scripture folysshelye and presumptuouslye: after our own brain / Thus than
says saint Ambrose expou^dynge these words of christ / Therefore he does
well (says saint Ambrose) avoid and eschew erthlye things, which came
down for godly things sake, neither he vouchsaueth to be judge of worldly
stryues or suits, or vmpyere of such goods and substance: which has the
judgment of men, both quycke and deed, and the arbytrement of their deades /
And a little after he says also / wherefore not without cause (says he) this
brother is rebuked, which coueted to busye the order of heavenly things,
about earthly things and corruptyble / Lo here, what saint Ambrose mind is,
of the office of christ in this world / For he says, that christ does
well avoid and refuse earthly things that is to wit to be judge of
contentyouse persons: which came down for heavenly things sake, that is, to
teach and to mynystre spyrytuall things / in the which thing he marked
forth and assygned the office of him and his successors, that is to wit to
dyspence heavenly or spyrytuall things, I say spyrytuall things, yea and
those spyrytuall things of the which the same Ambrose spoke in the. ix.
chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyans, and the which we brought
in before, in the second chapter of this dyccyon, in ye third sygnyfycacyon
of this nowne spyrytuall / Now consequentlye, it rests and remains, to
show, that christ himself not only did refuse the domynyon of this world,
or coactyue iurysdyccyon or judgment in this world (wherein he gave example
to his apostles and dyscyples, and the successors of them, to do likewise) but
also that he taught by his preaching and showed by his example yt al priests
and lay men ought to be underneath the coactyue judgment or iurysdyccyon of
the princes of this world, both reallye and personallye / that is to say
both in their own personages and in all their goods appertaynynge to them /
First than christ showed this, by his words, and example of his own self,
as concerning his goods and substance, in the. xxii. of Mathewe, where it is
read / that when the Jews asked of him, saying / Tell us, how thynkest
thou? is it lawful to give trybute to Caesar or not? Christ after he had looked
on the money or quoyne, and the scripture thereof, made answer, and said / give
than to Caesar those things, which belongs to Caesar, and to god those
things, which appertains to god / where the gloss interlyneare says, that
is to wit, trybute and money / And saint Ambrose upon that text, whose is
this image, and this superscrypcyon? says in this wise / As Caesar exacteth and
requires the money having his image imprynted in it: so god also requires
the soul, marked with the light of his own face / Take heed than, what
thing christ came to exact in this world / And Chrysostom says thus / But
thou when thou hear these words, give to Caesar those things which
belongs to him, know thou, that christ means only those things which
in no Note this.
point are contrary to virtue, and the commandment of god / for if there be
any such thing: it is not the trybute of Caesar, but the trybute of the devil
/ Behold, that in all things we ought to be subjects to Caesar, so that they
be not contrary to pytye, that is to wit, the worshyppynge of god, or his
commandment / Christ than would be subject to the seculer princes, in real
or temporal substance / This also was openly the sentence or mind of saint
Ambrose, grounded upon this sentence of christ, for he said in the epistle
against Valentynyan, which, is intytled to the people / we pay to Caesar those
things, which belongs to Caesar / and those things which belongs to god,
we pay to god / trybute belongs to Caesar / it is not denied him / The same
thing is showed again, by the. xvii. chapter of Mathewe / where it is this
written / they which received the Dydrachme, came to Peter and said / does
not your master pay the Dydrachme? and consequentlye after a certain words
between, it follows that christ said to Peter / That we do not offend them:
go to the sea, and throw in thine hoke / and that fysshe which shall come up
first, take it up, and when thou haste opened the mouth of it thou shalt
find a stotere, or a doble Dydrachme take it and give it to them for the and
me / and the lord said not only, give it them: but said give it to them
for me and the / and saint Iherome Iherome.
says here our lord both as consernynge his body, and also his spyryte,
was the sone of a worldly or living king, by two manner ways / First in
that he was gendred of the stock of David, or in that that he was the word or
sone of the almyghtye father / Therefore he ought by right no trybute to pay
but to be fre from all coactyue powers or bondage, as being the sone of kings
And afterward it follows in the same saying of saint Iherome / Therefore,
although he were free: yet because he had taken upon him the humylytye or
meekness of the nature of man, he ought to fulfill all justice / And Orygen
upon that saying of christ, says in this manner wise / But that we do not
offe^de them, speaks in this wise more to the purpose and to the mind of the
euangelyste which after this manner says as follows / Consequentlye we may
well perceive (says Origin) and understand by these words of Christ, that
as often Orygen.
as certain men ryseth up, which wrongfully takes away our earthly things or
temporal substance: the kings and governors of this earth does send them
to require of us, that which belongs to them / and by his own example, our
lord forbyddeth any occasyon of synnynge, or greyfe to be given even to such
manner men / outher lest they might sin the more or else that they may be
saved. The sone of god, which never did any seruyle work or deed, as having
ye form or shape of a bond man or servant, which he took upon him for man's
sake, gave trybute, and paid money / which way than are the bysshoppes and
priests exempte from this, by the virtue and strength of the words of the
euangelycall scripture? no nor yet otherwise from the iurysdyccion of princes,
but by the gracyous and fauerable grant of them, seeing that christ and
Peter gyuynge example to other, did pay trybute / and though christ which
was by bodily generacyon common of the stock of kings, perauenture did not
owe of duty to pay it: yet Peter being not common of the stock of kings
neither had any such cause of exe^pcion, neither yet was willing to have / but
if christ had thought it conuenyent though those which should be successors
to him in the office of preesthode, should pay trybutes: and that their
temporalles should be underneath ye power of the princes and governors of this
world: he might without gyuynge of evil example (that is to wit, of making
preesthode subject to the iurysdyccyon of worldly princes) have ordered and
dyspached or ryd those exactours or gatherers of dydrachyn / that is to wit, by
remouynge or putting away the intencyon or purpose of asking such things,
or else by some other co^uenyent way or mean / But christ did not repute or
think it conuenyent to do so, but rather he was willing to pay, assocyatynge
or ioynynge to him Peter syngulerly among ye apostles / notwithstanding that
this Peter, as we shall show in the. xvi. chapitre of this dyccyon, should be
afterward cheyfest doctoure, and heard of the church / that by such
example: no man of the other, should refuse to do the same / Saint Ambrose
understanding this text of scripture taken of the. xvii chapter of Mathewe,
in such wise as we have said before: in the epistle, whose title is of ye
delyueri^ge of churches: says / The emperor asks trybute, truly it Ambrose.
is not denied him, the lands of ye church pays trybute / and after certain
words being put between, he says more to the purpose / we pay to Caesar
those things which belongs to Caesar / and to god those things which
belongs to god / Trybute belongs to Caesar, it is not denied him / saint
Bernarde also more plainly expressing this to be the meaning of ye before
rehearsed scripture in a certain Bernarde.
epistle to the archebysshop of Senon, says in this wise / thus say they,
which counsel their subjects to rebelle against their superyour / But
christ says Barnarde both commanded and did him self otherwise / Give you
(says he) to Caesar such things as apperteyneth unto Caesar / and to god such
things as Of payenge trybute.
belongs to god / This that he spoke with his mouth: anon after he gave
head to perform and fulfill in his work and deed / he which was the creature
and maker of Caesar: was not grieved, neither did put of, to pay trybute / for
he gave example to you: that you should do likewise / when would he have denied
dew reverence to the priests of god, which gave dylygence to do this
reverence, even, to the heathen powers or officers of the world: and here we
ought to mark and take good head of this which Bernarde says / that christ
in that he cared to give trybute to the seculer powers: did give also dew
reverence / This reverence, was not coacte nor of compulsyon / for every man
owes of duetye, who soever he be: to pay such manner tax or trybute to princes
/ as we shall show in ye chapter next folowenge, by the auctorytie of the
apostles, in the. xiii. chapter to the Romans / and by the gloses of saints
and doctors in the same place / moreover christ showed, not only, that him
self is under the coactyue iurysdyccyon of ye seculer price as touching real,
or te^porall substance: but also he shows ye same in him self as touching
his person and body / than ye which personal iurysdyccion, it is not possible
for any prince to have greatter iurysdyccyon outher upon him or any other man /
for the which cause, this iurysdyccyon is called also in the law of the
Romans, mere empire / This may be showed euydently, by the. xxvii. chapter
of Mathewe / for as it is red, and appears there, christ suffered him self
to be taken, and to be led to the house of Pylate, which was the deputy of
the emperor of Rome / and by him as judge of coactyue power and auctorytie:
he suffered him self to be judged and delivered to extreme punysshement and
death / Neither did he cry against Pylate as against one that ought not to be
his judge: albeit perauenture he gave knowledge, that he suffered not right wise
judgment / And it is undoubtedly known / that he might have suffered such
judgment and punysshement by priests if he had would, or if he had judged it
inconuenyent, that his successors in time afterward to come, should be
subjects to seculer princes, and be judged by them / And because this sentence
is more seryously and ernestly written, in the. xix. of John^: I will also
bring in here, that which is had in the said place / when christ was
brought to Pylate the emperors deputy, and was also accused, for that he
said him self to be king of the Jews, and the sone of god: and when Pylate
had asked Jesus, whe^se art thou? And Jesus had given thereto none answer at
all, Pylate than said to him these words following, which appertains to our
purpose / wylt thou not speak to me? know thou not, that I have power and
auctorytie to crucyfie the, and let the go at liberty? Jesus answered / Thou
should not have any power at all against me, if it were not given to the from
above / Behold here that Jesus did not deny, that Pylate had auctorytie to
judge him / and to execute judgment upon him / neither said he, of right it
belongs not to the, but in deed thus thou doste / But christ added this
also, that Pylate had his auctorytye from above / how from above? Augustyne
makes answer saying / let us Augustyne
learn then that, which christ said and which he taught the apostle /
that is to wit Paul in the. xiii. to the Romans / what then did christ say?
what taught he the apostle? that there was no power, that is to say,
auctorytie of iurysdyccyon but of god / how soever it be, of the act of them
/ which mysse use this power / And that he seems more, which through envy
delyuereth an innocent to the power or offycer, for to be slain, than does
the power or offycer self, if he does kill or slay him for fear or dread of
an other higher or greatter power / for such power had god given to Pylate,
that he was also under the power of Caesar Then that iudyciall coactyue power
which Pylate had over the person of christ was of god / as christ self only
openly confessed, and saint Augustyne plainly expressed / And saint Bernarde
said openly to the archebysshop of Senon in a Bernarde.
certain epistle / saying that christ grants, that the power of Pylate
even over him self also, is ordained of god. These be Bernardes words,
speaking of the power of Pylate, and upon this place of scripture / Than if
the iudiciarie coactyue power of Pylate, over or upon christ self, was of
god: how much more than, upon his te^porall or carnal goods, if christ had
possessed or had any further than, if over the person of christ, and his
temporal goods, he had such auctorytie in how much more over and upon
the personages, and the te^porall goods, of all y^ apostles, and their
successors, al bishops or priests / and this thing was not only showed by
the words of christ but also confyrmed by the performynge or fulfyllynge of
the work / for by the same Pylate sitting in the place of judgment, sentence
of death was given, against christ / and by the auctorytie and commandment
of him, execucyon, was done of the same sentence, for these words in order are
red in the same chapter of John^ / when Pylate than had herd these words, he
brought Jesus forth / and satte him self in the place of judgment / and
after a little space, it follows / Therefore he delivered Jesus unto them, that
he should be crucyfyed / and even such was the sentence and opinion or mind
of the apostle Paul, concerning christ: when he said in the third chapter
to the Galathians / But when the fulness of time was common / god sent his sone
made of a woman, made under the law, It follows consequently than that he was
made under a judge also, to whom it did appertain to judge and command,
according to the law / which judge for all this was not a bishop or priest
/ And christ did not only will to exclude the seculare governance, or
iudycyall, coactyue power, from him self but also he did exclude it from his
apostles, as well of one of them over an other among them self: as in
comparyson to other men / wherefore this text is had, in the. xx. chapter of
Mathewe, and the. xxii. of Luke / there was made a contencyon or showing
among them / that is to wit, the apostles, which of them should be greatter.
But christ said to them, kings and rulers of the gentyles, have domynyon over
them / and they which has power over them are called benefycyall, and well
doers / But in Mathewe this clause is red in this wise, and they which be
greatter exercise power upon them / but you shall not do so / but he which is
greatter among you stand as younger / and he that is forgoer or master is as
a mynystre / for whether of the two is greatter, he that sytteth at the table,
or he that mynystreth or serves? Is not he which sytteth / But I am in the
mids among you: as he y^ mynystreth / but who soever will be greatter among
you: let him be your mynystre / And who soever will be cheyfe among you: shall
be your servant / even likewise, as the sone of man came not to be served,
but to mynystre / that is to serve in temporal things, and not to be lord
and ruler, or to be egall or fellow / for in spyrytual mynysterye or office, he
was cheyfest / and not a servant in the mids of the apostles / whereupon
Orygen says / you know, that the princes or governors Orygen.
of the gentyles, are lords and has domynyon over them / that is to say,
are not content only to govern their subjects, but also labors vyolently
to be lords of them / that is by power coactyue, if they must needs / but
among you, which are my dyscyples there shall be no such things / for as
carnal things / are put in necessytie or compulcyon and spyrytuall things in
the will: so Let men of ye church love and not play ye lords. Chrysostom
they also which be spyrytuall that is to say prelates, their auctorytie or
governance ought to stand in love, and not in fear / and Chrysostom among
other things says these words making for this our purpose / Princes of the
world be made therefore, that they should be lords, and have domynyon over
their inferyours / and to cast them vnderseruytude and bondage, and to spoil
them (understand thou, if their trespasses or evil deades shall deserve it)
and to use them even to death, to their own profit and glory / But rulers
and governors of the church, that is to wit prelates, are made therefore that
they should serve their inferyours, and mynystre to them, what soever things
they have receyuyd of Christ / and that they should despise their own profit
and procure the profit of them / And that they should not refuse to dye for
the health and salvation of their inferyours and subjects / therefore to desire
prymacye, or soueraygnetye of the church is neither right neither profitable /
for what wise man will of his accord wyllyngly bind him self to such
seruytude and such ieopardie, as to give account for the hole church?
except perauentare he be such one, which dredeth not the judgment of god /
abusing his ecclesyasticall prymacye after a Ecclesiastical persons ought to
be servants and not to be lords and rulers Iherome.
seculer and worldely fascyon so that he does turn it in to seculer
soueraynetie / what has priests than to do with medlynge of seculer coactyue
judgments? for they ought not to be lords temporally: but to be servants /
and to mynystre after the example and precepte of christ / wherefore saint
Jerome says. Finally christ sets forth before his dyscyples the example
of his own self / that if the apostles would little set by, or regard his
words and sayenges, yet at the least wise at the sight of his works and
deeds, they should be ashamed to be lords and to use domynyon temporally /
wherefore Orygen upon this text, and to Orygen.
give his life redempcyon for many. etc. says in this wise therefore the rulers
and governors of the church ought to follow christ, in that he was not
proud or daungerouse for to be co^med unto, but ready, for who soever would come
unto him and in that he spoke to women / and laid his hands upon children /
and washed the fete of his dyscyples / yt their selves may do likewise to
their brethren / But we are such manner men (says he meaning by the
prelates of his time) that we seem to excede and pass even the worldely
princes, in pride, outher because we do not understand and perceive the
commandment of christ: or else because we do despise and set at naught
the same commandment / and as if we were kings / we desire and seche for
armed hosts to go before us / and those terryble and dredefull / For asmoche
than, as to do these things, is to despise, or else to be ygnoraunte of the
commandment of christ: first prelates are to be monysshed and warned hereof
/ which thing we shall do by this treatise, showing and declarynge, what
auctorytie is conuenyent and according or mete for them / after this done, if
than they shall not regard to amend them selves: they ought to be constrained
and compelled thereunto, by the seculer and lay princes / least they might
corrupt and infecte the manners of men. These things than hitherto rehearsed,
has been said upon Mathewe, but upon Luke: Basilius says Basilius magnus.
in this wise / But it besemeth them, which be spyrytuall rulers, and
governors to offer also bodily obsequye and service, after the example of
christ our lord, which washed the fete of his dyscyples / Therefore christ
said. The princes of the gentyles: be lords over them / but you (that is to
wit the apostles) shall not be so / Christ than, the king of kings, and
lord of lords, did not give to them power and auctoryte, to exercise the
seculare judgments of princes: neither coactyue power or iurysdyccyon over
any man / but openly and euydently he forbad it them, when he said / but you
not so. And the same is consequently to be holden, of all the successors of
all the apostles, bysshoppes or priests / This is it also, which saint
Bernarde said openly to Eugenius, in the second book of consyderacyon, the
fourth chapter / treating upon those words of christ before rehearsed / the
king and princes of the gentyles. etc. for among other, these are the words
of Bernarde, that which the apostle Petre had, that same he gave / Bernard.
that is to wit, busy care, and dylygent ouerseynge of the congregacyons /
did he give domynacyon, or lordshyp? harken what he says / Not having
(says he) domynyon or lordeshyp over the clargye, but being made the example
of the flock / And least thou might wene or suppose that this was spoken only
of humylytie and lowlynes, and not to be exequyted in very truth, the saying
of our lord in the gospel is, the kings and princes of the Gentyles have
domynyon and lordshyp over them, and they which have power over them, are
called welldoers or benefycyall / and he infers or concludes / but you not
so. It is plain, y^ domynyon is forbidden the apostles / so that they may not
be lords. Dare thou then outher being a lord usurp y^ office of an
apostledor being an apostolyke person, usurp domynion or lordshyps? forsooth
thou art plainly phybyted from both / if thou art willing to have both of
them together thou shalt lose both / or else think not thy self to be
excepted from the no^bre of them, of whom god co^playned in this wise. They
have reigned and not by me / they have been princes and rulers and I knew them
not. Thus than by the veryties or treue textes of the gospel which we have
brought in and alleged / and by the interpretacyo^s or declaracyo^s of the same
textes, made by saints and other approved doctors It ought to appear
euydentlye to all men, that christ did exclude, or was willing to exclude him
self, as well by his deades, as by his words, from all soueraynte or
governance, and judgment coactyue, or worldely power, and auctorytie / and
that he would him self be subject, and underneath the coactyue iurysdyccyon of
seculare governors, princes or other high powers.

Of the canonycall oracles, or textes of the apostles, and the exposycyons of
saints, and holy doctors: by which the same thing is openly proved which
was proved by the chapter last before gone.
The, v, chapter,
How there rests and remains behind, to show that this same was also the
sentence and doctrine of the cheyfe apostles of christ And first of Paul,
which in the second chapter of the second epistle to Tymothe admonyssheth
and aduertyseth the same Timothe whom he had ordained and made bishop or
preeste that he should not wrappe him self in worldly busynes / for these are
his words / let no man that warreth to god: entangle him self with worldly
busynes / where the gloss after Ambrose mind says / that no man, that
warreth to god in spyrytuall things (which god can not be parted or divided
to two contrary servants, Ambrose.
even likewise as no man can do service to two masters or lords) entangeleth
him self in any manner worldly busynesses. And he says in any manner
busynesses, exceptynge none at all / for asmoche then as domynyon or judgment
coactyue of contentiouse and debatefull acts or deades, is the most seculer
and worldly of all busynes (for that it does order and rule all seculer
busynes, or all seculer cyuyle acts of men, as it has been showed in the. xv.
chapter of the first dyccyon) the apostle commands it pryncypally, and
most of all to be eschewed of him, which ought to be the souldyour or
seruau^te to god, in mynystringe spyrytuall things, so as every manner bishop
or preeste ought to be / And that this which we have rehearsed, was the very
meaning and mind of the apostle it is openly and euydently declared by the
text, which is red in the syxte chapter of the first epistle to the
Corynthyans / where he said in this wise. Therefore if you have seculer
judgments, ordain you or make you them judges, This text is but eue^
nakedly alleged of ye author.
which are contemptyble and of least reputacyon in the church / for there the
apostle speak unto all faithful or christen men, and to the church in his
most propre and last sygnyfycacyon / which said text of the apostle, the
gloss expounds thus, according to the mind of Ambrose and Augustyne /
Contemptyble Ambrose. Augustyne.
persons, that is to wit, some wise men, but yet which be of less merit,
than the priests and teachers of the gospel / ordain them to be judges / and
the cause is showed, why the mynystres of the gospel, should not be made
judges in such matyers / For the apostles going about from place to place:
had not laysure or space, to give their mind to such busynes / than his will
was, that wise and holy christen men, which restyd and were abiding in
places, and not they which can about hither and thither, from place to place,
for to sprede abroad the gospel should be the examyners and judges of such
business / And an other cause hereof, the gloss assygneth according to the
mind of Gregory in his moralles / and that very well (in my judgment)
according to the mind and intencyon of the apostle / for why (says Gregory)
ought contemptyble persons, and not bysshoppes Gregorius.
or priests, be ordained and set to exercise seculer offices? doubtless to the
end that such should examyne earthly and worldly causes, which have gotten
the wysdom or knowledge of exteryor and outward things / that is to wit, of
seculer or cyuyle acts or works / But they that are enryched with spyrytuall
gifts ought not to be entangled or encombred with earthly matyers or busynes /
that whiles they are not compelled to dyspose and order the inferyoure goods
of the world, they may be able to do service to the superyour or spyrytuall
good things, lo than this is most euydently the mind of the apostle, and of
the holy exposytours, which we have said of the office, that was utterly
forbidden to priests by the apostle Paul / which thing also saint Bernarde
expressing to Bernardus.
Eugenius, in the. v. chapter of the first book De consideratione: says in
this wise, dyrectynge his speech to the bishops of Rome and of other places /
Therefore your power and auctorytie (says he) is in crimes or sins, not in
possessions. For it was for sins, and not for possessions, that the keys of
the kingdom of heuens was given to you / that you might exclude transgressors
or sinners, not possessours / that you may know (says he) that the sone of
man has power and anctorytie to forgive sins / And afterward he says /
whether of these two seems to the greatter dygnytie and power to forgive
sins, or else to deuyde and part lands and lordshyppes? These inferyour
and vile earthly things have their judges, the kings, and princes of the
earth / why do you invade the bonds of other men, usurping that which
belongs to them? Thus than it follows, that it belongs not to the office
of a bishop or priests to judge by coactyue judgment, contencyous carnal
acts or temporal things / but rather the bysshoppes or priests medlynge
with such busynes invade other men's bounds / that is to say trouble the
office of an other man, and stretch forth their sithe in to an other man's
corn, after the mind of Bernarde / Therefore the apostle would, that they
should judge by coactyue judgment which are not ordained to be mynystres of
the gospel and which have gotten the knowledge of exteryoure or outward
things / that is to wit, of cyuyle acts or deades / for as much than, as no
man that trespaseth, is exempte from such manner judgment it appears, that
as well priests, as those that been no priests: be subject and underneath the
coactyue judgment of princes and lay governors / and here it is dylygently to
be marked and taken head of, that the apostle in writing generally to the
christen men of Corynthe, as it appears by the salutacyon, and also in that he
puts conte^ptyble persons in the church, that is to wit, seculer persons
after the mind of the gloss, does not say I my self ordain or set
contemptyble persons, neither yet any other such man judges the seculer or
worldly matyers, which you shall have for me or by my auctorytie / Neither he
left behind him any man there in his stead, to judge matyers or to co^stytute
or ordain such manner judges / which thing for all that he would have done,
or ought to have done, if this thing had be appertaynynge to his office and
auctoryte, as well as he did of priests and bysshoppes / for he did instytute
and ordain them, in the places where christen congregacyons were / and
commanded them, or else committed it to them, to make instytucyon of other
bysshoppes and priests / as it is euydent in the third chapter of the first
epistle to Tymothe, and in the first chapter of ye epistle to Titus / for
thus he said to Titus for this cause I have left y^ in Crete land, yt thou
should correct those things, which are lacking or wantynge / yt is to
wit, offenses and sins in them which trespase / and yt thou should put to
yt which is good / as the gloss says / and that thou should constytute and
or dayne, or set priests in every city / neither did he command seculet
acts to be judged by bysshoppes or priests: but he did rather forbid it /
wherefore Bernarde Bernardus.
in the place before alleged says in this wise / But yet here the apostle what
he judges or thinks of such manner persons / is there in so much (says he)
never one wise man among you, which may judge between his brother and
brother? I speak it to make you abashed and ashamed and than it follows /
Ordain them which are contemptyble persons in the church: to be judges and
according than to the mind of the apostle, thou that art an apostolyke
person, doste vnsembly and vnconuenyently, to usurp and take unto thy self, a
vile office, and the degree of contemptyble persons / wherefore the apostle also
which was a bishop said thus, instructynge an other bishop, that is to wit
Timothe / no man warrynge to god entangleth himself in seculer busynes / and
the same Bernarde says Bernardus
afterward / Supposest thou, that these times could suffer and abide it if
when men strive and go to law for worldly inherytaunce, and do require of
the, to give judgment between them / thou would make answer to them with
the words of christ / O you men who has ordained me to be judge over you /
what manner judgment would men forthwith give of the? what would the vplandysshe
and the unlearned man say? Thou know not thy prymacye / thou know not
Bernarde rayleth against ye spyrytualte.
the high and very magnyfycent see / thou doste derogate and mynysshe the
apostolyke dygnytie / And yet I suppose, they which would say thus: will not
show where at any time any of the apostles satte as judges over men, or
dyuyders of terms or bounds, or as dystrybuters of lands / and to be short,
I read that the apostles stood to be judged: but I read not yt they sat as
judges / It shall be seen perauenture, but it has not ben seen / Is the
servant to be judged a mynyssher of his dygnyte, because he wylleth not to be
greatter, than he which sent him? Or the same, because he does not go beyond
the bounds, which his fathers has set? The maystre and lord him self
said, who has ordained or made me judge? and shall the servant be thought
to have iniurye or wrong, except he do judge al men? Thus than Bernarde
says, that the successoure of the apostles does unseemly and vnaccordyngly if
he usurps or takes unto him self the office of a judge / And the holy
apostle commanded, that all men indyfferently (no man excepted, neither
bishop, neither preeste or deacon) ought to be under the judgment coactyue
of judges or princes and governors seculer / and that such seculer governors
ought not but to be obeyed, unless they did command any thing to be done
dyrectlye against the law of the everlasting salvation / wherefore in the.
xiii. chapter to the Romans: he says / Let every soul be subject to the
high powers / for there is no power, but from god and those powers that be:
are ordained of god / Therefore whosoever resysteth the power: resysteth the
ordinance of god / and those which resysteth: does purchase and get to
them self dampnacyon / for princes or governors are not feared of them that
are well doers / but of them that does evil / will thou not dread the power?
do good and thou shall obtain praise of him / for he is a mynyster, to the,
for good: but if thou shall do evil: than fear / for he bears not the
sword without a cause / for he is the mynyster of god to punysshe and to do
vengeance on him, that does evil. Therefore be you subgiectes / for so you
ought of necessytie / not only because of wrath / but also because of
conscience. For because of this, you do pay trybutes. For they are mynysters of
god serving to this same thing. Give you to all men, their duties / trybute,
to whom trybute is due / rent: to whom rent / fear: to whom fear / honor,
to whom honor is due to be given. And I was wyllyng also upon these words of
the apostle worthy to be noted, to bring in the gloss, after the mind of
saints, and catholyke Doctors / because of these things, which the apostle
has said, and the gloss maker / but our purpose is so openly and euydently
showed to be true, that no man being of right mind after he has seen and red
them: ought to doubt any longer. The apostle said every soul exceptynge none,
where the gloss after Augustynes mind first, and otherwhyles after the mind
of Ambrose, says thus. And here he provoke and exhorts men to humblenes.
For certain men thought, that evil Lords and rulers, and namely such as
were infydels ought not to have domynyon and rule Evil rulers are to be obeyed
as reuere^tly as good rulers.
over christen men. And if they were good and also christen: that then they
were but peetes and egall to other good and christen men. Which pride, also
the apostle here puts away even from the superyour part of man / that is
to wit the soul, by it betokenynge the hole man. For what is it to say /
every soul, but every man? as if he should say. All the foresaid things are
to be done / and though you be so perfyte in the body of Christ / yet that
notwithstanding let The soul is put for ye man.
every soul be subject / that is to say, let every man be subject /
which man I do sygnyfye therefore by the name of the soul, that you should
serve and be obeyssaunte, not only in body, but also in will and mind.
Therefore let every soul be so subject and obedyent, that is even also in will
/ he do serve the seculer powers, both good and evil / that is to wit
kings and princes / or governors / high capytaynes / under capytaynes / and
such other. Lo than, what the apostle understood and meaned by the higher
powers / nothing else: but seculer princes and governors. Than it follows
in the gloss / for if he be a good man, which is ruler, and gouernoure over
the / he is thy nouryssher / if he be an evil man, he is a temptoure to prove
and assaye the. Both receive and take nourysshementes or cherysshynges gladlye
and with good will. And in thy temptacyon be thou approved. Be thou therefore
gold, and mark and take heed, that this world is as it were the fornayce of
the gold fyner. So than let every soul be subject to the higher powers /
that is to wit, in this that they are high / that is in worldly things. Or
else in this word higher is signyfyed the cause wherefore they ought to be
obeyed / that is because they are higher by the ordenaunce of god.

For there is no power but of god / he proves, that they ought to be
subjects and obeyssaunte, this manner way, because all power is of god / but
those things, which be of god / are ordained of god / than it follows, that
power and auctorytie is ordained of god / that is to say, who soever has
power or auctorytie, has the ordinance of god. Therefore who soever resysteth
the power resysteth the ordinance of god. And this is it that he says, as if
he ought therefore to be subject because there is neither any good man,
neither evil, that has any power except it be given unto him of god /
wherefore our Lord said to Pylate / Thou should not have power over me / if
it were not given to the from above / which Bernardus.
thing Bernarde also repeting to the Archebysshop of Senon says. There was no
man more seculare: than Pylate, before whom our lord stood to be judged / yet
he said / thou should not have any power over me: if it were not given to
the from above. At that time Christ spoke for him self, and had experyence of
that thing in him self / which thing after he caused to be publysshed and
proclaimed throughout all the churches, by his apostles, that is to wit, that
there is no power but of god / and that who soever resysteth the power:
resysteth the ordinance of god. And within a little after in the same place
Bernarde says Christ Bernardus.
grants and confesses, that the power and auctoryte of the Emperors
deputy in Rome, even over his own self was ordained from above. And it
follows in the gloss / but those that be, are ordained of god / that is to
say are resonablye dysposed and ordained of god. Therefore who soever other by
vyolence, or by dyscorde or gyle resysteth the power / that is to wit the man
having power in those things which belong to the power: as in trybute / and
such other things: he resysteth the ordynacyon of god / that is to say, he
resysteth him, that has power by the ordynacyon of god / and therefore he does
not according to the ordynacyon of god. Of the good power: it is euydent, that
god has made him ruler reasonably and not without good cause / And of the
evil power, it may also appear, that he is made ruler reasonably / whiles
both good men are purged by him: and evil men are condemned, and him self is
cast down hedlonge worse and worse. And mark and take heed, that sometime by
this word power is understand the Of this word power.
power it self or auctorytie which is given of god / sometime by the same
word: is understand the man self that has the power / which. ii.
Sygnyfycacyons / let the dylygent reader mark the one of them from the other /
he that resysteth the power resysteth the ordynacyon of god / And this is so
grievous an offense, that who soever resysteth the power: they do purchase and
get to them selfs everlasting Mark this well I counceyll you.
dampnacyon. And therefore no man ought to resyste / but to be subject and
obeysaunte to him. But yet if he command the, to do that thing, which thou
ought not to do by the law of god: here truly thou may not execute his
commandment fearing the greatter power / that is to wit god / mark, and
take heed of the degrees of wordly things / if the Emperor of Rome shall
bydde or command any thing to his subjects it is to be done, albeit he do
command contrary to the proconsull? Again if the proconsul / which is the
emperors subject and offycer under him byddeth, one thing, and the Emperor
commands an other thing: is it any doubt, but that despysynge the
proconsuls commands the subject: ought to obey the Emperor or pryncipall
capytayne? Therefore if the Emperor command one thing, and god does
command an other thing, the subject ought to obey god, before the emperor.
But yet saint Augustyne said not, if the Emperor do command one thing, and
the Pope or bishop do command an other thing / which thing he ought to have
said, if the pope had been superyour to the emperor, in degree of Iurysdyccyon
/ but yet saint Augustyne would, that if the emperor has commanded, any
thing to be due against the law of everlasting health, which is immedyate
commandment of god / in this the emperor ought not to be obeyed / in which
case, the pope co^maundynge according to this law / that is to wit the law
of god / is rather to be obeyed than the Emperors co^maundynge, any thing to
be done, which is contrary to the law of god. But if the pope commands any
thing according to his Decretalles That we are bound to do as the Decretals
commands.
in that they are but his own decrees, he is nothing to be obeyed, against
the commandment of the Emperor, or his laws / and that appears openly and
euydentlye here, and shall be more largely declared in the. ix. chapter of
this dyccyon. Than it follows in the gloss / They that resyst worthily
purchase or gettedampnacyon. For governors good or evil, are not the fear of
good works / but of evil / that is to say, not the fearing of them which
work well: but to the fear of them which work evil. For if he be a good
prince or gouernoure, he does not punysshe him that works well, but loves
him. And if he be an evil prince: he does not hurt the good man, but tries
and purges him / But the evil man ought to fear / for princes and governors
are ordained to punysshe vices or evil deades. He calls them princes or
governors / which are created and made, to correct and amend the life of
men / and to keep away aduersytie / having the Image or likeness of god,
that all other might be under one. But to you as evil doers they are fearful
/ But will thou not fear the power, what soever man he be: other good or
evil? Do good and work thou well And than thou haste no cause, wherefore thou
need to fear ordrede / but thou shall rather have praise of the same power:
although he be evil / whiles thou haste a cause of greatter crown and
reward / But if he be a ryghtwyse power or offycer: thou shall have praise of
him, whiles he shall him self laud and co^mendethe / if The power is
profitable whether it be good or evil.
he be vnryghtwyse yet shall thou have praise of him / not in yt he him self
shall praise the: but in that he shall give occasyon, that thou shalt be
praised of other men / and so shall thou truly have praise by him. For he is
the mynyster of god to the / for good, that is to say, doing good to the,
whether he be good or evil. For he is given to the of god, for thy good and
profit / that is to wit to desende the and thine / for it is manifest and
euydent or open, that rulers or gouernoures, are therefore given of god that no
hutte should be done to good men. But if thou do evil: than fear thou / for
he bears the sword, that is to say the power and auctorytie to judge: not
without cause, but to punysshe evil doers. And this he shows when he says
afterward / for he is the mynyster of god, that is to say he punyssheth, and
takes vengeance in the rowme or stead of god / He I say being a punyssher or
auenger, for the wrath of god / that is to say, for to avenge the dyspleasure
of god / or else for the wrath of god to be showed / that is to say, to
show the vengeance of god, that is to come / for this punyssheme^t done by
the governor shows that they which continue in sins shall be more sore
and grievously punysshed, I say that he is a venger or punyssher also to him
that is to say to the hurt and correccion of him: that does evil / and that
because he is the mynystre of god. And therefore, be you subject to him, as of
necessyte / or else be you subjects to necessytie / that is to say, to the
necessary ordynacyon of god / And that not only for fear, that the wrath of
the governor, or else of god, shall be avenged: but also because of
conscience / that is to wit, that your mind may be clean, by loving him
that is made ruler by god / that is to say, him: which has such rule and
auctorytie, by the ordynacyon of god. For albeit that all Christen men, that
they are christen, are one in Christ, in the faith of whom, there is no
dyfference, whether they be Jews, or Greeks, Lords, or servants, and such
other things: yet that notwithstanding, there is dyfference between them, in
the mortal or worldly conuersacyon. And the apostles commands, the order of
the conuersacyon to be kept, in the Journey of this present life. For there are
some things, which we do keep in unity of the faith without any dyfference.
And there are other some things, which we do keep in the order of this life:
as is the way, lest the name of the lord, and his doctrine, might be
blasphemed. And therefore also you do give trybutes / This is the probacyon of
subjection / wherefore ye ought to be subject, because therefore / that is to
say, to show your subjection / you do give trybutes / which is a sign or
token of subjection / he does not say you do pay trybutes / but you do give
or lend, as to them which shall pay you again / for they do render or pay it
to you again, in that they do defend you / and when they fight for the
country. And whiles they do Judgments / you do lend trybutes. You (I say)
seruyng god in this thing, do verily serve him hyghly in that you do give
trybutes to them / for they are the mynysters of god / and they are ordained
for this intent: that good men should be praised, and evil men punysshed. Or
this it may be understand, wherefore you ought to give trybutes: for they are
the mynysters of god / they (I say) serving you: whiles they do defend the
country / for this same thing, that is to wit, for trybute they do serve
you in defending of the country / and because they are the mynysters of god.
So than by this text of the Apostle, and by the exposycyons of saints, here
before brought in: who soever is not willing / that the name, and the doctrine
of the lord, should be blasphemed, as unjust, and preaching against the
Cyuyle laws: (as the gloss of Augustyne said here in this place, and in the
sext chapter of the first epistle to Tymothe) he ought to hold without any
manner doubtyng That all me^ ought to be subject to princes and governors.
that all manner men, of what soever estate or condycyon they be, both really
and personally, ought to be underneath the iurysdyccyon of seculer princes and
governors and to obey the same in all those things, which are not contrary
to the law of everlasting health / namely according to the humayne laws, or
approved laudable, and honest customs / for of these speaks the apostle
openly and plainly: when he said. Let every soul be subject, and that without
cause they do not bear a sword, with such other things, which he has
spoken of them / as well of the defending of the country, as of gyuynge
trybutes to them, after the exposycyons of saints. But the apostle never said
such words, any where / of any Bishop or priest. For the lords, to whom we are bound to obey in coactyue iurysdyccion ar they, which by power and might
of arms ought to defend the country, which thing, in no wise is semely or
agreynge for a bishop or preeste. Wherefore saint Ambrose to Valentian in the
second epistle, which is entytuled to the people, Ambrosius.
says in this wise. I shall be able to sorrow, I shall be able to weep / I
shall be able to syghe and mourn / against armor and wepons, against
souldyoures / and the goths / my armor or wepons are tears / for such ar
the munymentes, defense or armor of a priest / otherwise I neither ought,
neither may resyst / again such lords to whom we are bounden so to obey might
be infydels or myscreantes (as the gloss says about the beginning) but
bishops neither ar, neither may be such manner men. And therefore it is open
and euydent to all men, that the apostle spoke not of priests or bishops: but
of kings, princes and governors / as saint Augustyne said. From this
subjection also the apostle excepteth no man / when he said, every soul. If
than it be so, that they which resyst such powers, yea being infydels, and
euyllmen, do purchase to them selves eternal da^pnacion / how much more do
they purchase to them selves the indignacion and wrath of almighty god / and
of his apostle Paul, and also of Peter / which despysynge this doctrine of
god and these apostles / have of late troubled, and contynually do trouble
Christen kings and princes / and most of all, and without any manner excuse,
the Emperor of Rome. For princes and governors ar the mynisters of god, as
the apostle said. And he said not they are our mynisters, or the mynisters of
Peter, or of any other apostle. And therefore they are not subjects in judgment
coactyue, to any bishop or priest, but rather contrary wise, the bishops and
priests at subjects to them / which thing also the gloss after saint
Augustynes mind declared, when it said / Than if the emperor commands one
thing, and god commands the contrary. etc. namynge there no bishop, or
archebysshop, or patryarche, in such iurysdyctions which thing, yet he would
have done, or ought to have done, if Christ which Babbling and lyeng
Decretals.
is the king of kings, and lord of lords, had granted such power and
auctorytie to him over the Emperor, as they do babble and lie in their
Decretals: which according to truth, and in very deed ar nothing else, but
certain ordynau^ces and Co^stytucions, or Decrees / appertaynynge to the
Establyssheme^t of their own governance, the decretals.
rule or domynyon, being but a few persons in no^bre / to the which
ordynacions, in yt they are but of their own brains, christen men are not bound
in any thing to obey / as it has been showed and proved of the. xii. chapitre
of the first dyccion, and as it shall appear more espcially in those thiges,
which hereafter shall follow. Yet of these things before gone, we woll not say
but the reverence and obedyence is due to be given to such Ecclesiastycall or
spyrytuall teacher or pastor, in those things which he commands or
teaches to be observed and kept, according to the law of the gospel, but
not otherwise, or to the contrary / as it appears suffycyently in the. xxiii.
of Mathewe, and by the exposycion of saint Jerome in the prestes ar to be
obeyed in those things which are according to the gospel.
same place. Howbeit, yet he neither ought, neither may compel any man to the
observing of such things, in this world, by any pain or punyssheme^t Real
or personal / for we do not read, yt any such power of punysshynge, and
using domynyon, over any man in this world: is granted to them / but rather
forbidden them by counsayll or commandment / as it appears euydently of this
chapter, and of the last aforegone. For such power in this world, is given
by the laws or by the humayne law maker / which although it were given to a
bishop, or priest? to compel men in those things which apperteyne to gods
law it should be unprofitable. For to them that should be compelled, no such
thing should avail, or do good, to everlasting health and salvation / And this
was plainly the mind of the apostle, in the first chapter of the second
epistle to the Corynthyans, when he said. And I do call upon god to witness,
that I sparynge you have not common yet to Corynthe / not because we are lords
over your faith / but we are helpers of your joy / for you do stand and
continue in faith. Where the gloss after Ambrose mind says I call god to
witness / not only against any body / but Ambrosius.
also against my soul / if I do lie in that thing whereof I speak. That I have
not common to Corinthe again, syns I departed from you / and I have done this
sparyng you / that is to wit, lest I should have made many of you sad and
sorrowful by sharp rebukyng of many of you / in which thing he spared them lest
he being very sharp: they might be turned in to sedicion. Therefore he wylleth
them to be first mytigated, before his coming. And therefore it was not long of
inco^stancie and lyghtnes, or else of any carnal co^sideracion, yt he did not
fulfill those things, which he had purposed. For a spyritualman does not
fulfill his purpose, than when he has devised any thing more prouydently
apperteynyng to health and salvation And lest they might be angry, as if he had
spoken of domynyon: because he had said, it was for sparing of you, yt I have
not come: he says afterward / I do not therefore say sparyng you, because I
have any domynyon over your faith / yt is to say because your faith does suffer
any domynion or co^pulsion, which is a thing free and not of necessytie: but I
say it therefore, because we are helpers, if you work with us / of yourioy
eternal, or else of the joy of your ame^deme^t: for they which are amended: does
joy and ar glad. I said very well over your faith / for by faith, which
works through love / you do stand, not by dominion. This same sentence and
meanig did sait John^ Chrysostom gather of the before reherced words of the
apostle Chrisostomus.
and has expressed it to al me^ euyde^tly, in his book of Dialoges / which is
entytled the Dignite of presthod, in y^. iii. chap. of the. ii. book / for
thereafter he has brought in yt sayng of y^ apostle, not because we are lords
over yo^ faith but we are helpers etc. he says thus. They which ar outward
judges / yt is to wit, seculer judges, when they have subdued evil persons /
they do show very much power and auctorytie upon them / and whether they
wylor not will they restreyne them, and keep them spyte of their teth, from
their old lewd and ungracious manners / but in the church: no man by
compulsyon (but well contented, and condescendynge) ought to be converted to
better manners and conuersacyon / for neither there is any such power given to
us by the laws, that by the auctorytye of sentence or Judgment, we may
restrain and withholde men from sins. And here Chrysostom speaks in the
person of all priests / assygnyng the first cause now rehearsed, wherefore they
There is not your auctoryte given priests to be judges.
ought to compel no man / because they have not coactyue auctorytye or
iurysdyccyon of any man, in this world / for asmoche as it was not given by
the laws, or law makers, at those times / or in those places or prouynces.
Than afterward he assygned and shows an other cause, saying / neither if
such power and auctorytie were given: we priests or bishops should have,
whereon we might exercise such manner power and auctorytie / seeing that our god
/ that is to wit Christ / shall reward, not such as be brought away from
sin, by necessytie, that is to say by vyolence or compulsyon but such as
abstain from sin, of their own towardnes. And yet woll we not by these
things say that it is vnconuenyent, that heretykes, or otherwise infydels or
mysbeleuers, should be punysshed / but this auctorytie to punysshe such
persons, belongs only to the humayne law maker. Than coactyue power or
iurysdyccyon, does not agree or belong to any bishop or priest / but as well
they as other ought to be under the seculare judges, in this power / as it
has been said / wherefore again the apostle said, in the second chapter of
the first epistle to Tymothe. Therefore first I beseech, that obsecracyons,
prayers, requests, and gyuynge of thanks, be made for all men / for kings,
and all men which are in high auctorytie / that we may led a quyete and a
peaceable life. Wherefore the gloss says, Paul dyrectynge these words to
Tymothe in him, teaches and shows a form and manner to all the whole
church. And afterward, after ye mind of saint Augustyne, it follows in ye
same gloss upon these words for all men / that is to say, for men of all
sorts / and especyally, and most of all for kings, although they be evil /
and for all which are set in high auctorytie, as dukes, earls, although they
be evil men. And yet among Augustinus.
all those, that are set in high auctorytie, or in such iudycyarie power,
neither the apostle, neither Augustyne, makes any where me^cyon, of bishop or
priest but only of seculare princes. But wherefore the apostle wylleth (says
Augustyne) prayers to be made for kings, and those which are in high
auctorytie, yea although they be evil men, he shows the cause, saying
i^medyatlye after / For this shall be profitable to us, that we may live a
quyete life, from persecution And a peaceable, that is to say, without any
dysquyetnes or trouble. Lo here is testymonye and witness of that thing,
which we said in the last chapter of the first dyccyon / that is to wit:
that the cause effectyue and also conseruatyue of tranquylytie and peace: is
the dew actyon or operacyon of the soueraygne or chyefe gouernoure, being not
let. Than Augustyne puts by and by after a thing, which is greatly to
the purpose saying. Therefore, the apostle admonysshed and counseyled the church
to pray for kings and all persons set in high auctorytie, being inspyred with
the same holy ghost, wherewith. Ieremye the prophet also was inspyred / which
sent an epistle or letter to the Jews yt were in Babylon: that they should pray
for the life of king Nabugodonozor / and his sons and for the peace of ye
city, saying for the peace of them, shall be your peace. By this fyguratyuely
he sygnyfyed, yt the church militant in earth, in all the saints belo^gynge
to her, the which at the Cytyzens by adoption, of the heavenly Iherusalem: should
be servant, and subject, under the kings and gouernoures of this world.
And therefore ye apostle monyssheth ye church, to pray for them: that they
might led a quyete and peaceable life. Loo here undoubtedly, yt the sentence
and mind of the apostle and of Augustyne, is that the church, or else all
true Chrystyans, ought to be underneath the seculer princes or gouernoures /
namely the christen gouernoures, and to obey the commandments of them /
which be not cantrary to the law of everlasting health. But if the apostle
had understand or meaned, that byssops or priests ought to be soueraygnes and
princes / and to judge men really or personally by coactyue judgment / in the
state, and for the state of this present life, he would have said to Timothe,
whom he had ordained and made bishop / I be seche the that obsecracyons etc.
be made for all kings and bishops which are in high auctoryte. Moreover in
the third chapter to Titus, the apostle said admonysshe and warn them, to
whom thou preachest: to be subjects and obeysaunte to princes and powers / the
apostle said not, admonysshe the seculare persons only / neither he said,
Admonysshe them, to be subjects to us and princes / for the Apostle knew
right well, yt neither he, neither other bishops or prestes ought to be
princes, or to judge other men, by lytygyouse Judgment or Judgment of
seculare acts or deades / yea and moreover he had revoked and called them
back from all manner seculare busynes / not only from lordshype or
soueraygntye, and Judgment of seculare matyers / when he said in the second
chapitre of the second epistle, to Tymothe / no man warrynge to god entangleth
him self with seculare busynes / wherefore Ambrose says admonysshe and warn
thou. etc. As if he had said / albeit that thou haste spyrytuall Empire and
rule / that is to wit to command them in spyrytuall things: yet that
notwithstanding, warn them to be subjects, and obeysaunt to princes / that
is, to kings, dukes, and to less or inferyour powers and officers / for the
Christyan relygyon depryueth no man of his right / which thing saint Ambrose
says so much, because the apostles will and mind, and also his doctrine was,
that also Christen men should be subjects and obeysaunte to their Lords or
masters, and also to princes and governors, although they be infydels and no
Christen men / as he says him self in the last chapter of the first
epistle to Timothe, in the beginning / who soever are bond men under yoke.
etc. where the gloss after saint Augustynes mind, says thus. It is to be
known, that certain me^ had preached, that liberty was common to all men in
Christ / which is verylye true concerning spyrytuall liberty, but not as
touching carnal liberty, so as they understood it / Therefore the apostle
speaks here against them, bidding the bond men to be subjects and
obedyent to their lords and masters / therefore let not the Christen bond
men require that, which is said of the Hebrews / that is to serve six years,
and than for naught to be made free / for that is mystycall / And wherefore the
apostle does command this: he shows by and by after saying / lest both the
name of the lord might be blasphemed, as of one, which did invade and usurp
things be longing to other men. And also the Chrystyan doctrine, as being
unjust and preaching against the laws Cyuyle. How than or by what means,
and with To absolve the subject from the bond and oath of his allegeau^ce, is
manifest heresye.
what conscience toward god, will any priest, who soever he be: absolve
subjects from the oath, by which they are bounden to their christen lords
and Soueraygnes? for this is an open heresy, as it shall appear more largely
hereafter. The postle than said, admonysshe them, to be subjects and
obeysaunt to soueraygnes and governors / he did not say admonysshe lay men
only / but he said admysshe them indyfferently / For after his mind: every
soul is subject to them in coactyue or contencyous Judgment / and if it be
not so / than tell thou me, In what thing he meaned, that every soul should
be subject to the po^oers. etc. For if every soul had ought to be subject
to Timotheus, and Titus, In such manner judgment he should in vain have
said admonysshe them. etc.

Again, if his mind and will was that certain men should be admonysshed, to
be subjects to seculer princes, or governors, and certain not, than should
he have spoken insuffycyentlye, in that he did make no such dyfference in his
speaking / which dyfference without doubt, no man shall find made any where
in all Paul's epystles / but rather always the contrary for he said / let
every soul be subject. etc. in which saying, the apostle should have spoken
vnaccordyngely and also falsely (which god forbid that any man should say) if
any manner persons had been exempted from subiectyon, to such seculer princes.
This also co^formably was the sentence and doctrine of blyssed Peter in the
second chapter of his first Canonycall epistle, when he said. Be you
subjects to every humayne creatures, for god. By every humayne creature,
understand thou, every man being constytute and set in high power or
governance. For that he meaned of such men / it appears by the examples,
which he brought in, immedyatly following, when he said / whether it be to
king, as being the most excellent, or to dukes being sent by the king, to
the punysshement of malefactors, but to the praise of good men / for so it is
the will of god / I have not brought in here, the gloses of saints upon this
place. For what soever they do say here it is contained in the gloss, which
we have brought in heretofore, upon the words of the apostle in the. xiii.
chapter to the Romans / Behold than, that both saint Peter, and also saint
Paul, conformablye and agreably the one to the other / do say, that kings
and dukes are sent by god, to the punysshynge of malefactors, that is to wit
to take vengeance upon them, by coactyue power in this world / but neither
they them selfs, neither the holy exposytoures of their sayenges / ever said
in any place, that bishops or priests are sent to do the same But rather
always the contrary, as it has euydently appeared cheyfly by the word of
Chrysostom before alleged / for as much than, as priests may be malefactors,
even as well as they which are not priests, concerning all kinds and sorts
of transgressyons, or trespasses, named and rekened up in the second chapter
of this dyccyon, It follows necessaryly, that they also ought to be underneath
the coactyue judgment of kings, dukes, or other seculer gouernoures. And
Peter says, that you do obey them (says he) is the will of god. This same
thing, again is confyrmed by the saying, and also by the manifest example of
saint Paul the apostle, for it is red of him, in the. xxv. chapter of the
Acts That saint Paul was subject to Caesar.
that he refusing the coactyue Judgment of priests / said openly, I appele
to Caesar, and again he said I stand in the court of Caesar the emperor,
where I ought to be judged. The gloss interlineare says, because here is ye
place of iudmente. Then Paul refusing the judgment of priests knowleged and
confessessed him to be subject to the coactyue iurisdyccion of Caesar. But is
it to be supposed, that the apostle spoke these words faynedly when he said.
There I ought to be judged / that is to wit, in Cesars court? which had
chosen than, and determined in his mind, to dye for the truth as it appears
in the xxi. chapter of the Acts? when he said / I am redye not only to be
bound / but also to dye in Jerusalem, for the name of the lord Ihesu christ
/ for who is so mad to judge that the apostle, for cause of prolongynge of
his own life, would by his words have committed so great a crime and offense,
as to make al priests subjects to the Iurysdyccyon of seculer governors, by
his doctrine and example, wrongfullye, and otherwise than he ought to have
done, if he had reputed this thing to be undue and vnco^uenyent? for it had been
better for him, not to have gone up to Jerusalem seeing yt no man compelled him
thereto, than to go up thither, and to make a lie both against him self, and
also against his neybour. and therefore for asmoche, as it is unlawful and
great sin, to have any such opinion of Paul, it appears euydently, that
Paul thought even the same in his mind, which he vtteryd forth with his
mouth / and in this thing he did follow him whom he would not be superyoure
unto, that is to wit christ, which not only knowleged Caesar to be his
worldly judge: but also Pylate the deputye of Caesar, when he said in the. xix.
chapter of John^ / Thou should not have any power against me / if it were
not given to the from above. etc. that is to say, except it were given to
the, by the ordynacyon of god above as saint Augustyne said before, in the.
xiii. chapter to the Romans / because there is no power neither to any good
man, neither yet to evil man: but it is given of god / which thing also
Bernarde did more largely declare, to the archebysshop of Senon / and it was
brought in before in the. iiii. part of this chapter / Seeing then, that to
no bishop, any iurysdyccyon or coactyue power over any man, is granted by the
law of god, but rather such power is forbidden to them by counsel or
precepte, as it has been euydently and openly showed in this chapter and in
the next before gone, Neither also such power is agreynge or appertaynynge to
bysshoppes or priests, in that they be bysshoppes or priests, by
inherytaunce, or succession of their fathers: it follows necessaryly, that in
such power or iurysdyccyon: they be subjects That priests be subjects to
seculer princes or governors.
to ye seculer princes or governors / as it has euydently / apperyd by the
sayenges of saint Peter, and saint Paul apostles, and of other holy doctors /
and by reason or demonstratyue syllogysme, it may be proved of those things
which have been said in the. xv. and the. xvii. chapytres of the first
dyccyon, that neither bishop, ne Pope, have any coactyue iurysdyccyon in this
world, neither upon any preeste, neither upon any other person being no
preeste, onles such iurysdyccyon be granted to him by the humayne power / In
whose power it is always, to revoke and call again the same auctoryte from
them, for any reasonable cause chaunsynge / The full determynacyon whereof, is
known also to belong and appertain to the same power / Thus then, that
christ him self refused and did forsake domynyon or coactyue iurysdyccyon of
any man, who soever he were, in this world: and that he has forbidden the
same to his apostles, and to their successors priests or bysshoppes, by his
counsel or precepte, and that his will and mind was, both him self, and
the said apostles to be subjects to the coactyue iurysdyccyon of seculer
princes or governors / and that he taught the same to be observed / and also
that his cheyfe apostles Peter and Paul taught the same, both by their
words or speech, and also by the example of their works and deeds / I
suppose we have euydently showed by the eternal testymonyes of Evangelical
verytes or textes, and also by the interpretacyons or exposycyo^s of saints,
and of other approved doctors of the christen believe and faith.

Of the auctorytye and power of the keys, given to priests / and what manner
of power, the preeste or bishop has, in exco^munycatynge of any person.
The, vj, chapter,
How it remains conseque^tlye to show, what manner of power, or auctoryte,
and what manner of judgment over christen men: christ was willing or minded
to give, or else did give in very deed: to the same apostles, and to the
successors of them, by ye virtue and strength of the words of holy scripture
/ and among all other words: those words seems to give most express
sygnyfycacyon and knowledge hereof: which christ spoke to Peter in the. xvi.
chapter of Mathewe / To the I will give the keys of the kingdom of heuens /
and also the words semblably spoken by the same christ, to all the apostles /
in the xviii. chapter of Mathewe / and in the. xx. of John^ / when he said /
what soever things you shall bind upon the earth: they shall be bound also
in heaven / and whose sins you shall forgive: they are forgyuen them etc. For
of these words pryncipally and cheyfely, the opinion and title of the fulness
of power, which title the bishop of Rome ascrybeth to him self, to have
taken their beginning.

Of the which words, that we may have more certaynlye the sense and
knowledge: we must call to rememberaunce certain things, which we said in
the last chapter of the first dyccyon / which things are these / That
christ very god, and very man, came in to this world, to bear testymony and
witness to the truth (as he said him self in the xviii. of John^) I say to
the truth, of things to be believed, of things to be done, and of things to
be despised of mankind, for the obtaynynge of everlasting life / which
truth, verily he taught by his preaching and showed by his example / and
last of all gave in writing, by the sayenges of the euangelystes, and of his
apostles / that by the scripture or writing: we might be dyrected and guyded,
in the absence of him, and of his apostles, in those things: which appertain
to everlasting health / And this was the office, which he committed to his
successors the apstles, to be exercysed of them / when he said to them after
his resurreccyon, and in a manner last of all / that text in the xxviii. and
the last chapter of Mathewe / Go you therefore The office of priests.
and teach all nacyons, baptysynge them in the name of the father, and the
sone, and the holy ghost / teaching them to keep al things: what soever I
have commanded you / But by ye mynystracyon of baptysme, which christ
commanded to be admynystred by ye apostles: he caused them to understand,
also the admynystracyon of other sacraments, which he has instytuted and
ordained, for the everlasting health of mankind / of the which: the
sacrament of penance is Penance
one / by which sacrament, the actual sin of man's soul, both mortal and
venyall: is put away / and in it, the grace, love, and favor of god / which
was corrupted in us by the reason of sin: is reformed and renewed / without
the which grace love and favor / all the works of man (because god so has
ordained) should not be merytoryous, to the obtaynynge of everlasting life /
wherefore it is said in the. vi. chapter to the Romans / By the grace of god
comes everlasting life / therefore priests are the mynystres of this
sacrament of penance, even like wise they are of other sacraments / because
they be the successors of the apostles of christ / to all whom, in it is
proved by the aforesaid textes of scripture, the power of ye keys, or of
mynystrynge the sacrament of penance, to have been given, in the person of
Peter / that is to say, power to bind or lose men from sins / for both
these are all one thing / wherefore saint Iherome upon these words Iherome.
of the. xvi. chapter of Mathewe, and to the I will give the keys. etc. says
thus / The other apostles verily have the same iudicyary power and auctoryte /
to whom he said after his resurreccyon / Take or receive you the holy ghost
/ whose sins you shall forgive: they shall be forgyuen them / And whose
sins you shall retain: they shall be retained. etc. All the church also
has the same power in priests and bishops / but therefore Peter received it
specially: that all men should understand, that who soever does separate and
depart him self from the unity of the faith: neither may be assoyled of his
sins, neither may enter in to heaven. And note here that saint Hierome said,
from the unity of the faith: and not from the unity of Peter or of the
bysshoppes of Rome / for some of them: might be heretykes, or otherwise
perverse and lewd persons / And in very deed many of them have been found by
experyence to be such manner persons in deed. And this Iudycyary power: is the
power or auctoryte of the keys, after the mind of Hierome and Augustyne, in
the same place / for of them: Augustyne Hierome. Augustyne. The power of the
keys.
says thus. The keys: are the science or knowelege of dyscernynge, or
judging the good from the evil / and power, whereby he / that is to wit, the
priest: ought to receive them, which be worthy / and to shytte out the
unworthy persons, from the kingdom of heuens. But how, or in what manner, he
may receive: and how he may exclude or shytte out from the said kingdom / it
shall hereafter be declared / and by that, it shall euydently appear: what and
how great is the power and auctoryte of these keys which were granted by
Christ, to Peter, and to the other apostles. But yet first of al, we ought to
mark and take heed, that in the soul of him that synneth deedly: is engendered
defaulte and blame / and the grace of god, which was given to him before / is
corrupted and destroyed. By the reason of which defaulte or sin, the sinner
is bound to the debt of everlasting dampnacyon. By the which sin so
engendered, the sinner is oblyged or bound to the pain of eternal dampnacyon,
for the state of the world to come. In which fault or sin if he do / also
resyste and continue, he is cut away from / the company or fellowship of
Christen men in this world / by a certain correccion among Christen men /
called exco^munycacyon. And again contrarywyse we ought to mark and take heed
/ that a sinner by heaviness and sorrow for his syn^e and by outward Confession
made to the preeste (which both outher Jointly or seuetally are called
penance) gets three benefytes. The first is that he is cleansed from the
inward fault or sin, and the grace of god is renewed in him. Penance.
The second is that he is dyscharged and losed from the death of everlasting
dampnacion / whereunto he was bound by the reason of sin. And the third is,
that he is reconcyled to the Church / that is to say he is reunyte and knytte
and made atone again, or else ought to be reunyte and made atone again with
the congregacyon of Christen people. Therefore to do and work these things in
a sinner / that is to wit to bind or lose from sin, and from the debt of
everlasting dampnacyon: (which thing ought to be done partly by the power of
the keys granted to the priest as it shall be said hereafter) is to mynystre
the sacrament of penance. These things than thus set before? let us come
nere to our purpose and say after the mind of the Master of the sentences,
or rather according to the mind of the holy scripture and of saints, by the
auctorytie of whom the said Master speaks in the. iiii. book the xviii.
distinction, and also according to the mind of Richard in a certain book.
Which he made entytled, the power of the keys given to priests, that to true
penance or to receive the sacrament of penance. First of all there is
required in the sinner inward contrycyon or heaviness and sorrow for the sin
or trespass committed and done. Secondaryly there is required the purpose and
act of confessing his sin by expressing it / with words of mouth or
otherwise gyuynge knowledge thereof to the priest, if he may conuenyently come to
the priest, or the priest to him / but in case no priest could be gotten, than
the person so penytent or contryte, hi^ is suffycyent to have a stead fast
purpose to confess and knowledge his sin to the preeste as soon as he shall
conuenyently come to the speech of one / and therefore consequently the
intencyon and mind of the said master and of Richard is / that in a sinner
being truly penytent / that is to wit being contryte and having purpose
to be confessed to the priest: certain things are wrought by god only before
confession, and a fore all manet accyon or operacyon of the preeste / and they
are these / expulcyon what god works before co^fessyon in a sinner.
or dryuynge out of sin / the renuynge of grace / and the forgyuynge of the
debt of everlasting dampnacyon / and that god alone works these aforesaid
things the master proves in the. iiii. book the. xviii. dystynccyon and the.
iiii. chapter by the auctoryties of holy scripture and of saints. First by
the auctoryte of the maker of the psalms: which says in the person of god I
alone / do put away the iniquyties and the sins of people. Again by the
auctorytie of Ambrose / That god only forgyueth sins.

Ambrose.


which says / The word of god forgyueth sins, and the priest is judge /
The preeste verily does his office: but he exercyseth the right of no power /
yet more over the same Ambrose says / He only forgyueth sins which only
dyed for our sins / Furthermore he proves it by Augustyne which says / No
man takes away sins, but only christ which is the lamb that takes
away the Augustyne
sins / of the world / and that god does this thing, before that the preeste
does work any manner accyon belonging to his office? ye master pueth it by
ye words of saint Augustyne upon yt text of ye psalm: Quo^ tecta sunt pcta^:
whose sins are coueryd / for of these things (says the master) it is
euydently showed that god him self loses the penytent from the det of pain /
And than he do the lose him when he lyghteneth him within, breathynge in to
him, true contricion and sorrow of heart / to the which sentence of the
master: reason is agreynge and also auctoryties bears witness / for no man
is now compuncte and sorry for his sin, having his heart contryte and
humbled: but only in charytie / but in that he has charytie / he is worthy
of life / Now no man is worthy both life and death at one time / wherefore it
follows: that he is not than bound to the debt of everlasting death / for
he has ceased to be the child of wrath and dyspleasure, ever syns he began
to love, and to be penytent / Therefore ever sythens that time he has been
losed from the wrath of god / which wrath abides not upon him that believes
and trusts in Jesus christ: but upon him that believes and trusts not /
therefore he is not delivered from the eternal wrath of god afterward by the
preeste to whom he confesses his sins / for from that wrath he has been
delivered already by the lord ever sythens he said / Confitebor I will
confess me. Thus than it is god alone which cleanses the man inwardly from
the spote of sin / and which loses him from the det of everlasting pain
and consequently the master of the sentences repeteth the auctoryties of the
psalmiste and of the saints before alleged / after which words also he making
expylogacyon: says thus. By these and other testymonyes mo it is euydently
showed, that god alone by him self does forgive sins / and as he forgyueth
certain men their sins so does he retain the sins of certain other / But
yet this notwithstanding It is sooner said than proved.
god requires in the penytent person purpose to confess his sins to the
priest also, as soon as he may have oportunytie / as the master says in the.
iiii. book, the. xvii. dystynccyon and the. iiii. chapter / where he moves
this questyon / whether it be suffycyent to confess our sins only to god /
and he determyneth by the auctoryties of scripture that it is not suffycyent /
if a man may conuenyently Then he wrytheth them.
have a preeste / but if no preeste can be gotten than it is suffycyent to have
confessed our sins to god alone, so that we have always purpose to be
confessed to the preeste / if we might conuenyently. This was also the mind of
Rychard in the book aforesaid, agreeable to the mind of the master / and of
the things determined by him in diverse chapytres: it is gathered and concluded
that god takes away the sin from the true penytent / that is to wit, from
him that is contryte and sorry for his sin: before all manner mynysterie of the
preeste / and also loses him and makes him free from the det of eternal death
/ but yet under a condycyon: that afterward as soon as ever he may
conuenyentlye: he ought to confess his sin to the preeste / which
condycion, truly, the master called a steadfast and sure purpose to be
confessed to the preeste, as soon as he may conueny ently be had. This sentence,
the master has concluded in the same. iiii. book, the xviii. distyncion in
the. v. and. vi. chapytres / making answer besides this, to a reasonable
questyon whereby it might be doubted / wherefore or to what end the office or
the workynge of a preeste, is required in penance / if god alone, before all
manner mynysterye of the preeste does take away the sin / and loses from
the debt of eternal dampnacyon / and the master said / in this so great
varyetie and dyuersytie of opynyons (for about this thing as well holy saints
as other doctors seemed to dysagre, albeit they do not dysagre, in very
truth) that this we may safely both say and think / and that it is to be
holden / that only god forgyueth sins, and retayneth them / and yet
nevertheless he has given power of byndynge and losing to the church (that
is to wit to priests, which at called the church after one sygnyfycacion of
the said word / as it was showed in ye second chapitre of this dyccyon). But
it is not after one manner of fasshyon that he loses or byndeth. And yt the
church (that is to wit, the priests) lose or bind / but he loses or byndeth
after one manner: and they after an other / For he by himself only does so
forgive the sin, yt he does both make the soul clean from the inward
spotte: and also loses from ye debt of everlasting death / but he has How
priests have power to bind and lose
notgraunted this power to the priests / to whom yet he, has given power to
bind and lose / that is to say power to show and declare that men are bound
or lose / In which words he has expressed for what end: the office or
mynysterye of a priest, is required in penance / and by and by after
declarynge the same he said / wherefore also the lord restored first by him
self, the person full of Leprye to his health / and than afterward, sent him
to the priests / by whose judgment / he should be showed and declared made
clean. And after the same manner also after that him self had raised Lazarus
again to life: he offered him to his dyscyples, for to be losed / for albeit,
yt some man is losed before god: yet is he not accounted or taken for losed in
ye face, yt is to say, in the knowledge of the church, but by ye judgment and
declaracyon of the preeste / In losing therefore or retaynynge of sins / the
preeste of the new law, does so work and judge / as ye preeste of the
oldelawe did work and judge, in them which were defiled with lepry which lepry
betokens sin. This sentence, also he does repete and rehearse / again
about the end of the syxte chapter / and confyrmeth it with the auctorytie
of saint Jerome / upon that saying of christ in the. xvi. chapter of Mathewe
/ and to the I shall give the keys of the kingdom of heuens / where the said
Jerome says in this Jerome. Mark this well.
wise. The priests of the gospel, has the same auctorytie and office: which
the legale priests had under the law, in old time, in healynge of persons
which were infected with leprye. These therefore priests of the gospel: does
forgive or retain sins, whiles they do pronounce, declare, and show, their
sins to be forgyuen or retained of god / wherefore in the book of Leuiticus,
the lepers are commanded, to show them selves to the priests / whom, the
priests neither makes full of Leprye, neither yet clean from the same / but
only do dyscerne, judge and declare, who be clean persons and who be unclean.
The office and mynysterie therefore of a preeste is required to the penytent,
for the aforesaid cause / that is to wit, that by him it may be showed and
declared in the face of the church / to whom god has either forgyuen, or
else retained their sins. There is another thing also, which god works
in a sinner: not without the mynysterye of a preeste / as the same master of
the sentences and also Richard, do judge / that is to wit, the chaungynge of
the temporal pain of purgatory (which the sinner This gear must be judged
by higher judges, whether there be a purgatory after this life o^ no.
should have suffered for his sins, were he never so well penytent, and
confessed) in to some satysfaccyon of this world / as in to fasting / prayer
/ or almose deed, or in to some other like deed. And as touching this point:
the preeste exercyseth right of power upon the sinner / wherefore the master in
the. xviii. distynccyon, and the. vii. chapter, says thus. And it is to be
noted and marked, that in that, that any priests do bind any men, with the
satysfaccyon of penance: they do show the same men to be losed from their
sins / for penytencyall satysfaccyon is enjoined to no man, but only to him,
whom the preeste does judge to be To whom penytencyall satysfaccyon is to be
moyued.
truly penytent / for unto other, he enioyneth no satysfaccyon / and in that
he judges his sins to be retained of god. The preeste also changes the
pains of purgatory, which were dew to the sinner: in to some satysfaccio^s
of this world And afterward, he reconsyleth the sinners to the church / that
is to wit, to the co^munyon or fellowship of christen men / in which point,
semblably he does exercise power over sinners: if it be so, that he do it
according to dyscrecyon and judgment / wherefore the master in the place
before alleged says. The priests also does bind: when they do enjoin the
satysfaccyon of penance to them, whose confessyons they have hard / and they
do lose, when they do forgive any part of the same: or else when they do
admytte and receive them / that be purged by such satysfaccyon in to the
co^munyon or fellowship of christen men / and to ye partetakynge of the
sacraments / After this manner priests are said to forgive or to retain
sins / wherefore saint Augustyne said before. To whom they do forgive sins
god does forgive. etc. for they do exercise the work of justice upon sinners:
when they do bind them with just and dew punyssheme^t / and they do also
exercise y^ work of mercy, when they do release any part of ye same, or else
do reco^syle them to ye co^munyon or pertetakynge of y^ sacraments. Other
works than these ye priests can not excercyse upon sinners / whereof it may
also appear euyde^tly: The pope for gives no more the sin / than any other
preeste / and then if the preeste do his duty as he is bound / who gothe to
purgatory? and the^ wherefore should we believe that there is one.
that the bishop of Rome, may release no more of the sin or of the pain:
than may an other preeste, who ever he be. Thus than, of the aforesaid
auctorytes of saints, of the master of the sentences, and of Rychard / it
appears euydently, that only god remytteth or forgyueth the sin and the
debt of eternal pain to the true penytent sinner / without any work of the
preeste / outher going before / or else coming between, as it has been
showed heretofore / where of I will also show an infable and sure demonstracyon
or argument, according to the scripture, and to the sayenges of saints and
doctors / For god only is he, which can not beignoraunt, whose sins are to
be forgyuen, and whose to be retained / and it is he alone which is not moved
or styrred with any perverse or crooked affection, and which judges no man
wrongfully. But it is not in like case, of the church, or of any priest, who
ever he be, even the bishop of Rome / for every one of them may otherwhyles
err and mystake, or else be inclyned and moved by perverse affection / or else
both / wherefore if the sin, and the debt of eternal pain or da^pnacyon,
should not be forgyuen to ye true penyte^t, having dew put pose to be
confessed, or also after he has been confessed in very deed, because the This
man rayleth.
preeste happily does retain his sin, either through ignorance or malice,
or both / than often times that faithful promise of christ in the gospel,
should perysshe, and be of no strength or truth / whereby he said / that he
shall give to good men the rewards of eternal joy / and to evil or wicked
men the everlasting pains of the fire of hell / wherefore, as it chances and
comes to pass / also oftentimes. I put the case, that a certain sinner had
confessed his sins faynedly, and not duelye, as he ought to do / and that
after such feigned confession made / he has through the ignorance, or favor
of the preeste / or else both received absolucyon and benedyccyon. I put the
case again, that there were an other certain sinner, which had confessed his
sins suffycyently, and duelye to the preeste / and that the preeste through
ignorance, or malice, or else through both / had refused to give to him
absolucyon, and benedyccyon. Are the sins of the former person which
confessed his sins faynedly forgyuen / and the sins of the latter man,
being truly penytent and confessed yet retained. It is to be holden
stedfastlye / and undoubtedly, that no / wherefore, Chrysostom upon these
words in the. xx. chapter of John^. Receive you the holy ghost and whose
sins Chrysostom
ye shall forgive. etc. says thus. Neither the preeste neither yet any
angel or archaungell may work any thing in those things. that are given of
god. But yet the preeste gives his benedyccyon, and puts to his hand. For
it is not right that for the malice of an other man, about the sacraments of
our health those men should be hurt, which come to the faith. The same
Jerome also a little before Jerome
recyted, upon that saying in the. xvi. of Mathewe, and to the I shall give
the keys of the kingdom of heuens, says thus / certain men understanding
not this place / take to them selves somewhat of the pride of the pharyseis / in
that they do suppose, them selves to dampne innocents / or to assoyle and lose
wicked persons / when of truth, before god, the sentence of the priests is
not required God regards ye life of men and not the judgment of the priests.
or sought for: but the life of the sinners, or persons accused / after
which words, the master of the sentences, in the. vi. chapter of the,
xviii. dystynccyon puts this notable text following. So it is here also
openly showed, that god follows not the judgment of the church, which
otherwhyles judges by surrepcyon and ignorance / by the church here he
means the priests. which are in the church / and he adds this also, in
the. viii. chapter of the same dyccyon. Other whiles he that is put forth
(that is to say, the which is judged by the preeste to be without the
church) the same is within the church / and he that is without the church
(understand thou in very deed) seems to be retained within the church / that
is to wit, by the false judgment of the priests. This sentence of the power
and auctorytie of the keys given to priests which we have gathered of the
sayenges of saints and doctors, and have heretofore reherced / the master of
the sentence repeatynge again, in the. iiii. book the. xviii. dystynccyon and
in ye. viii. chapter / says thus. Now it has been showed how and in what
manner, priests do forgive, or retain sins. And yet god has reserved to
him self a certain synguler and special power of forgyuynge or retaynynge
sins. For he only by him self and of his own auctorytie / loses or
forgyueth the debt of everlasting dampnacyon / and purges or cleanses the
soul in wardly. The same may ster says also in the. ix. and last chapter of
the same dyccyon. Therefore by that vnlykenesse or that elongacyon or being
far away from god, which is caused in the soul, through sin: is
understand the spotte or fylthe of the soul / from which it is purged and
cleansed by penance. But this thing is done only by god / which alone,
rayseth up or quyckeneth the soul, and does illumynate it / which thing
priests can not do, which are the physycyons or leches of souls. There is
also an other manner of byndynge and of losing, to the which also is required
the office or workynge of the preeste / and this is by exco^munycacyon / and
this exco^munycacion (as the master says in the. iiii. book of the
sentences, the. xviii. dystynccyon, and the. vii. chapter) ought to be done,
when any man when excommunycacyon ought to be done.
which has been thryse called to the amendment of an open sin, according
to the dyscyplyne of the gospel, and yet regards not to make satysfaccyon:
by the sentence of the church is cut away from / the place of prayer / from
the partetakynge of the sacraments / and from the company and fellowship of
christen men / to the entente he should be abashed and a shamed / and so by
the reason of shame should be converted and repentaunte / for his sin, that
his soul may be saved / which person, if he do profess and knowledge openly
him self to be penytent, and does amend: is admytted and received to the
partetakynge of the sacraments which was before to him denied / and is
reconcyled to the church. But this exco^munycacion or cursynge done by the
church: brings this punysshement to them, which are worthily stryken with
the sentence thereof: that the grace of god and his proteccyon or defense, is
taken away from them / and they are left to themselves / so that they be at
liberty, to fall in to the death of sin, and upon them also, the devil has
more power given to him for to rage, and cruelly to vex them. The prayers also
of the church, and the suffrages or helps of benedyccions, and good works:
are supposed to be nothing auaylynge to them. But now to know, to what
person, or persons, and after what manner, the power of exco^munycacyon or
cursynge does appertain / we ought first to attend and take heed, that in
exco^munycacyon, the sinner is judged to punyssement, for the state of the
world to come, by a certain judgment, whereof we shall speak more expressly
and plainly in the. ix. chapitre of this dyccyon / and there is also a
certain great pain or punysshement, put to him, even for the state of this
present life / in that he is defamed openly and banysshed the company of other
men / by reason whereof, also he is berefte of ye cyuyle co^munyon and
co^modytie / and albe it, that the inflyccyon of the first pain, to him
which is unworthily and wrong fully stryken with the sentence of
exco^munycacyon, does nothing hurt, for the state of the world to come:
because god does not always follow the judgment of the church / that is to
say of priests, when they do judge or declare any man accursed wrongfully (as
we have showed suffycyentlye heretofore) yet should he which were wrongfully
stryken with the same sentence by the preeste: be very greatly and fore hurt
for the state of this present life / for that he is dyffamed openly, and
berefte the company of the cytezens and the cyuyle co^modytyes / and therefore
it is to be said that albeit, that the voice or words of the preeste, and his
operacyon or mynysterye, is required to the promulgacyon or publysshynge of
such judgment: yet for all that, judgment coactyue, and power to give
commandment, of the exco^munycatynge or assoylynge of any person or
persons, does Note this.
not appertain to any of them alone, or only to the college or company of
them But to ordain, and make any such judge, to whom it may be lawful, to
call the person so accused or gyltie, before him, and to examyne him and to
judge him and condemn or to assoyle the person, which is so to be openly
dyffamed, or to be cut away from the company or fellowship of christen men:
does appertain and belong to the superyoure or soueraygne of the same
co^munyte, or else to the counsel, by him appointed, and the priests only to
judge or dyscerne by scripture the crimes (taking this word judgment in his
first sygnyfycacion) wherefore any man ought to be cut away from the company of
christen men, left he might infecte other men / likewise, as a physycion, or a
company of physycions must judge (by judgment of the first sygnyfycacion) of
the bodily disease, wherefore any man ought to be separated from the company of
other men, left he might infecte them / as a person having the leprye, or
other like co^tagyous syckenes / and again, the crime ought to be proved by
sure wytnes: to have been committed in deed. And therefore likewise, as it does
not appertain to any physycion, or to any company of them only, to ordain
the judgment or judge, which has coactyue power, to expel or drive out
persons full of leprye, but unto ye higher powers of a realm, town, or city:
even so it does not appertain to any priest alone or to any college or
company of them only, to ordain in y^ co^munytie of christen men, the
judgment, or the judge: which has coactyue power over such persons The
form and manner of doing exco^munycacyon.
which are to be expulsed and driven out from the common company or
fellowship, for the disease of the soul / as for a notorye crime / that is to
say, a trespass openly known, all though they are bound to know the law of
god: in which law the crimes and offenses are determined and appointed / for
which any sinful person ought to be forbidden and banysshed the company of
other christen men, which be innocent or faultles / for the lyppes of the
priest keeps knowledge, and the people shall require the law of his mouth, as
it is written in the second of Malachie y^ prophyte. But whether he, which is
accused of such manner trespass has committed such trespass, or else not:
this ought not to be judged by the bishop, or priest but by the superyour
powers as we said before. yet that notwithstanding, according to the
probacions before brought in: if he be conuycted by witness, and the crime also
is such, wherefore he ought to be exco^munycate / then the person found gylty
of such crime, ought to be pronounsed worthy to be exco^munycated by sentence
of a superyour judge.

And the execucyon of such sentence: ought to be done by the mouth and voice
of the priest / and that because such sentence of the preeste touches the
person so accused or gyltie / for the state also of the world to come. And
this to be true, which we have said / it is euyde^tly showed by that
scripture, whereof this kind of correccyon seems to have taken his begi^nynge:
and yt is in the. xviii. chapitre of Mathewe, when christ said. if thy brother
shall have trespassed against the: go and rebuke him between him and the alone /
if he shall harken to the / than haste thou have won thy brother / but if he
shall not harken to the: take one or two witnesses with the / y^ (...) the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word or saying may stand / but if he
will not regard or obey them, than tell it to ye church, but if he will not
here the church: let him be to the, as a gentyle or a publycane Christ than
said, tell it to ye church / and not tell it to the apostle or to the bishop /
or to the priest / or to the college or company of them only / and christ
understood thereby y^ church the hole multitude of christen people / or else the
judge ordained for such purpose, by the auctorytie of the higher power / for
in this sygnyfycacion, y^ apostles and the prymytiue church, used this word
church (as it was what y^ apostles understood or meaned by this wrode church
fully and perfytely showed in the second chapter of this dyccyon) and that
christ meaned by the church, the hole co^gregacyon of faithful beleuynge
people / and that it be longs to the said co^gregacyon to have a superyoure
heed to give such manner judgment, against stubburne or dysobedyent persons,
or such haynouse offenders and sinners. I prove by the apostle, in y^. v.
chapter of ye first epistle to the Corynthia^s / where y^ apostle declarynge
the sentence of christ's words, teaches more expressly the cause, y^ form and
manner, and by what persons such manner judgment of exco^munycacion: ought to
be given against any man saying in this wise / I being absente verily in
body, but present in spyrite: have now judged, as if I were present, you
being assembled in the name of our lord Ihesu christ, and my spyryte with the
auctorytie and power of our lord Ihesu, to give him which has done yt deed /
to Satan, that is to wit that synful person, which had flesshely known his
fathers wife: where the gloss after y^ mind of Augustyne says. Augustinus.
this thige I have now judged yt you being assembled together i^ one place
without any dyssencyon, with whom both mine auctorytie and the power of
christ shall work together: do give such manner person to the devil. Lo
here, wherefore or for what intent of whom, and under what manner any person is
to be exco^munycated / according to the intencyon and doctrine of the apostle.
In whose words peradventure, is marked rather a counsel, than a
commandment / even according to the law of god. For in case, that the
Corynthians through their pacyence, had suffered the aforesaid criminouse
person to have been conuersaunt, and in company among them, howb^it not
without slander and ieoperdy of infectynge other men: yet might they
neuerthesesse have been saved, and have done merytorious works. Again the case
put, that this had been a precepte and commandment according to the law of
god / yet was it not commanded that this thing should be done by a preeste, or
bishop only, or else only by a college or company of them / and therefore*
when the apostle said, I verily being absent in body but present in spyrite,
have no we judged. etc. his words ought to be understood of judgment taken
in his first sygnyfycacion, and not in the third / because he says
afterward / you being assembled, and my spyrite. etc. By which words, he
does also teach them the form and manner, how to avoid that no contencyon or
strife might rise among them-by the pronouncynge of the said exco^munycacion.
If it were done by them assembled together / wherefore Augustyne says that you
being gathered together without any dyssencion. etc. that is to say, yt
Augustinus.
it be done by you of common assente, or else by the superyour thereunto
appointed by the higher power of the laytie, which is allone thing / and
therefore the apostle did not command all the whole tragedy of this thing to
be done by any priest Exco^munycacyon is not committed only to priests.
neither did he write to any bishop or preeste, that this thing should be done
by him / and yet even at the same time he did send Tymothe unto them which
was a bishop (as it is euydent in the. iiii. chapter of the same epistle)
which thing doubtless he would have done, if he had known this judgment to
appertain only to the auctorytie of a preeste even likewise as he had done in
other things as we have declared here to fore in the last chapter of this
dyccyon, before gone, by the auctorytie of the third chapter of the first
epistle to T^mothe, and of the first chapter of the epistle to Titus / and
this sentence proueable said, which we do hold, myghtie also be confyrmed and
fortyfyed by reason agreably to the scripture / for such manner of judgment is
done more certaynelye, and more without suspycion, by the higher nowres or
their deputies, than if it were done by will of one priest alone, or else of
any college or company of priests only / for his or their judgment might
sooner be perverted through love and favor, or else through hatred and evil
will, or else for respect and regard of their own pryuate and syngular
profit and advantage: than the judgment of the superyours aforesaid, to
whom it chances always men to appeal / albeit (as I have said) the
pronouncyacion of such manner sentence, ought to be done by the priest / for
asmoche as by it the power of god is called on in this world, to do some
punysshement to the criminouse and sinful person even in this world / which
pain or punysshement could not be done to him by the power of man, that is to
wit, the vexacyon of the devil. And also because he is likewise judged to
pain for the state of the world to come / and because he is berefte the
suffr^ges of y^ church / which thing peradventure god has ordained to be done
by the operacyon only of a priest. Moreover because, if any manner bishop or
priest alone, or else with y^ college or company only of his clerks, should
have this auctorite, to exco^munycate any manner man, without the consent of
the higher powers or their deputies, it does follow thereof, that priests,
might take away al kingdoms and lordshyppes from the kings or princes which
have them / For so any prince or gouernoure being exco^munycated: the
multitude of his subjects shall be also exco^munycated, if they would obey
the prince or governor being so exco^munycated / and so the power of every
manner prince or gouernoure shall be void, and of no strength / which thing
should be contrary to the wyland mind of Paul the teacher of the Gentyles, in
the. xiii. chapter to the Romans, and in the. vi chapter of the first
epistle to Tymothe / and also against the mind of saint Augustyne, in the
gloss upon the same place, as we have declared in the. vii. and. viii. parts
of the. v. chapter of this dyccyon / and the obieccyons, which apparently
might be brought in against this determynacyon / shall easily be answered unto,
and avoided by those things, which shall be said hereafter, in the. ix. the.
x. ye. xiiii. and the. xviii. chapitres of this present dyccyon. There is
again an other certain auctoryte belonging to priests / and that is that
whereby bread and wine is transubstancyated, or turned in to the substance of
christ's blyssed body, at the oration of the preeste, after the pronounsynge of
certain words by him. And this auctorytie is a character of the soul: every
likewise as that auctorytie of keys is. And this auctorytye or power, is
called the power of making the sacrament of the aultare / and certain dyuynes
says, that this power is even The character of holy order.
the same character, of the which the power of the keys is, whereof we have
spoken here to fore. And certain other dyuynes say this power is by a diverse
and sondrye character, given to the apostles at an other time, and also by
other words of christ, than was the power of the keys / For this power, was
given (as they of this opinion do say) to the apostles, when he said to them
these words, written in the. xxvi. chapter of Mathewe / and the. xiiii. of
Mark / and the. xxii. of Luke / This is my body, which is given for you, do
this in the remembrance This is but a sely sorye gloss.
of me / do this, that is to say, have or take you power to do this thing. But
how soever the troth is in this so great dyuersytie of opynyons / it skylleth
not greatly to this our consyderacyon / for we think that we have rehearsed as
much as is suffycyent for us to our purpose, concerning the manners of
auctorytie or power given by christ to priests or bysshoppes / which may be
proved by the holy scripture. But now gatherynge together again, and making
as it were a su^me A corollary^.
of those things which have been said of us, concerning the power or
auctorytie of the keys, which was given by christ to the apostles, and to
priests the successors of them / Let us say, that in a sinner truly
penytent that is to say, being sorrowful for his sin committed: god alone
works some things, even What things god alone works in man.
without any mynystery of the preeste going before / that is to wit, the
illumynatynge of the mind, the purgacyon or clensynge of the fault, sport,
or sin / and the remyssyon of the everlasting dampnacyon. And other some
things therbe which god works in the same sinner, not by him self alone /
but by the what things are done by ye preeste.
mynysterye of the preeste / as this following / to show and declare in the
face of the church, who is accounted bound or losed from sins in this
world, so that he shall be bound or losed in an other world / yt is to say
whose sins god has retained, or else forgyuen. Again, there is an other
thing, which god works about a sinner, by ye mynystery of the priest / yt
is to wit, the chaungynge of the we be not agreed as yet of any purgatory aft
this life.
pain of purgatory, which is dew to the sinner, for the state of the world
to come / in to some temporal satysfaccyon in this world / for he does
releasse the said pain, outher in part or in the hole, according to the
satysfaccyons enjoined, and after the co^dycyon or state of the penytent /
which things every one of them ought to be done by the preeste with the keye
of power according to dyscrecion / after this manner also dysobedye^t persons
at excluded, from ye co^munyon or partetakynge of the sacraments, by the
preeste / And persons repentaunte and amendyng their conuersacyon, are received
to the said co^munyon by the preeste / as we have said about the end of the
Chapytoure last before gone. And this was the sentence and mind of the master
in the. iiii. book, in the. xviii. dystyncyon and the. viii. chapter / when he
said. After these manners or ways of byndynge or losing, that saying of
Christ is true, what soever you shall lose upon earth: it shall be losed also
in heuens / and what soever you shall bind upon earth: it shall be bound also
in heaven / Sometime the priests, do show or declare certain men to be bound
or losed which are not so before god / and otherwhyles they do lose or bind
with the pain of Satysfaccyon, persons thereof unworthy / and do admytte or
receive unworthy persons: to the part taking of the sacraments / and do
shytte out such as are worthy to be received / But this is to be understood,
in them: whose merytes or deservings require to be losed, or to be bound /
whom soever therefore, they do lose or bind, using the keye of dyscrecyon /
Judging the merytes or deservings of the sinners or persons accused: the
same persons are losed or bound also in heuens / that is to say, before god /
for the The keye of dyscrecyon.
sentence or Judgment of the preeste, which has so proceeded or gone forth /
is approved and confyrmed by the Judgment of god. And by and by after, the
master of the sentens said after the manner of an epylogation. Behold, what
manner one, and how great, is the use and profit of the apostolyke keys.

But for the further euydence hereof to be had / I shall bring the example or
comparyson made by the said master, which is famyi yare or plain enough and
seems to be very much agreynge to the words and mind of Christ, and of
saints, whose auctoryties we have heretofore alleged, and namely of Ambrose /
for he says that the word of god forgyueth sins. And the preeste Ambrose.
also verily does his office / but exercyseth not the office of any power. But
let us say, that the preeste which is as it were the iayloure of the heuenlye
judge delyuereth the sinner much like, as does the Iayler of the worldly
judge. For The symylytude between ye preeste and ye judges saruan^t oriayler
likewise as by the word or sentence of the seculare Judge, that is to wit,
of the sovereign or governor, the person accused is other dampened or else
quyte and delivered from the cyuyle trespass or blame, and from the cyuyle
pain / even so by the word of god, any man is utterly bound or losed from
sin, and from the debt of everlasting dampnacyon, for the state of the
world to come / And as by ye workynge of the iayler belonging to the worldly
prince, no man is dampened The word of god bideth and loses.
or losed from the worldly offense or blame, and from ye worldly punyssheme^t
but only by his mynystery whereby he shytteth or opens y^ prison, the person
accused is showed and declared outher to be delivered or else dampened: so in
like manner no man is bound or losed from sin, and from ye debt of
everlasting da^pnacyon, by the operacyon or workynge of the preeste / but it
is showed in ye face of ye church who is counted bound or losed of god, whiles
he takes the priests benedyccyon and is received to the co^munyon of the
sacraments / in such manner, as we have showed about the end of the chapter
last before gone / And therefore, as the iayler of the worldly judge by opening
or shyttynge the prison, shows and does his office, and yet he exercyseth
not the right or office of any iudycyarye power outher of absoluynge and
delyuerynge, or else of co^dempnynge (for although in very Mark this my
maystres
deed he would open the prison to any person being accused but not delivered
or quytte by ye judge, and did also declare to ye people by his words, yt
such person were quytte / yet should not the prisoner therefore be losed and
quytte from y^ cyuyle offense and punyssheme^t / and contrary wise, if he would
refuse to open y^ prison to him whom ye judge had verily delivered by his
se^te^ce, and moreover by his words would say and declare, that such person
were not delivered but dampened: yet should not the prisoner or person accused
therefore be detter of the cyuyle blame or punysshement). So likewise the
preeste, which is the iayler of the heavenly judge: shows and fulfylleth his
office, by the vocal or verballe pronuncyacion of absolucyon, or else of
byndynge and maledyccion / but in case that y^ preeste him self through
ygnorau^ce or through surrepcyon, or else through both, did pronounce, yt they
shall be hereaft absolved, or else ar already absolved, which in very deed and of
truth outher shall be hereafter condemned, or else at already conde^pned by ye
high judge above or else contrary wise did pronounce them, outher to be
already condemned, or else hereafter to be condemned, which are in very deed
and of truth outher already assoyled and losed, or else hereafter to be
assoyled: yet for all that the persons should not therefore in very deed be
assoyled and lose / neither the second sort dampened / because the preeste had
not applied the keye or keys with dyscrecyon, to the merytes of the said
persons / And therefore (as saint Ambrose says) the preeste The preeste
shows and declares the sinner to be absolved, but does not assoyle ye
sinner and then farewell the fetching of me^nes souls out of purgatory Nota.
exhibiteth his office / but yet he exercyseth not the lybertyes of any power /
For otherwhyles the priests pronounce in the face of the church them to be
already bound, or else hereafter to be bound, for the state of the world to
come: which are in very deed and of truth outher already lose, or else
hereafter to be lose in the sight of god / and contrary wise, as we have said
before by the auctorytie of saints, and of the master, in the. iiii. book the.
xviii. dystynccyon and the. viii. chapter and therefore the preeste exercyseth
not the right and office of any power / for if it were so / other whiles than
the justice of god and his promise should perysshe and be void / It is god
therefore only and none else that exercyseth the right and office of power
upon sinners / and which is judge having coactyue pewre, he (I say) which
alone can not be dysceyued, nor ignoraunte of the cogitacyons and thoughts,
neither of the operacyons and deeds of men. For as Paul says in the. iiii.
chapter to the hebrews, all things are naked and open to his sight / and
which only can not have any perverse will, or wrong affection / for thou / O
lord art ryghtuouse, and all thy judgments are ryghtuouse / and all thy
ways, mercy, truth, and judgment (in the third of Thobye) and therefore he
only is such manner judge / wherefore it is read in the. iiii. chapter of
James. Jacob. iiii.
There is but one law maker and judge, which may dystroye and deliver /
which words James spoke, not meaning of him self, or of any of the
apostles, not withsta^dynge that he was one of those. iii. which seemed to be
pyllers of the church as the apostle said in the second chapter to the
Galathyans. But christ would that such sentences and judgments outher already
given, or else hereafter to be given by him in an other world: should be
pronounced and publysshed of the priests, by a certain judgment of the
first sygnyfycacion and as it were pronostycatyue / yt by ye reason thereof,
sinners in this world might be made afrade, and be called back again from
vices and sins unto penance or repentance / to which thing, the office of
priests is required, and is also of great strength and auayleable / Likewise
and after such manner, as if y^ physycion of bodily health, to The physicyon of
ye soul is like to the phisycion of the body.
whom lysence and auctorytie is given for to teach, work, and practyse
according to the art or craft of physyke, by the instytucyon and ordenaunce
of the humayne law maker should openly declare and publysshe judgment
according to the science and knowledge of physyke among the people, who shall
be hole, and who shall dye to the intent, that by the reason thereof, men should
led a sobre life, and use temperate dyete / and should be brought back again
from ryotynge or surfetynge, for the conseruynge or recouerynge of their bodily
health, and should declare the precepts and documentes of physyke: doubtless the
physycyon should (after a certain manner) command such precepts and
documentes to be observed, and should judge that the obseruers and fulfyllers
of them shall be hole, and that the transgressors of the same should be sick or
else dye, whom he him self neither should make sick neither make hole,
pryncypally, but the workynge of the nature of the men / yet that
notwithstanding he should exhybyte and do some mynystery or office, and again
the same physycyon could not by his own auctorytie compel neither the hole
man, neither the sick, to do such things, were they never so much auaylable
to their bodily health, but only he might exhort and teach them, and put
them in fear by his pronostycatyue judgment of the first sygnyfycacyon she
wynge unto them yt they shall have health by the observing of certain things,
and that they shall be sick or else dye, if they do transgress and break such
precepts. Even so likewise the physycyon or leche of souls, that is to wit
the preeste judges and exhorts men concerning such things, which bring
to everlasting health or to everlasting death / for the state of the world
to come / and yet neither he may neither ought to compel any man to the
observing of such things, by judgment coactyue in this world / as we have
proved by the auctorytie of the apostle, and of Ambrose, in the first chapitre
of the second epistle to the Corynthyans / and also we have brought in with
ye same, the express sentence of Chrysostom, before in the syxte part of the.
v. chapter of this present diction. Wherefore the priest as touching to his
office ought not to be lykened to The preeste has auctorytie to tech but not
to co^pelle and this forget not, for the pope leseth here his sharp swerdes,
and his go^nes his moryspykes, and his hauldebardes.
a judge of the third sygnyfycacyon: but of the first that is to wit
having auctorytie to teach, or to work and practyse, likewise as the bodylye
physycyon has, but not having power coactyue / for after this manner christ
called him self a physycyon or leche, not a prince or gouernoure / when he
said in the. v. chapter of Luke, speaking of him self they which be whole
men: needs no physysyon / but they which be sick / he said not here, they
need a judge: but they need a physycyon / for he came not in to this world to
exercise coactyue judgment / of contencyons and debatefull matters / as we
have declared by the. xii. chapter of Luke, in the. iiii. chapter of this
dyccyon in y^. viii. part. But he shall judge both the quycke and the deed, by
such manner coactyue judgment in that day: whereof the apostle spoke in the
last chapter of the second epistle to Tymothe when he said / There is laid
upon me the crown of justice: which the lord shall yield to me, in that day,
which is a ryghtuouse judge / for than he shall by coactyue judgment punysshe
them, which have in this world tra^sgressed thelawe, which was i^medyatly
made by him / and therefore he said notablye and accordynglye unto Peter, I
will give to the: the keys of the kingdom of heuens / and he said not I will
give to the the judgment of the kingdom of heuens / and therefore, we have
said here tofore, that neither the keye beter or Iayler of the worldly judge
/ nor of the heuenlye judge has any coactyue judgment (of the third
sygnyfycacyon) because neither of them exercyseth the right laws or office of
any such power, as saint Ambrose said plainly and openly of the preeste / and
as it has been showed suffycyentlye, by the auctorytie also of other saints /
Therefore as touching to the auctorytie of priests or bysshoppes, and of the
power of the apostolyke keys given to them by christ: let it be determined in
this wise.

Of the dyuysyon of the deeds of men and how they are referred to the law of
man, and to the judge seculare.
The, viij, chapter,
ANd for asmoche as all manner coactyue judgment, concern and apperteyne to
the voluntarye acts of men, according to some law or costume, and that to
such voluntary acts, as outher ben dyrected to a fynall end and purpose of
this world, that is, to the suffycyencie of ye worldly life / or else as ben
dyrected to fynall end of the world to come, which we do call eternal life,
or everlasting glory / to the intent therefore that the dystynccyon and
dyfference of the judges, or of them which ought to judge may the more
largely appear and be open / and also according to what laws, and by what
judgment, or how and in what manner they ought to judge: let us somewhat treat
and speak of the dyfferences and dyuersyties of the said acts, operacyons, or
deeds. For the determynacyon of them shall be not little auayleable and
helpefull to the solucyons of the doubts here tofore moved. Let us therefore
say that of such works of The dyuysyon and dyfference of manner acts.
men which proceed and comes forth by knowledge and desire, some certain of
them proceed without delyberacyon of man's mind or understanding, and other
some are cause and proceed by the commandment or delyberacyon of man's
understanding. Of the first sort, are knowleges, desires, and loves suddenly
Sudden konwledges and affeccyons.
chaunsynge or caused of us and in us, without the empire or commandment of
the understanding, or of the appetyte delyberatelye provoked, concerning
such operacyons / as ben (for example) the knowleges and effeccyons whereby we
do go forth, when we are suddenly awakened from sleep, or as be knowleges, and
desires otherwise caused in us, without the commandment or delyberacyon of
our mind / and next to these follow the knowleges, consentes, affeccyons, and
Knowleges, affeccyons, and appetytes abdyng and permanent.
desires to continue and hold on such works as were had in hand before, or
else to inquire and search forth and to comprehend and perceive certain
things / as in the accyon or deed which is caused by calling again to
remembrance and these accyons or operacyons both are in deed, and also are
called the commandments or precepts of the mind, because they are done or
brought forth by our Deeds procedynge of delyberacion, ben called the
precepts of the mind.
commandment / or else by them certain other things, as loves, desires,
hatredes or esche wings. And the dyfference of the operacyons commanded or
done with good aduysement, and of the operacyons not commanded or done without
aduysement, is by the reason of that which we have said here tofore, because
of the operacyo^s not commanded: we utterly have not in us liberty, rule, or
power whether they shall be done or not done. But of the operacyons commanded
/ according He meneth y^ man has fre will in acts delyberate, if he be
judged with the spyryte of god.
to the christen relygyon, there is power in us, that they shall be done or else
not done. And I have said, that we have not utterly power in us of the acts
not commanded / because it lies not in our power, wholly or utterly to
prohybyte and let the chaunsynge and coming to pass of them. Howbeit by the
second sort of acts or operacyons which are called commandments or
precepts, and by the acts folowenge them / we may so dyspose and order our
soul, that it shall not lyghtely do cause or receive the acts of the first
sort or kind / that is to wit when each man has accustomed himself
contrary to their nature / and of the A dystynccyon of acts commanded, or
done with good aduysement.
acts or deeds commanded or done with good aduysement: certain be and are
called acts or operacyons inward, and other some are and be called acts
outward. The inward acts are and be called the commanded knowleges, and the
affeccyons commanded / or qualyties permanent, caused, and made of the mind
of man because they do not pass out in to an other subject matter, or
person, from him: which is the doer and worker of them. But the outward
acts, or operacyons Inward acts outward acts
passing forth, or as they are called in the latyne Actus transeuntes, are and
be called all the acts or loves of things desired, and the omyssyons of them
/ and also the mouynges, caused and made by any of the exteryour or outward
organs or instruments of the body, namely being moved as touching the
mocyon which is called Locale, that is to say from place to place. Again of
the acts A dystynccyon of outward acts. Profitable.
which are called Actus transeuntes, some ar and be done without the hurtynge
noyaunce, or iniurye of any synguler person, company, or co^munytie, being a
sondrye thing from him which is the doer or worker. Of which sort, ben the
kinds of al things possible to be done and the gyuynge of money / and the
chastysement of a man's own body, with beatynge, strykynge, or any other
manner of way / and other deeds like to these. And other some of those outward
acts, ar and be made with the noyaunce or injury of an other sundry person
from him that is the doer or worker of them. Of which sort be the strykynge
of another Unprofytable and harmefull.
man, theft, rauyne, or robbery, extorcyon, false witness, and many other
after diverse kinds and facyons. And there is found out and devised certain
rules or measures, habytes and scyences of all the aforesaid acts, which
come forth and are caused of man's mind / namely of the acts commanded or
done with aduysement / by which rules, the said acts or works may be done
and brought forth conuenyentlye, and in right and dew form and manner, both
for the getting and purchasing by them of a suffycyent life in this world /
and also in the world to come. But of these rules there are certain, by the
which, the Arts and scyences.
accyons, and operacyons of man's mind, as well the outward acts, as the
inward, are taught, ruled, and ordered either in doing of them or in leuynge
of them undone, without pain or reward to be given to him that does them or
that leueth them undone, of any other man, by power coactyue / of which sort
verily be the most part of dyscyplynes, arts or scyences, operatyue, actyue
and factyue. And there ben other of the said rules, after which the operacyons
of man's mind, are commanded to be done or to belefte undone, under pain or
reward to be given by the power coactyue of an other man, either to the
workers of the said deeds, or else to the leuers of them undone. And again of
these coactyue rules: A dysti^ccyon of coactiue rules and laws. Man's law
Gods law
there are certain, whereby the obseruers or transgressors of them are
punysshed or rewarded, in the state, and for the state of this present life. Of
which sort be all the cyuyle and worldly customs and laws of men. And there
be other some of the same rules, according to which, the workers ar punysshed
or rewarded only for the state, and in the state of the world to come. Of
which sort are the laws of god for the most part / which in the common
name are called sects. Sect, is here well taken.
among which (as we have said) the sect, which is of christen men: only
contains the truth and suffycyencie of things to be hoped, for ye world to
come. There is therefore for the suffycient life of this world a rule set, which
is preceptyue of the act of man, done with aduysement, and such as are called
Actus transeuntes that is to say outward acts or acts passing forth,
being possible to be done, to the profit or dysprofite, to the right or
wrong of an other sondrye person from him that is the worker of such deeds /
and the same rule is also coactyue of the transgressors / by pain or
punysshement, for the state of this present life / which we have called by the
common name the law of man in the. x. chapter of the first dyccyon. The
fynall necessytie also, and the cause agent or effectyue whereof: we have
assygned and showed in the. xi. and. xii. and. xiii. chapytres of the first
dyccyon. And how we should live in this world, for the state of the world to
come / there is a law given or made and set by christ / which The law of
Christ.
law, doubtless is the rule of man's deeds, being by the grace of god in the
actyue power of our mind, as well (I say) of such deeds as be in ward
acts, as of those which are called outward acts, according as they may
either be done or else left undone, dewely or vndewelye in this world / but
yet for the state of the world to come and this rule is also coactyue and
dystrybutyue of pain or reward to be given and executed in the world to come
(but not in this world) according to the merytes or demerytes of the
obseruers, or transgressors of the said law / or rule in this present life.
But because these coactyue laws, as well the laws of god as of man, lack
life or soul, and a pryncyple or cause motyue Cause motyue, is ye king which
is heed of the church and correctoure in this life of all crimes and
enormyties yt issue forth.
in themselves to give judgment, and to do execusyon: they had need to have
some subject (as they call it) and some pryncyple, or cause, having life and
soul, which may command, rule or judge the deeds of men, according to the
said laws / and also do execucyon of the judgment given, and punysshe the
transgressors of the same laws. This subject or pryncyple / is called a
judge / taking this word judge in his third sygnyfycacyon, which we have
said in the second chapter of this dyccion / wherefore Arystotle says in the
fourth of the Ethikes, where he treats of Justice or ryghtuousnes. A judge
is as it were, justice having life. Therefore according to the laws of man,
there ought to be a judge, having such auctorytie (as we have said) to judge
by judgment of the third sygnyfycacyon, of the co^tencyons deeds of men / to
execute the judgments given / and to punysshe any manner transgressoure of the
law, by coactyue power / for such a judge is the mynystre of god, and a
venger for wroth, to him which What a king is.
works evil / as the apostle said in the. xiii. to the Romans / and sent
by god for this intent, as it is said in the second chapter of the first
epistle of Peter / And note that the apostle Paul said, to him that works
evil, that is to wit whoeuer he shall be, meaning this indyfferently of all
men. And therefore for as Yea even a bishop.
much as priests or bysshoppes and generally all the mynystres of churches
which by the common name are called clerks, may do or work otherwhyles evil
outher in co^myssyon or in omyssyon, yea and some of them (would god not the
most part of them) other whiles do evil in very deed, to the hurt and injury
of their even christen: even they also are subjects, and set underneath the
vengeance or Bysshoppes are subjects as well as bochers.
iurysdyccyon of the judges and higher powers, which have, coactyue power to
punysshe the transgressors of man's laws / which thing the apostle / said
openly and plainly to the Romans in the. xiii. chapter / wherefore says he /
let every soul be subject to the higher powers / that is to wit, to kings to
princes / to capytaynes / and to such other their deputyes according to the
exposycyons of saints / for evermore the matter or stuff ought to receive the
operacyon of the actyue cause / which is apt and ordained to work upon it,
for the end to the which it is mete / as it appears in the second book of
the physykes or naturales for as it is said there every thing is so wrought /
as it is apt and mete for to be wrought / and contrary wise. But now the
transgressoure of the law, is a conuenyent The tra^sgressoure is the stuff
and matter and the king is the cause effectyue, apt to work upon the stuff.
matter or subject, whereupon the judge or gouernoure is apt and ordained to
work iustyfycacyon, and that, to cause and make proporcyon and equalytye, and
for the conseruacyon of peace and tranquylytie, and of the cyuyle company and
socyete of men, and last of all for to cause the suffycyencie of man's life.
And therefore where soever such a subject, matter, or stuff is found in the
prouynce being under the iurysdyccyon of the said judge / he ought to
iustyfye, and set it in order. For asmoche than, as every preeste may be, of
him self such propre matter or stuff, that is to wit, the transgressoure
of man's law / he To be a preeste is but an accede^tall thing.
ought to be under the judgment of the said judge. For to be a priest or no
priest / is an accydentall thing to the transgressoure, as touching the
comparyson of him to the judge / as well, as to be an husband man or a
carpenter / and even likewise as it is but an accydentall thing to the person
that may be hole or sick The preeste hode takes not away ye man, nor
cha^geth him in to an angel
to be a Musycyon, or no musycyon, in comparyson to the Physycyon or leche. For
that which he is of him self, and that which is essencyal: can not be taken
away, or changed, by that which is accydentall / for else: should there be
infynyte kinds or sorts of judges and physycyons. Therefore any manner
bishop or priest being the transgressoure of the law made by man / ought
to be iustyfied and punysshed by the judge / which has coactyue power in
this world over the tra^sgressours of man's law. And this judge is the
seculare prince or governor Priests ought to be punysshed by the secular
judge and yet Thomas of Cau^turbery would not have it so.
in that that he is a prince / and not any priest or bishop: as it has been
showed in the. iiii. and. v. chapytours of this dyccyon. And therefore all
bysshoppes and priests being tra^sgressoures of man's law / ought to be
punysshed by the prince or governor. And not only the preeste, or other
spyrytuall mynyster, ought to be punysshed as a secular man for his
transgressyon of the law: But also he ought to be punysshed so much the more
grievously and largely? by how much his offense is more heynouse or vnsemynge
and can less be defended. For that he does sin more knowyngly, and more of
election, which ought more to know the precepts of things to be done and
to be eschewed. And again because the offense is more shameful of him, which
ought to teach: than of him which ought to be taught. But it is the priest
which ought to teach, and the lay man which ought to learn. wherefore the
preeste offends more greuouslye, and therefore he is the more sore to be
punysshed than the lay man. Neither his objection ought The obiectyon of the
sprytualtie is answered unto.
to be received or allowed, which would say, that all manner injuries verbal,
real or personal, and such other things prohybyted by man's law, if they
be done against any man by a priest, are accyons spyrytuall / and that therefore
it does not appertain or belong to any Prince or seculer gouernoure to
punysshe the priest for any such offenses and trespasses / for such manner
things prohybyted by the law, as aduoutrye / maymynge / murder / theft /
robbery / dyffamacyon / detraction / treason / fraud or gyle / heresye, and
such other crimes committed and done by a preeste are carnal and temporal
deeds or offenses, as it is very well known by experyence / and as we have
declared it heretofore in the second chapter of this dyccyon, by the
auctorytie of the Apostle in the third chapter of the first epistle to the
Corynthians, and in the. xv. to the Romans / ye and also they are to be judged
so much the more carnal and temporal offenses, by how much the priest or
bishop in co^myttynge of them, synneth more grievously, and more shamefully,
than any of them, whom be ought to call back from such offenses, gyuynge
occasyon to them and redynesse to offend and trespass in the same through
his lewd and ungracious example.

Therefore every preeste and bishop is under, and ought to be under the
iurysdyccyon of princes and secular governors in those things, which at
commanded to be observed by the law of man: as well as other seculare and lay
men. Neither is the bishop or preeste exempted from the coactyue Judgment
of such princes: neither he may exempte any other man by his own auctoryte
which thing I prove, by an addycyon to those things / which has been said
in the. xvii. chapter of the first dyccyon / dedusynge and bringing him
which does say the contrary: to ameruaylous great inconuenyent. For if the
Bishop of Rome The Pope of Rome is not exempte from the iurysdyccyon
offeculare princes.
or any other preeste were so exempted, that he should not be under the
coactyue in rysdyccyon of princes and governors, but were him self such
manner Judge, without the auctorytye of the humayne law maker, and might
separate and exempte all ye sprytuall mynysters, whom by ye common name they
do call clerks, from the Iurysdyccyon of princes and governors, and make them
subjects to him self, as the bysshoppes of Rome done now a days: it followed
then necessarylye, that the iurysdyccyon of the seculer governors were in a
manner utterly adnulled, destroyed and made of no strength / which thing I do
recounte to be a great inconuenyent, and intolerable to all governors and
co^munyties. For the christen relygyon does depryue no man of his right, as it
was showed before by the auctorytie of Ambrose upon the saying of Paul in the
second chapter to Titus / admonysshe them to be subjects to princes and
powers. etc. as it was brought in and alleged in the. v. chapter of this
dyccyon. And that this inconuenyent does follow of such exempcyon: thus I
prove. For it is not found prohybyted any where in gods law. But rather it
is granted, and also lawful by the same, for him to be preeste or bishop:
which has a wife / namely if he have no mo wives than one: as it is read in
the third chapter of the first epistle to Tymothe / and that which is
decreed and ordained by man's law or constytucyon, may by the same
auctorytie be revoked and adnulled, in that it is man's law. Therefore the
bishop of Rome, which makes him self a law maker may of the fulness of his
power (if any man will grant him to have such full power) grant to all
priests, deacons, and subdeacons, to have wives / and not It may be granted
to priests to have wives.
only to them / but also to other which have not taken any of the foresaid
ordres nor be otherwise consecrated / whom they call clerks of syngle tonsure
/ yea moreover more semyngly to these / which thing Bonifacius the. viii.
seems to have done in very deed / that he might increase seculer power to him
self / for as many as had married a virgyne, and which were willing to
wedde but one wife, he ascrybed them to the company of charkes / and decreed
that they should be ascrybed, by his ordynacyons and constytucyons which they
call decretales / neither keeping them within these bounds: they have exempted
from the cyuyle laws of man duly made, certain lay men, whom they do call
in Italy Fratres gaudentes / and in other places they are called begymes So
they have also exempted Fratres gaude^tes Begini.
the brethren called Fratres hospitaliorum and templariorum / the brethern of
hospytalles and templars / and many other such like orders / and likewise them
which are called Dealto passu / and so also for their pleasure: they might do
in like manner and by like reason of other / wherefore if all such manner men
through this, are exempte from the iurysdyccyon of princes and governors,
according to their decretales (which also gives to the persons so exempted
certain lybertyes and imunytes from the publyke and cyuyle charges or
burthaynes) it seems very lykelye that the greater multitude or part of men
shall declyne to the company of them / namelye seeing that they do take and
receive indyfferentlye both Relygyous men receive men that be not learned, in to
their orders.
learned and unlearned / for every man is prone and redye to follow and to draw
to his own profit: and to avoid and eschew his own dysprofyte / But if the
greater multitude of men shall declyne to the company of clerks / then shall
the Iurysdyccyon and coactyue power of princes remain of no strength, but
weak and feeble / which is a great inconuenyence / and a thing / whereby the
common wealth and cyuyle governance should be destroyed. For who soever
enjoys cyuyle honors, co^modytyes, and profytes, as peace, and the defense
of the cheyfe governor: ought not to be exempte from the cyuyle charges and
burtheyns / and from the cyuyle. Iurysdyccyon without the determynacyon of the
same gouernoure. For the aduoydynge therefore of this great inconuenyent: we
ought to grant / according unto the truth, that the high and cheyfe
gouernoure has iurysdyccyon upon Bysshoppes, priests, and all Clerks / lest
it might chance the good order of the common weal to be broken: through the
pluralytie of cheyfe gouernoures, being not the one of them under an other /
as it was determytted in the. xvii. of the first dyccyon. And that the cheyfe
governor ought to determyne and apoynte a certain nombre of them in the
prouynce under his governance: likewise as he does of the persons of any
other of or part of the common weal / left if they did grow up in to over
great a multitude: they might be able to resyste the coactyue power of the
governors, or otherwise do great dysturbau^ce to the common weal / or else
with their pride and over great multitude: depryue the city, realm, or other
co^munytye of the profit and advantage, of their necessary works and
occupacyons. So than the outward acts or deeds going or tournynge to the
profit or dysprofyte, to the right or to the wrong of a sundry person from
the doer: ought to be ruled and measured by the humayne law / and by the judge
of the third sygnyfycacyon. To the which coactyue iurysdyccyon all seculer
and lay men, and also all charkes: ought to be subjects. There be also other
judges according to the laws Lawyers.
of man, which are called judges of the first or of the second
sygnyfycacion, as ye teachers of the same laws, but yet lacking or wantynge
coactiue power or auctorytie / of which sort, no thing lets: but that
there may be many, not ordered one of them under an other / and that even in one
communytie.

Of the relacyon and respect of man's deeds or works unto the law of god,
and to the judge of the other world / that is to wit to christ / and also
how the same deeds ar compared to the teacher of the same law / that is to
wit, the bishop or preeste in this world.
The, ix, chapter,
According therefore to this manner, there is also a certain judge having
coactyue iurysdyccyon or auctoryte upon transgressors after the law of god,
which law, also we have said to be a coactyue rule of some deeds or works
of men / as well those which are called Actus i^manentes, as of those which
are called Actus transeuntes. And this judge is but one / that is to wit,
Christ, and none other / wherefore it is written in the. iiii. chapter of
James. There is but one law maker / which may dystroye and deliver. But the
coactyue There is but one law maker Christ.
power of this judge, is not exersysed upon any man in this world, as towchynge
the dystrybucyon of pain or reward to the transgressors or obseruers of the
law i^medyatly given, by him, which often times we have called the law of
the gospel / for christ of his great mercy, would grant unto us space,
wherein we might do penance of our sins committed against his law: even
until the last end of every man's life / as it shall be showed hereafter
also by the auctorytes of holy scripture. There is also after the scripture of
the gospel an other judge, of the first sygnyfycacyon. Likewise as there is of
man's A judge here is taken but for a preacher
law / that is to wit, the priest / which is in this world the teacher of
gods law and of such things, which are either to be done or to be
eschewed, for the getting of eternal life / or for the aduoydynge of the
pain eternal / but yet having no coactyue power in this world, to compel
any man to the observing This judge has no coactyue power.
of the precepts and commandments of the same law. For it should be in
vain and to none effect to compel any man unto the observing of them. For
to him that should observe them only by compulsyon: they should be nothing
auayleable The clargy many a year has done all by co^pulsyon as with sword
and fire.
unto eternal health / as we showed before euydently by the auctorytie of
Chrysostom / and also of the apostle Paul, in the. v. chapter of this
dyccyon. And therefore this judge is conuenyentlye lykened to a physycyon or
leche which has auctorytie given to him, for to teach or command, and to
prenostycate or judge of those things, which are profitable to be done, or to
be left undone for the optaynynge and getting of bodily health, and the
aduoydynge of death and syckenesse which should chance to him / for the
which cause Christ also in the state and for the state of this present life
called him self a physycyon or leche / not a prince or a judge. And therefore
he said unto the pharyseys, speaking of him self, as it was brought in, in the
chapter before gone. They need not a leche which are in health: but they
which are sick and dyseased. For Christ has not ordained that any man
should be compelled in this world to the obseruacyon of the law made by him.
And therefore he has not ordained any judge spyrytuall having coactyue power
to punysshe the transgressors of this law in this world / wherefore it is to
be marked and taken head of, that the law of the gospel may be two manner
ways compared unto the men, upon whom it was made, by christ. One way, it
may be compared to them in the state and for the state of this present life.
And in this comparyson it may rather be called a speculatyue or a practyue
doctrine, or else both, than a law taken in his propre and last
sygnyfycacyon / albeit that it may be called a law, after other
sygnyfycacyons of the same word / as after the second and the third
sygnyfycacyons of which we have spoken in the. x. chapter of the first
dyccyon. And the cause of this which we have said: is this / for that the
name of this word law, in his third sygnyfycacyon: belongs only to a
coactyue rule / that is to wit, such a rule according to which, the
transgressoure is punysshed by power coactyue / given to him which ought to
judge according to the same rule. But now by the law of the gospel, or by
the law maker thereof, it is not commanded that any man should be compelled of
any spyrytuall man in this world to observe those things, which are
commanded in the same law to be done, or to be left undone, in this world.
And therefore it being compared to the state of man in this world, and for
this world ought to be called a doctrine, and not a law / but only after
such manner as we have said. And this was the mind of the apostle, in the
third chapter of the second epistle to Tymothe. All scripture inspyred from
god above: is profitable to teach, to argue, or prove, to rebuke to instruct
in ryghtuousnesse. But he never said that it was profitable to compelle or to
punysshe in this world / wherefore in the first chapter of the second
epistle to the Corynthyanes, the apostle says / not because we are lords and
governors over your faith: but we are helpers or comforters of your Joy.
Because you stand in faith / where saint Ambrose (as we have showed before in
the. v. chapter of this dyccyon and it greueth me not to rehearse the same
often times again) says these words / and lest the Corynthyanes might be
mysco^tent Ambrose.
and angrye, as if the apostle had taken upon him to be lord over them.
Because he had said, it was for the sparynge of you, that I have not come /
therefore the apostle says followyngely. I do say these aforesaid words / it
was for the sparynge of you and not because your faith suffers any domynyon
or compulsyon, Faith is voluntarye.
which is a thing of freewyll, and not of necessytye. But I speak these
words therefore, because we are helpers, if you will work with us. etc. Loo
here he says helpers, that is to wit by our doctrine / and he says also if
you will work with us / which now do stand in faith, that works by love
and not by domynyon or compulcyon. An other manner way, the scryperture or the
law of If men seem to be punysshed for breaking of gods law in this world
as for co^mitti^ge aduoutry, for nycacio^, theft heresy, and so forth it is
because the malice of their hertes breketh forth, and disq^eteth their
neighbors, and thereby offe^deth ye kings law, and not i^ that respect that
they offend gods law, which is only referred to god to be punysshed
euerlasti^gly.
the gospel, may be compared unto men, for the state of them in an other
world in which world only, and not in this, they shall be payned and
punysshed, whosoever has transgressed and broken the said law in this world
/ and so it may well be called a law, in his most propre sygnyfycacion. And
he that judges according to it which is christ, may than be called a
judge, in the most propre sygnyfycacyon of this word / because he has
coactyue power after the third sygnyfycacyon of this word. But the preeste or
bishop, who ever he be, for asmoche as he does rule and order men according
to this law, only in the state of this present life, although it be to the
life to come: neither is it granted to him by the i^medyate maker of this
law, that is to wit, christ, for to punysshe a man according to it in this
world: therefore the preeste or bishop is not called a judge properly in his
third sygnyfycacyon, as the which has not coactyue power, and neither may,
neither ought to punysshe any man by such manner judgment, in this world with
either reale or personal pain or punysshement And in this or in like manner,
any doctor or teacher operatyue, as a physycyon is in comparyson to the
judgment of the bodily health of men, having no power coactyue of any man as
we have said about the beginning of this present chapter. And this was also
the sentence of saint John^ Crysostome plainly and openly (agreynge to the
mind of the apostle, in the first chapter in the second epistle to the
Corynthyanes) in his book of dyaloges, which is also entytled of the dygnytie
of preesthode, in the second book, and the third chapter. But the order of
his words, which we have brought in heretofore in the. vi. part of the. v.
chapter of this dyccion: we have not rehearsed again here, for cause of
shortness but these words of his, which follow next after the aforesaid
text: we have put here, and they be these. For this cause than, there is much
need (says he) of the help of craft and co^nynge, that men may be persuaded
and brought in mind, when they be sick, of their own accord and frewyll to
offer them self to the leche craft or physyke of priests / and not only
this, but also that the priests may do good and be gentle to them that are to
be cured. For whether any man Chrysostom
would starte back when he is bound (for verily in this thing he has power
and free lybertye) he shall make his disease worse / or whether he will refuse
the words which should have done him good, then in the stead of the surgeans
salues and instruments, he joins and adds an other wound unto his first
wound by the reason of this his co^tempte / and is by the occasyon thereof
beco^med unto him self an instrument of a more peryllous and deadely disease.
For there is no man that may cure and heal one against his will. And the said
Chrysostom after certain words added of him, consernynge the correccyon or
amendment of the people, to be marked of al curates, but not co^sernynge ye
co^pellynge or co^strayni^ge of them: he says these words / but if any man be
led out from ye right faith: tha^ it remains to the priest, and appertains
to his charge, to use much exhortacion much wise dylygence, and much pacyence /
for he may not bring any man again Nota.
to the faith: by vyolence / but he shall enforce him self and do his
vttermoste endeavor, for to persuade such person, yt he will return to the
right faith, from which he has first fallen. Lo here how this holy man, does
separate and depart the judgment of priests, from the judgment of princes
and governors / because coactyue judgment neither does belong, neither
ought to belong to priests assygnynge the causes which we have said
oftentimes heretofore. The first because that coactyue power is given by the
temporal law, or else by the law maker or prince / which was not granted
to priests in Chrysostomes time or prouynce. Secondaryly, for that if such
coactyue power should be granted unto Even so were it pity to be granted in o^
time, wherein be so many tyrauntes of the clergy
them / yet should they in vain / exercise it upon their subjects / for no
spyrytuall thing avails men that are compelled unto it / neither profyteth
them any whyt to eternal health. And he said the same upon that text in the.
ix. of Luke if any man wylleth to come after me: let him deny him self. But
I have here left out the order of his words, partly because these aforesaid
are suffycyent and partly for cause of shortenesse / This same also was
plyanely and openly the mind of saint Hilarie, to Constantius the Emperor /
in which epistle among other things / thus he wrote to the same Emperor.
God has taught the knowledge of him self: rather than has exacted it / and
getting admyracyon Hilarious.
and estymacyon to his precepts, by his heavenly works: he despised and
refused all manner auctorytie coactyue of men, to confess and knowledge him
self. Loo here, that god wylleth men to be taught the knowing and confessyng
of him, that is to wit by faith / but not any man to be compelled: thereto for
that he despyseth. And he reherseth the same again not long after saying /
God requires not any coacte confession. And again afterward in the person
of all priests, he says thus / I can not receive any man except he be
willing / I Hilarious.
can not here any man, but prayeng / not sign or mark any man: but him that
professes. Therefore god will not have any coacte confession of his own self
/ neither he wylleth any man to be drawn thereunto, by any violence don to him
or by compulsyon. Wherefore the same Hilarious against Auxentius bishop of
Mylayne (whom he reputed to be an Arriane, and which procured men to be
compelled by force of Arms) as the said Hilarious says (to confess those
things I fear me there has be^ and yet be many such Arrians, if they might
have the fulswynge of sword in their own hands.
which belonged to his own opinion, about or rather against the faith, and
rebukynge him. Albeit that it had been so, that he had taught no thing but the
truth) he says thus. And first of all I may petye the labor and travail
of our time or age / and sorrow and bewail the folysshe opynyons of these
times / in which, worldly things are supposed and believed to help and to
defend god / and it is labored by seculare ambycyon, to defense and maintain
the church of Christ. And again to the same person, in the same place, he
says. But now (alas for pytie) the erthly helps or aids do commend the
faith of god: and causes it to be accepted / and christ is proved to be
without his power and might: whiles ambycion is joined to his name. The church
puts men in fear It is time to punysshe Hilarious for he rayleth against
the clargye.
with banysshementes and prysons / and co^pelleth men to give credence unto her
/ and she is believed by banysshementes and prysonamentes. And here Hilarious
speaks of the church understanding by it, the college or company of
priests or bysshoppes, and of other mynysters of y^ church, whom they do
call co^menlye clerks. This was also openly the mind of saint Ambrose, to
Valentiane ye emperor in the second epistle, which is intytled to the
common people, when he said / I Ambrose.
may weep / I may be sorry / I may mourn and syghe / against wepons or armor,
against men of war, and against the Bothians / my tears are my wepons for
such is the armoure of priests otherwise I neither ought neither may resyste.
Behold here that the preeste ought not, although he might to move or
stereany wepon, or power coactyue against any man / neither yet command or
exorte any wepons or power coactyue to be moved / namelye against christen men.
The contrary whereof all this world may judge and think of certain priests
against the doctrine of the holy scripture and of saints. Therefore according
to the truth, and to the open and plain intencyon and mind of the apostle,
and of saints, which of all other, were the cheyfest doctors or teachers, of
the church, or of the faith. No man in this world is commanded to be
compelled of the spyrytualtie by any pain or punysshement, to the embracing
or obseruacyon of the precepts in the law of the gospel neither infydell,
nor yet vninfydel / wherefore the mynystres of this law, bysshoppes or
priests, neither may judge any man in this world, by judgment of the third
sygnyfycacion / neither compel any man to observe the precepts of gods
law, namely without the auctorytie of the humayne law maker / for such manner
judgment, according to the law of god, ought not to be exercysed in this
world / nor execusyon thereof to be done, but only in the world to come /
wherefore in the. xix. of Mathewe, Ihesus said unto the apostles. Of a suertye I
do say unto you, that you which have followed me / in the regeneracyon, when
the sone of man shall sytte in the seat of his majesty / you also shall sytte
upon twelve seats, judging the. xii. trybes of Israel. Here may ye se when
the apostles shall sytte with christ, as it were judges with him, of the
third sygnyfycacion / verily in the world to come, and not in this world /
where the gloss says / in the regeneracion, that is to say when deed men shall
rise incoruptyble / wherefore after the mind of the gloss, there are two
regeneracyons / the first, of water and the holy ghost / the second, in the
general resurreccyon / wherefore upon these words, you also shall sytte:
says the gloss / after the mind of Augustyne / when the form of the
servant / that is to wit, of Christ, which in this world was judged by
coactyue power, and did not judge, shall exercise the power of a judge, that is
to wit, in the Resurrection: than shall you also be judges with me. Loo here
than that according to the saying of Christ in the gospel / and after the
exposycion of saints: Christ has not exercysed iudicare, power / that is to
wit, coactyue power, in this world. But rather being in the form of a
servant: he was judged of an other, by such manner judgment / and also that
when he shall exercise such iudicare power coactyue in an other world: that
than the apostles also shall sytte with him, to judge by such manner judgment,
and not before that time. Bysshoppes takevpon the^ more auctory tie than christ
had.
wherefore hit is worthily to be greatly meruayled at: wherefore any bishop or
preeste, who ever he be should take upon them, or be in will to have greatter,
or other auctorytie, in this world / than Christ or his apostles would have /
for they in the form of servants / have been judged by the seculate and
worldly princes / But the successoures of them, priests and bysshoppes, not
only refuses to be subjects to princes contrary to the example and precepte
of Christ and his As obstynat Thomas of Canterbury otherwise called Thomas
Beket.
apostles / but also they say, that them selves are above princes and the
highest powers, in coactyue iurysdyccion / and the princes to be subjects unto
them / not withstondyng that Christ said in the. x. of Mathewe. And you shall be
led unto kings and rulers for my sake / and he did not say you shall be
kings and rulers / and hit follows afterward / in the same chapter / The
discyple is not above his teacher nor the bondeman above his lord. Therefore no
priest or bishop, in yt he is such one, neither may, neither ought, to
exercise judgment, domynyon, power, or governance coactyue, in this world.
And this also was euydently the mind of Arystotle in the. iiii. book of his
polytykes, and the. xii. chapter.

THis may be proved also after this manner. For if christ had wylled, the
priests Christ would not ye priests of the new law to be coactyue power
of ye new law, to be judges by the auctorytie of ye same law, by judge meant
coactyue of the third sygnyfycacyon yt is to wit, by defynynge and determining
the contencyons and debatefull acts of men, in this world, by such manner
sentence / doubtelesse he would have given such special precepts of such
manner things, in this law / likewise as he did in the old law to Moses /
whom god by his own mouth or words and not by any man: ordained and made
governor and coactyue judge of the Jews / as it is red in the. vii. chapitre
of the acts of the apostles / for which cause also / god gave to him a law,
of things to be observed, in the state of this present life, contaynynge
specially precepts of such things, for the departing and ending of the
contencions and stryfes among men, and being very much like unto the law of
man as touching some part of it. To the observing and keeping of which
precepts, men were compelled and constrained in this world by Moses and his
substytutes coactyue judges, with or by pain or punysshement / but not by any
preeste / as it appears euydently in the. xviii. chapter of Exodus. But
christ has not given any such precepts in the law of the gospel / but
supposed them to be already given, or that they should afterward be given, in
the laws of men / which laws he commanded to be observed, and also the
governors according to those laws to be obeyed of every soul, at the
lestwyse in those things, which should not be contrary to the law of
everlasting health. And therefore he says in the. xxii. of Mathewe, and in
the. xi. of Mark. Give you to Cesare those things, that belong to Cesare /
understanding by Cesare: any manner prince or gouernoure. So alsothe apostle in
the. xiii. to the Romans says (for it greueth me not to rehearse it again)
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. So also in the last chapter
of the first epistle to Timothe, he byddeth the servants to be obedyent to
their lords, ye though they be infydeles. And the gloss also in the same
place after the mind of Augustyne, agrees with the same / which we have
brought in before in ye. viii. part of the. v. chapter of this dyccyon / of
all which auctoryties it appears euydently, that it was the intencyon and
mind of christ, and of the apostle and of saints: that al men ought to be
subject and obedyent to the laws of men / and to those that be judges
according to the same laws.

Moreover of these aforesaid things it is euydent: that christen men are not
Not all ye precepts of ye old law ar to be observed.
bound to observe and keep all things, which in the old law or testament
were counsayled or commanded to the people of the Jews to be kept. But the
obseruacyon of certain things which commanded to the Jews / is utterly
forbidden christen men (as for example the seremonyes) under pain of eternal
perdycyon / as the apostle teaches in the. iii. and. vii. chapytres to the
Romans / in the second and. v. to the Galathianes, and in the second to the
Ephesyanes / and in the. vii. and. x. chapitres to the Hebrews. To whose mind
saint Jerome and saint Augustyne agreynge, say in their epystles sent from the
one of them to the other the. xi. and the. xiii. concordynge each with other /
that the obseruers of such ceremonies, outher truly or faynedly, after the
publysshynge of the law of the gospel, shall be cast down in to ye do^gyon of
ye devil. Likewise also, christen men are not bound to ye obseruacyon of ye
legales as it appears by ye apostle and also by Augustine Augustyne.
upon yt saying aforesaid in the last chapitre to Timothe when he said / let
not christen servants require (yt is they can not require) that which is
said of the Hebrews. etc. for asmoche than, as there is not in the law of
grace any precepts specially given for the co^tencyons and debatefull acts of
men in this world to be determined and ended / it is left, that such things
ought to be determined by the laws of men, and by the judges according to
those laws, having auctorytie of the humayue law maker or prince. There were
also certain other things in the law of Moses commanded to be observed for
the state of ye world to come, as the precepts of the sacryfyces, or of
certain hosts, or oblacyo^s to be made, for the redempcyon of sins / namely
of the preuye sins / which are committed by the inward acts or judgment /
to the accomplysshynge of which precepts / no man was compelled or constrained
by pain or punysshement of this present world / and very like unto these, are
all the counseyles precepts of the new law / because christ neither would,
neither commanded any man to be compelled to the obseruacyon of them, in this
world. Albeit, that he does command by a general commandment, that the
ordynaunces of men's laws, should be observed / but yet under pain or
punysshement to be done unto the transgressors in an other world by him /
wherefore the transgressors or breaket of man's law Yea and to be punysshed
in this world by the prince.
in a manner for the most part / trespasseth against the law of god, but no
contrary wise. For there be many acts, in which he that does them, or leueth
them undone trespasseth against the law of god, which commands such
things / whereof to give commandment in the laws of men, it were in vain /
as the deeds, which we have called inward acts, never brastynge forth /
which can not be proved to be in any man or not to be in him: and yet they can
not be hyd or unknown to god / and therefore the law of god was conuenyently
given of such things duly to be done or to be left undone / for the more
goodness of men, both in this present world and also in the world to come. But
peradventure some man will reken imperfeccyon in the doctrine of the gospel /
if by it (as we have said) the contencyons or debatefull acts of men can not
be suffycyently ruled, for the state and in the state of this present life. But
let us say, by the doctrine The law of the gospel to suffycyent is the life
everlasting.
of the gospel we are suffycyentlye dyrected in the things to be done, and in
the things to be avoided and eschewed in this present life, and that for the
state of the world to come either to the getting of everlasting life, or to
ye avoiding or escapynge of everlasting punysshement / for the which ends
and purposes the scripture was made / and not for the worldly reducynge of the
contentious deeds of men, unto equalytie, or dew co^mensuracyon, concerning
the state or suffycyencie of this present life. For christ came not in to this
world, to rule or strayghten such manner deeds, for this present life, but
only for the life to come. And therefore the rule of temporal and worldly
acts of men, ben sundry manners and diverse facyons dyrectynge unto these
ends. For the one, that is to say the law of god / teaches that in no wise
we ought to strive, or go to law, or to ask our own again before a judge /
albeit it does not forbid this. And therefore it gives no special precepts of
such things, as we have said before. But the other rule of these acts or
deeds, that is to wit the law of man: teaches these things and commands
transgressors to be punysshed: wherefore in the. xii. of Luke when a certain
man desired of christ worldly or temporal judgment between him and his
brother: Christ made answer. Thou man who has ordained me judge or deuyder
between you. etc. As if he had said, I am not come to exercise such temporal
judgment / wherefore the gloss there says / he does not vouche save to be
judge of suits or stryffes in the law, nor to be judge or vmpere of worldly
goods and substaunces, which has the judgment both of quycke and deed, and
the arbytrement of them all. Therefore the acts or deeds of men could not be
sufficyently measured or ruled by the law of god, or by the euangelycall law,
for the end of this present world. And in deed the co^mensuratyue rules of
such deeds, to the proporcyon which men lawfully desire for ye state of this
present life, ben taught in the same law / but supposed either given or else
to be given, and taught of the laws of men / without the which also for
defaulte and lack of justice, it might chance through the occasyon and
contencyon of men fighting, and seperacyon, and departing of them, and the
insuffycyencie of man's life in this world which thing in a manner all men
hate and avoid naturally. It can not be said therefore according to truth:
that the law or doctrine of the gospel is imperfect. For it is not ordained
and apt to have ye perfeccyon, of worldly matters. But it was made and given,
that by it i^medyatlye we should be dyrected, concerning those things, and in
those things which belong to the obtaynynge or getting Here ye se, y^ we
lack no necessary unwritten vanytyes, verities I would say but ye scripture is
perfect and suffycient as the auctoure affyrmeth.
of everlasting salvation, and to the avoiding of everlasting mysery / in
which things: it is very suffycyent and perfyte / for it was not made to the
determining of cyuyle contencyous busynes or matters, appertaynynge to the end
which men desire, and lawfully, in this worldly life / and truly if it should
be called imperfect therefore: it might be called as conuenyentlye imperfect,
for that by it we are not taught to hele bodily dyseases / or to measure
quantyties or to sail in the occyan see / howbeit this may be granted
safely, that it is not utterly perfyte, for so there is no thing perfyte: but
only one / that is to wit, god. And to this sentence, as being undoubtedly
true: the gloss after the mind of Gregory bears witness, upon the syxte
chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyanes, where he says. I say it
to your rebuke and shame. They (says Only god is perfyte.
Gregory) should examyne / erthly causes: which have gotten wisdom of
exteryour things / but those which are endewed with spyrytuall gifts: ought
not to Gregory.
be wrapped or entangled with erthlye business. Now if he had understand by
the wisdom of exteryour things, and of erthly causes or contencyons the holy
scripture: he would not have said afterward / but they which are induced
with spyrytuall gifts, that is to say with holy scripture: ought not to be
entangled with erthlye busynesses / neither would have separated such
persons, according to this doctrine / one of them from the other. Moreover,
because the apostle and also the saints after one exposycyon, had before called
them, which had such know lege and wisdom / that is to wit of exteryoure
things / contemptyble persons in the church / which thing neither the
apostle, neither yet the saints expoundynge his words, meaned or thought of
them / that were learned in the holy scripture. Thus than, how many and what
manner legale acts of men there be / by what laws also and judges / how, and
when, and by whom, they are to be ruled, made strayghte, and amended. I
suppose we have showed suffycyentlye, to the intencyon purposed of us.

Of the coactyue judge of heretykes, that is to wit, to whom it appertains
to judge them in this world, to punysshe them by personal or real
punysshementes, and to whom or whose use or behole these ought to be applied
or put unto.
The, x, chapter,
But of these things which we have said, it is doubted not with out a cause /
for if the inflyccyon or exaccyon of real or personal pains, by coactyue
judgment of all persons, that are to be coarted or punysshed in this present
life, apperteyneth only to him that is heed gouernoure and prince, as it has been showed here tofore / than it follows, that the coactyue judgment of
heretykes, or otherwise infydels / or scysmatykes, and the inflyccyon,
exaccyon, or applycacyon, of real and personal punysshement: shall appertain
to such prince and governor / which seems and appears to be a great
inconuenyent. For in asmoche as it appears to belong al unto one, and to the
same auctoryte, to know Obieccyons.
to judge, and to correct the offense or trespass: and it belongs to the
preeste or bishop, to dysserne the crime of heresye, and to none other: it
shall appear that both the counsel, the coactyue judgment, and the
correccyon of this crime, shall appertain or belong to the priest or bishop
alone. Moreover the judgment of the trespasser, and the exaccyon of
punyssheme^t, seems to appertain to him, against whom or whose law / the
trespasser has offended / but that is only the preeste The priest is the
mynystre of gods laws.
or bishop (for he is the mynyster and judge of the law of god, against
which law pryncypally the heretyke, scysmatyke, or otherwise infydell, does
offend and trespass, whether it be a company, or else a synguler person) it
follows therefore yt this judgment belongs to the preeste, and in no wise to
the seculer governor. And this appears to be openly the mind of saint
Ambrose in his first epistle Answer to the obieccyo^s before proponed.
to Ualentian the emperor / and because it appears and seems that he
means the same throughout the hole process of ye same epistle. I have left
out his words here because of breuytie and shortness. But let us say that,
that who soever trespasseth or offends against the law of god / is to be
judged, corrected, and punysshed according to the same law / but as to
wchynge to that law / there is Be not here so hasty and captious. as to think
yt because of these words thauctoure would have no heresy punysshed (as it may
seem) but read a little further and se the co^clusyon, how he would have it
punysshed by ye common law and not by no spyrytuall law or man.
two manner of judges. The one a judge of the third sygnyfycacyon, having
coactyue power to coarte the transgressors of this law, and to exact
punyssheme^t of them / and this is but only one / that is to wit, Christ / as
we have showed in the chapter before gone by the auctorytie of James in his.
iiii. chapter / which judge for all that, has wylled and ordained, that all
the transgressors of this law shall be judged by coactyue judgment in the
world to come / and to be coatted with pain or punysshement only in that
world, and not in this / as it has suffycyently appeared of ye chapter before
gone. But the other judge as touching to this law is the preeste or bishop /
not a judge of the third sygnyfycacyon, so that it belongs not to him to
compel any transgressoure of this law in this world, or to require or exact
any pain or punysshement upon him, by power coactyue, as it has been openly
showed in the. v. chapter of this dyccyon and in the last chapter before gone,
by the auctorytie of the apostle and of saints, and by the inuyncyble reason
of them / yet that notwithstanding, he is a judge of the first sygnyfycacyon,
to whom it apperteyneth to teach, to exhort, to rebuke, and reprove sinners
or transgressors of the same law, and to put them in fear, or dread, with
the judgment of eternal da^pnacion, and the inflyccion of everlasting pain
which shall be done to them by the coactyue judge, that is to wit Christ, in
the world to come / as we have declared in y^. vi, and. vii. chapytres of this
dyccion, where in we treated of the power of the keys given to priests / and
also in the last chapter before this where we compared the priests which are
the leches or physycions Heretykes are to be taught and exhorted by the
preeste.
of souls: unto the bodily physycyons, as saint Augustyne said by the
auctorytie of ye prophet and as the master of the sentence recyteth in the.
iiii. book of y^ sentences in the. xviii. dystynccion and the. ix. chapter /
for asmoch than as an heretyke a scysmatyke, or any other infydell, who soever
he be is the transgressoure of the euangelycall law, if he shall continue in
that crime or offense, he shall be punysshed by that judge to whom it belongs
to punysshe the transgressors of gods law, in that they are such ones,
when he shall exercise his iudyciarie power. And this judge is only christ
which shall judge the auycke and the deed and those that shall dye, but yet in
the world to come, and not in this (for of his great mercy he has granted
to sinners, that they may repent or do penance, even until their last
departing or passage from this world / that is to wit even vntyldeth. But by
the other judge, that is to wit, the pastor or curate, bishop or preeste / he
is to be taught and exhorted in this present world / and the sinner is to be
reproved and rebuked, and to be put in fear and dread with the judgment of
eternal glory, or everlasting dampnacyon to come / but not to be compelled in
any wise / as it is euydent of y^ chapter last before gone. But if it shall be
prohybyted by the law of man that any heretyke or otherwise infydell shall
continue or abide and When heretykes are to be punysshed, and by whom
remain in any regyon: who soever shall be found / in that regyon to be such
one, that is to wit an heretyke, or mysbeleuer, and so iustlye and manyfestly
proved, in that he is now a transgressour or breaker of the law of man: he
ought to be punysshed even in this world, with pain or punysshement ordained,
and set in the same law, for such transgressyon or offense / and that by
such judge: which we have showed in the. xx. chapter of the first dyccyon,
to be y^ keeper or mayntener of the law of man, that is by the prince or his
deputy. But if it be not prohybyted by the law of man, an heretyke or an
other infydell, to dwell and abide in the same prouynce, with christen men:
likewise as it has been permytted to heretykes, and to the sede of the Jews
now by the laws of men, even in the times of christen people, christen
princes, and christen bysshoppes: than I say it is not lawful for any man to
judge any heretyke or other mysbeleuer or to compel him by any pain or
punysshement either real or personal, for the state of this present life. And
the cause general hereof is: for that no man though he synneth never so
greatly against any manner dyscyplynes speculatyue or practyue, is punysshed or
coarted in this world precyselye in that he is such one: but in that he
synneth against the commandment of the law of man. For if it were not
prohybyted by the law of man, to be dronken, to make or to sell noughtie
leather or shoes, and that so ill wrought as any man may or wylleth, to
practyse false phisyke, and falsely teach or to exercise other occupacions,
even as he list him self: the dronkarde. or who soever did amysse in the
other works or occupacyons, in no wise should be punysshed. And therefore we
ought to mark and to take heed, that in every Of a certain order and dew
pcesse to be observed in ye bultyng forth of all treuth.
manner coactyue judgment of this world, before that sentence of delyueraunce,
or of condempnacyon be pronounced, and given forth: as concerning the just
trial of the truth, certain things at to be inquired in order. One is,
whether the word or the deed, whereof the person is accused / be such as it
is said to be, And this is to know before, what it is which is said to be
committed. The second thing to be required is, whether it be prohybyted by
the law of man, such thing to be done. And the third is whether the person
accused has committed that offense which is laid to his charge. Than after
inquysycyon made of these things / follows judgment or sentence of
co^dempnacyon against the person accused, or else of absolucion and
delyueraunce / as for example. Let any man be accused for an How heretykes are
to be examyned and judged.
heretyke, or else for a cou^terfayter of golden vessels, or of any other
metal. After that this person so accused, be delivered or dampened by coactiue
sentence of y^ judge it ought first to be inquyred whether the word or the
deed laid to his charge, be heretycall or else not. Seco^daryly it ought to
be serched out, whether to say any thing in such wise: be forbidden by the
law of man. Thyrdly whether such crime or offense has been committed by him
which is accused thereof. Than last of all after these inquysycyons duly made
follows judgment coactyue either of absolucyon, or else of co^dempnacion. As
concerning the first of these. iii. things: the governor or judge ought to
be certyfyed by them which are learned and skylled in each manner of science, to
whom it belongs to co^sydre the quidditie or nature of yt saying or deed,
which is laid to the charge of the person accused / for such persons ar
judges of such things, in the first sygnyfycacion, as we have said in the
second chapter of this dyccion, and they are bound to know y^ nature of
such things: to whom the auctorytie is given by the prince or governor, to
teach, or to practyse, and to work such things, in the city or co^munytie
(which auctorytie given by the governor we are wont to call in the lyberall
scyences: a license) and it is after like manner in all other arts practyue or
mechanical, as it has been showed and declared in the. xv. chapter of the
first dyccion. For a physycyon ought to know those, that be full of leprye
concerning the body: and those yt be not. So also the preeste ought to
discern and know, which saying or doctrine is heretical: By leprye he resy
is sygnyfyed.
and which catholyke. So also y^ goldfyner or goldsmyth ought to dyscerne and
know one metal from an other / and so the lawyer ought to judge between things
borrowed, or laid to keep / and other like cyuyle acts. For the prince or
gouernoure, in that he is governor, is not bound to know such things. Albeit
after if the law be perfyte he ought to be sertyfyed of the nature of words,
or sayenges, of works and deeds, by the teachers, workers and practysers of
scyences and arts. Than to the questyon purposed and moved in the beginning
of this chapter: I do say / that Nota.
any manner teacher of the dyuyne scryptures, which is or ought to be every
priest may and ought to judge / by judgment of the first sygnyfycacion,
whether ye crime whereof any person is accused, by heresye or not. Wherefore it
is said in the second of Malachie the prophet. The lyppes of the preeste
keep knowledge, and men shall requyrethe law (that is to wit the law of god)
of his mouth / for such manner men, ought the successors of the apostles
preests or bishops for to be, to whom it was said of christ in the. xxviii.
chapter of Mathewe. Do you therefore and What manner men bysshoppes ought to be.
teach you all nacyo^s. etc. teaching them to keep al things, whatsoever I
have given to you in commandment. So also it is written in the. iii. chapter
of the first epistle to Timothe among other things he ought to be apt to
teach / understand thou, the law of god. So also in the first chapter to
Titus he says a bishop ought to embrace and cleue fast to that faithful and
true speech: which is according to doctrine, that he may be able to exhort
in holy doctrine, and to conuynce and reprove them, which gaynsaye it. For
there ben many deceyuers / which are to be reproved and conuynced. But the
second thing / that is to wit, whether such trespass be prohybyted by the
law or not / the prince ought to know. And the third thing which he ought
to know / is whether he, to whose charge that crime is laid, have said or
exercysed the crime of speaking or doing heretically. And this judgment may
be judged by the exteryoure or interyo^ senses or wits, as well of unlearned:
as of learned men / whom we call witnesses or records. Than after these
things done, judgment or sentence is to be given by y^ governor, Witnesses.
outher of co^de^pnacion, or else of absolucyon or delyuerau^ce from payneor
punyssheme^t / and either exaccion or relaxacion to be made of the same
punysshement unto him, which was accused of such trespass. For no man is
punysshed of the governor, for that that he does offend or trespass only
against ye law of god. For there are many deedly sins, and against the law
of god, as the sin of Fornycacyon, which the humayne power does sometime
wyttynglye permyt Fornycacion
(as in that case where no law is ordained for such enormyties) neither any
bishop or preeste does prohybyte, neither may or ought to prohybyte by
coactyue power. But the heretyke which trespasseth against ye law of god, if
such sin be also prohybyted by the law of man: is punysshed, in that he
does offend and Why heretykes ben punysshed
trespass against the law of man / for this is the precyse and the very
pryncypall cause / wherefore any man is punysshed by pain or punysshement of
this present world. And where the cause is present: there the effect of that
cause must needs As where the crime brosteth forth.
follow / and where the cause is absent: there ye effect must nedely be away.
Likewise on the contrary side, he that trespasseth against the law of man, by
any offense: shall be punysshed in an other world / but yet not for that that
he does offend against the law of man only. For there are many things
prohybyted by the law of man: which are permytted by the law of god / as if a
man do not pay home that he has borrowed, at the time set, and appointed,
either throught lack of habylytie, or by y^ reason of any fortune or chance,
or of forgetfulness, or of syckenesse or through any other impedyment or
lettynge, he shall not be punysshed for That is to say, he shall not be
punysshed in an other world for breakyng of his day of payment, so yt he pay
after wards, be it in case, yt he might not keep his day
this in an other world: by the coactyue judge, according to the law of god /
and yet that notwithstanding, he is ryghtuouslye punysshed in this world / by
the coactyue judge, according to ye law of man. And therefore to trespass or
offe^de against the law of god: is the very pryncypall cause and the necessary
cause, wherefore one shall be punysshed in an other world / for where this
cause is: there necessaryly follows the effect, that is to wit pain or
punysshement for the state and in the state of the world to come / and where
this cause fails: there fails also the said effect.

Therefore the judgment of coartynge or exactynge of temporal pain or
punysshement upon heretykes, scysmatykes, or any other mysbeleuers who soever
they be / and the power thereof belongs only to him that is governor, and
not to any preeste or bishop for that they offend or trespass against gods
law / which compared unto men in the state and for the state of this present
life: is a law / but not after ye last sygnyfycacion of this word having
coactyue power Who ought to judge of heretykes and under what manner.
of any man in this world (as it appears by the chapter last before gone, and
by the. v. chapter of this dyccyon) but it is called a law after the third
sygnyfycacyon of this word / as it appears in the. x. chapter of the first
dyccyon. According to which law, priests even in this world are judges /
after the first sygnyfycacion of this word judge or judgment / having no
coactyue power, as it has been showed in the. v. chapter of this dyccyon, and
in the chapter last before gone, by the authority of the apostle, of Ambrose,
Hilarie, and Crisostome / for if they were coactyue judges or governors over
heretykes, because such do trespass against the dyscyplyne / whereof they be
teachers and workers, teaching many things to other men according to the
same dysciplyne, than by the same reason the goldfyner or the goldsmyth should
be coactyue judge and governor, over him, that is a false counterfaytour of
golden cups, which is against reason greatly. By the same reason also, the
physycion might punysshe them, that work not aryght according to the art and
science of physyke. And than should there be as many governors coactiue as
there ben offices or occupacio^s in a city, against the which it might
chance any man to trespass or offend / which thing we have showed to be
impossyble and superfluous, in the, xvii. chapter of the first dyccyon / for
those that trespass or offend against the offices, occupacyons and crafts in
the city / should not be coarted or punysshed / unless there be somewhat else
coming between, as for example the precepte of the humayne law, made by the
auctorytie of the prince, For if such manner offenses were not prohybyted by the
law of man, they that do committee such offenses ought not in any wise to be
punysshed. This yt we have said: may be proved and declared by a famylyare
example / for I put the case that it were forbidden by the law of man that
persons infecte with leprye, shulded well or abide among other cytezens /
might the physycion or leche (which alone can judge their syckenesse according
to his faculty and scye^ce that is to wit, whether they be full of leprye or
not) by coactyue power and of his own auctorytie, because he is a doctor of
physyke drive them, whom he shall judge by judgment of the first
sygnyfycacion to be full of leprye: from the fellowship and company of other
men. etc. It is euydent and undoubted, that he might not do so. But to do this
thing belongs only to him, to whom the costume of the humayne law
coactyue is committed / that is to wit to ye governor / for it is not lawful
for the people or for any company pryuatefy, to judge, or to coarte, or
punysshe any man: but only to the cheyfe governor / which governor for all
this concerning the crimes, or trespasses and offenses, whereof any man is
accused: and co^cernyyge the nature of the same, according to the
determynacion of the law, if it speak of this thing (which doubtelesse it
shall do if it be a perfyte law) or else by his own wisdom, if it be not
spoken but left out in the law: ought to use and to give credence to the
judgment of the learned men, and such as be well skylled in the arts or
scyences, which treat of the nature of such works, deeds, or words / as to
the judgment of a physycyon concerning the persons which be full of leprye
or which be not so / and to the judgment of a dyuyne of sinners / which are
fygured or sygnyfyed by leprouse persons in the holy scripture after the
exposycion of saints. Likewise also he ought to believe ye judgment of the
goldsmyth Sinners are fygured by the lepres
concerning the deceytfull counterfaytynge of golden cups, or of other
metalles / and semblably to any other manner learned or co^nynge man, after the
other kinds of things, that may be done or wrought. So than the physycyon of
souls, yt is to wit the priest: ought to judge of heretykes or infydels, by
judgment of the first sygnyfycation, that is to wit in pronou^cynge, and
declarynge by the word of god which saying or which deed is heretycall, and
which not. But to judge of such persons by judgment of the third
sygnyfycacion, that is by da^pnynge or absoluynge them from temporal pain or
punysshement, or to compel them which shall be dampened, suffer such pain or
punysshement: and to apply the pains exacted for these crimes, if there be
real, as well as other pains which are exacted and required for other crimes,
and offenses, according to the determynacyon of the law of man. All these
things (I say) belong only to the prince and governor or his deputy. And
to these things which we have said: the scripture bears witness. in the.
xxv. chapter of the acts of the apostles. For when the apostle was accused of
the Jews for an heretyke, though falsely and wrongfully: the inquysycyon,
deduccion, applycacion, and determynacyon of this cause, was made a fore a
judge, to a judge, and by a judge / thereunto ordained and appointed, by the
auctorytie of the governor. Likewise as to other co^tencio^s or cyuyle acts
or deeds. And it is no mastery, to assoyle the reasons or obieccyons made
contrary to these determynacyons / for when it was said, that the judgment of
the heretyke belongs unto him as judge, to whom it belongs to know the
crime of heresy: here is a dystynccyon to be made, because of the equyuocacyon
or manyfolde sygnyfycacion of this word judge or judgment / and after one
sygnyfycation of these words that is to wit? the first: ye proposycion
aforesaid is true / and after an other sygnyfication Answers to obieccyons made
before.
of this word judgment / yt is to wit y^ third, ye said proposycion is false.
And therefore nothing can be concluded against our determynacion of this
proposycyon before alleged. And to the other obieccyon which follows, that to
him belongs the judgment / of the trespasser, and the exaccion of the pain,
and the applycacion of y^ same, if he be real, against whom and whose law,
the trespasser does offend. And than when it is said afterward / yt the
heretyke trespasseth and offends against the law of god: it is to be
granted / and therefore he shall be judged by him, that is judge of the third
sygnyfycacion according to that law / that is to wit by christ in an other
world / but not in this except it be by man's law. But neither preeste
neither any bishop is such a manner judge of the law of god: but only a
judge in the first sygnyfycacion, for that he is a teacher thereof / namely if
this law be compared to men in the state and for the state of this A preeste
is a teacher and not a prince.
present life. Again ye first proposycyon of this syllogysme supposed to be
true / after the sense which we have said, that is to wit, yt the judgment of
the tra^sgressour / apperteyneth to him as to a coactyue judge, against whom
or against ye law whereof he is keeper / the transgressour does offend (the
law I mean of the last sygnyfycation only) than let us add thereunto this
second proposycion being very true / that the heretyke trespasseth only
against the seculer judge, taking this word in his third sygnyfycacyon, and
against the law whereof he is keeper, taking this word law in the last and
his propre sygnyfycacion, that is to wit coactyue only, and not against any
other coactyue law or judge in this An heretyke is not to be condemned by a
preeste.
world / And than let us therefore conclude that the heretyke is to be judged
by such judge, with coactyne judgment in this world (the maker of this law
so ordaynynge) and pain or punyssheme^t to be exacted of the same
tra^sgressour also by the same judge / which pain if it be real, is to be
applied by the same judge, to him, to whom the temporal law has ordained and
appointed it to be applied. Or else we must make a dystyncion of ye first
proposycion, according to ye equocacion of ye words made in the parologisme or
deceyptlull reason last before this. So then it can not be inferred or concluded
thus of necessyte / some man is to be condemned or judged as an heretyke in
this world and for this world, by coactyue judgment, really, or personally or
both ways: ergo he is to be judged by some priest or bishop / except
peradventure it be by judgment of y^ first sygnyfycacion / neither it also
follows therefore, ergo the carnal or temporal goods which be exacted of the
heretyke co^de^pned, as punysheme^t or part of the punyssheme^t of his
offense: ought to be applied to any bishop or priest, likewise as it does not
also follow. This man is to be judged as a cou^terfayter of money / ergo he is
to be judged by the coyners except it be peradventure by judgment of y^ first
sygnyfycation, and not of y^ third that is to wit by coactyue judgment.
Neither it follows also, that the te^porall goods, which are exacted of him
as punyssheme^t / ought to be applied to ye use and behoue of the coyners, or
to any company, or synguler person of them / but he ought to be judged with
coactyue judgment, by the gouernoure only and the gooddes of him to be
applied, accordige to ye determynacion of ye humayne law. And to the obieccyon
grounded upon y^ auctorytie of saint Ambrose, it is to be Se these obieccyo^s
in the beginning of this chapter.
answered and said yt he understood and meaned, y^ the heretyke, or the crime
of heresye bolo^geth to the judgment of priests or bysshoppes / taking this
word judgment in his first sygnyfacacion, and not in y^ third / for never
any bishop or priest used such manner judgment coactyue, of his own
auctoryte, about the stake of the prymytyue church / albeit afterward they
proceeded unto such things, by the occasyon of certain grau^tes made to them
by princes and governors / and therefore who so ever does co^fydre the very
begynnynges of such things: those things which semen now by long abusyon to
be of strength, and to have the face and apparau^ce of right shall seem to him
but tryflynge phantasyes and dreams / thus then, be it determined of the judge
and judgment, and the coactyue power over infydels and heretykes.

Of certain signs, testymonyes, and examples, as well of the canonycall as of
the seculare scripture: by which it is showed that to be true which has been
determined in ye. iiii. the. v. the. viii. ye. ix. and ye. x. chapytres, of
this dyccyon concerning the state of bysshoppes and generally of priests, and
why, and wherefore christ has separated the state of them / that is to wit,
the state of poverty / from the state of princes or governors.
The, xj, chapter,
FOr asmoch as it has been showed of us in the chapytres before gone, as well by
the auctorytes of the holy scripture, as by other certain euydent polytycall
or cyuyle arguments, that to no bishop, or priest or any other clarke,
belongs any iurysdyccyon coactyue of any person in this world. Now we will
declare the same by manifest signs and also testymonyes of which signs this
is one and that euydent, for that we do not read, neither yt christ, nor any
of his apostles, did ever, or in any place, instytute any judge or deputye in
their stead, for to use such manner domynion or to execute such manner judgment:
albeit that it seems like to be true, that both he and his apostles neither
were ignoraunte, neither did little regard this which is so necessary, a
thing in the society and co^panyeng of men one with an other in this worldly
life if they had known this thing to have been appertaynynge to their office,
and if they had been willing, that it should belong to their successors, that
is to wit bysshoppes or priests: they would have given some precepte or else at
the least some counsel, concerning the same / but as touching the
instytutynge or making of spiritual mynystres, bishops priests and deaco^s:
they showed and taught the form and manner, how it should be done. And this
thing is known suffycyently, to apper tayne unto their office: by the saying
of saint Paul, in the third chapter of the first epistle to Timothe and in
the first chapter to Titus and it appears also euydently in very many other
places of the scripture. And christ has separated and departed the office of
priests or bishops, from ye office of princes and governors where as if he
had lift, he might have exercysed ye estate of a prince, and the office of a
preeste both together / and have ordained his apostles likewise to have done ye
same. But he would not so do / but rather as a thing more conuenyent, he (as
he has ordained al things in the best wise yt might be) would yt these
offices should be of sundry manners and facyo^s / and also to be executed of
sundry manner persons / for asmoch as he was come to teach hu^blenes and
despysynge of this world, as being the way whereby we might obtain
everlasting health. To ye intent therefore that Christ was the teacher of
humblenes and poverty.
he might teach humylyte and the despysynge of the world or of temporal
things by his example, before that he taught it by his doctrine: he came in to
this world in the most low and humble manner to the utter refusing of such
temporal things / and that because he knew, that men be nothing less, but
much more taught by work or ensample, then by words or preaching /
wherefore Seneca says in his. ix. epistle. Look (says he) what ought to be
done: and that is to be learned of y^ doer. Christ then would be borne in most
low and vile manner and poverty and in the greattest despisynge of the world
for to teach us and practyse ye same things by example. wherefore it is red in
the second chapter of Luke, that the blyssed vyrgyn his mother, wrapped him
in course clothes / and that she laid him down in y^ Mawnger. Behold here,
that he was poorly borne in an other man's house, behold that he was laid
down in a mawnger or cratche, which was a place for beasts to be fed in. And
it is like to be true, yt he was wrapped in cloutes borrowed of another body
because Joseph and the blyssed virgyn were strangers, and pilgrims or
passengers in yt place / and he which was thus borne in poverty lived also in
poverty, when he was grown in age / wherefore speaking of his own pouerte in
the viii. of Mathewe, and in the. ix. of Luke: he said. The foxes have dens
/ and the birds of the air have nestes but the sone of man has no place,
where he may lay down his heed. And this state (as being the state of
pfeccion) after al other precepts and counsayles duly and accordyngly
observed and fulfilled: he taught them, to elect and chose those, which be in
will and mind, to be his dyscyples and cheyfe folowers / and namely his
successors in yt same office, which for the exercysynge whereof, he came in to
this world / wherefore in the. xix. of Mathewe, and in the. x. of Mark what
bisshoppes ought to chose.
and in the. xviii. of Luke, when a certain man demanded a questyon of him,
saying in this wise. Good maystre, what thing shall I do, to obtain and get
everlasting life? Ihesus answered to him and said, know thou the
commandments. Thou shalt not kill, thou shalt do no theft. etc. he said
again I have observed and kept all these, from my youth / when Ihesus had
herd yt he said to him / yet thou lackest one thing / or as it is red in
Mathewe / if thou will be perfect go and sell all that thou haste, and give
it to poor folks / and thou shall have a treasure in heaven. Again in the.
xiiii. of the same Luke: he said to his dysciples / who soever of you does
not renounce al things, which he possesses: he can not be my dyscyple. Lo
here, yt the state of poverty, and despysynge of ye world, besemeth every
perfect man / namely the dysciple of christ, and his successor in ye pastoral
office / yea moreover, this state is in a manner necessary to him, that ought to
counsel and exhort other unto the despysynge of y^ world / if he do intend
and purpose, yt any profit or good shall grow of his teaching or preaching /
for if such manner person does possess riches and desires domynyo^s and
soueraygneties, which teaches other men, unto whom he speaks, to despise
these things / that person verily by his own workynge and doing does
manyfestly reprove and rebuke his own preachi^ge and words / wherefore
Chrysostom, against such preachers, in his book of the compunccyon of heart /
says in this wise. To say, and not to do: is not only no lucre Chrysostom
or aduau^tage, but also very much loss and hynderaunce / for verily it is a
great co^de^pnacion, to him that orders well and trimeth his speech / but
regards nothi^ge his manner of living. This same also is y^ mind of
Aristotle, in the first rhapytre of the. x. book of his etykes / where he says
thus. For when the words be dysagreynge from ye works of him yt speaks,
which works be seen and perceived by other bodily senses / the said works
destroy the troth / yt he which orders and tri^meth his words so well,
can not be believed. And he says a little after, ye words, which be agreynge
unto the works or deeds, shall be believed / and therefore christ which knew,
how all things were to be done most co^uenyently, willing credence to be
given unto his words, whereby he taught the co^tempte of the world, and the
despysynge and eschewynge of worldly vanyties and carnal pleasures, he
counsayled yt the works should be comfortable to the words or doctrine /
wherefore in the. v. of Mathewe he says to all, that should after wards be
doctors and teachers of such things, in the person of the apostles / let
your light, yt is to wit your doctrine, which is compared to light / so shine
before men, yt they may se your good works, where the gloss says these
words. I require works yt they may be seen / and so by the reason of them,
that your doctrine may be confyrmed and establysshed, for works be required in
a preeste.
else little credence is given to the words and doctrine / where the works be
not seen / wherefore y^ gloss upon that text in the. x. of Mathewe, do not you
possess gold nor silver. etc. showing y^ cause hereof: says in this wise /
if they had these things, that is to wit gold and silver. etc. they might
seem, to preach, not because of soul health: but for cause of lucre and
advantage / for the teachers or pastors of other men possessynge such
things: do rather destroy the faith and devotion of men, with their contrary
works and examples: then strength and establesshe them with their words and
doctrine and that because they do set their own works and deeds manyfestly
against their own teaching / of which works men take heed, rather then of
the words / and it is greatly to be feared, least at the last through the
lewd examples of their works / they do bring the christen people, to the
desperacyon of the The evil life of bysshoppes.
world to come. For such be the examples and works in a manner of all the
mynysters of the church, both of bysshpps or priests, and of other clerks,
consequently and most euydently of them which sytteth upon the greatest trones
or chayers of ye church that is to say, which be in most high rowmes and
auctorytie: that they do seem no Note this well.
thing at all to believe, that there shall be any judgment of god done in an
other world / for let them tell (I beseech them) with what conscience toward
god, and if they do believe, that there shall be made a ryghtwyse judgment of
god in ye worl^ to come: done ye most part of the popes of Rome, and their
cardynalles, with other priests or bysshoppes (which be made overseers, and
put in trust, to take charge of souls, and to dystrybute the te^poralles of
the church, to poor folk) and also in a manner The priests don rob the
poor people.
all other deacons and clerks of every sort, according to their power, why
do they I say of the theft or robery of such te^porall goods (which have been ordained and bequest by devout christen men, for the suste^tacion of the
preachers of gods word and of their poor folk) either deliver whiles they
be living, or else bequeth when they be dyenge, as great su^mes of money as
they may, not to y^ poor and nedy people: but to their nere kynsfolke or to
other who soever they be, robbynge (whereof no man doubts) the poor men of
the same goods. Let them tell also, I require them, with what conscience
according to the christen relygyon, That preeste do waste vnthrystely the
goods of poor men.
do they living te^porally and after a carnal facyon (which for their
mynystrynge of the gospel, ought to be contented with meat, and drink, and
clothes, to cover them with all, after the mind of the apostle in the last
chapter of the first epistle to Timothe) consume and waste the goods
apperteynynge to ye poor people in so many superfluous and unnecessary
things, as horses, servants, feasts, and bankettes and other vanytes and
pleasures / both open and secret. As for the great inco^uenyences and
enormytes, which be done, concerning the dystrybucyon of ecclesiastical
offices Of benefyces evil and unhappily bestowed by the clargy.
and benefyces: I pass over here. For very many of those offices either for
much prayer and entreaty, or for to obtain the favor of seculer men being
rich or of great power / or for money which is offered (if it be laufull to
speak it) to the dystrybuters selves or else to the mynystres of Simon Magus,
for to be intercessours and brokers / ar given to ignoraunte, to sclaunderfull
persons / to children / to strangers Simon Magus.
unknown, to hateful / and to euydently unlearned persons after the judgment
of the whole common people. Albeit yet, yt the apostle in the third chapter
of the first epistle to Timothe, does teach that the ecclesiastical officers
ought to be known, as honest and perfect men both in life or manners: and also
in doctrine and learning / wherefore he says in yt place. He (yt is to wit, the
bishop or preeste) ought to have good report and testimony, even of them:
which be without the church / how much more then, of them which be within the
church? And a little afterward in the same chapter he says. The deacons
likewise ought to be chaste / and let these also be proved and tried first /
and afterward let them so mynystre that no man may accuse them / But here some
may say co^uenyently, that the most part of them be well proved as the world
knows: that is to wit, how much money they be able to give / or how great
intreati^ge or prayer they be able to make / but because we will not take
inhande, to nombre or reken up pertyculerly all the inconuenyences (which to
do, is in a manner impossyble or very hard) we making as it were a general
su^me of the acts and works of priests, deaco^s, and well night al other
mynystres of the temple: do wytnes here before christ, calling upon ourselves
Note this* and bear it well away.
his judgment and condempnacyon, if we do make any lie, yt the aforesaid
bysshoppes, and all other welnere which be now a days, do work in a manner
the contrary things to all those, which they do teach unto other men, for to
be observed, according to the doctrine of the gospel / for they be all
together inflamed with the desire of pleasures, of vanytyes / of temporal and
transytory goods / and of worldly domynyons and dygnytes / and with all
labor and enforceme^t, not by right, but by both pryuy and open wrong, they
go about to purchase and get such things / and vyolentlye possesses them
/ which things every one for all that, christ and the apostles his true
folowers, both did theyrselues despise: and also taught and commanded other to
despise them / namely and most of al those Priests should be ye despisers of
worldly things.
which ought to preach the despysynge of worldly things unto other men. For
christ, if he had would, and if he had seen and perceived it to be expedyent
for the preacher: might have kept the estate of a prince or ruler in this
world, and have suffered passion likewise in the same state. But he fled out
of syghte in to the mountain, to refuse and despise such manner state / and to
teach, that it is to be despised / as we have alleged here to fore in the.
iiii. chapter of this part, of the. vi. of John^. For it is not semely nor
according for them, which teaches and preaches the despysynge of such
manner state / to bear the same estate / but rather to bear the state of
subjects, and low or vile persons / which manner state, both christ
himself and also his apostles kept, whiles they were in this world.
Contrarywyse, the state of outward poverty, and the low or vile state / is
not semely nor co^uenyent for a prince or governor / for such state is
expedyent for him which state the good subjects may have in reverence, and the
evil subjects may Pouertye is not setting or semely for a prince / but he
must needs be of a right high estate, power, and richesse.
fear and dread / and by which estate also, if need shall require, he may be
able to punysshe rebellyons and transgressors of the laws / which thing he
could not do conuenyently, if he had a poor and low state / for which
cause, also the office of a preacher is not co^uenyent nor semely for him. For
if he that is prince and gouernoure over the people, should counsel and
exhort men to the state of poverty, and to the humble and low state, and
again, that if a man be strycken on the one cheke, that he should hold out
the other cheke to the stryker: and also that to him which takes away our
cote, we ought to give also our gown, rather then to go to the law, and
strive before a judge, with him that has wronged us. Men would not lightly
give credence to him in such things / for in the state which is setting and
semely for him, and which he does also bear / he should do clean contrary to
his own words and teaching. And besides this, he should also do
vnconuenyently and vnaccordynglye / for in asmoche as it apperteyneth to his
office, to restrain and hold under by punysshement, them yt done injury and
wrong, yet albeit yt they do not require it which have suffered the injury or
wrong if he should preach, yt iniuryes be to be forgyuen to ye doers of them
both he should give to the evil men a certain occasyon of more largely
trespassynge or doing evil / and also to ye persons offended, and which have
suffered injury or wrong: he should give occasyon to doubt or to mystruste of
obtayni^ge true justice: for which cause christ, which has ordained al
things always in y^ best wise and manner: would not ye offices of princes or
governors, and of priests to be joined together in one person / but rather
to be deperted y^ one from ye other, and to be executed of diverse persons. And
this seems to be expressly the mind of saint Barnarde in the. iiii. chapter
of Bernarde.
his second book, which he wrote to Eugenius the pope De consideratio^e /
where he says thus. Dare thou then which art a lord: usurp and take upon
the, the office of an apostle? or thou which art an apostolyque person: take
unto the domynyon or lordshyppe? plainly thou art forbidden from both / if
thou will have both together at one time: thou shalt lose both / for else:
do not suppose or reken that thou art excepted from the nombre of them, of
whom god complayneth in this wise. They have reigned: and not by me: they have been princes and governors and I have not known them. To these before rehearsed
things, bears witness the decrees or certain hystoryes of the bysshopps of
Rome / for in them The donacyon of Co^stantyne.
is found written a certain donacion pryuylege (which is also approved and
allowed of the same) of Constantyne the emperor of the Romans, whereby he
granted to saint Syluester (as men say) Iurysdyccyon coactyue, and temporal
domynyon That could not the emperor do justly
or soueraygnete, over all churches, and al other priests or bysshoppes of the
world. And for asmoche as every pope of Rome, and with him also ye other
congregacyon or company of priests or bysshoppes, do confess and knowledge,
that grant to be of valor and strength: consequently they must also grant,
that the same Constantyne had first this iurisdyccyon or power upon them.
Namely seeing that no such manner iurysdyccyon is known to belong unto them
over any clarke or lay man, by the virtue of the words of holy scrpture / and
this is it, which saint Barnarde says expressly to Eugenius, in the book of
consyderacyon Barnarde.
and the. iiii. chapter / for there he says thus. This Peter is he which is
not known to have come forth at any time, either adourned with precious stones
/ or sylke garments / nor covered with gold / nor carried on a white palfray /
How like ye Barnarde my lords?
nor having a thycke guard of men of war about him. And though he had none
of all these things: yet he believed, that he might well enough fulfill that
wholesome charge which, was given to him, if thou do love me: feed my sheep /
for in these seculer pompes and powers, thou art the successor not of Peter:
but The pope is successoure to Co^sta^tyne and not to Peter.
of Constantyne. Thus then to conclude, the office of princes or governors is
none office semely nor mete for priests, in that it is such one / nor
contrary wise the office of a preeste semely for princes. Of ye dyfference of
which let this which we have rehearsed, be suffycyent at this time.

Of the dystynccion, of certain words, very necessary for the determynacyon
of the questyons, about the state of most high and perfyte poverty.
The, xij, chapter,
How then after that we have thus syngularely and specially showed, that
christ and his apostles whiles they were co^uersaunte here in this world did
teach and keep the state of pouertye and humylyte, and that this also is to be
holden as sure and undoubted of christen men, that every doctrine or counsel
of christ and his apostles, is somewhat merytoryous of everlasting life: it
seems conuenyent to make inquysycyon of their pouertye, what manner one, and
how great it was / that they may have knowledge thereof: which whiles they be
here in this present life, are minded and willing to follow them in the same
poverty. Taking therefore this inquysycyon in hand, we shall first tell and
declare, what pouerte is / and how many manner ways one may be said to be
poor / and also how many manner ways one may be said to be rich / for these
two, that is to wit to be rich, and to be poor, seem to dyfferre the one from
the other / sometime as Habitus and priuatio / that is to say as a qualyte
dyffereth from the lack of itself (as light dyffereth from darkness, which is
nothing else but lack or want of light) and sometime they seem to dyffre as
contrary qualyties. That done: we shall deuyde either of these nownes in to
their sygnyfycacions / and shall afterward put to, the descrypcyons of the
same / that it may appear to us, whether there be any poverty meritoryous /
and whether among the diverse manners of pouerte, there be any order of
perfeccion of the one to the other / and which is the cheyfe and highest of
all other manners of poverty. And for asmoche as all men calls them rich,
Rich.
which have laufully or of right, power, domynyon, or possession of temporal
things (which they call riches) either severally or in common, or both ways:
and they do call him a poor man, which is without such manner goods: least by
reason of Poor.
the diverse use of certain of the said nownes, which we shall have need to
use to our purpose, the sentence, which we entende to declare, might be
ambygnouse and doubtful: we shall first show the diverse sygnyfycacions or
manners where in the said words may be taken. And the nownes or names whereof we
do mean, be these. Ius, dominium, possessio, propri^m, coe^, dives, et pauper.
And first we will begin, to show the diverse sygnyfycacio^s of this word
Ius / for we shall need them in the assygnacyons and dyuysyons of the other
words, but not Ius / Right.
contrary wise we shall not need the other words in the declaracyon of the
sygnyfycacions of this word Ius. This word Ius therefore in one sygnyfycacion
betokens the law, as this word law is taken in his third and last
sygnyfycacion, whereof we made mention in the. x. chapter of the first part of
this book and this law is divided in to two members or parts, that is to wit,
the law of man / and the law of god / which also, as touching to a certain
time, and after a certain manner may be called a law after the third
sygnyficacion, as it was said in the chapter before alleged and of the
nature and qualyte of these two lowes, and of the agreement and also of the
dyfference of them: we have spoken suffyciently, in the. viii. and. ix.
chapytres of this dyccion. Of the which chapytres thus much we will rehearse
now again for our purpose / first that the agreement of them is in that, that
either of those laws is a precepte, or prohybycion or a permyssyon of the
deeds or works, which be apt to set in order and rule the commandment The
dyffere^ce of the law of god and the law of man
of the mind of man / but they do dyfferre in this, for that the first of the
two, that is to wit the law of man / does punysshe the transgressors of it,
in this world / and the second that is to wit the law of god does not so,
but only in the world to come. And this word precept is said two manner of
ways one way actyuely, that is to wit, of the act or deed of him that
commands, after which manner we be wont to say, that the will of any one
that has power to command, being expressed is a precepte or commandment /
as the will and pleasure of a king or any other gouernoure, when it is
expressed or uttered, is called the kings or governors precepte. An other
manner way, the thing, which is wylled to be done by the act of the
co^maunder: is called a precepte / and after this manner we be wont to say that
the servant has fulfilled or done the precepte of his maystre / not
meaning that the servant has done the act or work of the lord or
master, which act is to bid or command: but meaning that the servant
has done the thing, which the maystre by his act, that is to wit by his
bidding or gyuynge commandment, wylled to be done / and therefore as often as
this nowne precepte is referred to the co^maunder: it is alone to say, as
gyuynge of commandment, which is the work or operacyon of him that
commands / but as often as it is referred to y^ subject: it is all one with
the thing that is wylled to be done by the gyuynge of a commandment, and
that it is said passyuely. This nowne precepte then taken actyuely and
co^menlye: is said of the ordinance or statute of a prince or governor,
as well an affyrmatyue as negatyue statute, byndynge the transgressour to some
pain or punysshement / but properly, and after the usage of this word now a
days: it is taken only for a statute affyrmatyue / for an affyrmatyue statute
has not any propre name belongyng to it self after the use: but has kept
to it self the common name precepte. But a statute negatyue has a propre
name belonging severally to it self. For it is called a prohybycion. And I
call yt an affyrmatyue statute, whereby any thing is ordained to be done. And I
call that a negatyue statute, whereby it is ordained, some thing not to be done
/ and if such manner ordinance or statute be affyrmatyue, byndynge the
transgressour thereof unto pain or punyshement it is called a precepte. But if
it be a negatyue ordinance, and also byndynge the transgourssours Precepte.
Prohybycion
unto any pain: it is called a prohybycion. And this word prohybicion is
said two manner of ways actyuely and passyuely, even likewise as the word
precepte / and these two ordynacyons byndynge the transgressoure unto some
pain, are for the most part expressed in the laws, either according to
their own kind, or else after a like or proporcyonale kind. An other manner
Precept how it is taken in the law of god.
way, this nowne precepte is taken more straytly or narowly in the law of god
and likewise this word prohybyted, for that statute only whether it be
affyrmatyue or negatyue, which byndeth to eternal pain / and after this
manner, the deuynes vsen these words, when they do say, that the precepts be
of the necessyte of health and salvation, that is to say, nedely to be
observed, if any man ought to be saved / wherefore it is red in the. xviii. of
Luke / if thou will enter in to life: keep the commandments / that is to
say precepts. And there be certain ordynau^ces expressed or understood
only, in the laws, but affyrmatyue and also negatyue either about one and
the same act, or about diverse and sondrye acts / which done not bind the
doer, or else him that leueth it undone to any pain or punysshemente as to
exercise or to not exercise the work of lyberalytye, and so likewise of
certain other works / and such be properly called things permytted by the
law. Albeit that this word Permissum taken commonly or generally / is
Permission
said otherwhyles of statutes byndynge to pain / for every thing that is
commanded by the law for to be done: ye same thing is also permytted by the
law to be done / but not contrary wise, every thing is commanded: which is
permytted. So likewise what soever is prohybyted or forbeden by the law for to
be done: the same thing is also permytted by the law not to be done. Again
of these things which be properly permytted, that is to say, which byndeth
not to any pain: some be merytoryous according to the law of god, and these
be called cou^sayles / and certain be not merytoryous / and these be called by
Counsayles.
the common name, permyssyons or things permytted / which words also so
taken, that is to say generally, and also specially or properly: are said two
manner ways, that is to wit actyuely and passyuely / likewise as the words
prohybycyon and precepte or commandment. But these permyssyons for the most
part be not expressed according to their propre nature and kind in the laws
/ namely in the laws of men / for cause of the great multitude of them, and
also because the general ordinance of them is suffycient in this, for every
thing that is not commanded or prohybyted by the law, is understood to be
permytted by the ordinance of the law maker or prince. A precepte therefore
according to the Precepte.
law, in his propre sygnyfycacion, is an affyrmatyue statute byndynge the
tra^sgressour of it to pain or punyssheme^t. And a prohibycion, pperly is a
negatyue Prohybycion Permyssyon
statute byndynge to pain or punysshement. And a permyssyon properly is the or
denau^ce or statute of the law maker byndynge no man to pain / after which
propre sygnyfycacions we must use these said nownes. And of these things thus
declared it may co^uenyently appear, what this word Licitum in english
laufull Laufull.
does sygnyfye, and what we do mean by it / for every thing, which is done
according to ye precepte or permyssyon of the law: is laufully done, and is a
lauful deed and what soever thing is left undone according to the
prohybycion or permyssy on of the law: is laufully left undone, and may be
called laufull / but the contrary of these may be called unlawfully done, or
unlawfully left undone / hereof also it Unlaufull. Phas.
may appear to us, what this word Phas betokens. For in one sygnyfycacion
this word phas / and this word Licitum ar alone so yt what soever is phas: ye
same is licitum / and what soever is licitum: ye same is phas / and so it may
be englysshed laufully. In an other sygnyfycacion this nowne phas betokens yt
thing which it is reasonably presumed, that the maker of the law or prince
has permytted: albeit that such a thing be absolutely or tegulerly
prohybyted, as otherwhyles to pass through an other man's ground / or to
handle an other man's thing, with out the express consent of the owner it is
phas / albeit yt it is not called right or laufull regulerly after any of the
ways and manners of these words before rehearsed for the handelynge of an other
man's thing is regulerly prohybyted / but yet in such a case or chance it is
phas in which it is reasonably presumed, yt the owner or lord of the thing
does consent, all though he does not grant it* expressly / for which
consyderacion or cause, there is need other whiles in such things of
favorable interpretacyon of the law, which of the Greeks is called Epikeia /
thus then this nowne Ius after one sygnyfycacyon, is asmoche to say, as the
law of Ius.
god or the law of man / or else a precepte, or a prohybycion or a permyssyon
according to these laws. But there is a certain other dyuysion of this nowne
Ius and specially of Ius humanum, that is man's law: in to Ius natural, that
is y^ Iusnaturale
law of nature, and Ius civil, that is the cyuyle law. The law of nature
after ye mind of arystotle in the. iiii. book of his etykes, in the treatise
of Justice: is called that statute of the law maker, in which, as being
honest and to be observed, in a manner all men do consent and agree together /
as that god is to be honored: that our parents are to be worshypped and had
in reverence / that the father and mother should norysshe and bring up their
children until a certain season / that we ought to do wrong to no man / that
we may lawfully put back iniuryes from us and other like things, which all
though they do hang of the instytucyon of man / transumptyuely they be called
Iura naturalia. i. natural laws / forasmoche as all nacyons after one manner
and facyon don believe these things to be laufull / and the contraryes of them
to be unlawful / likewise as the operacio^s of natural things, which yet have
no reason, will, or purpose: ben wroughte conformably and after one facyon in
allnacions / as for example, the fire works his operacyon yt is to say,
brynneth here: even so as yet does in all other nacyo^s. Howbeit there be
certain men, which call the law of nature, the judgment of right reason,
concerning things that may be wrought or done / which they make a part
contained under gods law / for because every thing yt is done according to
the law of god, and according to the counsel and judgment of right reason:
is utterly laufull without any excepcyon. But yet not every thing that is done
according to ye laws of man / for these laws in some points sweruen and
croken from right reason / but this word natural both here, and also before,
has diverse sygnyfycacio^s for there be many things according to ye
counsel and judgment of right reason, which be not granted of all nacyo^s
as honest things. As for example, such things which be not euydently known
of all nacyo^s / and therefore consequently are not granted of all nacyons as
honest. So also according to the law of god certain things be commanded,
prohybyted, or permytted, which in this point be comfortable to the law of
man / which thing because it is known to be so in many things: I have left
out here examples, for the more speed and breuenes of our process. And hereof
also it comes to pass, that certain things ben laufull after the law of
man: which be not laufull after the law of god / and backewarde again, many
things laufull according to the law of god: which be not laufull according
to the law of man. Howbeit for all yt, lauful and unlawful at to be taken head
of, and judged after the law of god, rather then after ye law of man, in such
prceptes, prohibicio^s or permyssyo^s, wherein these. ii. laws don dysagre the
one from the other. But this word Ius / right in his second sygnyfycacion:
What this word Ius does betoken
is said of every humayne act power, or qualyte acquisyte, commanded,
interyour or exterior, as well inward and abiding within our self, as outward
and going from us in to some exteryoure thing, or in to somewhat of the thing
(that is to wit to the use, or the taking of profit of ye thing, or the
getting, or holding or the co^seruacyon or chau^gynge of the thing or other
like) conformably to the law, which we do call Ius, taking this word in the
former sygnyfycacion last before this rehearsed. Now what is Vsus rei, or vsus
fructus rei, with other laufull handlynges of a thing by right: let it be
supposed to be known of the cyuyle law, at this present time. After this
sygnyfycacion we be wont to say, that it is the right of any man, when he
wylleth or desires any thing, or else handles or occupyeth any thing,
comfortable to Ius taking this word in his first sygnyfycacion before rehearsed
that is to say conformable to the law / wherefore such manner of handlynge or
occupyenge of a thing, or such manner will is called right or law / because
it is comfortable to ye law, in that which it commands prohybyteth or
permytteth. Likewise as the pyller is called the right or the left pyller:
when it is cituate or set in place, that is nerer to the right or the left
side of the sencyble creature. Then Ius in his second sygnyficacion, is
nothing else but a thing wylled by the actyue commandment, prohybycion, or
permyssyon, of the law maker, or prince which we have said here tofore to be a
precepte, or a prohybycion or permyssyon passyuely. And this is it also: which
we called a fore Licitum, yt is to wit laufull. Again this latin nowne Ius, in
english, right, sygnyfyeth and betokens the sentence of them, that judge
according to the Ius.
law or their judgments, according to Ius, taken in his first
sygnyfycacion. And after this sygnyfycacion of this word, we are wont to say,
yt the judge or prince has done right to any man, when by his sentence,
according to the law he has outher co^de^pned, or delivered him, and set him
quyete. And also this nowne Ius in english right, is of the act or qualytie
of perticulare justice / and after this sygnyfycacyon we are wont to say, in
our common talking that he will the right, and that, that is just, which
desires outher equalytie or proporcionalytie, y^ is to say outher even or
like: in making of exchaunges and dystrybuciones.

Here it is conuenyent consequently to show the diverse sygnyfycacions of this
What domynyon is? 1
word Dominion / which in english is as much to say as lordshyp. This word
Domynyon taken straytly and specially: in one sygnyficacion, betokens a
pryncypall power and auctoryte to challenge and claim yt, that is optayned by
the law or by right taking this word right in his first sygnyficacion. I
mean ye power of him, that knows and dysagreueth not in this, and wylleth
also, that it shall be laufull for no other man to handle, or occupye that
thing without the express co^sente of him, that is to wit of the lord and
owner, as long as he is lord and owner of it. And this power is nothing else,
but an actual or an habitual will, so to have the thing gotten by right or
law, as we have said / which truly is called the right of any man: because it
is conformable to law or right / taking this word right in his first
sygnyfycacion, after which manner, we said the pyller, to be called the right
or the left pyller, when it shall be truly compared (touching nerenesse) unto
the right or left parts of a man, or of any other sensyble creature.

Again this nowne Domynion is said more generally of the power before rehearsed,
2
whether yt power shall be upon the thing only, or else only upon the use or
taking the fruit or profit coming of the usage or occupyenge of y^ thing,
or else upon all these things together. Again this nowne Domynion is also 3
said of the aforesaid power, belonging to any man, but yet not knowing or
co^sentynge, neither expressly dysagreynge or renouncing. And after this
manner, a thing, or somewhat belonging to a thing, may be gotten to an
infau^te and to one that is absente, or to any other person being ignorau^te
(but yet being apt to receive it) with the domynion also or power to challenge
the said thing, from him that takes it away / and to demand and make claim
to the same before a judge: outher by himself, or by an other in his stead /
and we said here, not dysse^tynge or renouncing expressly: for because to him
that does expressly disagre renounce, or forsake any thing, or the usage, or
profit of y^ thing / such things can not be gotten or recovered, neither
domynion or power to challenge them. For any manner man may, if he list lawfully
renounce the right or law, brought in for him, after the laws of man /
neither any man after any law is compelled to receive the benefyte of the law
against his will. And these domynio^s, whereof we have now spoken / are legale
domynions and that because they are gotten or may be gotten be the ordinance
of the law. what possession is. 1


Now consequently the sygnyfycacions of this word, possessio, are to be
showed and declared. Which word Possessyon, taken largely betokens one way
the same, that this word domynion betokens, in his first, second, or third
sygnyfycacion, Or else it betokens any te^porall thing, in co^paryson to him
yt has it, or else is willing to have it, after such wise and manner, as has been said in the two first sygnyfycacions of this word domynion / wherefore it
is red in the. xiii. chapter of Genesis. And he was very tyche in possessyon
of gold and silver / and in the. xvii. of the same book / I shall give to the
and to thy sede or ofsprynge / the land of Canaan in to eternal possessyon.
An other manner way, and not so latgely, 2
this word possessyon is said of the aforesaid domynion, with actual, bodily
contractacyon, handlynge or occupyenge, outher present or else paste, of a
thing, or of the use, or of the fruit or profit that comes of it / after
which manner, this word possessyon, is very much used in the cyuyle law.
Again this 3
nowne possessyon, is said of the laufull bodily co^traccyon, handlynge and
occupyenge of a thing being his own, or else belonging to an other man /
wherefore in the. iiii. chapter in the acts of the apostles it is written.
Again this word 4
possessyon, though improperly, is said of the unlawful withholdynge of a thing
outher in this present time, or in time paste / outher by himself, or by an
other man, corporally handlyd or occupied. Now it follows consequently to
show the diverse sygnyfycacions of these nownes Propre, and Common. Propre. 1


This word propre or property, in one sygnyfycacion and manner: is said of
Domynion / as this word domynion is taken in his first sygnyfycacion / and
after this manner this word propre is used in the cyuyle law. Again taking
it more 2
largely: it is said of domynion, both after the first, and also after the
second sygnyfycacion of this word domynyon. And after this manner: it is used
among deuynes, 3
and also very often times in holy scripture. Again this word nowne Prope or
properte is said among deuynes, of the syngularyte of a person, or a thing
belonging only to one person by him self and not with an other / for so do
they take this word propre, making it contrary to this word common: which
do move this questyon, whether it be more merytoryous as touching to eternal
life, for to have temporal goods in propre, that is to wit severally to him
self than to have the same things with one or mo other in common. Again
this 4
nowne propre or propertye, is said of an accydent or qualyte being in any
subject / and in this sygnyfycacion philosophers use this name / but yet most
co^munelye for that qualyte which can not be deperted from his subject / nor
the subject from it.

And this nowne Common as touching to our purpose at this time: is taken
Common.
co^traryly to the two last rehearsed sygnyfycacions of this word propre. Now
it rests or remains to show how many manner ways these nownes Rich and
Pore / ar taken and used. This nowne rich most co^munely: is said of him,
which who is called rich.
has to him self superhabundau^ce or superfluyte of temporal things (which
they do call riches) for all manner time, both present and to come and that
laufully. Another 1
manner way he is called a rich man, which has lawfully unto him self 2
the foresaid things, only in a suffycyent quantyte, both for the time
present and the time to come. Yet again this nowne rich, is said two manner
ways and more properly. First of him that has the things aforesaid
superhabundantlye and 3
more than suffycientlye, or is willing also to have the said things in such
manner and facyon. An other way it is said of him, that has the things now
said 4
and rehearsed only suffyciently, as it was said in the second sygnyfycacion
of this word: or of him that is willing to have them after such suffycient
manner. And this nowne poor in his two first sygnyfycacions dyffereth from
these Poor.
signyficacio^s of this word rich as a pryuacion differs from his habit.
For one way, he is called poor, which wants only superhabundaunce and
superfluite 1
of goods, although he have suffycyentlye. But an other way he is called 2
poor which has not together at one time, suffycient things for every
manner time, yt is to wit both present and also for to come. But the third
way he 3
is called poor which of his fre will without co^pulcion: is willing to be
berefte of superabundau^ce or superfluite of goods for every manner time / and
after this manner or sygnyfycacion: this word pore dyffereth from this word
rich, as one contrary from an other contrary. And the. iiii. way he is
called poor, which is 4
not willing to have together at one time so much as is suffycyent for every
manner time both present and also to come / but otherwhyles will of his own
fre will lack or want them. Wherefore not every sygnyfycacion of this word
pore and pouertye, is dyfferynge or contrary to every sygnyfycacyon of this
word rich: indyfferentlye. And here we ought not to ouerhyppe, that of those
which be willing poor: some there be which forsake temporal things for an
honest end, and in a conuenyent manner. And other some seem to refuse and
forsake such things not for a good intent: but for vain glory / or else
for to do some other worldly dysceyte or gyle. Here also it is to benoted and
marked besides these aforesaid things, that of temporal things which they do
call riches / there are certain of them, which are apt to be consumed or
spente with only one act or ones using of them / as meats / drynkes /
medycynes / and such other things / and certain other things there be:
which abide, continue, and are apt to serve, to moo uses than one, or oftener
than ones / as a field / a house / an axe / a garment / an horse / or a
servant.

The. xiii. and. xiiii. chapytres ben omytted as contaynynge no matter much
necessary.

Of the deuysyon of the office of priests, that is to say preesthode by
essencyall, and accydentall auctoryte / by seperable and in seperable
auctoryte, And that, in the essencyall dygnyte a preeste is not inferyor to a
bishop / but only in auctoryte accydentall.
The, xv, chapter,
THe pryncypall and i^medyate effectyue cause or maker of preesthode, is god,
but yet certain mynysterye of man going before. The beginning The
instytucion of priests
whereof in the new law: was of christ. For he which was very god and man,
in that he was a man and a humayne preeste: he did exhybite that mynistery
which the priests following him do now exhibit. But in that he was god: he
did institute: and make them priests. And so first of all he instytuted the
apostles, and his i^medyate and next successors / and then consequently all
other priests / but yet by the mynystery of the apostles / and of other
succedynge them in this office. For when the apostles and other priests lay
on their hands upon other men, and do also speak the words and form dew
thereunto. Christ in that he is god does make and admytte them and give them
power. And this order of preesthode is a power or auctoryte, by which a
preeste may consecrate of bread and wine, the blyssed body and blood of
christ, with the pronouncynge of certain words / and also may mynystre other
sacraments of the church / by which also he may bind and louse men from
sins. And this power the apostles received, after the mind and opinion of
certain doctors, when christ said to them yt which is written in the. xxvi.
of Mathewe / in the. xiiii. of Mark and in the. xxii. of Luke. But because the
order thereof appears more perfytely in Luke: we will allege the text as it is
had there in this wise. After he had taken bread in to his hands / he (that is
to wit christ) gave thanks, and brake it, and gave At what time ye apostles
did receive ye power of preesthode.
it to them (that is to say to the apostles) saying. This is my body, which
is given for you / do this unto the remembrance of me / do this that is to
say, have you power to do this. But certain other men have thought, that this
auctorite, was given to the apostles by that, which is written in ye. xx.
chapter of John^, when christ said to them. Receive you or take you the holy
ghost. And whose sins you shall forgive: the same are forgyuen to them / and
whose sins you shall retain: they at retained. Some other again, say, that
this power was given to Tibi dabo clauos.
them by that which is written in the. xvi. of Mathewe, when christ said to them
in the person of Peter. To the I shall give the keys of ye kingdom of heuens
etc. or else by that, which was said to them of christ in the. xviii. chapter
of the same euangelyst / verily I say to you what soever things you shall
bind upon earth: they shall be bound also in heaven / and what soever things
you shall louse upon Two powers or auctorite belo^gyngeties preesthod
earth: they shall be loused also in heaven. And other some again say, yt they
are. ii. so^dry powers or auctoryties belo^gynge to preesthode. The one whereby
they may consecrate the sacrament of the altar. And the other, whereby they may
bind or louse men from their sins / which they say to have been given to the
apostles, at diverse and sondrye times, and also by diverse and sundry words
of christ / Now which of these said opiniones is most like to be true: it
skylleth not to this present purpose / for how soever, or wha^ soever yt
istitucion of this office was done or made upon the apostles, this is
undoubted, that this power or auctorite was given to them by christ / and that
so also it is given by the aforesaid mynystery of the apostles and their
successors / unto other men, which are taken unto this of fyce / wherefore in
the. iiii. chapter in the first epistle to Timothe, it is said / do not thou
despise or set light by the gift or grace, that is in the, which is given to
the by prophycie, by the priests layenge one of his hands upon the. And in
the same manner wise, the deacons receive a certain power belonging unto them:
by the priests putting one of his hands upon them / of the which deacons it
is written in the syxte chapter of the acts. They did set these men (that is
to wit those which should be made deacons) before the syghte of the apostles,
and they making their prayers put there hands upon them.

This power of preesthode, whether it be one alone, or else mo than one, which
The auctoryte essencial or inseparable.
we have said to be the power and auctorite of making the sacrament of the
aultare, or of the body and blood of christ, and the power of byndynge and
lousynge men from sins, and which from henceforth we shall call the auctoryte
essenciall, or the auctoryte inseparable from a preeste, in that he is a
preeste, this auctoryte (I say) all priests (as me thinks of very lykelyhode
to be true) have all one in kind / neither the bishop of Rome, or any other
bishop has this auctoryte any whyt more largely / than any other has who
ever he be, being called a simple or pryuate priest. For in this auctoryte,
whether it be one, or else mo than one: a bishop dyffereth nothing from a
preeste / as saint Iherome witnesses / or rather the apostle, whose plain and
open sentence this is, as it shall euydentlye appear hereafter / for thus
says saint Iherome upon the text in the. xvi. of Mathewe. And Iherome.
Tibidabo claues.
what soever thing thou shalt bind upon earth. etc. The other apostles
truly have the same iudiciarie power (understand, which Peter had) to whom
christ said after his resurreccyon / receive you the holy ghost / whose sins
you shall forgive they are forgyuen to them. etc. Every church also has the
same power in Mark this term, Every church, and how yt every priest has as
much power in byndyng and lousynge as the pope.
priests and bysshoppes / and here Iherome sets priests before bishops in
this point / for this auctoryte is duly belonging to a preeste, in that he
is a preeste, first and pryncypally, or essencially / and as touching to the
power of making the sacrament of the aultare. No man does strive or say
against it, but that any other preeste has egall power, with the pope of Rome.
And therefore it is to be meruayled, wherefore some men do strive styffely and
frowardly affyrmynge, but yet no thing reasonablye: that the pope of Rome
has more large power of the keys, given to him of christ: than has other
priests / seeing that this can not be proved by the holy scripture, but rather
the contrary. For which things more euydently to be seen and perceived: you
ought to understand and know, that these two words presbiter, and episcopus
/ that is to say preeste or senyoure, and bishop, were both of one
sygnyfycacion, and betokened alone thing, in ye prymatyue church / albeit that
they were put to sygnyfy one thing of diverse propertyes / for presbiter was a
name given to them of age, which is as much to say, as a seniour or elder.
And Episcopus was a name given of cure or charge upon other / and is as much
to say, as an ouerloker / wherefore saint Iherom in a certain epistle to
Eua^dre priest, which epistle is written to be intytled, how a preeste and a
deacon does dyffer: says thus. Presbiter and Episcopus / the one is a name of
age: the other of Presbiter. Episcopus.
dygnyte / wherefore also to Titus and to Timotheus, mencyon is made of the
ordynacion of a bishop or ouerseer and of a deacon, but of senyours or
priests no word at all is spoken / for in this word Episcopus: presbiter is
contained. This also appears The same is a priest which is a bishop / that is
to say bishop or preeste are all one.
manyfestly by the apostle, in the first chapitre to the Philippianes, when he
said. To al ye saints or holy men, in christ Jesus: which are in Philippe,
with the bishops and deacons. To here, that he names the priests none
otherwise than bishops or overseers / for this is undoubted, there was not
otherwise many bishops in one city: but because there were many priests. The
same thing again is euydentlye showed, by the same Paul in the first chapter
to Titus, when he said. For this cause I left the behind me at Creta: that
thou should furnysshe Candy.
up such things, as are lacking or wantynge / and that thou should ordain
and make priests or senyours by the cities, so as I have ordained and
appointed to the. If any man be fautles. etc. and by and by after appoyntynge
and showing the qualytes belo^gyng to them that should be made priests: he
says / for a bishop ought to be without fault as being the dispe^satour or
mynystre of god. etc. Lo here, that he called him which was to be made preeste:
nothing else but a bishop. The same Paul in the. xx. chapter of the acts,
speaking to the priests of one church that is to say of Ephesus: says in
this wise. Take heed to your self, and to ye hole flock, in which the holy
ghost has set you bishops or overseers, to govern the church of god, which
he has redeemed with his own blood. Lo here that in the church of one city,
that is to wit of Ephesus, the apostle spoke to many as to bysshoppes or
ouerlokers / which was not, but for that there were many priests / which all
were called bishops or ouerlokers: because they ought to ouerloke the people.
How beit afterward in the church following, he only was called bishop or
ouerseer: which by the other priests, and the people, was instytuted and made
cheyfe or highest of all y^ priests, of that city or place. And the apostle
called them Wherefore Paulecalleth priests bishops or over seers.
rather bishops or overseers, than priests or senyours / because he would
call unto their remembrance, the care and busynes or dylygent ouerlokynge,
which they ought to have, of the other christen people. He called himself a
preeste or senyour, and not a bishop or ouerloker / because of humilite and
mekenes / as it appears of the text before brought in, of ye. iiii. chapter
of the first epistle to Timothe, when he said Do not despise or set light of
the grace or gift, which is in the. etc. So also Peter and John^ called them
selves senyours / for this name was given of age / wherefore in ye. v. chapter
of the first epistle of Peter / it is written. Therefore I beseech the senyours
which are among you, being my self a senyour with them, and a wytnesser of
the passions and afflyccyo^s of christ. etc. And in the first chapter of the
second epistle of John^, it is written. The senyour, to the chosen lady and to
hersones. etc. And in the first chapter of the third epistle of the same
John^. The senyour to the most derely beloved Caius. etc. But where the common
text of the canone, or holy scripture, has these words senior or co^senior /
saint Iherome in the epistle aforesaid, has every where presbiter or
conpresbiter. For the apostles used these words / as being all of one
sygnyfycacyon. But after the times of When bishops or prelates were first
instytuted and why.
the apostles, the nombre of priests being notablye augmented and increased,
to avoid sclaundre and occasyon of offendynge any man, and to avoid scisme
and dyuysyon / the priests chose one among them selves, which should dyrecte
and order the other, as touching to thee xercysynge of the ecclesiastical
office, or service, and the dystrybutynge of the oblacyons, and the dysposynge
and ordering of other things in the most conuenyent manner / list if every
man might do this thing after his own pleasure, and as he left him self /
the good order and service of the churches might be troubled, by the reason of
the diverse affeccions of men. This preeste which was so elected and chosen,
to order and rule the other priests: by the custom and used manner of
speaking of them that came afterward, was only called a bishop or ouerseer
/ because not only he was over loker of the christen people, for which cause
all other priests also were called overseers in the prymatyue church / but
also be cause he had the ouersyght of yt other priests / for which Nota.
cause such manner a preeste of Antioche retained to himself alone the name of
a bishop or ouerseer / all they afterward retaynynge to them selves, only
the name of a priest. But this said eleccyon or instytucyon made by man: gives
or The eleccyon of man augmenteth not the power of spiritual byndynge and
losing in a bishop, nor decreaseth it not in a priest.
adds to the person so elected and chosen, no whyt of more large merit
essencial or of the auctoryte of preesthode, or of the power aforesaid / but
only gives to him a certain power of a canonycall ordynacyon, in the house
of god or temple to order and dyrecte or rule other priests and deacons, and
other officers and mynystres. Like as now a days unto the pryour of a
relygyouse house / power and auctoryte is given upon the covent. Power I say
not coactyue of any man but only so farforth as shall be granted concerning
this point, by the auctoryte of the king, to the person so elected / as it
has been proved in ye. iiii. and the. viii. chapytres of this dyccyon, and shall
appear more largely in the chapter next following. Neither yet any other
intrinsecall dygnyte or power, is given to him so elected / by such eleccyon.
After this manner the soldyars in war, chose to them selves a capytayne /
whom they were wont in the old time to cala master or emperor / albeit
that this word Imperator, in English emperor, is now translated to Emperor
betoken a certain manner or kind of regale power, highest over all / and so
it is used now adays. So also the deacons among them selves choseth an
archedeacon, Archdeacon
to whom such eleccyon does not give or add any essencyal merit, or any
holy order, above deaconshyppe / but only it gives to him a certain humayne
power or auctoryte (as we have said) to order and rule the other deacons /
wherefore the bishop of Rome has no whyt more of the essencyall auctoryte of
preesthode: Cecidit Babylon.
than has any other priest, who ever he be. Even likewise as saint Peter had
no whyt more of this essenciall power / than the other apostles / for all they
received this same auctoryte of christ i^medyatly and egally / as it was said
before by the auctoryte of Iherome, upon that text in the. xvi. of Mathewe.
And to the I shall give the keys of the kingdom of heue^s, and as it shall be
more largely declared in the next chapter following. And this was openly the
mind of saint Ihetome Iherome.
in aforesaid epistle / in which, after yt he had showed by many auctorytes of
ye aforesaid apostles, yt in the prymatyue church or in the time of the
apostles, a priest or senyour, and a bishop or ouerseer, was utterly all one
in the essenciall dygnyte given to them of christ: showing ye cause of the
said things, he says thus / but that one was elect, which should be above
other: it was done for the remedy of scisme and deuysyon / lest if every man
should draw unto himself, the church of christ, by the reason thereof, might
be broken or divided in sondre. For in Alexandria also, from the time of Mark
the euangelyst, unto yt time of Hereidas and Dionise byssshops: yt priests
always chose one among themselves, whom they did set in an higher degree, and
called him bishop or ouerseer / much like, as if the host or army should make
an emperor. Or else as if the deacons did chose one among them self, whom
they do know to be dylygent and wise / and did call him an archdeacone. For
what does the bishop (ordynacyon only excepted) which a preeste might not
do? as touching to the acts or works belonging to ye essencial auctorite?
For Iherom where he speaks of ordinacion did not understand thereby
ordynacyon, the power and auctoryte to give, or the gyuynge of holy ordres /
for the bysshoppes do now adays many things beside the gyuynge of ordres,
and so did the bysshoppes also in saint Iheroms time / which things the
priests do not. Albeit yt to the gyuynge of all the sacraments, by ye dyuyne A
priest may manystre all sacraments as well as a bishop by ye law of god
power, any priest may do as much as ye bishop. But Iherome understood thereby
ordynacyon, the power of ordering such things, as pertayne to the service of
god, and other things aforesaid given to him i^medyatly of man or men / which
thing I do confyrme both by reason, and the auctoryte of the same Iherome. The
reason is this / for there has been many elected bishops by the whole people
or co^munaltie / as saint Clement / saint Gregory / saint Nycolas / and many
other saints / to whom it is undoubted, that no greatter holy order, nor any
inward characte, was given by the people or by their fellow priests: but
only power and auctoryte to dyspose and order the ceremonies and service of ye
church, and to dyrecte and rule the mynystres of the temples, as touching to
the exercise of gods In the old time they were called Iconomi reuere^di
which now are called Episcopi.
service, in the temple or house of god / for which cause and consyderacyon
also, such persons elected to dyrecte other priests in the temple, and to
instruct the people, in such things which appertain to the faith, called
bysshoppes: of the old law makers as of Iustiniane and of the people of Rome
were than called Iconomireuerendi. And the highest of them was called of the
same law makers Iconomius reuerendissimus. And therefore according to the
troth, and after the mind of saint Iherome, a bishop is none other thing,
than an archpreest. And that the essencyall dygnyte of a bishop and of a
preeste is all one, neither that one bishop has more large essencyall
auctoryte, than an other bishop. Neither one preeste than an other preeste:
saint Iherome also expressed in the aforesaid epistle, when he said. Neither
it is to be judged or thought, that there is one church A bishop is an
archpreest Iherome.
of the city of Rome, and an other of the whole world. Both France, and
England / and Affryke / Perselande / and the Eest / and the west / and Inde /
and al Barbarouse nacyons: do worship one christ / they all do observe and
keep one rule of the troth / if auctoryte be sought: the whole world is
greatter than a city / where Or at Canterbury, or at Lyncolne.
soever he shall be bishop, whether it be at Rome, or at Engobin^, or at
Constantinople, or at Regium, or at Alexandrie, or at Rachane: they are all of
one and the same merit, and all of one preesthode. The power and might of
riches, and the lownes of pouerte: makes an higher or a lower bishop / but
they are all, the successors of the apostles. But there at certain other
instytucyons not essencyall, of the offices belonging to priests / as for
example / the eleccyon which we have spoken of a little heretofore, whereby one
of them is taken or chosen to the ordrynge or gouernynge of other, as touching
to those things, which appertains to the worshypynge of god or the dyuyne
service / and also the eleccyo^s and instytucyons of certain of them, to
teach and instruct the christen people, and to mynystre the sacraments of y^
new law, to a certain people, and in a certain place appointed, greatter or
smaller. And also to dyspence and dystrybute both to him self and also to
other pore men, certain te^porall things appointed and ordained by the king
or by a plyament for the sustentacyon of poor preachers of the gospel, in a
certain prouynce or co^munyte / and also for the sustentacyon of other poor
folks / but yet of y^ only, which shall be superfluous, and more than needs,
to the suffycient finding of the preachers of the gospel / which te^porall
goods so appointed and ordained to such use, are after the common use and
manner of speaking now a days called the benefyces of the church / for these
are committed and betaken to the mynystres of Ecclesiastical benefyces,
the temples, to be bestowed upon the aforesaid uses / to the mynysters I say
thereunto ordained, in a certain prouynce. For by the auctoryte essenciall, by
which they are the successors of the apostles they are not more determined to
teach and instruct the people, and to mynysters the sacraments of the new
law, in one place / than in an other / but likewise as the apostles were not
determined or appointed, to any certain places / to whom it was said. Go
therefore, and teachr all nations. Christ did not appoynte them to certain
places / but they afterwae des among them selves, divided the peoples and
prouynces to them selves, in which they would preach and show the word of
god, or the law of the gospel / and sometime they were taught, where they
should preach: by the reuelacyon of god / wherefore also it is red in the
second epistle to the Galatianes. They gave their right hands to me, and to
Barnabas, in token of felowshyppe (that is to wit James, Peter, and John^) that
we among the gentyles, and they among the Jews. etc. So than of the
premysses it appears, of whom, as of the cause effycyent: the instytucyon of
preesthode is, and of other holy ordres. Truly of god or christ imedyatlye /
albeit there gothe before as preparynge, a certain mynysterye of man / as the
layenge one of the hands / and the pronounsynge of certain words / which
peradventure does nothing to this / but are so put before of a certain The
ceremonies of the church what manner ones they are.
promise or ordinance of god. It appears also of y^ same premysses: yt there
is a certain other instytucyon made by man, by which one preeste is preferred
above other priests / by which also, priests are ordained and appointed to
certain prouynces, and to certain people, to instruct and teach them in the
law of god / and to mynystre the sacraments, and to dyspose and dystrybute
the temporalles, which we called before the ecclesiastical benefyces / it has
appeared of the same premysses: that in the first auctorytie which we have
called the essenciall auctorytie: all priests are equal in merit and
preestehode / as saint Iherome said in the aforesaid epistle, showing also
the cause. For that all priests are the successors of the apostles. In which
saying he seems to mean, that all the apostles were of egall auctorytie / and
so consequentlye, that none of them syngularelye by him self, had auctoryte
upon an other or above other apostle or apostles / neither as touching to the
essencyall auctoryte, which we have called the first and pryncypall auctoryte:
neither yet as touching to the secondarie instytucyons / wherefore it seems
that we ought to have like opinion of their successors among them selves, one
of them in comparyson to an other / to whom, and in to whom, how such manner
instytucyons does come, which we have called secondarie institucyons, and made
by the auctorytie of man: and which is according to reason, the effectyue
cause of the said instytucyons, that is to say who has auctoryte to make
such instytucyons: it rests and remains / to be determined.

How the apostles were egall, in what soever office or dygnyte was given to
them by christ imedyatlye / whereof, that is proved: which was said in the
last chapter before gone concerning the egalyte of their successors / and
how all bysshoppes, are indyfferentlye the successors of what soever apostle.
The, xvi, chapter,
SO than beginning at the things before determined: we shall in this chapter,
first show that none of the apostles had prehemynence above other in the
essencyal dygnyte of preesthode / tha it is to wit given to them of christ.
And after we shall show, that in none other instytucyon, which we have called
secondarie / and by so much the less in any iurysdyccion coactyue / howbeit
this last thing has been suffycientlye proved in the. iiii. and the. v.
chapytours of this dyccyon. Of which things we shall also of necessyte:
conclude: yt none of the bishops, successors to the apostles, syngularlye
have any of the auctorytes or powers aforesaid, upon or over other his fellow
bysshoppes, or fellow priests. And that the contrary hereof can not be proved
by the virtue of the words of holy scripture: but rather the present purpose.
And last of all, hereof (which thing also we did fynallye intend in the
chapter last before gone) we shall infer and conclude of necessyte, that
these instytucyons which we have often times called secondarye: does
appertain to the chrystened prince, as to the pryncypall cause effectyue of
them, even so as he is also of other offices or parts of the co^munytie. The
first therefore of these purposes, is proved by the. xxii. chapitre of Luke. For
christ gyuynge to the apostles power to make the sacrament of the aultare: said
unto them. This is my body / which is given for you do this thing in to the
remembrance of me / that is to say, have you power to do this thing, but yet
by speaking like words, when you ought to excercyse this act / that is to
wit these words Hocest enim corpus meum. And he did not speak these words,
more to saint Peter: than to other / for christ did not say, do thou this /
and give thou power to the other apostles, for to do likewise / but he said do
you this in the plurell nombre, and to them all, indyfferentlye. The same is
also to be judged in every point, of the power of the keys / whether it was
given to the apostles by these same words / or else by other words, or else
at an other time / as by the words which are had in the. xx. of John^ / for
after that christ had said to his apostles, as my father has sent me so
also I send you / he breathed upon them, and said / receive you the holy ghost
/ whose sins you shall forgive / they be forgyuen to them / and whose sins
you shall retain: they are retained. Christ than said, I send you: as my
father has sent me / and he said not to Peter, or to any other apostle,
syngularlye / I send the, as my father has sent me / and send thou the
other. Neither it is again said there / christ breathed upon him, but it is
said, he breathed upon them / not upon one by an other / neither said christ
to Peter, receive or take thou the holy ghost and afterward give thou it to
other / but he said, receive or take you, in the plurellnombre / speaking
indyfferently to them all / and this is it also which is had in the last
chapter of Mathewe when christ said to them. Go you therefore, and teach all
nacyons / and he said / go you, and teach you, speaking in the plurel nombre
and endyfferentlye / and not said to Peter go thou therefore, and send thou the
other / which thing the apostle expressing more largely, to determyne this
questyon (that is to wit that no man should believe or suppose, that any of the
apostles had this prerogatyue or auctoryte upon or above other) remouynge or
taking away expresselye such prerogatyue from Peter, of whom peradventure
this seemed to be true, that he was above the other, because of certain words
spoken to him syngularly of christ, and also because he was elder than the
other he says thus in the second chapter to the Galatianes. For they which
seemed to be somewhat or to be in price and greatly esteemed / gave me nothing or
helped me nothing / but contrary wise I them / when they had seen and
perceived, that the preaching of the gospel to the Gentyles vncyrcumcysed,
was committed to me, likewise as it was committed to Peter, to preach the
gospel to the people of the Jews / for he that wrought in Peter to be apostle
of cyrcumcisyon / wrought also in me among the Gentyles. And when they had
known the grace, which was given to me / James / Peter / and John^ / which
seemed to be the pyllers / gave to me and to Barnabas, their right hands of
fellowship. etc. he therefore yt wrought in Peter to the apostleshyp: wrought in
also in Paul / and this was christ / ergohe took not or received this manner
office of Peter: and likewise no more did the other apostles / where also the
gloss after the mind of saint Agustyne expressing Augustyne.
this more largely / says thus. They which seemed to be somewhat, that is to
wit Peter and the other which were with our lord: gave nothing, that is
Paul, took nothing of Peter.
to say added nothing to me / wherein it is euydent, that I am not inferyor to
them / seeing that I am made so perfyte of the lord and of god / that there was
no thing, which in ye co^ferrynge of my preaching with their own / they
might add to my perfeccion. Lo here that Paul was not inferior to Peter, nor
to the other apostles / consequently, to this purpose / it follows thus in the
gloss / when they had seen or perceived, that the preaching of the gospel to
the vncyrcumcysed gentyles, was betaken to me / as faithful and trusty, so
pryncypally, as the gospel of cyrcumcisyon was betaken to Peter. Lo that Paul
was sent as pryncypallye, as Peter was / and not of Peter or of any other of
the apostles / but of christ i^medyatlye / which thing the apostle more
largelye expressing in the first chapter of the same epistle, says thus.
Paul the apostle, not of men or by man: but by Ihesus christ, and god ye
father / where the gloss says after the mind of Ambrose. Paul the apostle,
not elect or sent by men, that is to wit, by Ananias Ambrose. Paul was not
sent of Ananias.
as certain men said / or by other men, as certain were elected and sent by
the apostles / and a little after it follows in the same gloss, alter the mind
of Augustyne. For the other apostles seemed to be greatter, because they were
before. And this apostle seemed to be least / because he was last / but hereof
he appears more worshypfull / because the first apostles were made and
ordained by christ being yet partlye a man, that is to say mortal / but the
last apostle (that is to wit Paul) was constituted and made by christ now
being whole god / that Paul was more worthy apostle.
is to say utterly mortal / and by god the father / which did or wrought
this by the same / and that he might open and declare wherefore he said neither
by man / he says afterward, which has raised him up from death. And so he
has more worthelye or worshypfullye made me by christ being i^mortall: than
he did the other by christ being mortal. Again the apostle co^fyrmynge this
afterward in ye same chapter, says thus. I give you knowledge or do you to
wit brethern: that the gospel, which has been preached of me: is not after
man / for I have not received it, or learned it of man: but by the reuelacyon
of Ihesu christ / where the gloss after the mind of Augustyne says. I do you
to wit brethren, that the gospel which has been preached of me: is not
after the mind of any man, teaching me / and verily it is not of man: for I
have not received it, neither learned it of man, so that man did elect me to
preach it, or inioyne me to preach it. Neither I learned it of man teaching
me: but by the reuelacyon of Jesus christ. Lo here, that neither Peter, neither
any other of ye apostles, or any man has chosen Paul, or sent him or enjoined
to him the mynystery of preaching the gospel. The same is to be judged also
of ye other apostles. Peter therefore had no power (and much less than he had
coactyue iurysdyccion) of god i^medyately, upon ye other apostles / neither of
i^stytutige them in ye office of preesthode / neither to segregate and depart
them in sondre, or to send them to the office of preaching / saving only
that this may safelye be granted, that Peter was before or above other in How
and after what manner. Peter was superyor to the other apostles.
age or au^cyentnes / or perauenture before them in office as touching time or
the choosing of the apostles, that is to say first elected apostle / for
which cause the other apostles had him in reverence, not unworthily / albeit
yt no man can prove this eleccion of Peter before the other apostles: by the
holy scripture. And that this is true which we have said / it is an euyde^t
token, seeing that we do not find any where in the scripture, that Peter took
upon him any auctoryte syngulerly above ye other apostles / but rather that he
kept and used egalytie with them / for he took not to him self auctoryte, to
determyne such things which were doubtful concerning the preaching of the
gospel, which pertayneth to doctrine and teaching / but such things, as
were doubtful, concerning this busynes: were determined by the common
delyberacion or counceyle of the apostles, and of other christen men most
learned / and not by the determynacyon of Peter alone: or of any other apostle
severally by him self / wherefore in the. xv. chapter of the acts, when a
dyssencyon was risen among ye preachers of the gospel, whether it was
necessary to cyrcumcyse the christen men that were vncyrcumcysed, for the
getting or obtaynynge of everlasting salvation: and certain said, that it
was necessary, but Paul and Barnabas said plainly against it: the apostles
and the senyours assembled together to take consultacyon of this matter / upon
which Peter and James said, that it was not necessary / to whose sentence and
judgment the senyours and the other apostles consented / wherefore it follows
afterward in the text. Than it pleased the apostles, and senyours, with the
whole congregacyon, to chose men, and to send them to Antyoche / with Paul
and Barnabas. etc. sendynge letters by their hands / and the manner of their
writing, was like to the manner of a delyberacyon or consultacyon in this
form and facyon. The apostles, and senyours, and brethern, to the brethern of
the gentyles, which are in Antioche, in Siria, and Cilicia: sends greatynge.
etc. A like thing is also had afterward in the same chapter, when it is said
/ it pleased us therefore being assembled together in one, to chose men, and to
send them unto you / again the same thing is had in the same chapter a
little after / it has pleased the holy ghost and us, to lay no more burthayne
upon you. Thus than it is euydent, that Peter did not determyne the aforesaid
doubts concerning the faith / of the fulness of power / which fulness of power
certain masters and teachers in Israel, dreamynge, does say / that the
bishop of Rome has / which also has pronounced and given sentence in their
decrees written, that the bishop of Rome by him self alone (which thing
Peter durst never be bold to do) may determyne the doubts, which are
concerning the faith / which is openly and euydentlye false / and plainly
contrary to the scripture / whereof also we shall speak largely in the next
chapter hereafter following, and in the. xx. chapter of this dyccyon. It was
the congregation than of the learned christen men / which took cou^ceyll /
which determined the doubt / which chose messengers / and which wrote. And
by this auctoryte of the whole congregacyon: the thing which was so
determined and commanded, was of strength / for the congregacyon of the
apostes was of more or greatter auctorite, than Peter alone / or any other
apostle by him self / wherefore we do read, that Peter was sent by the
congregation in to Samarye / as it is euydent in the. viii. chapter of the
acts, by these words / when the apostles had herd which were at Iherusalem,
that the Samaritanes had received the word of god / they sent to them Peter
and John^. Why then or whereof does certain cursed flaterers take upon them,
to say, that any bishop has fulness of power given to him by christ, not
only upon lay men, but also upon clerks / seeing that saint Peter, or any
other apostle, never presumed to ascribe such manner power unto him self,
neither by word or dead / wherefore they which affirm and say this, are to be
laughte to scorn, and nothing to be beleaued, and less to be feared / seeing
that the scryptures cry plainly the contrary in the lytterall and manifest
sense of them. For saint Peter had never such power upon the apostles or
other: but he kept rather equalyte with them, according to the precepte of
christ, as we have said before / wherefore it is red in the. xxiii. of Mathewe.
Be not you willing to be called Rabbi, yt is to say in english master for
your master is but one christ / and all you ar brethren / yt is to say equal
one of you with an other / and he said al you: exceptynge no man. This sentence
also is co^fyrmed by the apostle in the second chapter to the Galatianes,
where he says. And I went up to Iherusalem according to the reuelacyon / and
I conferred with them, the gospel, which I do preach among the Gentyles /
where ye gloss after the mind of Augustyne says. And I did not learn of them
as of superyours / that is to wit of Peter, nor of the other more pryncypall
apostles, of whom it shall be spoken hereafter. But I co^ferred with them: as
with my friends, and peers, or fellows. The same is showed again afterward
in the same chapter when the apostle said / but when Peter was com to
Antioche: I withstode him openly to his face, because he was reprouable. etc.
where the gloss after the mind of saint Iherome says, they gave nothing to
me, but I gave to Peter / and it follows there co^sequentlye, I resysted or
withstode him, as his peer or match / for he would not have been bold to do
this: except he had known him self not to be inferyor. Behold here
therefore, that Paul was egall to Peter in office and dygnyte, and not inferyor
/ albeit that Peter was senior to him in age, and also pastor before him in
time. Likewise it appears that neither saint Peter, nor any other apostle, had
preemynence or power and auctoryte above other, in the dystrybutynge of the
te^porall goods, which were offered to the prymatyue church / whereof it is
red in the. iiii. of the acts / for as many as were possessyoners of lands
and Saint Pet had no more auctorite tha^ the other apostles had.
houses / sold them, and brought the pryces of them, and laid them before the
fete of the apostles / and they were divided to each man: after as each one had
neade. Lo here, that the dysposycion and ordering of the temporal things,
which were offered unto the church: was done by the apostles in common
together / and not by Peter alone / for it is not said they laid before the
fete of Peter: but before yt fete of the apostles / neither is it said and Peter
divided: but they were divided. etc. Tell me therefore, whereby, or from whence,
or how, comes the auctoryte to the bishop of Rome, for to dystrybute such
things according to his own pleasure or else to claim as dew to him self
alone, the things bequest in men's testamentes for charytable causes, and to
good and godly uses / but yet committed to other men for to be kept or
dystrybuted / seeing that it is neither laufull to him alone neither yet with
an other, neither by the law of god, nor yet of man, to demand or claim
such manner things, which has been committed and betaken to the faithful
custody of other men by reasonable laws / as by the will of the testatours, or
of them yt so ordained / for let the testatour say or will any thing
concerning that which is his own, and it shall be a law, as it is written in
other places. For there can be no cause or reason taken of the holy scripture,
which may make us to beleaue, that this power belongs to the bishop of
Rome, or else to any other bishop / but rather the contrary / but if these
legacies or bequestes were committed (by the king) to the church of a
certain and a determynate dyocese, for to be dystrybuted: than shall it
appertain to those bysshoppes which are rulers of ye said dyocese / but in no
wise to the pope of Rome. And the cause of this is, for that the bishop of
Rome neither has, neither had, of christ any power or auctoryte above the
other, that be bishops or priests as well as he. And this was one of the
things purposed of us syns ye beginning of this chapter. For as Peter had
not any such prerogatyue or power above the other apostles / even so neither
the successors of Peter in the epyscopall see of Rome, has any prerogatyue
above the successors of the other apostles. For Peter had no power or
auctoryte to give unto them preesthode, apostleshyp, or the dygnyte of a
bishop for all they took this power or auctorytie i^medyatlye of christ / and
not by the mynysterie of Peter, more than Peter took it by the mynysterie of
them / as we have proved heretofore euydentlie of the scripture. And saint
Augustyne also says Augustine.
the same expressly in his book of the questions of the new and of the old
testament in the. lxxxiiii. questyon: where he says thus. The same day (that
is to wit the fyftie day) the law was given: upon which day also the holy
ghost lyghted and came down upon the dyscyples / that they should take
auctoryte / and also have cunning and knowledge, to preach the law of the
gospel. Moreover as Peter is red to have been elected and chosen bishop by the
multitude of christen people, and neded not the co^fyrmacyon of the other
apostles: so also y^ other apostles were bysshoppes and governors in other
prouynces, without any knowledge of Peter, or any instytucyon or consecracyon
taken of him / for they were consecrated suffycyently by christ / wherefore it
is to be thought and supposed likewise, that the successors of the other
apostles: neded not any confyrmacyon of the successors of Peter / but rather
moreover many successors of the other apostles, were elected and instytuted
bishops in dew form and manner, and also did govern and rule their
prouynces holylie and virtuously: without any other instytucyon or
confyrmacyon of them, done by the successors of Peter. And this was so
laufully observed even unto the time of Constanstyne the emperor / which gave
(as it is lied) a certain prehemynence and power to the bishops and to the
church of Rome: upon the other churches, or all other priests of the world.
And this equalyte of That y^ apostles were egal in dygnyte.
Peter and the other apostles: the apostle Paul did sygnyfye in ye second of
the epistle to the Galatianes, when he said. They gave their right hands of
socyetie and fellowship, to me and to Barnabas / that we should be apostles and
preachers among the gentyles: and they them selves among the Jews. They gave
then the right hands of society and equalyte, as it was said before of the
gloss after Augustyne / albeit yt the saying of the apostle in this point is
so open and plain yt it needs no gloss / which thing also we have proved
here before by the epistle of saint Iherome to Euander the preeste / where he
says yt all bysshoppes, whether it were of Rome, or of any other place: are
all of one and the same preesthode, and merit or of one power and auctorytie
given by christ. But yet if any where it be found in the wrytynges of
certain holy fathers, that Peter is called Princeps a Why Peter was called y^
price or cheyf of ye apostles.
postolorum, yt is to say, the cheyfe or pryncipall of the apostles: it is said
taking this word princeps largely and improperly / albeit that it is openly
against the sentence and saying of christ in the. xx of Mathewe, and the.
xxii. of Luke, where he says. The princes of the gentyles have domynion of
them / but you not so. And therefore it is to be said yt the holy fathers spoke
not so meaning yt Peter had any power or auctoryte given to him by christ
over or upon the other apostles / but peradventure because he was elder in age
/ or because he first of all the apostles, did confess, that christ was the
very consubstancyal sone of god / or else because peradventure he was more
seruent co^stante, or bold in the says / or else because he was more often
times co^uersau^t with christ, and more often called i secret busynes and
counseyles / wherefore the apostle in the second chapter to ye Galatyans,
says thus. James Peter and John^ which seemed to be y^ pyllers. etc. where y^
gloss after y^ mind of Ambrose says / because they were more worshypful: for
that they were always with our lord in secret busynesses. A co^uenye^t
example of the which thing, may be taken of the worldly princes. For one of
them is not above an other of them by having any power one over an other / as
the earls of one realine of whom one is not under an other of them in
iurysdyccion or auctoryte / but they be all i^medyatly under the king / and
yet for all that one, or mo then one of them is otherwhyles accounted more
honorable then the other: because they be elder or more ancient / or else
because they be more excellent in one or mo virtues / or because they be more
obsequyouse and obedye^t, or do more pleasure or service to the king, or to
the realm. For which cause they be more loved of the king or the people: and
had in more reverence then the other / and after this same manner we ought to
judge of the apostles, in co^paryson of them one to an other, and unto christ /
for all they were under the power and auctoryte of christ i^medyatly and
received of him their instytucion in the office of preesthode, and of
apostleshyp, not one of them of an other (as the scripture witnesses openly
every where, and the saints following the scripture) albeit yet yt among them
saint Petre was the most worshypfull: for the causes aforesaid / but not for
any power or auctoryte given to him by christ, over or upon the other apostles
/ for this power or auctoryte, christ forbad them to have one over an other,
as we showed before by the. xxiii. of Mathewe, when he said dyrectly to the
present purpose, unto them these words. Be you not in will to becalled Rabbi
(yt is to say master) for you have but one master christ / and all you be
brethren / and likewise neither had he any coactyue iurysdyccion upon the other
apostles / more then they had over him / and so consequently neither his
successors upon the successors of the other apostles / for this christ
utterly forbad them in the. xx. of Mathewe, and the. xxii. of Luke: when he
said dyrectly, for ye present purposes unto them (when there was a co^te^cion
made among them which of them should be the greatest) these words following.
The kings and princes of the gentyles: are lords over them / and they which
are greatter don exercise power and auctoryte upon them / but do not you so.
Christ could no more openly and plainly have denied it them / why then shall
any man believe the tradycyon of man concerning this matter, whether he be saint
or no saint: more then ye most plain and open speech or saying of christ?
for against such manner person or persons christ speaks in the. vii. of
Mark: when he said dyrectly to our present purpose. But they honouren me in
vain, teaching the doctrynes and precepts of men / for you leave the
commandment of god: and do hold or keep the tradycio^s of men / and a little
after it follows / you do well refuse or make the commandment of god void,
or of none effect: yt you may keep your own tradycio^s. And this thing do
all they: which The decretalles made by men.
teachen the Decretalles made by men / which sayen, that to the bishop of Rome
belongs power and domynyon of the temporal goods, not only of men of ye
church that is to say ecclesiastical persons: but also of the te^poralles
belo^gynge to kings and emperors / maki^ge the precepte of god void and of
none effect (as it was showed in the. xiiii. chapter, and as it appears
euyde^tly of this present chapter (that they may keep their own tradycyon or
constytucyon concerning the temporal goods: for their own profit and
aduau^tage. But yet if the apostles had elected and chosen saint Peter, as
ouerseer to them, or more pryncypall, because of his age: and more excellent
holiness (as it is had of a certain decre of Anacletus pope which is contained
in the Code or book of Isydore, ye text of which decre is in this form
following. But the other apostles with the same Peter received honor and power
by egall fellowship / and they wylled him to be cheyfe and pryncypall of them
(yet for all yt it should not follow hereof, that his successors in the sea of
Rome, or in any other see, if he were bishop any where else: has the same
priorite or prehemyne^ce above the successors of the other apostles / except
his successors were chosen there unto by the successors of the other apostles
/ for some successors of the other apostles: were of more virtue, then
certain of the successors of Peter. Howbeit properly every bishop is
indyfferently the successor of every one of the apostles as touching to
office though not as touching to place. Again why should this superiorite or
prerogatyue belong more to the successors of Peter in the sea of Every one of
the bishops is the successor of saint Petre.
Rome: then to his successors in the sea of Antioche, or of Jerusalem, or in
any other see if he had been bishop in many sees. etc. Moreover every bishop
as touching to the intrynsecall dygnyte, yt is to say, the inseparable
dygnyte, is indyfferently the successor of each one of the apostles / and of
the same merit or perfeccyon, as touching to the dygnyte aforesaid or office
/ for all they have this power all one, of one and the same cause effycye^t or
gyuer i^medyatly, yt is to wit of christ and not of him that put on his hands
upon them. Neither it makes any skyll or force, which of y^ apostles laid on
his hands / wherefore it is written in the third chapter of the first epistle
to the Corynthianes. Let no man glory or rejoice in men / whether it be Paul
or Apollo or Cephas (that is to wit Peter. etc) yt has baptized you, or
otherwise laid hands: it makes no force. Furthermore the bishop of Rome is
not or ought not to be called syngulerly the successoure of saint Peter: for
cause of the putting or layenge on hands / for one may be co^uenyently
bishop of Rome / upon whom saint Peter never laid hand, neither medyatly ne
yet i^medyatly. Neither again he ought to be called yt successor of Peter,
for yt see or determynacion or appoyntme^t of ye place. First because none of
ye apostles was determined or appointed at al by ye law of god to any people or
place / for it was said in the last chapter of Mathewe. to them all. Go you
therefore and teach you all nacyo^s / again because it is red that Peter was
at Antioche: before that he was at Rome. Moreover because though Rome were
made inhabitable and destroyed / yet the succession of Peter should not
therefore perysshe / but Peter should have a successor. Furthermore because it
can not be proved neither by the law of god, neither by the scripture
(although it does call men to the belefe of it self of the necessyte of
salvation) that it was ordained or appointed by christ, or by any of the
apostles, that the bishop of any determynat prouynce or dyocese is, or ought
to be called spyritually the successor of Peter or of any other apostle, and
superyour to other / the case put that the apostles had been never so unequal in
auctoryte / but that person or those persons be rather some manner way more
the successors of Peter, and of the other apostles / which be more
comfortable to the life, and holy manners and co^uersacyon of Peter, and the
other apostles / for such manner men the blyssed apostles would answer (if they
were asked the questyon) to be their successor / much like to the answer of
christ their master in ye. xii. of Mathewe where when one said to him. Thy
mother and thy brethren stand without ye doors seeking the or wylli^ge to
speak with the, he answered and said who is my mother? or who be my brethren?
who soever shall fulfill the will of my father which is in heaven, he is my
brother and suster and mother / which of the bishops then or priests, is
more worthy to be called the successor of the apostles? doubtless, he which
follows Who is y^ successor of the apostles.
them more in their co^uersacion and works. But if any man shall say, yt any
bishop is therefore pryncypally made the successor of saint Peter, because he
is elected by the clargy of Rome, or by the clargy with the resydue of the
people, to the bysshopriche, and therefore to be made bishop and ouerseet of
the universal church although more spyrytually he belong to the city of
Rome, aslonge as it shall remain vndystroyed, it is to be answered and said
that albeit this saye^ge may be many ways repreued, yet it may suffycye^tly be
disproued and put by, by this one way / seeing that it can not be proved by
the holy scripture / but rather the contrary of it / as it has been showed here
before, and shall be showed more largely in y^ chapter next hereafter
folowi^ge / wherefore as lightly as it is said: so lightly it may be denied. But
whereby or how, and for what cause, the pri^cipalyte or superiorite has com to
the bishop and church of Rome (if such superyorite be dew to them) above
other bishops and churches: it shall be said seryously and earnestly in the.
xxii. chapter of this dyccyon. But though these things aforesaid be
meruaylouse, and vnwonte to be hard: yet this that follows is more
meruaylouse, because it is more vnwonte and strange, and it shall peradventure
seem at y^ least wise inopinable if it do not seem false. That by ye certain
and undoubted testymony of ye scripture it may be proved, yt the bishops of
Rome as touching the prouynce and nacyon: ben rather the successors of the
apostle Paul, then of Peter / namely in the episcopal The bysshoppes of Rome
are rather the successors of Paul then of saint Peter
see of Rome. And moreover (which shall seem excedyngly more meruaylouse then
this before rehearsed) that it can not be proved by the holy scripture that the
bysshoppes of Rome ben the especyal successors of saint Peter, by reason of
the determynacyon of the prouynce or see but rather, that they, for that cause:
are the successors of Peter / which have been bishops, and have set or don
set in the epyscopall see of Antioche, more then the bysshoppes of Rome. And
the former of these two sayenges may be proved, by this / that albeit saint
Paul was generally sent to all nacyons, likewise as every one of the other
apostles was (whereof it is red in the. ix. of the acts, he is a chosen vessel
unto me, for to bear my name before the gentyles and kings and sons of
Israel, but yet specyallye and pryncypally / he was the apostle of the
gentyles / likewise as Peter was the apostle and teacher of the Jews / as well
by reuelacyon as by the ordynacion of the apostles among them selves /
wherefore it is red in the second to the Galatyans / when James, Peter and
John^ had perceived and seen, that the gospel of vncyrcu^cisyon (that is to
say of the Gentyles) was betaken to me, as the gospel of cyrcu^cysyon (that
is to say of the Jews) was betaken to Peter. etc. and the apostle means in
both places the preaching of the gospel to the gentyles, and to the Jews /
to have been committed to him and to Peter pryncypally / for both Peter might
preach to the Gentyles, and Paul to the Jews: if cause or necessyte had so
required. Albeit that the pryncypalyte among the Gentyles by mynystrynge of
the gospel did belo^ge to Paul / and the pryncipalyte of mynystrynge the same
to the Jews / did belong to saint Peter: as the gloss expounds the same
place after the mind of Augustyne. Again in the. xxii. of the acts, it was
said to Paul being in a trance, by reuelacyon. Go thy way, for I shall
sendethe in to far nacyons. Again in the. xxviii. and the last of the acts
it is said / and so we came to Rome. And a little afterward the apostle
speaks to ye Jews in rome saying. Be it therefore known to you, that this
wholesome gospel of god, is sent to the gentyles / and they shall here it / and
he remained or dwelled hole two years / in a house that he hired / and received
al men that came in to him / preaching to them the kingdom of god. Again he
him self witnesses this, more specially in the. xi. to the Romans where he
says. For I say to you ge^tyles / yt as long as I am ye apostle of the
gentyles, I shall do honor to my mynysterye / if I may by any mean provoke
my nacyon to emulacyon and following / yt is to say, though otherwhyles I do
exhort the Jews also to this, yet pryncypally I am sent apostle to the
gentyles. Again it is written of him to the Galatians, in the second chapter.
James, Peter, and John^ which seemed to be the pyllers, gave to me and to
Barnabas y^ right hands of society and fellowship that we unto the ge^tyles /
and they unto cyrcu^cisyon (yt is to say to the Jews) should go to preach the
gospel / and last of all the same is red in the second of the first epistle
to Timothe / and in the first of the second epistle to the same / but the
textes, I have left out here because of shortenes.

For as much than, as it is open euydentlye by the scripture, that Paul was
two years abiding in Rome, and that there he did receive all the Gentiles,
which were willing to be converted / and that he did preach the gospel there:
it is plain and open, that he was specially bishop of Rome / because he did
exercise there the office of a pastore or bishop / having y^ auctorite thereof
of christ and commandment, by reuelacion / and the consent of other apostles
by eleccion. But as touching to saint Peter, in whom the second of the
purposes said shall be proved, and appear Saint Peter was not only not
bishop of Rome / but also he never came there.
euydently. I do say / that it can not be proved of the holy scripture that he
was bishop of Rome, neither yet (which is a greatter thing) that he was ever
at Rome. For it seems a very wonderful thing if it should be so as it is red
in a certain common ecclesiastical legende of saints, that Peter did come
to Rome a fore saint Paul / and there did preach the word of god, and
afterward was taken. Moreover that afterward saint Paul at his coming to
Rome, and Peter together: had so many conflyctes or dysputacyons with Simon the
inchau^ter / and that they both together strove so greatly for the faith,
against the emperors and their mynysters, and that at the last according to
the same hystorye: they both being headed together for the co^fessyon of
christ, dyed in our lord, and so did consecrate y^ church of Rome to
christ. I say it is a wonderful thing yt neither saint Luke which wrote the
acts of the apostles / neither saint Paul made any mencyon at all of saint
Peter. Again that saint Peter came not to Rome before them it is of great
lykelyhode to be believed by that, that is written in the last chapter of the
acts. For when Paul spoke unto ye Jews, at his first coming / among
other things willing to show the cause of his coming to Rome: he says.
But when the Jews cried contrary I was constrained to appele unto Ceaser. But
they said unto him / we neither received letters concerning the from iewry
neither came there any of ye brethren, that showed or spoke any harm of the.
But we desire to here of the what thy mind or opinion is / for as touching to
this sect: we do know that it is every where said against. Let therefore the
sercher of the truth, not sechynge to co^tende and strive only: tell me,
whether it be probable or lykely to any man, that saint Peter came to Rome
before Paul, and did show them nothing of the faith of christ / which the
Jews speaking to Paul called a sect. Furthermore Paul, in rebukynge them of
their i^credulyte and hardness to believe, if he had known that Peter had been
there, and had preached: how could it be but yt he would have said, and
brought in him to be wytnes of this busynes, which was wytnes of the
resurreccyon of christ? as it is open in the third of the acts / and again
(where of we have spoken already) who will suppose or think yt Paul being
abiding in Rome two years / had never co^uersacion co^munycacyon, or company
and fellowship with Peter? And if he had, that Luke would have made no mention
thereof at all, which wrote the hystory of the acts? for in other less
famous places, when Paul found Peter he made mencyon of him / and was
co^uersaunt with him, as in Corynthe (as we read in the first epistle and
third to ye Corynthya^s) and in Antioche (as it is had in the second to ye
Galatia^s) and so of very many other places / if he had therefore found him in
Rome: how could it be, but he would have named him, Rome being y^ most famous
city of all other, and in which after y^ foresaid hystory, saint Peter was
ruler as bishop thereof / for these things be in a manner vnbeleueable /
wherefore it seems that, that hystorye or legende can not prouable be sustained
or holden in this point / and that it ought to be counted among the scryptures
which be called apocriphe / and of no Legenda Ecclesiastica.
canonycall veryte. But by the holy scripture it is to be holden undoubtedly
that saint Paul was bishop of Rome / and if any other were with him in Rome,
yet for all that Paul was syngulerly and pryncypally bishop of Rome for the
causes aforesaid / and that saint Peter was bishop of Antioche: as it appears
in the second chapter to the Galatians. But that he was bishop of Rome I do
not say against it / but of lykelyhode I do hold that in this Peter did not
prevent or com before Paul / but rather contrary wise Paul prevented Peter.
But the thing which of all is most to be taken head of, and marked for our
pryncypall purpose is this: yt albeit there are some congruences, by reason of
which it might appear, that they which are called (which way soever it be)
specially the successors of saint Peter, and namely, the epyscopall see of
Rome, are more worshypful and reuere^de, than the successors of the other
apostles / yet for all that of no necessyte holy scripture causes us to
believe, that the successors of the apostles are subjects to ye same
successors of Peter, after any of the powers or auctorytes aforesaid. For all
though it were granted, that the apostles were unequal in auctoryte: yet had
not Peter therefore, nor any other apostle by the virtue of the words of
scripture, any power upon ye other, to instytute or depose them, neither as
touching to the dygnyte of preesthode / which we have called the essencyall
dygnyte neither as touching the sendynge or determining, and appoyntynge of
them to any certain place or people / neither to the interpretynge of
scripture: or of the catholicall faith, neither as touching to coactyue
iurysdyccyon of any man in this world / wherefore of necessyte it seems to
follow, that neither any successor of any of them syngularly or specyallye
(after what soever manner he be so called) has any of the abouesayde manners of
power, upon the successors of the other. And this may be euydently confermed
by the auctoryte of saint Iherome which we brought in, of his epistle to
Eua^dre about the end of the chapter last aforegone.

Of the auctoryte of instytutynge bysshoppes, to whom it does appertain and
belong, and also of instytutynge other curates / and the other mynysters of
the church, as touching to both dignytes or offices, seperable and
inseparable.
The, xvij, chapter,
THus than we have showed, who is the effectyue cause (that is to say the
instituter and ordayner) of y^ first auctoryte belonging to priests, which we
have called the essencyall auctoryte / and now it rests and remains unto
us for to determyne and speak of the other auctoryte by which some of the
priests are preferred before other some, to be rulers outher to certain
priests, or to certain people, or to both / in a certain prouynce or place.
Moreover ho we or whereby it belongs to the same, to dyspence and order or
dystrybute certain te^porall things, called the benefyces of the church.
Aagayne also, how and by which mean coactyue iurysdyccio^s has come to them
or to certain of them. To what person also or persons and after what manner
most co^uenyently: it belongs to determyne y^ doubtful senses of the holy
scripture / namely and cheyfly in those things which are appertaynynge to the
necessyte of soul health / for when these things shall be ones suffycyently
opened and declared: that thing shall euydentlye appear which was pryncypally
intended and purposed of us ever syns the beginning of this work.

But yet before that we do prosecute the things here purposed partyculerlye, it
is expedyent and necessary, to show first the manner of the instytucion,
determining, or assygnynge of bishops or priests, used about the state and
begynynge of the prymatyue church / from which all other things above ben
afterward deryued. And the beginning of all these things are to be taken of
christ, which is the heed and stone / whereupon the catholyke church is
grounded / according to Christ is the stone, where upon ye church is grounded
and builded.
the saying of saint Paul in the. iiii. and. v. to the Ephesianes, and in
the. x. of the first to the Coryntheanes / and a certain gloss also says the
same, in the. xvi. of Mathewe upon this text. Upon this stone I will build my
church / this heed I say, and the stone, and the foundacyon of the church,
that is to wit christ gave preesthode to the apostles, and episcopal
auctoryte, over and upon all nacyons and peoples, not determining or
appoyntynge any of them seuerallye, so unto any certain place or people, but
yt it might be laufull to every one of them to preach where soever it were /
albeit that some of them were more deputed and assygned to preach among the
Gentyles, and some to preach among the Jews by the ordynacyon of them among
themselves: or else of the holy ghost / which thing also seems to be the
mind of the gloss, the second to the Galathians / upon this text. And when
they had known the grace which was given to me among the Gentyles. etc. For
there says the gloss,. Christ gave to Paul, that he should mynystre to the
gentyles, and to Peter that he should mynystre to the Jews. But yet this
dyspensacyon or mynysterye of the gospel, was so dystrybuted and departed
between them two: that both Peter might preach to the Gentyles, if cause had been, and Paul also to the Jews. And this same also Paul seems to have
meaned likewise in the. xi. to the Romans, when he said. I shall put my
mynysterye to honor if I may by any mean provoke my nacyon to emulacyon or
following. His nacyon he calls the Jews of whom he came by carnal
generacyon / as the gloss says in the same place / of which words of the
apostle, it seems to be thought and judged, yt by the same power by which one
is instytuted and made priest: he has power, to mynystre every where
indyfferentlye, and upon every people / albeit that by a certain ordynacyon of
man: some are determined and assygned more to one certain place or people,
than to another, namely now adays. And these things seems consonau^t and
agreeable to the scripture, and also to reason / for christ gyuynge to every
one of the apostles, general admynystracyon in the. xxviii. of Mathewe: said
to them indyfferently. Go you therefore and teach all nacyons / assygnynge or
appoyntynge none of them to any determynate place or people. But they seem
otherwhyles to have been determined and assygned to some special nacyon or
people: by the reuelacyon of god / for asmoch as the apostle says of himself
in the. xxii. of the acts. It chanced me when I was returned in to
Iherusalem, and as I was prayenge in the temple: to be rauysshed in mind, and
to se him, that is to wit christ, saying unto me. Make haste and go out
quyckely from Iherusalem / for they shall not receive thy testymonye, that thou
shalt bear of me. And a little after it follows, that christ said unto him /
go thy way: for I shall send the in to nations far hence. Lo here, seems it
that Paul sometime by reuelacyon was assygned to some determynate and certain
place and people. And beside this he also with the other apostles, received the
same assygnemente by a certain ordynacyon of man / wherefore he said in the
second to the Galathyans, thus. James / Peter and John^, gave to me and to
Barnabas: the right hands of society and fellowship / that we should preach
among the Gentyles, and they among the Jews. Lo here a determynacyon or
assygneme^t of the apostles, unto certain people and determynat prouynces:
made i^medyatlye by the ordynacyon of man. But this is undoubted that of such
determynacyon or assygnement made, other i^medyatlye by the reuelacyon of god,
or by the ordynacyon of them among themselves / they did not receive any
perfeccyon by the holy ghost which they had not before.

The same also as I said is agreeable to reason. For the case put, that any
bishop or other curate, being assygned and appointed to a certain prouynce
or people / were gone forth of ye prouynce committed to him (as we se it
chance now adays more often than is needful or conuenyent) and did mete other
by some chance, or else of purpose, with some infydell and not baptized, but
yet desiring other by himself, or by some other person, of the said curate
to be baptized and made chrystened / if the said curate do the baptyse him
keeping the form of the sacrament, this is undoubted, that this man is verily
and truly baptized, albeit peradventure, that he does sin deedly, which
does so baptyse any man in the prouynce not subjected or committed to him /
wherefore we may conclude, that no man is determined or assygned, by the
episcopal or sacerdotale power which we have called the essencial power: unto
any certain place or people, but this power indyfferentlye concerns all
nacyons and people. But yet such determynacyons and assygnementes have been
made sometime by dyuyne reuelacyon / as in the prymatyue church / but more
often by the ordynacyon of man, namely now adays / and that for cause of
avoiding sclaunder, and occasyon of offense among the bysshoppes and
priests, one of them with an other, and for other euydent co^modytes and
profytes which I shall assygne hereafter.

These things than thus premysed and put before / now coming pertycularely
and specially to the things purposed in the beginning of this chapter First
we shall show, that of such determynat instytucyon of the apostles to
certain peoples and prouynces, the most co^uenyent cause effectyue imediat,
was the reuelacion of christ / or else y^ able ordynacion of them among
themselves, and afterward we shall show, that the imedyate cause effectyue
of the determynate instytucyon of their first successors, before the conuercion
of the people was the express will of all the apostles, or else of many of them
/ if other all, or else many of them, were present together in one place or
prouynce, in which it was necessary to ordain and instytute a priest or
bishop / or else only one of the apostles: according to the dysposycion of
the place and people and time. Last of all we shall show / that after the
death of the apostles, or in their absence, the secondarye instytucion of
bishops / and of other spyrytuall mynysters / or mynystres of the church,
after the most conuenyent manner possible to the conuersacyon of man / was done
by the university, or hole congregation and multitude of the christen people,
in the place or prouynce, over which the said bysshoppes or mynystres ought
to be instytuted and ordained / rather than by any other pertyculare company
or person / and so afterward the other things shall be showed co^seque^tly.

The first therefore of these may appear, that is to wit, that there can be
no more conuenyent cause assygned, of the aforesaid determynacion of the
apostles to a certayue place. etc. than the deuyne reuelacyon, or ye conuenyent
delyberacion of them among themselves, for as much as in neither of these
two: there seems any error or malice to have chanced or come between / for
of the deuyne reuelacyon no man doubts. And as for the eleccyon made by the
apostles: it seems probable, and to be believed, that they were inspyred with
the holy ghost / as we have alleged here tofore of the. xx. chapter of
John^. Furthermore I say that of the secondary instytucyon or determynacyon or
assygnement of their first successors, namely before the conuersyon of peoples
/ the imedyate cause effectyue or doer, was and ought to be, all or many of the
apostles, or some one alone of them after the manner aforesaid / as if all
together, or many, or else but one alone of them: were found in that place.
And this is proved first by the scripture / for we read in the. vi. of the
acts that the apostles did after this manner, in the instytucyon of the
deacons, yea and that touching the first and essencyall (as we do call it)
instytucion of them. For it is said in the same chapter. They set these men
(understand thou which were to be made deacons) before the sight of the
apostles, and they (that is to wit the apostles) making their prayers: laid
their hands upon them. They did not than bring them to Peter alone, but they
brought them before the sight of the apostles. Neither Peter alone took upon him
auctoryte The apostles and not Peter only: laid hands upon them yt should
be made deacons.
severally to put his hands upon them: but the apostles did put hands on
them. And this is also agreeable to reason. For it is like to be true, that all
or many of the apostles together, took more sure council, and did less err
about the person to be promoted outher to preesthode, or to any other holy
order than any one of them taken severally by himself / as we alleged before
in the last chapter, that for this cause, they assembled with the other
senyours or priests, to determyne the doubt about the law of the gospel in
the fact or work of cyrcu^cysyon. Again by this common assente, was taken
away the matter and occasyon of offense and contencyon / which of lykelyhode
should have risen among them: if any one of them in the presence of the other
would have taken unto him any power or superyoryte above other / which
contencyon risen among them even by christ's time, Christ determined and
ended by this, showing and expressing y^ equalyte of them, as we have here
tofore alleged of the. xxii. of Mathewe / and the. xxii. of Luke / and also
have showed it more largely by* ye apostle also, and the exposycyons of the
saints in the chapter last before gone. Moreover it was most reasonable so to
do / that thereby they might take away the presu^pcyon of such syngularyte,
from all their successors, and also give them example of doing likewise as it
shall be showed hereafter in the. ix. part hereof by the gloss upon the. vi.
chapter of the acts.

But if they were not all together, or else many of them, in the place, where
it was needful to make a bishop or ouerseer, and governor to some multitude
of christen men, for the keeping of them in the faith: it is to be said
verily, that Fools desire promocyon and dygnyte. Albeit yt in ye prymatyue
church sometime it happened ye bishop to be chosen of ye multitude because
there lacked christen princes to rule the matter yet yt was a dangerous manner
as our author says full well and then much more it were dangerous now adays
It were a wise way now also, one bishop to be elect by an other if men might
be sure that ye bishops were all of the apostles complexcion, but because
there is a great doubt in yt, thanked be god a more wise and sure way is
found, yt the eleccyon and all together belongs to the kings most gracyous
hyghenes.
one of them alone might lawfully do this thige, namely where was but a small
multitude of christen people, and the same rude and vnskylled to dyscerne, what
person was most conuenyent for the office of a bishop or ouerseer, and
cheyfelye where was not many suffycyent or able persons for this said office,
which thing chanced often times to Paul, and to his first successors, as
it appears suffycyentlye of the acts of the apostles, and of his own
epystles unto Timothe and Tite. And that such manner instytucion might
lawfully, and ought to be made by one of them alone, it may be proved by this,
that thereby was chosen the best, and most conuenyent pastor. For outher it was
lawful for each one of them at his own pleasure to make himself ouerseer
unto other in the mynysterye of the gospel, or else this thing ought to be
done by the eleccion of the multitude being subject, or else by some of the
apostles being there prsente. Of the first way, slaundre and error might
have chanced / slaundre or offense I say, if two persons or mo would have
taken this auctoryte unto them. Error also or insuffyciencie and unableness of
the pastor likewise. For most co^munely fools or ambicious persons desires
and goes about to take upon them dygnyties and prelacies / more than vertuose
or wysemen. And of the second way (that is to wit, if the prelate should have been made by the eleccyon of the multitude) error and insuffyciencie of the
person promoted, might of lykelyhode have chanced / by the reason that the
said multitude was weke both in nombre and also in knowledge / for they were
rude and ignorant at the beginning: in main prouynces / namely out of Iewrye
/ and easy to be begyled / as it appears of the holy epistle to the Galatians
and of many other epystles / wherefore the apostle in the third of the first
epistle to the Corynthea^s, says thus. And I brethren might not speak to you,
as to spyrytuall persons: but as to carnal persons as to children or babes
in christ: I gave you milk to drink / for you were not yet able or strong /
neither yet you be able or strong / for you are yet carnal. Wherefore to
conclude, it was a more sure and more wise way, that this instytucion should be
done by ye eleccion or determynacion or assygneme^t of one of the apostles,
whose life and wysdom was more wayghtye and greatter (by the reason that they
had the holy ghost) than the life or wisdom of all that were in such a
multitude, albeit that it is not to be denied, but that it was expedyent, for
the apostle to have asked counsel of the multitude, as touching to the
manners and conversation of the person, which was to be preferred and elected
to the said office.

Now consequentlye after the premysses I will show, that after the time of
the apostles, and of the holy fathers, succedynge next after the apostles in
office and namely the co^munytes and congregacions of christen men being ones
perfyte, the i^medyat factyue cause or doer of this instytucion and assygnacion
of the governor and ouerseer, whether he were greatter, whom they do now call
a bishop, or whether he were smaller whom they do now call a curate or a
priest having cure, and also of the other inferyor mynystres: is and ought to
be him to whom the said multitude has granted auctoryte to make such
instytucyons, or eleccyons. And to the same auctoryte it belongs laufullye to
put out and depryue every one of the said officers, of such manner offices /
and to compel each one of them to exercise and execute his office, if it be
thought expedye^t and necessary. But yet we ought to mark and take heed, yt
although it is in the power of any preeste who ever he be, so to exhybyte and
do his mynysterie, that he may put his hands upon all men indyfferently and
to promote him to preesthode, him self being As it is granted to o^ most
gracyous sorayne forde ye king by act of perlyament.
as mynystre preparynge, and god absolutlye and i^medyatlie gyuynge the power
of preesthode / yet I do say for all that, yt it is not laufull for him to give
it to every manner of man at his pleasure / neither by gods law nor man's
law, in ye co^munytes of christen men being now perfyte, as we said before
/ but more over if he do exhibyte his said mynysterye to any crymynous or
sclaunderous person, or otherwise insuffycient and unable, he trespasseth
worthy of punysshement, against the law of god, and of man also / that he does
sin punyssheable It were to much and tedyous for the kings grace to be
troubeled his own person with the eleccion of every simple preeste (as me^
call them) and therefore his grace may commit yt office to them yt ben underneath
him, which if they would be neglege^t and vncircu^specte in the leccyon of
them, yet ought not the bishop hastily to put his hands upon them, but to
show ye king thereof, in whom is the only remedy
against ye law of god: it appears by the apostle, in the third of the first
epistle to Timothe / and in the first chapter to Tite / for a bishop ought
to be faulteles / with other mete qualytyes and properties there rekened up.
And the same or else much like: is to be thought and supposed of the deacons
/ wherefore in the place before alledgyd unto Timothe, he says / deacons
likewise ought to be chaste. etc. And that he does also sin and trespass
worthy of pain, against the law of man in promotynge any insuffycient, or an
unable person to the ecclesiastical order, it appears by these things which
have been showed in the. viii. chapter of this dyccion. For he co^mytteth an
outward act tournynge to the noyau^ce and hurt of an other man, for the
state of this present world, and also of the world to come (which may be
proved to him in very deed although he would say nay) in promotynge unto a
common office, such a person which may corrupt the life and manners of
other both men, and women / or else which can not (so much as is expedyent and
necessary both for the state of this present world, and also of the world
to come) fascion the manners of men / for such one, is ever leude and evil
dysposed, or otherwise insuffycient and unable.

Of these premysses I will forthermore infer and conclude of necessyte, that
in the co^munyties of christen men being now perfyte: it belongs only to
the king or his deputies to have ouersyght: to elect, to determyne, or
assygne, and to present the persons, which are to be promoted to the
ecclesiastical ordres. The persons therefore which are to be promoted unto
ecclesiastical ordres: are to be approved or to be dysalowed by the sentence
or judgment of him, which is cheyfe highest governor. And by the same
auctoryte: the said persons are also to be instytuted, or removed from the
cure or office of a bishop or preeste / and to be prohibited from the
excercysynge thereof. Or also, if of malycyouse purpose they did cease from the
excercyse of their office: to be compelled to the excercisynge and doing of
their duty / left through their lewdnes any man might fall in to ieopardy of
eternal death, as for lack of baptism, or of any other sacrament: and this
verily is to be understood, in the co^munyties of christen men, which are
already perfyte. For in such a place, where the prince or gouernoure an hethen
prince, as the most part of co^munytes, and well nere all co^munytes were
about the state and time of the prymatyue church, there the approbacyon or
reprobacyon Chaste, in matrymony he means.
of persons to be promoted to the ecclesiastical ordres, with the aforesaid
instytucions, and the auctorite to prohybyte them from the exercise of their
offices, or to compel them to the same: should appertain and belong to the
priest or bishop, with the more wise part of the christen multitude, being
in the said place / or to him alone (if he were there alone) without the
consent or knowledge Of whom ye mynister of ye church, is to be chosen.
of the gouernoure or cheyfe ruler / that of, or by such manner promotynge and
instytucyon of prelates or curates: the faith and wholesome doctrine of christ
might be publysshed which things should not be done by the auctoryte, favor,
study, or commandment of the governor: but rather should be prohybyted. And
after this manner did the apostles this thing about the beginning of christ's
As is ye turk
church / and were bound to do, by the commandment of god. And the
successoures of them should be bound also to the same: in the defaulte of such
a prince or in defaulte This is to be understood where the consent of ye
heathen prince can not be optayned, for if it may, his eleccyon is of good
force before god.
of the hethens prince consent / wherefore the apostle says in the. ix. of the
first to the Corynthya^s. For if I shall preach the gospel: it is no glory or
praise to me / for necessyte of so doing lies upon me, for woo is to me if I
shall not preach / but yet where the parlyament and the prince are willing
and content, that such things be done: I say that the auctoryte belongs to
the prince.

But as concerning the dystrybucyon of the temporalles, which are wont to be
called the benefyces of the church: you ought to know that such things can
not here so well be dysputed as they may be ordered by kings and their most
honorable and dyscrete counsayles. Provided always that the mynystres of the
gospel have suffycyent finding and sustentacion in meat, drink, and
clothes, semely and suffycient for them / and herewith the said mynysters
ought to be contented, as it was showed by the last chapter of the first
epistle to Timothe. As in turkye with such like places.
But as concerning temporalties ordained and appointed to works of pytie and
charity, by the gift or bequeste of any syngulare person or persons
departed, I do say, that such te^poralties or lands, rentes, or revenues, it
were well done if they were conserved, kept, and dystrybuted, according to
the intent, The mynyster of the gospel ought to have his finding.
will, and mind of the gyuer, or bequether in case the deades mind ben good
and reasonable, but if it be otherwise, or if error or fault do appear to be
in the dystrybuters of the said temporalties, and redress therein is needful
to be had, according to the will and mind of him which was the gyuer, or
bequether of them: this error or fault ought to be redressed or amended by
him that is cheyfe governor / ye moreover, if he do know it, and be of power
to amend it, and does not redress it, he offends god. For this
appertains not, nor ought to be done by any other synguler company or
person, of what estate soever he be: this only excepted that the correccyon
or redressynge of such faults be committed by the gyuer or bequether unto any
person or company / in whom also if any fault should chance to be: at the
last it ought to be corrected and redressed, by the gouernoure and cheyfe
ruler / albeit, yet no synguler person or company may build a church and
there in ordained any evangelical mynystre: without the grant or license of
the prince. Moreover I will show or prove the premysses concerning the
instytucyon of ecclesiastical mynystres, and the dystrybucyon or gift of the
te^poralles Of the gift of the ecclesiastical benefyces.
or benefyces: by the auctoryte of the catholyke christen French kings which
is not to be despised / but rather to be regarded and taken head of / for they
say, that of right (which thing also in very deed they do well, and cause to
be observed and kept even unto this day without any change) the auctoryte
concerning the instytucyon and dystrybucion of ecclesiastical offices, and of
the te^poralles or benefyces, does so appertain and belong unto them selves:
that the said auctoryte is not deryued in to them, from any other syngulare
man, or partyculare company of men, of what soever estate he or they be. For
the prince or cheyfe governor (say they, and well) is not prohybyted by the
law of god: from the instytucyon, gift* and dystrybucyon of them, but rather
contrary, and they say that this auctoryte, has been deryued in the parfyte
co^munytes of christen men, in to the persons, collages, or companyes of
priests, by the grant of the prince or perlyament / wherefore in the laws of
the princes, and emperors of Rome there is a certain manner and form set and
appointed, of choosing or instytutynge bysshoppes, curates, deacons, and of
ordaynynge other mynystres of the temples or churches / and the nombre also of
them is determined and certaynely appointed. For this thing appertains to
the prince and heed gouernoure as it was showed in the. viii. of this dyccion,
and in the. xv. of the first dyccion. So also there are laws ordained and made
concerning the form and manner of handelynge and ordering the temporalles, or
benefyces of the church / and of the conte^cious acts of priests among them
selves, one of them with an other, or else with any other persons, who ever
they be / against the which laws, they which were first bishops of Rome,
bei^ge holy men, and not ignorant of it but knowi^ge it well enough never
grudged or spoke against them / but of their own mind were, and would be (as
they ought of right to be) subjects unto them. But how and whereof, this so
great change has come to pass, that the company of priests not only does
say, that them selves are exempte from the lawas and customs of the seculare
princes, but also makes them selves lawmakers over them, and does styflye
maintain and defend the same, we shall show hereaf^er.

Again also of the premysses we ought to understand and know, yt the heed
governor or prince may lawfully of the te^poralles of the church, namely the
pue^tes and rentes of vnmoueables (if any shall be left more than is necessary
to the suffycyent sustentacion of the mynysters of the gospel) tallyes, taxes,
subsydes, both according to gods law and man's law, for the defense of the
country or redempcyon and raunsonynge of prisoners, in to the obsequye and
service of the faith / or for the supportacion of ye common charges, and other
reasonable causes. For An inuyncyble reason.
who soever ordained and appointed such te^poralles, outher by gift or else by
bequeste, unto such charytable uses, and did commit the dystribucyon of them
to any person or persons, he could not give them to any company or synguler
person, with more i^munyte, lyberte, or fredom, than he had him self, whiles
they were in his power and possessyon. But for that time they ware never free
from the common charges / wherefore it follows, that they are not free, no not
after they have been translated by the gyuer or ordeyner, in to the power or
governance of any other man. And here unto bears wytnes saint Ambrose, in his
epistle De trade^dis basilicis, when he said / we pay to Caesar: such things,
as belongs to Caesar / and to god, such things as appertains to god.
Tribute belongs to Caesar / we do not deny it him. And again in ye same
epistle / if the emperor demau^deth trybute: we do not say him nay of it.
Theloondes of the church pays trybute. But doubtless he would have denied ye
emperor trybute, if he had believed or supposed, that trybute had not ben dew
to him of right. Hugo de scto^ victore, also Hugo de scto^ victore.
says the same, in his treatise made of the sacraments. The church (says
he) all though it does take ye fruit of the erthly possessyon to her use: yet
for all that cannot the church by ecclesiastical persons exercise ye power of
executynge justice, or seculer judgments / but yet the church may have
mynystres lay persons: by whom the laws and judgments belonging to cyuyle
power, may according to the tenoure of the laws, and the duty of cyuyle
auctoryte, be exercysed or executed / but yet so that the church do know / yt
she has all such power: of the world prince / and that she do understand
and know: that she may never so exempte or with draw those possessions from
the kings power: but that if reason, and necessyte shall require: both that
power of theyrs ought of duty to aid and defend him: and also the
possessions of them ought of duty, to do obsequye and service to him in time
of need. For as the regale power must needs give the defense, which it owes
of duty to other men: so likewise the possessyon of the ecclsiasticall. etc.

Of the beginning, and first state of the chrystyane church / and how and by
what mean, the bishop of Rome, and the church of Rome, has taken the
aforesaid auctoryte and a certain prymacye or superyoryte unto them selves,
above and upon other bysshoppes and churches.
The, xviij, chapter,
Now this rests or remains of the intentes purposed: to show and declare
the rysynge and beginning, whereof the coactyue iurysdyccyon, and the power and
auctoryte of all the seco^darie instytucio^s of priests called before of us the
accedentall or not essencyall instytucyo^s, and also the power to dystrybute
all the ecclesiastical te^poralles or benefyces, has come unto certain
bishops or priests / and whereof it comes, yt the bishop of Rome does
ascrybe to him self, the highest of all such auctoryte. And consequently
after these premysses, we will show and declare to what person or persons,
the ryghtfull auctoryte and power belongs, to interpret the doubtful senses
of the scripture and those so interpreted: to give and command it to be
believed and observed of the christen people.

Supposing therefore first of all, of the determynacions made by us in ye. xv.
and. xvii. of the first dyccion, and in the. iiii. v. viii. ix. and. x. of
this present dyccion, yt unto no bishop, or preeste, or ecclesiastical
mynystre in yt yt he is but a mynystre belongs any iurysdyccion coactyue of
any man in this world. And again yt no bishop or priest by the i^medyate
ordynacion of christ, ought to be under any other bishop or preeste, as
touching to any of the powers belo^gynge to priests outher essencyall or not
essencyall aforesaid. Beginning therefore at the holy Canon or scripture.
Canon or scripture, as at the fountain of the verite and troth which we do
seche we shall take the oracle or saying of christ in the. xx. of John^, by
which he gave the auctoryte of preesthode, or the power of the keys, or both,
indyfferently to al his apostles, when he brethed upon them, and said. Take you
ye holy ghost / whose sins you shall forgive: they are forgyuen them / and we
shall also join to this, the commandment of ye said christ, whereby he did
inioyne them also indyffere^tly, to preach the gospel through out the whole
world, when he said to them in the laft of mathewe. Go you therefore and teach
all nacyons. etc. To which apostles, he did afterward by his own i^mediate
vocacion, join Paul as a chosen vessel (that is to wit of the holy ghost) as
it appears euydently in the. ix. of ye acts S. Paul was a chosen vessel.
And this Paul, and the other apostles together, executynge the aforesaid
commandment of christ. But afterward by the reuelacyon of god, and their
own ordynaunces among them selves: certain of them remained still in Iurye,
and the resydewe of them departing them selves asondre, went from thense in to
diverse countres, and to soundrye peoples, among whom they boldly and
consta^tly preaching the gospel: profyted and did as much good, each one of
them as he was able, and as it pleased god, in the converting of men and
women, unto the faith / as it is recyted and rehearsed in their legendes, or in
the approved hystoryes of them / albeit, that among other, two of them did
most notable good with their preaching / that is to wit, saint Peter, and
saint Paul / which Paul, although he was none of the. xii. yet
nevertheless he was called, and sent as i^medyatly and pryncypallye of
christ as any other, whosoever it was, of the apostles / as it appears of
the. ix. of the acts.

From these two apostles Peter and Paul, the usage and custom of the christen
church was first deryued / albeit, yet more manyfestly from Paul: after ye
text or process of the canon or scripture / and namely to the Gentyles / as
saint Augustyne says in the. ix. chapter of ye. xiiii. book De ciuitate dei.
For Paul himself was pryncypall and the first apostle unto the Gentyles or
vncyrcu^cysed people, likewise as Peter was the pryncypall apostle sent unto
the Jews or cyrcu^cysed people / as it appears in the second chapter to the
Galatianes, and in the x. to the Romans / and of ye gloss also of holy men in
the same place, and in many other places of the scripture. And these two
apostles, with all the resydue of them, following their master / that is to wit
christ, lived under the coactyue iurysdyccyon of the seculare princes / and
taught other to live likewise / as it has been euyde^tly showed in the. iiii.
and the. v. of this dyccion. And so did their successors, priests and
bysshoppes, with their deacons, and other mynystres of the gospel, from time
to time co^tynually even unto the time of Constantyne the first emperor of
Rome (as it appears euydently of the aforesaid book of Isodory) so that none
The christen faith was fre until Co^stantynes time.
of all the bishops, in all that space: did exercise any coactyue iurysdyccion
upon the other bysshoppes / albeit yet that many bishops of other prouynces,
in such things wherein they doubted, as well of the holy scripture, as of the
custom, usage, and ceremonies of the church / being not bold to gather them
selves together openly, asked counsel of the bishop / and the congregation
of christen men being at Rome / because peradventure there was ye greatter
multitude of christen people, and Why Alyen bishop sought counsel before the
reygne of Co^stantyne the emperor of and at the bishops of rome How
bysshoppes came first from Rome which I beseech the good reder to mark with
all dylygence for it is worth much worldly treasure.
better learned / for as much as at that time the studyes of all manner
scyences florysshed than at Rome, whereupon the bishops and priests there,
were more learned, and the church there, had more abundau^ce and plenty in
nombre, of such learned persons, than had the co^gregacyo^s or churches in
other places / and the bishops of the same place also were had in more
reverence / partly because sayut Peter the most ancient of the apostles, and
most sage and reverend, is red to have sit there as bishop, and saint Paul
also, of whom it is more euydent and undoubted, as it appears in the. xvi. of
this dyccyon. Partly also for the pryncipalyte of the city of Rome, and his
greatter fame in co^paryson to other prouynces of the world / wherefore also
the christen people of other prouynces lacking then able and suffycye^t
persons to govern their churches, desired of the bishop and the christen
congregation of Rome, able and suffycie^t persons to be made bishops and
overseers unto them selves, because the christen church of Rome had more
plenty of such manner persons / as we said not long before. The bishops than
of Rome, and the congregation of christen people there so being then required
and desired to give their help and counsel, as well about the faith, as
about the custom and ceremonies of the church, and the prouydynge of able
persons, charytablye and brotherly did succor and help them yt had need, and
required it of them / in these aforesaid things that is to wit insendynge
bishops unto them (which could scantly be found any yt were willing to
take that office upon them) and also in making the other prouynces which so
sent unto them partakers of such ordynacions which they had How laws and
ordynau^ces were first received from Rome, and aft what manner: and would to god
it had never ben worse Isodore.
made for themselves, concerning the customs and ceremonies to be used in ye
church of Rome, and sometime also cherytablye putting away the co^tencion or
scisme of the christen people among themselves, in other prouynces. These
things the churches of other prouynces took and received thankefully, from the
time of pope Clement, which is written to have been first bishop there being
the successor of Peter, or Paul, or of both: until the time of the
aforesaid Constantyne. And after this manner also or much like: the people of
Rome received of the Greeks, freely and without co^pulcion, certain laws,
called the laws of the. x. tables / out of which, as from the orygynall: all
other laws of the people of Rome proceeded and came forth. And yet this is
undoubted, that the people of Rome was not The church of Rome received
ordynau^ces of the church of Greece.
subject to the greeks in any manner iurysdyccion or auctoryte.

But of this said superyoryte coming in a manner of custom, by the fre and
wylfull consent of other churches, the bishops of Rome (as touching to their
further going forth from the beginning) have taken unto themselves, a
certain more large auctoryte, to make decrees, or ordynacyons, upon and over
the universal church / concerning the custom and ceremonies of the church,
and Se how virtue is perverted to mysche fe, by to much sufferaunce.
the acts of all priests / and to command the obseruacyon of the same
decrees, even until the aforesaid constantynes time. But whether the
bysshoppes of Rome inyght do this, by the auctoryte of themselves alone, or
else there was necessaryly required the consent of other bysshoppes unto the
same, we shall show here after. And the aforesaid Constantyne (as Isodore
shows in the foresaid book, in Co^stantyne ye emperor.
the chapter of the prymatyue church, in the Nicene counceyle / and the same
is also contained in writing in the preuylege of lord Consta^tyne the
emperor) was If thou wylt se ye truth of this gift read the book entytled,
ye gift of Co^sta^tyne the emperor and thou shall there se many festly that it
was but forged of the bysshoppes of Rome.
the first emperor, which by the mynysterye of Syluester than pope of Rome,
did openly receive and take upon him the faith of christ. And the said
Constantyne seems to have exe^pte preesthod from the coactyue iurysdyccion of
princes / which also by the aforesaid pryuyledge seems to have given to the
church of Rome, and likewise to the bishop thereof: the auctoryties and powers
upon all other churches and bishops, which they do say now to belong unto
themselves by an other title, as we have showed before, in the. viii. and. ix.
part, of ye xix. chapter of ye first dyccion / beside this also he seems to
have given to them coactyue iurysdyccions upon the same feldes, lands,
lordshyps, and many possessions, with the secular domynyon also of certain
prouynces, as it appears euydently in the same decree preuyledge: to them,
that list to look upon it. This Consta^tyne also (as it is red before) was the
first emperor, which granted to christen men lyce^ce, to gather the^ selves
together to assemble openly: to build temples or churches. And by his precepte
and commandment, the first council called the council of Who gathered ye
first counsel called Co^cilium Necenum.
Nece was gathered or assembled / of which counsel, with other, which have been made in the process or going forward of the church, from the time of ye
apostles, even unto these present times: we shall hereafter touch, and bring
in, or allege the hystoryes, in mete and co^uenyent places / concerning so
much, as shall belong to our purpose taking out of them, these things
which shall be consonaunte and agreeable to the scripture and right reason,
and refusing those things, which shall be dissonaunte or dysagreynge from
the same.

Of a certain preamble, necessary to be had, that is to wit yt faith and
credence is to be given only to the scryptures of god, and not to the pure
doctrine of any ancient doctoure.
The. xix. chapter.
But before that we do proceed any further we confess, that we are not bound,
of the necessyte of eternal salvation, to believe or to confess any scripture,
to be undoubtedly true: but only these scryptures, which are called the
canonycall scryptures, contained in the Bible / or else those: which
necessarylye follow of the said canonycall scryptures. And yt no man is holden
or bound To what scripture sure credence is to be given.
to give sure credence, unto the other scryptures, yt is to wit which have been
showed, given, or taught by ye spyryte of any doctor spyrytual: it is euydent
/ for no man is bound steadfastly to give credence to any scripture, which may
sygnyfy or give knowledge of false things / nor to confess or knowledge it as
utterly true. But such are all the scryptures of men grounded upon their own
inuencion for they may swerve from the truth, as it is euydent by expereme^t,
and is had also in the. c. xv. psalm: I said in mine excess, every man is a
liar. But the canonycal scryptures are not so / for they are not of man's
inuencyon, but rather taught or given by the imedyate inspyracyon of god,
which neither can be deceived neither is willing to deceive. And this
sentence which we have said, and the dyfference of the deuyne and of the
humayne scryptures, saint Augustyne openly confyrmeth Augustyne.
in the. xiii. of the epistle to saint Iherome, when he said. For I knowledge to
thy charytie that I have learned to give this honor, and fear only to the
books of the scryptures, which at now called canonycall, that I do believe
surely and sted fastly none of ye authors or makers of them to have erred any
whyt in their writing. And if any thing be offered to me in those scryptures,
which seems contrary to the truth. I do not doubt, but that outher the book
is corrupt or else that the interpretour did not understand that which was
said, or else that I my self have not understand it. But other books I do so
read: that were the Saint Augustyne judgment of books.
aucthours of them never so excellent holy or well learned, yet I do not think
any thing therefore true, because they have thought or judged so: but because
they have been able to persuade unto me by these foresaid canonycall aucthores,
or else by probable reason, yt it does not dysagre from ye truth. The same
thing also he reherseth Augustyne.
in ye prolouge of ye iii. book De trinitate wha^ he said: do not o reder follow
and obey my books, as thou would the canonycall scryptures, but in them yt
is to wit in the canonycall scryptures, even that also which thou doste not yet
believe when thou shalt have found it there, believe it forthwith, without any
taryau^ce or delay, but in these books of mine, yt which thou art not sure
of, except thou shall perceive and understand it to be undoubted, do not
steadfastly and suerly hold or sustain. The same thing also he said in his
epistle to Fortinacianus, and in many other books / the textes whereof I have
left out here because of speed and shortness. Wherefore also it is found to
have been prohibited by the third counsel The counsel of Carthage.
holden at Carthage, and were reasonably that none other manner scryptures
should be red under the name of these, that is to wit of the canonycall
scryptures / wherefore there is red in the said counsel, and also in the
foresaid book of Isodore is contained / this text following. Also it has
pleased us that beside the canonical scryptures, nothing be red in the
church under ye name of the deuyne scryptures. And the canonycall scryptures
be Geneses, and the other in the volume of ye bible which are rekened up
there, neither that which Augustyne says against the Manicheis, in the
epistle of the foundacyon: is any whyt against these things Non credere^
eua^gelio, nisi me catholice ecclesie co^moueret aucthoritas.
aforesaid: for there saint Augustyne says / but I would not believe the gospel
except the auctoryte of the catholyke church did move or styre me, in which
saying, he seems to prefer the auctoryte of man, before the auctoryte of
the scripture. For always that wherefore an other thing is regarded: is more
regarded it own self. But let us answer yt it is not all one thing to
believe a work, book or treatise to be made and written by some doctor or man,
and to believe that that same work, that it is true, profitable, or hurtful,
to be observed, or to be refused. For a man may receive or take the one of
these two things, by the testymonie of men without the second, and contrary
wise, the second without the first, and he may receive both of them likewise
otherwhyles, by the testymonye of men / as for example / some man shall believe
that same scripture which is offered and laid before him, to be the law of the
country, by the common testimonye of the inhabytantes or dwellers there /
which said law for all yt, to be true, or to be observed, and not
transgressed or broken: he may learn by some sensible sygile, as by ye pain or
punyssheme^t which he has seen to be done to the tra^sgressours thereof / by
right reason of his own mind, without any perswasyon or saying of any men.
So also backewarde again / he which sethe any man make a book or build a
house, or to do anyother thing, shall believe of his own self, without the
testymony of men, yt the book was made, or the house was builded of the same
man / but that the contents in that book be true or false, profitable or
noisome, to be followed or exchued he may believe this, by ye testymony of men,
namely of credable persons. Again a man may take or receive both otherwhyles
of or by the testymony of men / as he which never saw Hyppocrates, shall believe
yt this is y^ book and doctrine of Hippocrates, by the testymonye of men, and
that the contents and things written in it be true, or false, to be observed,
or to be refused for the co^seruacyon of health, and the avoiding of syckenes,
this the same man shall receive or believe, of ye testymony of learned men. And
after the same or very like manner, to believe yt any scripture contained in the
bible is the tradycion of god / this thing a man may take of the common
testymonye of christen men, or of the catholyke church, which yet for all that
never saw, nor herd christ, neither has had any perceiving of christ, by
any other exteryor sense. But yet that this scripture is true, he shall believe
by faith, as for example, by miracle, without the testymonye of any man / even
like wise as Paul believed before his co^uersyon yt the law which he did then
perceive was the doctrine of christ: by the testymonye of the preachers whom
he persecuted / and yet for all that he did not therefore believe, the said law
to contain the truth. But afterward he believed it to be true: first by a
sencyble miracle, and co^seque^tly by the faith which he had / likewise also
both these things is taken otherwhyles by the testymony of man / as yt the
scryture is a law made and given by christ, and that the contents in it are
true and to be observed, and to get eternal life, salvation, and to avoid
eternal myserye: is believed and has been believed of many men, which never saw
christ, nor have known him, by any exteryor sense: neither ever has
perceived any miracle or sencyble sign thereof.

Therefore this saying of saint Augustyne, I would not believe the gospel if
How saint Augustynes saying is to be understood. Non crederem eua^gelio,
nisi me catholice ecclesie aucthoritas co^moueret.
the auctoryte of the church did not move me: may according to the things
aforesaid, be understood, two manner ways, and have two senses. The one is
this, that he believed the scripture to be the gospel, that is to say the
joyful message of christ / by the testymonye of the church / albeit yt he
did believe, this scripture or gospel to contain truth, more pryncypally
peradventure by some miracle, or by some reuelacion, or else by the faith, by
which he did believe yt christ was very god and so consequentlye that al his
tradycion and doctrine was true and to be observed and kept. The other sense
which the said words of Augustyne may have: is this / that he did first,
and at the beginning receive and believe both these aforesaid things, by the
testymonye of the church / albeit the first sense of these two seems to
agree more unto the saying of the apostle, in the first chapter to the
Galathians. For the words and sayenges of christ or of god, are not therefore
true: because the church does so witness to them by true testymonye / but
therefore is the wytnes or testymonye of the church true, when Why ye judgment
of the church is true.
she alleges for her the true saying of christ, which make her sayenges
true, because they are true / wherefore the apostle to the Galathia^s before
alleged says thus. But though we, or an au^gel from heaven do preach unto
you any thing otherwise, than we have preached, unto you: cursed be he. And
likewise it is to be understood, that although the holy church had preached
any other gospel that is to say a contrary gospel, it should not have been
true. And the cause why Paul thus said, was for that that was sure and out of
doubt, that the said gospel was the saying or reuelacyon of christ, in
which could be no falsytie And therefore after what soever sense, the
aforesaid words of saint Augustyne be expounded: they are not contrary or
against the sentence, which we have said. And saint Augustyne does for so
much say, that he believes the gospel, for the auctoryte of the church,
because he took the beginning of his believe, of the church. For faith
otherwhyles begins of hearing. And again because he was moved with the
good living and holy conuersacyon of the church, and with the pacyent
sufferaunce of trybulacyon which he perceived in the church in time of
persecucyon.

The. xx. xxi. and. xxii. chapytres be left out, as not of much value, and to
avoid the offense of some spyrytuall persons, that bear peper in their noses,
and yt judge every truth to be spoken of malice.

Of the diverse manners or sygnyfycacio^s, after which, fulness of power may be
taken / and after what manner and order / the bishop of Rome has taken these
unto him / and breyfly, and generallye / after what manner and fascyon he has
used and does use them.
The, xxiij, chapter,
THe fulness of power is and may one way truly be understood and How many
manner ways fulness of power may be taken.
taken for that power which is able to do any manner act possible and upon any
manner thing, voluntarylye / power I say having not excess / which manner
power seems to be agreynge and belo^gynge only unto christ / wherefore it is
said in the last of Mathewe / Al power is given to me, both in heaven and in
earth.

The second way, fulness of power may be understood more to the purpose for
that power, by the which, it may be lawful for any man for to exercise any
manner act any manner man, or any manner outward thing being in the power of
men, ordynable to the use of men. Or else again that power, according to
which, a man may exercise any manner act, albeit, not upon every manner man,
or upon all manner thing being subject to the power of man. Or else again
that power according unto the which it may be laufull to exercise not all
manner acts: but only an act or operacyon determined in kind or manner, but
yet according to all manner inclynacyon or appetyte of the wyller, upon any
manner man, and every thing being subject under the power of man. The. iiii.
way, fulness of power may be understood the last aforesaid power or the power
according to the manner aforesaid, upon all clerks only / and the power
instytutynge all them to the ecclesiastical offices, and of depryuynge them or
deposynge them from the said offices / and of dystrybutynge the ecclesiastical
temporalles or benefyces, or according to the manner last before rehearsed. The
v. way fulness of power may be understood, that power, which belongs to
priests, all manner ways to bind and lose men from sins, and the pains
done for them / and to exco^munycate, to interdycte, and to reconcyle / of
which power we have spoken before. The. vi. way, the fulness of power may be
understood, that power, by which it may be laufull to put on hands upon
all men, to the receyuynge of the ecclesiastical ordres, and to give or
prohybyte and with hold the sacraments of the church / of which power it
has been spoken before. The. vii. way, by fulness of power, may be
understood the power of interpretynge the scripture. The. viii. and the last
way, as touching to our purpose, by fulness of power may be understood the
power of the pastoral cure of souls, general in comparyson to all peoples
and prouynces of the world / of which it has been spoken before. Again fulness
of power, may be understood according to each one of the aforesaid
dyuysyons, that power, which is not determined by any law / and that power may
be understood to be not full power: which is determined by the laws of man,
or of god / under which right reason may co^uenyently be comprehended. There
be peradventure certain other manners, and combinacions of the fulness of power:
but I think that we have rehearsed and rekened up all, which appertains to
the purpose intended of us.

These dyuysyons of the fulness of power than thus premysed and declared: I do
say, that fulness of power according to the two first manners, or
sygnyfycacyons aforesaid, does in no wise agree or appertain to the bishop of
Rome, or to any other bishop or priest, save only christ or god / of the
which two I pass over because the thing is euydent / and because it has been
certyfyed by the wisdom of god, and man, and by all moral science, and also
because of speed and breyfnes. And as touching to the third and. iiii. way or
manner of fulness of power it has been proved by demonstracyon and strong
reason, in the. xv. chapter of the first dyccyon: and moreover co^fyrmed by
the holy scripture, in ye. iiii. v. and. viii. of this dyccion. Again most
stablysshed and coroberated in the. xv. xvi. xvii. and. xxi. of this dyccyon:
that such manner power, not only not with any fulness: but also does not at
all, by the law of god, agree or appertain to any preeste or bishop in yt he
is such one, upon any man being other clarke or no clarke. But an concerning
the other two, that is to wit ye. v. and. vi. manners of fulness of power: it
has been showed in the. vi. and. vii. chapytours of this dyccion / that the
power of byndynge and lousynge from sins, and from the pains dew for them,
and like wise the power of cursynge or exco^munycatynge any man openly is not
granted to the preeste absolutelye or with fulness: but is determined by the
law of god so that he can neither co^dempne those that be innocents before god:
neither louse them, that are gyltye before god. Moreover that the same power to
instytute the ecclesiastical mynysters, by the putting on of hands / to
teach and preach, and to mynystre the sacraments of the church in the
co^munyties of christen men, does not so fully agree or belong to bysshoppes
or priests: but that there is determined, and appointed unto them by the law
of god and of man / a conuenyent manner of workynge according to it. And as
touching to the other two manners of fulness of power remaining, that is to wit
the. vii. and the. viii. it has been showed before, that they do not agree or
appertain to any preeste or bishop with fulness / but according to the
determynacyon both of the law of god, and of the law of man.

Therefore to conclude fulness of power does agree or appertain, neither to the
bishop of Rome / neither to any other bishop or preeste in that he is such a
one. Now consequentlye it is to be showed, whense and of which sygnyfycacion
the bishop of Rome took his first beginning of ascribynge this title of
fulness of power unto him self / albeit that in very deed it does not agree or
belong unto him after any at all of the foresaid sygnyfycacions / and it
appears that the bishop of Rome took first his title of fulness of power unto
him self, after the. viii. sygnyfycacion. And that the beginning of the
apparente appertaynynge thereof unto him / was that saying of christ, which
is had in the. xxi. of John^ where he speaking unto saint Peter says. Feed
my sheep. Again because he said syngulerly to the same Peter in the. xvi. of
Mathewe. To the I shall give the keys of the kingdom of heuens. etc. Again
for that it was said to Peter in the. xviii. of John^. Turn thy sword in to
thy scaberde. Moreover of ye answer which the dyscyples made to christ
saying. Se here two swerdes / of the which textes, after their own
interpretacyons / certain men will this to be understood, that the
university or the hole flock of sheep of all the world, that is to wit of
christen men / was committed to Peter only, and so likewise to every bishop
of Rome, as to the special vycar of saint Peter / but to the other apostles
and to the bishops successors of them, not the university or whole flock of
sheep of the whole world / but to each one of them, one determynate and
pertyculare flock, and prouynce has been committed to be governed.

After that the bishop of Rome, had taken unto him self the title of fulness
of power, albeit not according to the true sense of the scripture, as it
shall be suffycyentlye showed in the. xxviii. chapter of this dyccyon. Of
presumpcion he went further in to an other sygnyfycacyon (peradventure because
of lucre and advantage, or else to usurp some other co^modyte profit or
excellency about other men) that is to wit taking upon him self and
preaching openly, that he alone seuerallye may after what manner soever it
shall please him: by his word utterly exempte or deliver and assoyle sinners
from the pains of purgatory so he calls them.

And after these sygnyfycacions so taken under a certain color and
appetaunce of pytie and mercy, to the end that first they might seem of
charity to take thought and care, for all men. And secondaryly, that they might
be supposed to have power, and to be willing to have mercy and pytie upon al
men, the bishops of Rome being stre^gthed with the pryuyleges and grauntes of
the emperors (as they lowedely lie) cheyfly the emperyal seat being vacant:
did extend and stretche forth this title further. First to the ordeynynge and
making certain laws upon the clerks or priests, concerning the
ecclesiastical customs and ceremonies, which at the beginning were called
decrees. And afterward How and wherefore fastings from certain kinds of
meats at certain days came first up and was first received.
by the way and manner of requests and exhortacyons, they persuaded certain
ordynacyons to the lay men / as of fastes and of abstynence from certain
meats at certain times, for ye obtayni^ge of ye help and mercy of god to
take away certain pestyle^ces and infesciones of the air from men, which
raygned at yt time / as it appears euydently of the legende of saint Gregory,
and of other certain saints. But after that the lay men had of their own
free will taken and received such abstynences, and because of devotion had by
long custom observed such free ordynaunces, which we said to have been
requests or exhortacyons, than the tyrants of Rome began to command openly
the same things by the manner of a precepte or law / so that they were bold
without ye lyce^ce of the Under the color of religyon has spro^ge much
myschefe.
worldly princes to stryke the trangressoures thereof, with the terroure or
dread of their curse or exco^munycacyon / but yet under the color and
apperaunce of relygyon or of the honorynge of god. Afterward their appetytes
of having do mynyon increasynge more and more, and when they perceived also
that devout christen men were greatly put in fear with such manner of words,
through After ignorance follows folysshe fear, and after that fond
obieccyons, as is this / were there not as wise men before our days as there
ben now?
fearefulnes and ignorance of the law of god, which believed them selves to
be bound unto those things, which were commanded by the priests for fear
of eternal death, than the bysshoppes of Rome with their company of clerks,
presumed further to statute or make certain oblygarchicall decrees or
ordinacyons concerning cyuyle acts, by which they pronounced them selves,
and every one that did take their order, or the office of clarkeshyp upon them,
yea being pure lay men, to be exempted from all publyke and common charges /
promotynge unto this office even seculare men, and married, which were soon
allured thereunto, that they might enjoy i^munite and fredom from the common
and publyke charges / by the reason whereof they made no little part of the
cyuyle multitude subjects unto them selves: withdrawynge them from the power
and governance of the seculare princes and governors. And again purposynge
and going about Exempcion of clerks.
to withdraw a greatter multitude: they pronounced by other decrees, yt all
those were stryken with the pain of cursynge, who soever shall have done any
personal iniuryes / what The devil is latten lose to blow his trompettes.
soever they be: unto any of them, which have been taken unto the company of
clerks, and defamynge also openly in the churches, those that does any
iniurye to clerks: by exco^munycacyon / and no less persuynge the same men
therefore, they require to have them punysshed by the penaltes of the Cursings
for money.
temporal laws. But this that follows, is a more detestable thing and very
execrable to the office of priests / that the bysshoppes of Rome and certain
other bysshoppes, to the intent that they may ampliate and enlarge their own
iurysdyccyon, and after that their most fylthy lucre, unto the contempt of
god, and the manifest preiudyce of the seculare princes, does exco^munycate
and shyt out from the sacraments of the church, as well lay men as clerks
being peradventure a little neglygent, and not regarding, or else being all
utterly unable to pay certain dettes of money / to the payment whereof they
were formally bound until a certain term of time appointed / which lay
men and clerks, christ, with main exhortacyons, pains and labors, and
last of all by his own marterdome and precious blood, has put or set within
the church. So did not Paul which was made of all facyons unto all men: to
the intent S. Paul.
that he might win all men to christ / but he would that sinners should be cut
away, from the company of other christen men, only for great and greuouse
offenses / as it has been showed of us before, of the first epistle to the
Corinthyans. And yet they being not content herewith, but desiring the
domynyon and highest governance of seculare men, contrary to the precepte of
christ and the apostles: has braste forth in to the making of laws
severally from the laws of the whole co^munaltyes / decreynge that all the
clargye is exempted from the cyuyle laws, bringing in and causynge, a cyuyle
scysme or dyuysyon and a pluralyte of cheyfe governors, which we have showed
in the. xvii. chapter of the first dyccion, to be impossyble to the quyetnes
and tranquylite of men, alledgynge sure and undoubted experyence thereof / for
this said pluralyte of hedes or highest governors, is the rote and the
beginning of the pestylence or dystruccyon of the empire of Italy, out of
which rote all hurtes and occasyons of euyls has The cause of the undoing
Italye.
spro^ge and does come forth / and during the same: there shall never cease
cyuyle dyscordes in the same empire / for the bishop of Rome has of long
time holden this power, whereunto he crope in, by little and little, and by preuy
preuary cacyon of custom, or rather abuse. And he furthermore fearing least
the same power should be revoked from him by the emperor (and not without a
cause) for the excesses committed by him, with all wicked dylygence, forbyddeth
and lets the Treason.
creacyon and promotynge of the emperor of Rome / and at the last one of them
has braste forth in to so great boldness, that he has in his decrees
expressed, the emperor of Rome to be bound to him by oath of fydelyte, as
being subject to him by coactyue iurysdyccyon / as it appears euydently to
them that lift to O shameless children.
look upon it, by the folysshe and utterly despise worthy. vii. book of their
narracyons which they do call decretalles, in the title Desentencia et re
indicata. To the which rasshe and mysaduysed presumpcyon, that most christen
emperor, The co^me^dacion of Henry the. viii. emperor of Rome and the cause,
of his most cruel deposycyon.
a man of all virtues, syngulerly among other princes approuyd at all time,
place and state, of happy and worshypfull memory Henry the. viii. refusing
to agree as faynynge him self to have forgotten the oath made, is dyscrybed a
transgressoure of it / by a certain no less false than presumptuouse
narracyon, called a decretall: whose title is De iure iurando / which
nevertheless might worthelye be intyteled De iniusta iniuria, et illata, dino
imperatori, suisque successoribus et affinibus omnibus contumelia / that is to
say, of the wrongful iniurye, and contumelye The title of Iure iura^do.
or dysworshyp done to the most honorable and godly emperor and to all his
successors and alyaunce / for of the makers of the Canon law / he is
pronounced a person defamed or of evil name: because he is (as they count it)
perjured / which also have gone about to spotte and defyle the famous memory
of him: if it might have been spotted or blemysshed, by the words or wrytynges
of such false and wrongful accusers and dyspraysers. But yet the bishop of
Rome with their cardynals durst not call these oblygarchicall ordynacions,
appertaynyng to the power of their own selves, being a few in no^bre, by the
name of laws but they called them decretalles / albeit that by the same they
do intend to bind men unto pain, for the state of this present world, by
power coactyue: likewise as the princes of the world entende in their laws.
But the cause why they durst not express that, at the beginning by ye name of
laws: was this / for that that they fered the resystence / and correccyon of
the aforsayd princes, for the treason which in so doing they committed against
the princes or governors. Again at the why the spyrytual laws were named Iura
canonica, that is to say, the canon laws and hereby note the craft of the
devil.
beginning they called such manner ordynacyons Iura canonica, to the end yt
by the color of the word, though wyckedly aplyed: they should be accounted
and taken for more antentyke / and that they might imprynte the bylefe,
reverence, and obedyence, of the said ordynacyo^s the more largely in christen
men's hertes. So than to conclude all together: the bishops of Rome conuayenge
them selves further by little and little preuylye: preched openly the six latter
sygnyfycacions of fulness of power also of them selves / by them co^myttynge
very many mo^struous things in the cyuyle order, against the law of god and
man, and against the right judgment of any man that has reason.

How and after what manner the bishop of Rome has used the prymacye taken
upon him, and the fulness of power, in special within the ecclesyastycall
lymytes, or the ordering of priests.
The, xxiiij, chapter,
AFter the aforesaid determynacyons, it follows consequentlye to show, after
what fascyon, the bishops of Rome has taken the said full power unto them
seues: and has used, and does use it hitherto, and of lykelyhode will use it
hereafter, if they be not stopped or let. And first of all how, how they
have used it in the instytucyon of the ecclesyastycall officers, and
dystrybutynge of the ecclesiastycall temporalles or benefyces, as well unto the
ecclesyastical mynystres, as unto other miserable persons, for whose cause
also the ecclesyastycal temporalles has been given and ordained so to be
dystributed or dysposed by the mynystres of the church. And afterward it is
to be showed how they have used hitherto, and does use, and hereafter will use
these powers, in co^paryson unto them which do live cyuylie, as well princes as
their subjects. The bishops of Rome being permytted and suffered hitherto,
and now adays, to work according to his fulness of power, has infected, and
corrupted all the mystycall body of christ, for they have dymynysshed,
corrupted, and finally in a manner have utterly destroyed and taken away
eleccyon, which is the best way, ye moreover in which way only is securyte
of well instytutynge any manner offycer / notwithstanding that by eleccion the
apostles with the other multitude of christen men made the instytucion of the
deacons: as it is had in the. vi. chapter of the acts. They have dymynysshed
it first, by tournynge the eleccyon in to the clargye alone, which was ought
to be done by the christen princes. They have corrupted it also by
dymynysshynge it: as by translatynge ye auctoryte of electynge the bishop,
unto certain young men, unlearned, and vnskylled in the law of god, whom they
do call Canons. And they have also in a manner utterly destroyed it. For the
bishops of Rome reserve i^medyatlye to their own power, the instytucion of all the ecclesiastical prelacyes or dygnytes and not only of these: but also of
the mean and smaller offices, which may agree and belong to pure lay men,
as the custody of the temples and churches, the colleccyon, and the
dystrybucyon of the temporalles or benefyces ordained and appointed for the
said officers. By which reseruacyon, they do decree and determyne all manner
eleccions of suffycye^t and approved persons, to be void and of no strength
(though they be never so dewely made) instytutynge in the stead of these
suffycye^t persons, by the fulness of their power (as they call it) being
ignoraunte, or corrupted with money, or prayer, hatred, or love, fear, or for
pleasure and service done to them, or for to obtain favor, or The church
that can not err.
through some other crooked affection, persons ignoraunte and vnskylled in the
scripture of god / fools and boys without learning / and for the most part
men corrupt of mind, and openly known for vycious and leude dysposed persons
/ which can not also speak the language and tongue of the people: to whom they
are made overseers and governors, as being of an other strange nacyon /
wherefore let the pope make answer to christ in the. x. of John^, which pope
against the true eleccyon that ought to be made, among other monstrous
things which he has done and does: has instytuted two bishops of his own
nacyon and language / the one bishop of Wynchestre in England, and the other
bishop of Land in Denmark / which can neither of them speak any language,
which the people of their dyocesis can understand / but what manner of
persons the same are in learning and manners, it appertains not to me nor
needs not me to reherce / albeit that the bishop of Land (as it is openly
known in Denmark) his church and dyocese being spoiled and robbed of all
the droues of great beasts necessary to husbandrye and tyllage of the
ground, according as the country requires: gatherynge great treasures unto
him self by the sale of them, and forsakynge his church, is fled from thense,
and is returned in to his own regyon or country. I say let the bishop of
Rome make answer, how this pastor or bishop shall call his own sheep by
name, knowing the manners and conversation of them, or how shall his sheep
follow him by understanding and knowing the voice of his preaching and
doctrine? Neither it is needful now to beg or desire bishops or curates of
other puynces, because of necessyte or lack of men, as it was in the old
times. For there were in England men more excellent of good life, and more
co^nynge in holy doctrine, than he / which being vnskylled of the language,
and also being no doctoure of dyuynyte, but only being a lawyer and pleader
of causes was made gouernoure and ouerseer unto them. And so likewise in
Denmark and in other prouynces, of which many open testymonyes might be
brought in, in like error / but I pass over them because of speed and
shortness. For who will not marvel or wondre to se young men, ignorau^te of
the scryptures of god, lacking also conuenyent grauyte of manners, men without
experyence and learning, and otherwhyles openly dyffamed persons, to be made
bishops, and to be promoted to the highest dygnytyes and offices in the
church, through Symonye, or the request and prayer of great men, I do not
say otherwhyles through fear of great men, or for service done, or for cause
of co^sanguynyte, or affynyte, ye doctors of dyuynyte and teachers of the holy
scripture, and men approved for ye honestye of their life and co^uersacyon
being put bye or not regarded / whether these be feigned or false things that
I do speak / he shall easyly perceive, which will reken up the bysshoppes or
archebysshops of prouynces, the patriatches, and other inferyour prelates / for
he shall not find one among. x. of them / which is a doctoure of dygynyte, or
yt is suffycyentlye learned in the holy scripture / and which thing I am a
shamed to speak, although it does not grieve me to speak it, because it is
true. The bishops of these days neither have co^nynge to preach to the
people the word of god, neither to say against the erronyous doctrynes of
heretykes, if any shall happen to rise / but in the aforesaid chau^ces / they
do shamefully beg and crave the doctrine of other men / notwithstanding that
the doctoure of the gentyles Paul does say in the third chapter of the
first epistle to Timothe, that a bishop ought to be a teacher, embrasynge A
bishop ought to be able to teach.
that faithful word, which is according to doctrine, that he may be able
to exhort in wholesome doctrine, and to reprove them which speak against it As
the same Paul wrote in the first chapter to Tite. And as touching the other
inferyour prelates, abbottes, and pryores, and other persons, and curates of
churches, I take god which is i^mortall truth, to record: that a great
multitude and no^bre of them are without both suffycie^t virtue of life and
also learning / yea in so much, that many of them can not speak one sentence
congrulye according to the rules of gra^mer. But they to whom of the fulness
of power (for of it I will no we speak again) the greatter dygnyties of the
church are granted for the most part, and they which are supposed to be
suffycyent and able to govern them: are lawyers and pleders of causes. These
the pope of Rome promoteth to dygnyties, as being profitable persons and
defenders of the church, Lawyers, lawyers and al lawyers.
which can contend and strive for the conseruacyon and large vsurpacyon of
temporal things / and the doctors of holy dyuynyte he does reiecte: as
being unprofitable persons. For they are simple men, as he with his college
of cardynalles does say: and would suffer the church to decay, and go to
waste. Notwithstanding Nota.
that in very deed the church is not the temporalles: but the faithful people
of christ / for which the bishop ought to contend and strive / and not for
the temporalles / according to the counceyle of christ and of the apostles /
as it appears in the. x. of John^, and by the apostles words in the place
before alleged / and by very many other places of the scripture, which I leave
out here, because it is euydent enough, and also for the abbreuacion of our
process for the te^porals are not inherytaunce of the apostles, which they
left to the bishops their successors, for to be saved and kept. Neither are
emperyall dygnyties, and seculer domynyons, the right or lybertyes of the
spouses of christ which right. etc. the bishop of Rome that now is, to
defend or rather to offend took a doubtful intricate sentence and after a
crafty sophysticall fascyon, most unjustly has anau^ced him self against
noble Ludouyke coming of ye dukes of Bauarye, king of the Romans /
wherefore Barnarde, in the. iiii. chapter of ye second book written to
Eugenius, De consideratione, when he had spoken of the dylygent cure and charge
of souls or churches, which the apostles left to their successors: says in
this wise / what other thing has the apostles left? he said, that I have: I
do give to the / what thing is that? one thing I know: it is not gold nor
silver. And within a little after the same Bernarde says / Be it so that thou
may challenge these things (that is to wit the te^poralles) unto thy self,
by whatsoever other way or title, one thing I am assured of, that not by the
right or title of an apostle. And again afterward / that which he had,
says Bernarde, he gave / that is to wit the dylygent cure and charge (as I
have said) upon the churches. But concerning domynyon or lordshyppe: here
what the said Barnarde says afterward / has he given domynyon or
lordshyppe? here what he said him self. Not being lords or having domynyon
of the clargye: but being made the example of the flock. And because thou
shalt not think this to have been spoken only of humylyte and not also of
truth, these are the words of christ him self in the gospel. The rulers of
the Gentyles has domynyon upon them: and they which have power over them are
called benefycyall / and it follows afterward. But it shall not be so with
you / it is plain here and euydent that domynyon and lordshyp is utterly
forbidden the apostles. And ye thing which is worthy of most meruaylynge,
and most to be marked and regardyd of all men, and to be redressed and
brought again to a dew form and manner, by the princes as being the
mynystres of god is the instytucyon of the bishop of Rome, with other
bysshoppes, for seldom is a dyuyne chosen to be bishop of Rome. But for the
most part one is taken of the company of lawyers and pleders of causes /
which thing is utterly contrary to the scryptures of god, and dysagreynge
from right reason, and most shameful of all things in the face of all
churches. So also conuenyently, and no less in a manner it is to be marked /
concerning the company of cardynalles / that unto this dygnyte at taken wanten
young men / and very many of them not learned or skylled in the holy
scryptures, notwithstanding that this bishop of Rome and his church or
college ought to be an example unto all other. But of these things thus
farforth beit spoken / and now retournynge to our purpose, whereof we spoke
before: let us say yt the bishop of Rome, of the fulness of power: does give
the greatter multitude of the greatest, the mean, and the smalestest dygnytyes
and ecclesyastycall promocyons, to unlearned men / or to them that be
ignoraunte of the holy scryptures and would god that he gave them not, to
crymynous persons, as well those that be known of him self, as those that be
not known / to children and infantes also through symony outher of their own
party, or of y^ intreaters / or through some other corrupt affection, for the
most party. So than the greatest and most pryncypall seats being thus
infected, by the promotynge, yea and also by the intrusyon of such manner
persons: all the other smaller cures or offices belonging to the gift of
them, are also through the co^tagyousnes of them made corrupt and are
poisoned. For they being glad of like persons unto them selves, as ever like
is glad of like, as man of man, horse of horse (as the gentyle philosopher
said) they set upon the gate of symonye, or of some other unlawful way, by
which them selves entered or came in to the ecclesyastical offices: unto other
unlearned persons and lewd of manners. For they willing to do according to
their own manners, which manners dygnyte has not changed, but often times
has showed and brought to light: do hate, and reiecte, eschew, and oppress,
holy, ryghttuous, and learned men / which go not about to enter in to the
house of god, by such manner paths: as being enemies unto them selves / for
as christ which is the imortall truth says, he that evil does: hates
the light. And I can not ouerhyppe this also / that the aforesaid bishop, for
to purchase and get the love and favor or thanks of great men, and
peradventure also for money received beside that, has promoted certain young
men unto bysshoppes in famous cities, notwithstanding that they have been
ignoraunte and vnskylled of the law of god, and of other dyscyplynes and
scyences, and moreover not promoted to any holy order. And yet for all that
saint Iherome says to Euandre, that priest hode is contained in the office of
a bishop or ouerseer. The ecclesyastycall governors than being thus
infected, doubtless all the whole mystycall body of christ is sick and
dyseased / for when the prelates of the churches omytteth and leaves out
exhortacyons, obsecracyons, and increpacyons, to the other curates, according
to wholesome doctrine. And does committee detestable and abhomynable things
openly, the people is offended, and takes occasyon of synnynge through the
example of them, for as a mark is set up to shoters, so are they, set to be an
example to the people / which thing Christ considering said in the. v. of
Mathewe. Let your light so shine in the syghte of men, that they may se your
good works. And hereof, comes the rote and first peruersyte of the manners
used now adays, unto which inconclusyon follows eternal dampnacyon / for
as Christ says in the. v. of Mathewe / if a blind man be guide to a blind
man, both do fall in the dyche. But what shall we say of the dystrybucyon and
bestowynge of the temporalles / where the resydue of the said temporalles that
is superfluouse to suffyce the necessytie of the ecclesyastycall mynystres,
ought to be dystrybuted unto poor impotent beggars, and other miserable
persons (as every man in a manner does know) now they are turned in to shameful
uses, or to speak more truly in to shameful abuses / unto which this new
kind of almose is one, that the most part of the said temporalles are spente
and bestowed upon men of war, both horsemen and foremen: to raise up and to
norysshe contynuall wars among christen people / that at the last they may
subdewe them and make them subjects to their own tyrannycall power. Thus than
of the aforesaid things it appears, and is euydent, that by reason of the
fulness of power, the mystycall body of the church / as touching to the matter
or pryncypall members of it specyallye as (for cause of example) the prelates,
is on every side infected and nere to corrupcyon.

Now to speak of the form or fascyon of this body, which form ought to
co^syste in the order and dew sytuacyon of his me^bres: this same dody, to him
yt lust dylygently to behold it, and to advise and mark it well: shall seem
as an evil favored and mysshapen monstre / for what man would not judge the
body of yt beast A similitude.
to be mysshapen and unprofitable to co^uenyent operacions: in which body
every one of the me^bres thereof is i^medyatly joined and knytte un to the heed:
for ye finger or hand, if it be joined and knytte i^medyatly unto the heed:
because it wants his due place, it shall want also his virtue and conuenyent
mouynge and operacyon. But it shall not be so if the finger be joined to the
hand, and the hand to the arm, and the arm to the sholder, and the sholder
to the neck, and the neck be knytte to the heed by conuenye^t joints. For so
the body is made comely in his shap / and so the heed may send co^uenyent
virtue in to the other me^bres, in to one of them by an other, according to
the nature and order of them. And the said members by ye reason hereof: may do
the operacions co^uenyent and belonging unto them selves / which form and
manner we ought to regard in every / both ecclesiastical and also cyuyle
regyment or governance / for the bishop of Rome can not i^medyatly behold
and look upon the syngulare and pertyculare acts of every pertyculare person,
in all prouynces, and i^medyatlye dyrecte them / but if these things should be
done suffycyently and accordyngly, they ought to be helped by special
mynystres according to a due order / for the body of the church being so
ordered: may continue and also increase / which thing Paul the doctor of the
gentyles perceiving said in this wise in the. iiii. chapter to the
Ephesyans. Let us grow in him which in all points is the heed christ / in
whom all the whole body being co^pacted and knytte together, by every ioynte
of submynystracyon, according to the operacyon of every part in his measure,
makes increase of the body / but by the fulness of power permytted unto the
bishop of Rome: all this order or dew form is taken away. For he alsolueth
all prelates archebysshops, bysshoppes, chaptours, collegyes, abbottes, freers,
monks, and pryours of relygyous houses from their allegia^s due unto their
prince. And has subdued al these to his own cure and i^medyate correccyon,
for no euydent profit or vtylyte, but rather (as it is openly known) for
greadynes and desire to hepe suits or stryues in the law unto him self, to
the gatherynge of money, and to the spoylynge and robbynge of the prelates, and
also intending the greatter subduynge of them. But yet how great insolency
and pride has followed thereof in a manner every man knows / for these
aforesaid persons lacking the cure and obedyence dew to their prince are made
stubburne dysobedyent, and without the reverence or dread of them, to whom
they ought of right worthelye to be subjects and obedyent / and takes also
hereof unto them selves, and to other, occasyon and liberty to syn more at
large / To this add a new spring or branch of the said rote: yt the
bishop of Rome of his fulness of power, has forbidden them which have any
ecclesiastical benefyce where ever it be, without his license to make any
testamentes / and has decreed that the goods of them that dies intestate are
to be co^uayed and brought i^medyatlye unto his see. And add this also which
is a greatter thing and more of the devil, for it is most large symonye
although it be fulfilled after the dead, that by the same power, he reserueth
the rentes and profytes or fruits of all the benefyces, in whatsoever places
they be, the first year that they are vacant / gatheryng after this manner unto
himself all the treasures of the world, and robbynge all kyngdoms and
prouynces of the same, in which prouynces they ought to be dystrybuted to the
mynystres of the gospel, and to miserable persons, or else to be turned in to
the subsydie and succor of the common wealth, whereof they are taken if need
shall require / for herefore they have been ordained and assygned. This again
is a more i^tollerable thing, that he says, that the legacyes or bequestes in
the testamentes of christen lay men, for the passage beyond the sea, or for
other causes, according to the dysposycion of certain determynate persons,
whom they call co^myssaryes, does appertain to his ordrynge, by the same
fulness of power. And no marvel hereof, seeing yt a certain bishop among
them has said, that he himself has domynyon of all kings, princes, realms,
and co^munyties, notwithstanding yt in very deed / none of all the aforesaid
things does appertain unto his power / and of the same rote, mo and greuouser
things than these shall chance to spring up, which can not all be told for
the so diverse nature of them. For one inconuenyent granted, namely such one
in which all other inco^uenyences that may be thought or ymagyned about
cyuyle acts, are contained, it is no hard thing for any other inconuenyences
whatsoever they be, to chance according to the gentyle philosopher Arystotle
/ for this full power being due unto him: it follows, that he may do
whatsoever helyste / wherefore he does suspende, dysanulle, and revoke, all ye
ordynacio^s and laws of men at his own pleasure / which thing, as being the
extreme and vttermoste inco^uenyent, yt may be in the worldly regyment and
governance: as well saints as philosophers has hated and refused / as it was
proved by demo^stracyon in the. xi. chapter of the first dyccyon, and also was
more largely confyrmed in the. v. of this dyccion / by the auctoryte of saint
Augustyne, in ye. vi. chapter of the first epistle to Timothe. So than by the
fulness of power permytted unto him: yt whole body of ye church is infectyd /
and the order of all the ecclesiastycall iconomie is broken / and cyuyle
regyment and governance is let utterly, or troubled in part. Upon the
which bishop if christen men will cast their iyes (as I beseech them to do)
which has been dusked and bleared many adaye to the most part of them, by a
certain cover or cloak and color of sophistycall honesty: they shallse
clearly them selves, who soever has visyted the court of Rome, or to say
more truly, the house of marchaundyse, or the horrible den of thieves (to use
christ's words) or whosoever has not visyted it, shall learn by the report
of a great many of credyble persons: yt it is made in a manner the receptacle
and sanctuarye of all myscheuous men, and of merchants both spyrytuall and
temporal / for what other thing is there, than the concourse of symonyacall
persons, from all countrees? what other thing than the babbling noise of
proctours and pleaders of causes, and the assault of quarelers and false
accusers, and the vexacion of just men? There the justice of innocent persons
is in ioperdy, or at the least wise it is so greatly dyfferred and put of, if
they be notable to bye it with money, that at the last they being clean
beggarde, their money all consumed / and themselves weryed with innumerable
labors, are compelled to give over their ryghtful and miserable causes. There
the laws of men thundre and sound loud / but the law and doctrine of god:
outher keeps scylence or else sounds very seldom / there are treatyses,
rolls, and rentalles and preuy castes devised, how to invade the prouynces of
christen men, and by violence and power of arms to get and to take away the
said prouynces from them to whose custody they have been lawfully committed. But
how to get or wyn souls: there is no thought nor care / no counsayles at all.
Moreover there is none order: but co^tynuall horroure inhabyteth and dwells
there. And I which have been present there and seen the manner, do think in my
mind, that I do se that terryble and dredefull Image, which Nabugodonozor did
se in his dream (as it is recyted in The interpre tacyon of the Image which
Danyell descrybeth.
the second chapter of Danyell) having his heed of gold / his arms and
breast of silver, his belly and his thyghes of brass / and his legs of yerne
/ and the one part of his fete yerne / and the other of earth / for what other
thing betokens this great Image, than the state of the court of Rome, or of
the pope, which in old time was terrible to lewd and evil men: and now is
horrible to behold unto good and virtuous men. For the superyoure me^bres of
this Image, the heed, y^ breast, and the arms / what other thing are they in
sight, in affection, and love, than gold and silver and the works of man's
hands? And the belly and the thyghes of it, what other thing are they: than
the great noise and sound of seculare stryfes or causes, or of false
accusacyons and quarelles, and of symonyacall byenges and sellynges? for I will
not now speak of the thundres and lyghtnynges of curses and exco^munycacions,
both written, and given forth by mouth against christen men / which do refuse
(though ryghtuouslye) to be seculerlye subjected unto the bishop of Rome, and
to his church, and to give temporal goods unto them. And I beseech the tell
me, what other thyngis at the thyghes of brass: than the, pompouse and proud
ordynau^ces of pleasures, ryote, and well nere of alvanyties, yea such as are
unseemly for lay men? which pompous ordinance they do imprynte in the senses
of men: which ought to be the example of chastyte and honestye unto all other.
And the legs of yerne, and the fete and the toes, whereupon the Image stands
and is made fast, being partlye of earth: toward what other thing go they,
than the vsurpacyon, inuasyon, and occupacion of seculare domynyons kyngdoms,
and prouynces, by the vyolent power of armed men, or men harnaysed with yerne /
bringing with them for this purpose the superyoure members, that is to wit the
geuynge of gold and silver, which provoke the armed men here unto / and
also bringing with them the brazen belly and thyghes, by their lewd promise of
such things, and by vocale absolucyon (though dysceytful) of sins and
pains: and by the unjust condempnacyon and cursynge (though through gods
defense it does no hurt) of them, which defends their own lybertye, and
are willing to observe their faith and allegyaunce dew to their princes and
governors? But the soles of the fete, and the toes being of molde or earth,
and by reason thereof brytle and easy to break: what other thing do they
represente, than the vnconstancye and unstableness of the court of Rome / what
other thing do they sygnyfye or betoken, than the feebleness of ye occasyo^s
(because I will not say the falsytie and iniquyte of them, euydently known of
all men upon which occasyons the pope of Rome groundeth himself, and whereunto
he leans against the faithful people of christ for to oppress them? But as
the same prophet does witness and record upon this Image shall fall a stone
cut out of an hill without hands, that is to say a king, whom god shall
raise up elected by his grace of the university of men, that is to wit by
gyuynge to him power, and whose kingdom shall not be given to an other. This
king I say more by the virtue or grace of the trynyte, than by the work or
power of yt hands of men: shall first of all, crusshe and break ye earthy part
of this terryble, and horrible and monstruouse Image, that is to wit his fete,
where upon he stands vnconuenyently / that is to wit causynge the false and
unjust causes and baulde occasyons (as I may call them more truly with the
poetet) to be known unto all princes and peoples, the sopheme and dysceyte of
them being opened and dysclosed, and impungned by humayne demonstracyons, and
dystroyed and anulled by the veryties of holy scripture / and afterward shall
break the yerne parts of the same, by putting away his cruel and wicked
power / and consequently shall cause the brazen parts, that is to wit the
auctoryte of cursynge, which he has presumptuously taken upon him, upon
peoples and princes, and the troublous noise and strife of seculare
iurysdyccyons usurped, and consequentlye of causes, and vexacyons, to keep
silence and to be dombe. And the excesses and superfluyties of voluptuous
pleasures, and the pompes and vanyties to cease / last of all he shall subdue
and dystroye the gold and silver of the same Image, that is to wit, the
couytousnes and the robberye of the bishop of Rome. And so according to the
mind of the aforesaid profit, the yerne, the earth, the brass, the gold,
and ye silver of the said Image: shall be broken al together / that is to say,
all the vices and excesses of the abouesayde court, shall be quenched and
dystroyed, as it were strawes burnt unto ashes and carried away with the
wind / for that thing which is both against nature, and against the law
both of god and man, and contrary to al reason: that thing can not long
abide or co^tynewe.

How and after what manner the bishop of Rome has used the aforesaid manners
of fulness of power, inespecyall without the ecclesiastical lymytes / toward
lay men and toward cyuyle or temporal things.
The, xxv, chapter,
Now it remains unto us to search out, after what manner and facyon, and in
what things, the bishops of Rome have used hitherto, and do use the fulness of
power (which they have taken unto them selves) without the ecclesiastical
lymytes / but yet we will first make rehersall and call to remembrance the
usage and customs of the prymatyue church, and the procedynge of the same,
even from the begynner and heed thereof, which is christ / and from the first
promoters and setters forward thereof the holy apostles. For he, that is to
wit christ, came in to what christ taught.
the world to teach, and also to exercise the office of a preeste, or of a
pastor and feder of souls. For he being the interpretoure and expounder of
the law of eternal health: declared breyfly the same law, wherein was
comprehended the form and exercise of the sacraments / the precepts also and
counsayles of the things to be believed / of the things to be done / and of
the things which are to be despised and eschewed / to the inherytynge or
deseruynge of eternal felycyte or beatitude, which we call eternal life. But
as for the judgment of cyuyle or temporal acts, and the office of a seculer
prince or governor: he refused it, and expressly renounced it and commanded or
counseyled all the apostles and the successors of him, and them in the office
aforesaid, to renounce the same likewise / and expressed, him self, by ye
ordynacion of god, to be subject to the judgment or coactyue power of prices
of this world, with all his apostles / and they also expressed the^ selves to be
subjects to ye said seculer prices, both by their deeds, and also by their
words and doctrine / doctrine / as it has been euydently showed by the
scripture, and the exposycyons and auctoryties of saints and doctors, in the.
iiii. and. v. chapytres of this dyccion / and has also ben somewhat declared by
polytyke reasons, in the. viii. and. ix. chapytres of the same. And he
exercysed also those powers / and granted the same to be exercysed of the
apostles, and to their successoures in the person of them / and observed also
most high and perfyte poverty him self, and taught, commanded, or
councelled, them and the successors of them to observe and keep the same,
according to the manner before rehearsed and declared.

This form and manner of living, and of exercysynge the said office according
to the aforesaid power: the apostles did observe and keep: as being y^
children of obedyence. The same also the bishops of Rome, and other
successors of the apostles has observed many of them, though not all: well
near until the time of Co^stantyne the first emperor of the Romans. For
certain of them did possess lands or lordshyppes / among whom Orbane the
first bishop of Orbane was the first bishop of Rome that possessed lands.
Rome, is red to have been the first / for until his time, the church and
college of priests lived after the manner of christ's life, and of his
apostles / that is to wit, observing meretor yous and most high or perfyte
poverty. And albeit peradventure that the aforesaid Orbane did this thing
pryncypally (that we may judge his intent as cherytably as we may to the
best) for pytie, and for the succurrynge and releuynge of poor people, and
for mercy: yet for all that, if he took unto him self the power, to challenge
such manner lands or the prouentes or rentes thereof, before a coactyue judge:
or if he had power and auctoryte to sell the said lands, and to dystrybute
the price of them unto poor folk and did not sell and dystrybute them:
whether he did it wyllyngly or through ignorance: doubteles he declyned and
swarued from the most high poverty aforesaid, or from the state of perfeccion
which manner also very many Bishops of Rome did follow in this thing: until
the time of Constantyne / In which space of time the bysshoppes of Rome with
their college made unto them selves certain ordynacyons concerning the
ceremonies and customs ecclesiastical, as about the deuyne service, and the
honest state of the college and company of priests / and the same ordynacyons
as being profitable: they did co^munycate unto other churches, namely to such
Note this again.
as required them and they did also take upon them selves of pytie and
charytie: the cure and dylygence of other churches of the world, according to
their possybylytie / Because that very often times they wanted suffycie^t
governors, postors, or prelates / and therefore they did exhort, monysshe, and
counsel the persons of other churches in those things: which appertayned to
honestye, to faith, or believe. And the other churches thankefully, kyndly, and
wyllyngly, received ye exhortacyons and monycio^s of them. In which churches
also, when otherwhyles some of the priests or bishops, or some of the
deaco^s, or of other persons were froward, and did not cease from troblynge of
the other, as touching manners or faith, at the brotherlye monycion of them
that were present: than peradventure those persons, which were most
dyscrete among them, and willing to live godly and vertuouslye in christ,
procured exco^munycacyons or curses to be given How exco^munycacyo^s came
first from Rome.
by the bishop of Rome and his church (whose monycyons chrystened people
most feared, for the causes aforesaid) against rebellyous persons, and to
the dystroublers of other men, or otherwise crymynouse persons / or else the
bishops of Rome did it of their own accord vndesyred: for the zele and love
that they had to the faith. Therefore the christen people which were in other
places, for the most part of them: agreed to obey the bishop of Rome, and
his church, for the conseruacyon of the unity of the faith, and of quyetnes
among them selves one of them with an other, because these said things
could not be kept by power coactyue, or by any other more co^uenye^t way, for
as much as yt time ye humayne lawemakers in a manner or princes every where was
hethen and not chrystened. But when the time of Constantyne the first
Emperourr of Rome How councelles were first congregated and gathered.
was come, which first of all emperoures permytted and granted, that
christen people might assemble and come together openly, than was first made
general councelles of priests or bysshopes, by the commandment or auctoryte
of the foresaid emperor / by which councelles, the doubtefull senses, of the
holy scripture, were defyned and determined and the true senses of the same
sequestered, and dysceuered from the false and erronyous senses / which false,
corrupt, and mad senses some of the priests, otherwhyles through
ignorance, and most co^munelye through superstyciousnes and malice, had
sown and sparpled abroad among christ's faithful people / in which
councelles also, ordynacyons and statutes were made about the ecclesiastical
usage and customs, as concerning the deuyne service, and the honestye and
good order of deacons and priests / and as touching the promotynge of them
unto the ecclesiastical offices, as well in seperable which they call ordres:
as seperable which they call prelacyes or cures Offices seperable and
inseparable.
of souls / and to such other offices incertayne places and prouynces / and
also concerning the dystrybucyon of the temporalles or benefyces, as the
oblacions and other things which were given unto them, both moueables and
vnmoueables for the mynysterynge of the gospel: the form and manner was
determined, set, and appointed in the said councelles / of the which form
and manner to be observed and kept: the prince and governor gave or made a
coactyue precepte, or law, byndynge every manner man, both priests and lay
men, by a pain or punysshement outher real or personal to be done unto the
transegressours of it, according as every one did require, for ye state and in
ye state of this present world. The canony call laws were first made against
priests and not against lay men.
And such manner laws were made against priests and bisshops, more tha^
against other men / because co^munelye, at that time, they were priests which
gave the cause of making such coactyue precepts or laws. And neither the
bishops of Rome, neither any other bysshoppes who ever they were, did resyste
or speak against the humayne law maker or prince, as being not subjects to
ye laws and statutes of princes: but always made supply cacyons to princes,
that they would make such laws / as it appears by the aforsayd book of
Isodorye, and by other approved hystoryes.

Moreover by the same princes or emperors laws were made and has been made,
concerning the certain nombre that should be of priests, according to the
prouynces / and concerning temporal goods belongnnge to them both moueables
and vnmoueables, which has been given to them (as it is said) by the^ said
constantyne and by the other emperors of Rome, or other princes or governors
/ and As it is falsely feigned.
successyuely also by some other synguler persons. And again concerning the
cyuyle or contencious acts of them, albeit the said laws has been moderated,
with special favors of the grace and goodness of the humayne law makers or
princes considering and regarding the dygnyte and reverence of the order of
preesthode, because by it according to the truth the office of christ is
represented / regarding also the grauyte of their manners, and the symplycyte
and innocencye of the parsones, which at that time were mynysters of the
gospel, The pryuyleges of prestes.
and bare the said office: even like acts they ordained, and made less
rygorous laws for them than for lay men, granting unto them also many
pryuyleges. For at that time they were in nombre but few, and devout, and
through And now they be many and undevout.
humylyte and humblenes, easylye geuynge place, and making no resystence to
the assaults of lawyers and pleaders of causes / nor strengthed and compased
about (as they ben now) on every side with vyolent or armed power for the
defense of them selves, and the offendynge or hurtynge of other. For in the
old time it was a great abhomynacyon, and should have seemed a cyuyle monstre,
if clerks, namely, priests, or bishops, had taken harnes or weaponed them
selves: or had commanded other men to take on harneys to fight / wherefore
saint Ambrose in the place before alleged in the. ix. chapter of this dyccyon:
says thus. I shall Ambrose of the armure of priests.
be able, or may be sorry / I may weep / I may wayle and syghe / my tears
are my armoure or weapons, against wars / soldyers / and also against the
Goths / for such things are the munymentes strength and aids of a preeste /
but otherwise than thus, I neither ought, neither may resyste. And for this
cause they neded at that time special favors and pryuylegies: that they might
live But now ye contrary needs.
quyetlye and safelye, and might escape the vexacyons of quarelles and false
accusarers / howbeit now adays: there is a conuersyon and change made in
this thing, of them, in respect and comparyson to lay men / in to the
contrary qualytye. So that in the old times, they lived under the laws and
cyuyle ordynacyons of seculer princes / and a long season the whole college
or company of Mark this ye princes, and lose not your hono^ regal.
priests, took of the same princes and of the people: the gifts / the
confyrmacio^s / and the inuestytures of their offices / as of the prelacyes,
cures / and of other like or else of smaller offices / and also power to
dystrybute and bestow the temporalles or benefyces. Neither did the bishops
of Rome in the old time, strive against the emperors of Rome, for cause of
such manner subieccyons, neither against the people, or pertyculer persons,
being patrones of the churches. For they knew that they were bound to this
subieccyon: by the law of god, and also by the law of man / as we have showed
suffycyentlye by scripture and polityke reasons, in the. iiii. v. viii. and.
xvii. of this dyccyon. For so we read of Symachus being a man of Sarde by
birth and nation / that he being coelected with one Lawrence, through
dyscorde, was confyrmed pope of Rome by the judgment which Theodorichus
king, made or did give. So also writes Martyne, of saint Gregorye. This
Gregorye (says Martyne) is chosen pope, and Mauricius ye emperor confyrmeth
him by his letters emperyall. So also the bishops of Rome, were wont to
desire the confyrmacyon of their pryuylegies, humbly, of the emperors / as it
is red of Vitelliane which was a Syguen borne / and of Vitellianus papa.
Constantyne which was a Syryane borne / and of very many other bishops of
Rome / yea moreover they were wont to go personallye unto the emperoures
Co^sta^tyne pope.
by places far dystau^te, for these and other supplycacyons, and their
confyrmacyons to be obtained / as it is red of very many of them in Chronicles
and approved hystoryes. And also (which is a greatter thing) John^ the. xii.
was deposed To this point they would be brought again. John^ the xii. pope is
deposed by Otto and I pray god that I mayese such things again, both in this
land and otherwhere.
from the popeshyp, his demerytes so requyrynge: by Otto, the first, being
emperor, all the people consenting thereunto, both the clargy, and also the
lay men. So also in the cronycle of Martyne, where he speaks of Benedicte
the. ix. it is red of two, that were elected contenciouslye, and deposed by the
emperyal censure and judgment of Henry, which than was emperor of Rome. For
to the same pryncypall or cheyfe auctoryte it appertains, to depose, and
destytute any thing if it shall be expedyent, to which it belongs to
instytute it. For asmoche than, as every bishop ought to be elected by the
prince, by the auctoryte of the same he may be destytuted or deposed / as it
has been certyfyed in the. xvii. of this dyccion. The bishops of Rome
therefore, and of other prouynces, and the priests, and all the college or
company of clerks, lived after the example of christ and of his apostles,
under the coactyue iurysdyccyon, and governance of them: which were princes
and rulers. But through the entysement and pryckynge on of the prince of this
world, the first father of pride and ambycyon, and the suggesture, and putter
in mind of all other vices, the devil: certain of the bysshoppes of Rome
were deduced, nay rather seduced and brought out from the way of christ and of
the apostles: in to an other clean contrary way. For auaryce and covetousness
inuadynge and coming in to the minds of them: did thruste out from thense ye
highest merytoryouse or perfyte poverty, which christ had planted and set in
the church. And again pride, and ambycyon or desire of honor, and of
seculare domynyon, inuadynge and coming upon the same: has driven out from
thense most high and perfyte humylyte which christ had commanded and
charged to be observed. and kept of the same clergy or universal company of
priests. Among which bysshoppes one Simplicius Tibertinus bishop of Rome
is red Simplicius Tibertinus was one of ye first traitors bisshoppes of Rome.
to have been, the first that suffered this thing / for this Simplicius
taking to him auctoryte, I wotte never from whense, albeit that I know
certaynely, except he be excused by ignorance, whereof he took this rasshe and
mysauysed presumpcyon, ordained and decreed, that no clarke ought to take his
inuestiture of a lay man, understanding and meaning the inuestiture of
benefyces and offices, of which we have spoken here tofore / albeit, yet that
by his statute and decree it is euydently sygnyfyed: that his predecessors
willing to give dew humylyte Inuestiture.
and reverence to the princes and emperors, were wont to receive the
aforesaid inuestytures of lay men. Again an other successoure of his though
not next after him, Pelagius the first of that name: ordained and decreed,
that heretykes This good honest man gave ye emperor a pygge of his own so we.
should be punysshed by the seculer powers or officers / of which statute or
decree it is also to be marueyled, for asmoche as he knew well enough, that
such a law was made against heretykes, in the time of Iustiniane emperor of
Rome, And because it belongs not to his auctorytye to make such manner of
laws, in that he was a bishop: unless peradventure this thing had been
granted to him by the auctoryte of the temporal prince. Therefore likewise as
Simplicius aforesaid did: so also did Pelagius put in his syeth in an other
man's corn, by usurping the auctoryte unto him self: which appertayned
unto an Adriane ye. iii pope was a worshypfull p^late I warraunt you.
other man. To whom again Adryane the third succeeded, though not imedyatlye:
in the said vsurpacyon / for he ordained and decreed, that none emperor
should intromytte, or meddle concerning the eleccyon of the Pope (that we may
use the words of the said Martyne) which statute or decree being utterly
of no strength, for asmoche as it was made by him that lacked auctoryte to
make such manner laws: did contain also an open inconuenyence / as it has
benshewed Here ye mayese yt no writer of histories is to be trusted at all
times, and that a man may soon be deceived in them, except he have a right
judgment first in scripture. Martin was a freer beggar
in the. xviii. chapitre of this dyccyon beside that that the contrary of it
had been roborated and establysshed by long and laudable custom. For albeit
that Martyne does say, where he makes mention of Leo the. x. yt the Romans of
a lewd and wrong custom desired a bishop to be given unto them by the
emperor: in that he confesses it to have been a custom: we grant that the
said truth / but in that of his own auctoryte he calls it a lewd or crooked
custom, intending thereby to iustyfye the aforesaid vsurpacio^s of the
bishops of Rome and to deface the auctoryte and laws of the emperors, in
this he going about to please man, rather than to please god and the truth:
says falsely and untruly / but he shows playnelye the beginning and
mysterye of this thing to have been shyt up and closed from him self. Neither
credence is to be given unto Martyne in this behalf / for he with his order
were partakers of such manner vsurpacyon. For the ordres which they do call
beggynge freets, have optayned or believe that they have optayned of the
bishops of Rome, an exempcyon / that is to wit, that they are in no point
subjects under the iurysdyccyon of their own pastores the bishops / or other
superyoure prelates. But now to return to that whereof we spoke before, it
was no lewd nor vnlaudable custom, that the bishops of the church of Rome
were instytuted by the emperors, as we have said. For we do read, and they
also which labor with the said Martyne, to contrary and to be against this
truth, do confess or grant, that this auctorite, and after a larger manner
than is aforesaid: has afterward ben granted to Charlemayne / and to Otto
the first king of Almayne, and emperor of Rome, by all ye people of Rome / as
by the bishop, the clargye, and other seculer persons wherefore it is red in
approved hystoryes, and it is true also that this decree following came forth
by the common consent of the people of Rome. Leo pope in the synodye which
was congregated at rome, in the church of saint sauyoure, according to the
example of blyssed Adryane, bishop of the apostolyke see, which granted unto
lord Charles the most vyctoryous king of France and Lombardy the dygnyte of
a senator, and the ordynacyon and the inuestyture of the apostolyke see. I
also Leo the servant of the servants of god, bishop, with all the clargye
and the people of Rome, do constytute, confyrme, and roborate, and by our
apostolyke auctoryte do grant and give to Otto the first king of Almayne,
and to his successors of this realm or empire of Italye forever, as well
power to chose a successoure unto them self, as also to ordain and assygne
the bishop of the apostolyke see / and by this also to ordain arche bishops
or bysshoppes / so that they shall take their inuestiture of him, and their
consecracion of them of whom they ought to take it. Only these excepted whom
the emperor has granted to the pope and to archebysshops. And that no man
from hensforth, of what so This he means of bishops within ye emperors
dominion for else the emperor has naught to do in the leccyon of bisshops in
England. This punysme^t would be put in ure. Steven. Nicholas.
ever dygnytie, relygyon, or holiness he be: shall have power to elect outher
senatoure, or bishop of the highest apostolyke see, or to ordain any other
bishop, who soever he be, without the consent of the said emperor / which
for all that shall be made without any money / and that he shall be senator,
and also king. And if it so chance that any bishop be elected by the
clargye, except he be lauded and allowed of the aforesaid king, and have his
inuestyture of him: let him not be consecrated / if any man do enterprise or go
about any thing agynst this auctoryte, we have decreed him to be under
exco^munycacion / and accursed / and except he shall repent, to be punysshed
with perpetual exyle or banysshement / or else to be punysshed with the extreme
punysshementes or death. This decree also Steue^ the pope successor unto the
aforesaid Leo has confyrmed / and also one Nicholas the successor of Steven /
co^mau^dynge it to be observed and kept under the pain of the terryble curse
/ that is to wit that the transgressors and brekers of it ought to be
accounted among the wicked men, which shall not rise again in judge meant /
as the profit says in the first psalm. And of this decree it is specyallye
to be noted, yt this auctoryte concerning the inuestytures, which the bishop
of Rome with the whole people did translate unto the emperor: as touching on
the popes party: was a certain renu^cyacion. For the first and pryncypall
auctoryte hereof was and is appertaynynge to the emperor, which had than
granted to the pope this auctoryte of gyuynge ye inuestyture unto bishops and
arche bishops. For because all te^porall things, by whom soever they shall
have been translated in to any manner church: as touching to this thing, were
and are subject to the prince of the prouynce in which the said temporalles
are sytuate or lyenge. And this is sygnyfyed by the aforesaid decree, where it
is said, except those, whom the emperor has granted to the pope and
archebysshoppe. So also to instytute the bishop of the apostolyke see,
appertains to the power and auctoryte of the emperor. This notwithstanding
certain bishops of Rome usurping the iurysdyccyon of the peoples and
princes, as well in the making or gyuynge, as in the laws given, have
enterprysed to make, promulgate, or publysshe these laws, though unduly and
wrongfully / and by little and little have proceeded and gone forward in them /
namely the emperyall see being vacant / whereupon commonly and for the most
part, and for the occupacion of certain te^poralles (so far as may be
perceived by the Chronicles, or approved hystoryes) stryfes have been raised up
between the emperors and the popes of Rome. Howbeit The bisshops of rome have
caused much strife debate and blood shedynge.
the said bishops in this have done against the council or precepte of christ
and of the apostles / which in that they ought to succeed the apostles in the
office of preesthode or apostleshyp: they ought also to observe and keep most
high poverty and humylytie / but they turnynge out in to a certain other
way, and contrary to it, through ignorance, or malice, or through both, as
we have showed here tofore: have begone this i^mortall and perpetual contencion
or strife against the said emperors which same contencyon most of all among
all other, a certain bishop of Rome called Paschalis, began against Henry
the. iiii. king Pope Pascal a good man but small
of Almayne. For as the hystoryes do record the said bishop did prohybyte
the said Henry to come up unto the emperyall dygnyte / reysynge up against him
the people of Rome, until such time as the aforesaid Henry being in Tusky, by
ambassadors and letters, did grant in a manner by co^pulsyon, unto ye same
bishop, the inuestitures and instytucio^s of all bishops, abbottes, and all
other clerks. Of which Henry again, the aforesaid pope requyrynge an oath,
after he was entered in to the city, concerning the things, which he had
extorted and gotten of him by co^pulsyon: was taken, and al his college of
Cardynalles / and in co^clusyon being delivered: had peace with the aforesaid
emperor. Against whom he raysynge again the old strife: had much to do to
end it at the last, with great labors and pains.

But (as Martyne tells) the aforesaid emperor repenting (to use the words
of the same Martyne) and waxynge wise again: frelye resygned by the staff and
the ring, to one Calyxte the successoure of Pascall, the inuestyture of
bysshoppes Calixte pope
and of other prelates / and granted that canonycall eleccyon should be made
in all churches throughout the whole empire / and all the possessyones and
regalles of saint Peter, which through his discord, or any other strife or
debate He durst non other do then, but I think yt freer Martyne lies. Otto
the. iiii. emperor.
with the church had been alienated: he restored to the church of Rome / and
dysposed and ordered, that all other possessions as well of clerks as of lay
men, which by the occasyon of war had been taken away: should be faythfullye
and truly restored again / which said grauntes or pryuyleges, Otto the.
iiii. and Frederyke the second emperors of Rome, afterward willing (for a
laufull cause peradventure) to revoke, or reuokynge utterly, or else in part:
suffered very many dysceyptes, persecucyons, and impedymentes or vexacyons of
the bysshoppes and of the clargye of Rome. And some of their predecessors have
not ben helped Frederyke ye second.
by the people, subjects unto them, by the reason that the rule and regyment
of the bysshppes of Rome, or of their officers and mynystres, has otherwhyles
tasted peradventure of tyranny. This than (as we have said) is and has been
the first and pryncypall occasyon, and noryssher of the present strife and
dyscorde between the emperors and the popes of Rome / which enemyties and
dyscordes, on the behalf of the emperoures and other princes have many times
ben cessed, upon a blind zeal toward the law of god, and for fear that
else they might be taken of other as heretykes and rebellyons against the holy
church, as men call the clargye. But the bishops of Rome will for all that
vnduelye and excescessyuely possess temporal things, and not be under the
laws, statutes, or decrees of the emperors clean against the example and
doctrine of christ and his apostles / as it has been showed here tofore.
Notwithstanding that they ought not only in these things which are not
their own, but also in things being their own, rather to give place: than
to contend and strive / according to the counsel which Paul gives to all
christen men in the. vi. chapter to the Corynthians where he says thus. Is
there not one man among you, which may judge between brother and brother: but
does one brother strive with an other brother in judgment, and that before
infydels? Truly in so doing ye declare sin to reygne in you / why have you
judgments between you? why do you not rather take wrong? why do you not
rather suffer hurt or loss? and it follows afterward Be not angry.
in the same place, which may conuenyently be said, well nere unto all the
bishops of Rome, and to all other clerks. But you do wrong and work
dysceypte, and that to your christen brethren. Do you not know: that unjust
persons, shall not possess the kingdom of god? Be not begyled or do you not
mystake or err. Neytheyr fornycatours, neither worshyppers of Imagies, neither
adulterers / neither bouggardes, using the sin of the sodomytes / neither
thieves / neither covetous men / neither dronkerdes / neither evil sayers /
neither extorcyoners and robbers, shall possess the kingdom of god. Which
saying or counsel of saint Paul, the bishops of Rome with the resydue of
bishops and clerks, little markynge or regarding, if at any time they think
them selves to be grieved by the emperors of Rome, by reason of taking of
tithes or of such temporal trybutes, to the sustentacyon and mayntaynynge of
their soldyers, the necessyte of war being toward and nere at hand: for
the favor and benefyte of temporal things, which they have received and
taken, gracyouslye given unto them by the emperors of Rome, they being lyfted
up in to pride, ignoraunte of their own condycion and estate, and most unkind
of all unkind men, of a certain unbridled presumpcyon, have braste forth in
to horrible blasphemies and cursings, as well against the emperors: as against
the christen people subjects unto them. Albeit the said curses have returned
again unto their own wreched souls and bodies, rather than have hurted the
emperors and the innocent flock of christen people.

And they not being contented with the temporalles granted unto them by The
bisshops of Rome ben thefes and robbers.
the emperors / through the insatiable desire which they have unto such
things, have vyolently entered upon many of the temporal prouynces
appertaynynge to the right of the emperor / as the temporalles of the cities
of Romandiole / and of Farrarie and Bononie / also of the lands and other
iurysdyccyons: specyallye when the emperyall seat has been vacant. And
(which thing is Tyranny and vsurpacyon
the vttermoste inconuenyent of all cyuyle inconuenyentes) they have made them
selves princes and lawmakers, to the end that they might bring kings and
peoples in to their bondage, most intolerable / and shameful. For the most
part of them descendynge and borne of a low and vile stock or lynage, whiles
they are taken to the state and dygnyte of the pope, not knowing or skylled in
seculer governance, and as ignoraunte in the ordering of riches, being also
indiscreet persons, and lately made rich, are now made or become importable
and intolerable unto all christen people.

Moreover beleuynge that it was laufull for them to do what soever they lust
by reason of the fulness of power, which they do challenge as dew unto them
selves: they have made, and do make certain Oligarchicall ordynacyons, called
decretalles / by which they do decree such things to be observed and kept /
as they suppose to be agreynge unto the temporal profit of them selves, and
of their clerks, and other lay men, of the exempcion whereof we have spoken
though they be to the great preiudyce, of all princes, and other christen men.
And who soever are dysobedyent unto these decretalles: they do stryke them, as
we have said before, with their sentence of curse, outher by mouth or else by
writing. yea more Oh shame of all shames.
over some of them have brast forth at the last in to so great madness that by
these their decretalles, they have pronounced all the princes and peoples of
the world to be subjects unto them by coactyue iurysdyccyon / and that every
manner man is bound of the necessyte of eternal salvation, to believe that this
is true / which thing for all that, how greatly it is worthy to be mocked and
laughed to skorne I have showed heretofore.

These excesses and trespasses than, which we have rehearsed to have been done
by the bishops of Rome, with the college or company of their clerks, against
all princes and peoples, though most largely, and manyfestlye against the
people of Italye, and the princes and emperors of Rome: they are willing to
co^serue / Obstynacye.
and as obstynate persons frowardly to defend / and not only these: but also
they are willing and gothe about with all care and dylygence to seche or get
unto them selves the same excesses, or else greatter excesses preconceyued, and
desired against other kingdoms / and does give also hereunto all the outward
As against England.
loboure and dylygence, that they dare. And they verelye co^syderynge and
knowing well enough (though they do dyssemble it and with certain
rethorycall colors and clokes of words do go about both to obscure and
deny it) that it belongs to the auctoryte of the princes and their
parlyamentes, to give and to take away what soever pryuylegyes or grauntes
has been made unto them / yet when soever it shall seem expedyent to the
emperor and his counsel to receive at Rome his crown emperyall, then as
traitors untrue with all malycyous dylygence and enforcement they do
prohybyte and let the creacion and promocyon of the emperor of Rome: because
they know the unkindness and demerytes of them selves or else of their
predecessors, for which they do fear least their pryuylegyes and grauntes
shall be revoked, and taken from them by the emperor / and that they shall
suffer punysshementes such as they have deseruyd. And again, by the reason of
the said fear and dread, and because that by the aforesaid pryuylegyes there
was no way open unto them, to get or enter upon the domynyons, iurysdyccions,
and possessions of other kingdoms with out cauellacyon / for that that the
emperors pryuylegyes does not bind other princes, as being of as great
power as he, within their own domynyons they have therefore I say sought and
gone about to enter unto these things by a certain other craft and subtel
medytacion and deuyse. For they have taken upon them the title, which they
preach openly of them selves / and which they go about, to make the
instrument of this wyckednes and myschefe, that is to wit, the fulness of power,
which they do say to be granted syngulerlye unto them selves by christ in
the person of saint Peter the apostle. whose successors they say them selves
to be. By which cursed title, and sophysticall oracyon, because Fulness of
power is an execrable title.
it may be taken diverse ways, and as being false. in all senses and always
and at al times to be denied of all christen men: they have hitherto disceyued,
and does new dysceyue and gothe about more and more to begyle and dysceyue,
and to bring under their seruytude and bondage, all the princes, and peoples
collegyes, and syngulare persons of the world. For after the bishops of Rome
had taken this said title of full power unto them selves, first of all in
that sense, after which, fulness of power seems to betoken for the vnynersall
cure of all souls, or the office of general pastor or herdes man, and again
in the sense after which it betokens power to absolve all men seuerallye
from all sins and pains, under the color and apperaunce of pytie, charity,
and mercy: from these, by little and little, and secretlye, as we have declared
in the. xxiii. chapter of this dyccyon they have gone further / and at the
last have taken unto them selves this title in and after that sygnyfycacyon, by
which they do understand by fulness of Folnes of power, full enough I trow:
and if the devil be not in it.
power, universal auctoryte, and highest iurysdyccion or coactyue governance
and domynyon of all princes and peoples, and all temporal things / taking
the beginning and ground of such fulness, by the metaphorycall and
allegorycall exposycyons, whereof we have spoken in the. v. part of the. xxiii.
chapter of this dyccyon. And this is an euydent and manifest sign to all men,
that the bishops of Rome does according to this sense, ascrybe unto them
selves, and brag them selves to have fulness of power, that is to wit that
they will have the auctoryte of highest iurysdyccyon, or coactyue domynacyon,
over all princes, peoples and partyculer persons, to be agreynge and
appertaynynge unto them selves by this fulness of power. For in the. vii. book
of their narracyons, which they do call Decretalles / in the title Desentencia
et re iudicata, Clement Dese^te^cia et re iudicata.
the. v. pope of Rome, which is intytled the maker thereof, and he which
afterward publysshed the same, being called the successoure of the same
Clement asmoche as in them was, reuokynge a certain sentence of the most
honorable Henry the. vii. emperor of the Romans, among other things,
after very many words of contumelye, rebuke, and irreuerence there promised,
after their wont and accustomed manner, both by word of mouth and also in
wrytynges against the said Henry: at the last (I say) they bring for y^ this
sentence following. We as well by the superyoryte, which it is undoubted that
we have in comparyson to the empire, as by the power and auctoryte in which we
do succeed Marsilius of padway, the herolde of truth.
the emperor, the empire being vacant, and also by the fulness of that
power, which christ the king of kings and lord of lords has granted to
us though unworthy in the person of saint Peter: do declare by the council
of our brethren, the sentence and processes aforesaid, and what soever has
followed of them or by the occasyon of them, to have been, and also to be
utterly Here al kings take heed, if ye will not have your crowns pulled of
your hedes, or the succession of your bodies betrayed, for in y^ decretalles is
manyfeste treason co^ceyuyd against you all, and eke the succession of your
bodies.
void and of no strength. And because the dysceypte and gyle of these
bishops shall not from hensforthe be hyd and unknown. I as the common
proclaymour and cryere of truth, do cry stronglye and say unto you kings,
princes, peoples, and men of all nacyons and languages, that the popes of Rome
with the company of their clerks by this their decretalles being most
openly false as touching to every supposycyon of it do the most high
preiudyce that may be, unto you all / for they do go about to bring you in to
their subieccion, if you shall suffer that Decretall to remain, and namelye to
have the virtue and strength of a law. For mark well this / it follows of
necessyte, that he which has pryncypall auctoryte to revoke the sentence of
any manner prince or judge: has also iurysdyccyon and coactyue domynyon upon
the same prince or judge / and has auctoryte and power to instytute and to
depose him from kingdom rule, and governance. But the pope of Rome ascrybeth
this auctoryte unto him self, over all princes and kingdoms of the world
indyfferentlye / for by that full power and auctorytye, which he says that
Christ has granted to him in the person of saint Peter: he has revoked
the cyuyle sentence of the aforesaid Emperor of Rome Henry / which power,
it follows of necessyte, to have been granted to him, no less upon other
kings and governors of the world, than upon the emperor of the Romans.
For christ no less has been is, or shall be king and lord of other kings and
princes or governors: than of the king and gouernoure of the Romans /
which thing also their own speech or scripture witnesses openly, when they
do say or write, king of kings, and lord of lords. For if their saying or
writynge were under this form, syngulerlye, that of the fulness of power
granted unto them by christ king and lord of the king or emperor of Rome.
etc. By this peradventure might the excepcyon of other kings and kingdoms be
somewhat perceived and comprehended. But now for asmoche as they pronounce this
sentence plurallye, absolutelye, and indyfferentlye, even as it is written of
the euangelyste (though not to that sentence or purpose, which the bishops
of Rome do intend) by it there can be made none excepcion of any king or
governor / no more then they themselves do understand or mean any prince to
be excepted from it, but every one to be contained in it / as in an other place
their predecessoure Boniface the. viii. did plainly and dystynctely express /
and we have brought in his saying here tofore. To whom yet let no man
continue enuyous minded for their saying or writing. And albeit that the
euangelyst said true, when he called christ the king of kings and lord of
lords, yea if he had said also of all creatures: yet for all that he said and
wrote a false and an open lie, and contrary to the many fest and euydent
sentence of christ, and of the apostles Peter, and Paul, and James, which
said and affyrmed the foresaid full power of domynyon or of coactyue
iurysdyccion, or any such power at all to be given in the person of saint
Peter or of any other apostle, to the bishop of Rome, or else to any other
bishop. But such manner of power is, has been, and shall be utterly for
bydden to the bishop of Rome, and to all other bishops in the person of what
soever apostle he be, as we have undoubtedly certyfyed by the scripture and
the auctoryties of saints, in the. iiii. v. and. ix. of this dyccion. But in
that new faynynge, and which was never before hard of any man, the bishop of
Rome no less falslye The bishop of Rome is both false and presu^ptuous.
than presumptuously, is not afraid to speak openly against his own mind,
and against the mind well nere of all christen men, being partakers of this
consyderacion, whiles he does styffely affirm, that it is undoubted, him
self to have superyoryte (as he inte^deth and means) of coactyue
iurysdyccion or domynyon in co^paryson unto ye emperor of Rome. And again yt
the empire being vacant: he succedeth the said emperor of Rome. For by
these words is manyfestly showed the wrongful and unjust vsurpacyon of the
emperyall iurysdyccions, which the bishops of Rome hitherto have exercysed,
and now adays do exercise: namelye when the emperyall see is vacant. For who
is so far from shamefastnes and utterly shameless, as to say that thing
to be undoubtedly tree we, which thing, was never before hard, neither has been strengthed and confyrmed by the law of god or of man, or by right reason /
and whose contraryety according to the said laws and right reason: has
always ben conceived and spoken forth as a token of the truth believed of all
men? wherefore likewise (as the proverb of physycions is) as he does heal most
men, of whom most men have confydence and trust: so may we say in very deed he
is willing to dysceyue and begyle Asymylitude
most men, to whom most credence is given now adays.

Now the bishop of Rome has used the same fulness of power, more specyallye,
against the emperor, and the empire of Rome.
The, xxvj. chapter,
THus than the bishops of Rome have so used hitherto the aforesaid fulness of
power, contynuallye, ever longer worse and worse, and so do still, but yet most
of all against the emperor and empire of rome. For against him they may most
largelye exercise thus their wyckednes, that is to wit of subduynge ye empire
unto them selves: by reason of the dyscorde which has been hitherto raised
up, and contynuallye is raised up and norysshed by those men which ben called
pastores or most holy fathers, The fruits of o^ holy herdesmen or bysshoppes.
Between the inhabytantes of the empire among them selves: and also against
their prince. And again because this empire being ones subdued unto them:
they suppose and believe, that they may easily have a way open to subdue other
kyngdoms also / and yet are they most largelye and syngulerlye bound to the
emperor and empire of rome: for benefytes received of them, as it is known
unto all men. But that we may speak a thing not unknown to any man or
nedynge my words or testymony, they smytten with couytousnes, with pride, and
ambycion, and by unkindness made worse then ill, search and go about all manner
ways: to prohibit and let the creacion of the romayne emperor: yea and in
conclusyon go about to destroy his empire or else go about to translate it in
to an other form or fascyon, being subject unto them, and this they do lest
the excesses might be corrected and redressed, which they have commit against
ye empire, by the auctoryte and power of the said prince or emperor, and lest
also them selves might suffer chastysment according to their deservings. And
though for that intent which we have said, they do euydently lay some manner
stop or impedyment unto the aforesaid emperor, yet gylefullye they pretend
an other thing, to cover and hyde this their intent / saying that they do it,
to defend the right and lybertyes of the spouse of christ, that is to wit of
the church / but this pypyked pyetie and sophistycall devotion is to be
laughed to scorn. For I am that The spouse of christ, and ye church must be a
cloak to cover alwyckednes.
temporal things, yea rather their couytousnes, their ambycion, and desire of
iurysdyccyon or domynyon, is not the spouses of christ neither have christ
coupled it unto him self by matrymonye, but has expressly refused and
forsaken it / as it has been here tofore declared by deuyne scryptures.
Neither is it the inherytaunce which the apostles have left to their true and
unfeigned successors, as saint Batnarde says openly and plainly to Eugenius
pope in ye book De The spouses of christ. Barnarde
consideratione and in the. iiii. chapter. This is Peter (says Barnarde)
which is not known to have come forth at any time, outher adourned and
decked with precious stones or sylkes / or covered with gold / or riding on a
white palfraye, neither guarded with men of war / neither compased about on
every side with servants making noise / and yet without those things he
supposed, that him The popes have succeeded not Peter but Constantine or rather
Ni^roth yt cruel thief and tyra^t.
self might suffyciently fulfill yt wholesome commandment or charge, if thou
love me feed my sheep. In these things yt is to wit gold, precious stones,
and other te^porall things, thou art successor not to Peter, but to
Co^sta^tyne. So than by stryuynge for te^poralles, the spouse of christ is not
defended / for ye popes of rome yt are now adays do not defend, but offend
the very spouse of christ / yt is to wit the catholyke faithful multitude
of christen people, and they do not save and keep: but do defyle and blemysshe
the beaultie and fayrenes of this spouses / that is to wit the unity thereof,
whiles by sowynge cockele and scysmes, they do tear the members thereof, and do
dysseuer them one from an other. And whiles also they do not admyt and receive
y^ true accompanyers and wayters upon christ, poverty, and humylyte, but done
utterly exclude them, they do show them selves not to be the mynystres of the
spouse, but rather his enemies. The bysshoppes of Rome therefore going about
to subuerte and destroy this empire, do suppose ye thing, which we have
brought in here before of their own narracyo^s called Decretalles, Treason
toward ye emperor of Rome in the decretalles.
that is to wit, that them selves, by the law of god, or of man, or
perauenture by both, have superiorite in comparyson to the prince or emperor
of Rome other being already created, or else to be created / and that the
emperyall power or iurysdyccion does appertain unto them when the empire is
vacant / which supposycyons for all that, are most euydentlye false / and
strengthed by no law of god or of man, or right reason / but the contrary of
them has been proved by demonstracyon in the. xii. of the first dyccyon, and
has also ben more largely confyrmed by scripture in the. iiii. v. and. ix. of
this dyccyon. And the occasyon of these supposycyons, nay rather presumpcions
with other aforesaid was a certain superfluous yea superstycyous devotion /
for it fo^dely pleased / certain of the princes and emperors of Rome syns the
time of Constantyne frendely The coronacyon of ye emperor.
and amyablye to sygnyfye and give knowledge of their eleccyon unto the
bishops of Rome / that in the person of the bishops, they gyuynge syngulare
reverence to Christ: they might obtain of christ by the intercessyon of the
bishops (as they thought) larger benedyccion and grace to govern their
empire. And in Let al kings by this take heed how they suffce the bishops to
exercise any ceremonies about or upon them, yea or bishop upon bishop under
what color of holiness so ever it be, for in conclusion an other day if they
may come a lofte, they will challenge thereby a certain power and make thereof a
certain refygyon necessary holiness and a law of god.
the same manner or much like, certain emperors of Rome for a solempnyte and
sign of their intronizacion or coronacion, and for the more large grace of god
to be optayned: have caused the emperyal diadem to be put upon their hedes, by
the bishops of Rome / which setting on of the diadem, who will say yt it
gives to the bishop of Rome more auctoryte upon the emperor: than it does to
ye arche bishop of Rhone over the king of France? For such manner
solempnyt^es do not give auctorite: but they do sygnifie that auctorite has been had or given. Of this reverence than so given by the emperors of their
own free wylles, the bishops of rome oftentimes sechynge those things which are not their own: have brought in a custom, and to say more truly an abuse
by reason of the symplycite (because I would not say the cowardenes and
dastardnes) of the princes and emperors, to call the approbacion of the
person elected, and the benediccion which they sent upon the same person by
word of mouth or in writing, the co^fyrmacyon of the eleccion aforesaid. And
whiles the emperors of rome in ye old time did nothing regard nor take heed, what preiudyciall intent and purpose was hyd under this manner of so
calling it: the popes of rome have so secretlye and pryuely brought it in from
time to time, yea and now does it openly, that no man, be he never so
co^uenyently elected king of the Romans, may be called king neither yet
may have or exercise the auctoryte of the king of the Romans, except he
shall have been approbated before by the bishop of rome / which approbacyon
rests only, in the will and pleasure of the bishop of rome as he him self
says, because he recognyseth or knowledgeth no man here in earth to be
superyour or equal to him self in such manner judgment. Neither he is bound
(as he says) to follow the counsel of his brethren whom he calls
cardynalles in this thing or in other things, albeit that he does use their
counsel, but that he may do contrary to their counsel in what soever
things if he list, of the fulness of his power.

But in this the bishop of Rome after his own wont and manner, concludes
false of true things, and evil of good things / for it does not follow,
because the emperor through devotion of his own free will gave this
reverence to ye bishop of Rome, that he gave him knowledge of his eleccyon,
and desired his benedyccion and intercessyon unto god: that therefore the
eleccion of the emperor of Rome hangs of his will and pleasure. For this
should be none other thing than to lose or dystroye the empire of Rome, and
perpetually to prohybyte or let the creacion of the emperor or governor. For
if the auctoryte of ye king or prince elected, should hang only of the will
and pleasure of the bishop of Rome: than is the office of the electours
utterly void and of no strength, for as much as he that is elected by them,
neither is emperor, neither may be called king or emperor, before that he
be confyrmed by his will or auctoryte, who is said to sit in the sea
apostolyke / neither may he that is so elected exercise any regal auctotytie.
Yea and moreover (which is a very paynfull thing, not only to suffer but also
to hear) it shall not be lawful to any man so elected, to take unto him self
so much as his cotidiane and daily charges of the prouentes of the empire:
with out the license of this said bishop / what other auctoryte than does the
eleccyon of the princes, give unto the emperors, than only the name: saying
that the determynacyon of them hangs upon the will and pleasure of one man
alone, that is to wit the bishop of Rome. For seven barbours / or seven blere
iyed men might give as much auctoryte unto the king or emperor of Rome, as
does the. vii. electours / but yet let no man think, yt we do speak thus to
the contempt of the electours / but to the mocking and derysyon of him, that
would depryue them of the auctoryte dew unto them / for he is ignoraunte, what
is the virtue and nature of an eleccyon, and for what cause the power and
auctoryte of the said eleccyon does consyste and rest in the bygger part of
them that ought to elect and those the emperor, and that the effect thereof
neither ought, neither may depend or hang upon the will of any one man
alone, if it shall be reasonably instytuted / but only it shall hang upon the
will of the electours. So than the bishop of rome euydentlye is willing to
destroy the office of the electours, all though he gothe about by
meruaylouse craft and subteltye, to blind, circumuent or begyle them. For he
says in certain of his scryptures, that no man being elected to be king of
the romans is king or ought to be called king, before his conformacion / the
auctoryte whereof he says to belong to his own fre power. And he means also
that the instytucyon of the electours, also does belong to the same
auctoryte. For the same bishop as he says has translated the empire from the
Greeks, in to the person of great Charles otherwise called Charles main. And
again in other certain decrees where he says plainly that a certain
emperor which was elected by them, was by christ and his apostolyke see
depryued of all the auctoryte, which the electours might give unto him / he
puts afterward craftelye and gylefullye these words. And yet we will not
that by this any preiudyce be gendred to the electours, or to their office. And
yet he does manyfestlye preiudyce unto them / nay rather to speak more
truly: he does anulle their office utterly, in that he said before, that by
their auctoryte: the regale auctoryte of the romans is given unto no man /
and again in that that without their consent and determynacion he does
depryue him, that was elected by them: of the right and the auctoryte of the
eleccyon given to him by them / and so mocking and begylynge them he does
none otherwise preiudyce unto them, than he does hurt one, that pulls out
hisiye: although he do say, that he will not hurt him, when he does so.

Again to ascrybe this confyrmacyon of the emperor elected, unto him self
and to say that without the said confyrmacion no man is emperor, nor ought to
be called king or emperor, nor ought to mynystre the things appertaynynge
to the emperor, that is none other thing, than to prohybyte perpetually the
creacyon and promocyon of the said prince or emperor / or else to bring the
said empire holly in to the seruytude and bondage of the bishop of Rome / for
the bishop of Rome if he list not: will never approve or confyrme any man that
is elected king or emperor of the Romans, for asmoch, as he affyrmeth him
self to be superyoure unto all men / and in this thing to be under no
college or syngulare person / now shall he never list or be willing to
approve or confyrme any man elected / because that before he does approve him,
which is elected king or emperor, he will require of him promyses and
oaths. And among other he will require ye oath, whereby the emperor shall say
and express him self to be subject unto the said bishop, in fealtye, or
temporal and coactyue iurysdyccyon. And he will require also the unlawful and
unjust occupacyons of certain prouynces, to be kept and mayntayned unto him
self by the said elected emperor / and this thing he will require to be
promised and confyrmed by the oath of the said elected emperor / which
unlawful promyses and oaths, being not possible to be made, neither to be
holden, and kept after they The unlawful oaths of ye emperors to ye bishop
of Rome.
are made, saving the conscience of the emperors majesty, and the lawful
oath given or made in his creacyon to co^serue and maintain the lyberties of
the empire. Never any man being elected emperor will give or make to the
bishop of Rome, or to any other bishop, except he be more soft and
cowardlye than a woman / and also manyfestlye perjured in swerynge and
promising such manner things / wherefore none of the emperors elected, shall
ever be created emperor of the Romans, or shall deserve the name of the
emperor: if the regal or emperyall auctoryte of the persons elected does
hang of the bishop of Rome / For as long as the said bishop may let
and prohybyte them (though he does this unjustly, and seeking those things
which appertain not to him) no questyon but he will let them / both by his
words, and also by his works and deeds / so long as he may. And yet there
follows also a more grievous preiudyce and more intolerable hurt than these
aforesaid / yt all princes co^munytes, and synguler persons which ben
subjects to ye emperor ben by this reason also subjects to ye empire and
domynyon of ye bishop of Rome. For seeing yt the said bishop does say and
affirm him self to succeed the aforesaid emperor in office, the emperyal
seat being vacaunte: it follows of necessyte, that it belongs to the
auctoryte of the said bishop, to exact and require oaths of fidelite of all
princes, and other that owes fealty to the emperor and to compel them to
make or give the aforesaid oaths / and also to demand of the same, trybutes
and other seruyces, which has been wont to be done by the same unto the
emperors of Rome, with other things which the said bishop shall list to
feign, to be dew unto him self beyond the custom, of his fulness of power,
which he says openly to belong unto him self. And it follows also that
the collacyon, or gyuynge of pryncedomes, of fees, and of other lybertyes,
which the emperor of Rome may give, for defaulte of hayres male, or for any
other reason or cause: does likewise appertain to the auctoryte / of this
said bishop, the emperyall seat being vacaunte. Yea it follows moreover
(which is most preiudycyall and most greuouse thing of all) that when the
emperyall see is vacaunte, which after the power and dylygence of the bishops
of Rome shall perpetually be vacaunte: the princes, colledgies, co^munyties,
and syngulare persons which are subjects to the empire of Rome, contendynge
and stryuynge cyuyly one with an other, by the reason of appellacyons coming
between / or through complayntes made of them brought unto the court of the
bishop of Rome / as well real as personal shall be compelled to come to the
court of the said bishop by his cytacyons / and there to abide cyuyle and
temporal judgment. And no prince co^munyte or judge being subject to the
emperor of Rome shall be able to put any sentence: by the reason that the
persons condemned shall always, to stop such execucyon, appele from the
temporal sentences of them unto the court of Rome. And if they that be
subject to the empire of Rome, will not obey the said bishop or be under
him in the aforesaid things (as they are not bound) than the said bishop
shall contynuallye without ceasynge, and with all malycious and froward
enforceme^t, pursue them by sentences as they are called of cursings, of
blasphemies / of exco^munycacyons / of heresies / of interdyccyons / and last
of all of being depryued and losing of their temporal goods / making such
manner temporalles common, and granting them to who soever shall be able by
any manner way to pluck them away / and by granting to them that does
pursue such persons with all their subjects, and adherentes, and which also
by whatsoever mean can kill or slay them: false and dysceyptfull pardon of all
manner Pardons.
sin and pain / and also by absoluynge (though heretycally) the subjects
of them from their oaths outher before given, or afterward to be given unto
Absolucions
the said princes. And if the bishop of Rome, prete^dynge after his wonted
manner, the cure and love of the people, shall say, that therefore it
appertains unto An obieccion
him self, to confyrme or allow the eleccyon of the emperor of Rome, lest
peradventure an heretyke might clyme up unto the emperyall dygnyte. Which by
the reason thereof would do very much hurt to the co^munyte of christen
people: verily answer is to be made unto him conuenyentlye, that the said
eleccion needs Answer.
not therefore to be allowed of him for asmoche as the same eleccyon is
celebrated and made by. iii. solemn archebysshops of chrystendom (which each
one of them has taken as great auctoryte of preesthode, or epyscopall power of
christ, as has the bishop of Rome. And also by. iiii. seculare christen
princes, with whom, when the aforesaid relygyous pastors or prelates do
agree together: than the eleccyon of the aforesaid emperor is made perfyte.
And it is not like to be true, that these. vii. will so err or be moved by
perverse intencyon or corrupt affection, as does the will of the bishop of
Rome alone by him self, which thinks and supposes, that he may of right,
leave unto his own judgment alone, by ye reason of that fulness of power,
which vnaccordyngely he does ascrybe unto him self. For so he might at his
pleasure judge whom soever he list to be an heretyke, and so depryue him of
the right of his eleccyon / by reason whereof the office of the princes
electours should be made void / and the creacion and promotynge of him that is
elected should be always prohybyted and let for the causes aforesaid. But
yet the case put, that according to the mind of our aduersarye, the emperor
of Rome outher before or after his eleccyon has falen or does fall in to
heresye, and that the princes electours had no knowledge thereof: yet it is to
be said, that the judgment or correccyon of him does in no wise therefore
appertain to the bishop of Rome. Moreover it is to be demanded, No nor yet
to any other creature or creatures living
why the ablynge of other kings does not belong also to their said
judgment and power of approbacyon. For I dare be suertye, that they do
intend this also, though they dare not as yet attempt it or set upon it, but
do wait a mete and a conuenyent time therefore / whereof also peradventure we
shall speak somewhat. So than of these said false supposycions, no we last of
all a certain one called pope of Rome entering in to the way of error and
iniquyte with all his study and inforcementes lets and prohybyteth noble
Ludouyke descendynge of the dukes of Bauarye, which, is elecced king of the
Romans: to proceed unto quyete possessyon of the high emperyall dygnyte. For
the said Ludouyke both by his word and also by his deed, kylleth and
destroys, and not with out a cause, the supposycions of the aforesaid
bishop. For albeit that he has not yet ben approved or confyrmed by his
words or wrytynges, as we have euydentlye showed here before, neither neadeth
to be confyrmed: yet that not withsta^dynge from the time of his eleccion made
and publysshed by the electours hither to contynuallye: he has caused, and
does cause him self to be written and named king of the Romans, as in very
deed and according to the troth, he is and has been / and also he does
admynystre all things belonging to the said king or emperor in all
points: as he may and also is bound to do of right / wherefore according to
the tale of Esope worthy to be marked, and very well agreynge to our purpose,
this serpent the bishop of Rome, that now is, albeit that he has been
exalted, releued, and auaunced, in his predecessors, by the said Ludouyke or
his predecessors, from great pouertye, vylenes, oppressyon, rebukes, and
persecucyon, unto abundaunce of temporal goods, to that high dygnyte and
honor / and to power and tranquyllite: yet like an unkind person, and one
that had forgotten all the aforesaid benefytes, he has lyfted up him self
against the aforesaid Ludouyke. First after his lewd and wont manner
spyttynge out many words of rebuke, dysworshyp, and irreuerence, against the
said prince. But yet offrynge this venom or poysone under the apperaunce of
honey, he pretends after his old craft and deceypte, a color and
apparaunce of virtue and charity / where he says in certain of his epystles
which he calls decrees, that he writes or speaks such things to the
end, that he might bring again the said Ludouyke from the bypathe or
error, unto the right way or pathe of truth and of health / not regarding
him self which speaks neither what he speaks, neither to whom he
speaks. To the which bishop as being out of the way from all truth, and
parteles of all equity, we may say co^uenyently and verily truly with christ,
that text in the. vii. of Mathewe and in the. viii. of Luke / why see thou a
straw in the iye of thy brother, and do not se a bealme in thine own iye?
or how say thou to thy brother, brother suffer me to cast out the straw out
of thine iye: and haste a bealme in thine own iye? Thou hypocryte first cast
out the bealme of thine own iye / and than shalt thou se, to cast out the
straw of thy brothers iye. There is no good tree, which brings forth
euylfruyte / neither evil tree bryngyng forth good fruit. Every tree is
known by his own fruit. Why than does this hypocryte, the most euyltree,
bring every where the fruytes of all malice and seducyon and dyscorde, as it
is sencyble known of all men, and why does he go about to defame this
virtuous man, innocent, catholyke, and praised of all men, with his words of
ignomine and slaundre, under the false apperaunce and color of devotion and
charity. Let him first cast out from his own mind, being full of darkness,
and as it were blind the bealme / that is to wit, his most great ignorance
and error. And from his own lewd affection (being in a manner oftynate and
in durated) let him cast a way malice and furyous woodnes, and than he shall
be able to se the small faults of other men, and may by his exortacions and
monycyons the more metelye and conuenyentlye cast them out of other men. And
afterward the aforesaid bishop, which under such deceyptfull and feigned
words, does intend not the amendment of the man, but the cyuyle death and
destruccyon of the common weal, has powered forth and spredde abroad
against the aforesaid most christen prince, the venomes and poisons of cyuyle
life, which he has supposed to be most deadlye unto him / in that that he
has exco^munycated him, with all those that pertyculerly, do cleue unto him /
and has also forbidden the exercise of the dyuyne service unto all co^munyties
of christen men, which do give or are about to give help, counsel or
favor, unto the same prince as being king of the Romans, little or nothing
markyng or regarding the counsel of saint Ambrose in his book, which is
intytled De sacerdotali dignitate. For there Ambrose treating of the text of
Paul in the third chapter of the first epistle to Timothe. If any man
desires preesthode. etc. And among other things in the. viii. chapter of
the said book, he says thus. Not brawlers that is to say / let not a
preeste louse his tongue to raylynge and evil words, left by the same tongue,
by which he gives praises to god and offers up the deuyne service, he do
bring forth the venom or poison of braulynge and strife. For it is not semely
that both benedyccyon, and maledyccyon should issue out of a priests mouth.
And again left by the same tongue by which god is lawded, man may be
despraysed and evil spoken of. For he may not bring forth both sweet water
and bitter water out of one fountain or spring. And in conclusyon
peradventure he shall send forth the prycke or stynge of his malice, which
he supposes to be most utter and extreme in noyenge or dystroyenge, supposing
to fasten it upon the said prince / that is to wit a certain blasphemye,
called of him a sentence, though in very The fruytes that have co^med and
proceeded these many hundred years from ye seat of Rome from our holy fathers
there, and mayntayned by o^ holy fathers here.
deed it may be called a madness by which he has pronounced the aforesaid
prince with all that does cleue unto him, or that does obey him, or favor
him as king of the Romans: to be heretykes and enemies or rebellyons unto
the church. And by the which sentence he has depryued and berefte them the
right of all their temporalles both moueables and vnmoueables / in making the
said temporalles common by his aforesaid sentence (unworthily so called)
and by granting them also to who soever list to enter upon them, and to win
or get them by vyolence, and by spreadynge abroad in all prouynces by his
words, or else by his wrytynges in parchement, by him self or else by
certain other false preachers, that this may be done lawfullye. And again by
condempnynge them to death / and by granting remyssyon and forgyuenes of al
sins and pains or punysshementes, and of all crimes unto those that do kylle
or invade them. And by bringing them if they betaken prisoners a live, where
soever they shall be, in to the seruytute of those persons that takes them.
Moreover he grants the greatest ecclesiastical offices / as bysshopryches,
archebysshop riches, and patryarkeshypes with the mean and smaller
ecclesyastycall offices also / he spends thereto the ecclesyastycall
temporalles called the benefyces, the treasures and money of the church: that
he may raise up all men to envy and rebellyon, to war and dyscorde again
the said prince. And this he does albeit / that it does nothing at all
belong to his auctoryte to give forth sentence of any of the forsayde things
/ as we have before euydentlye declared. And beside all these horrible
malygnytes aforesaid, he exercyseth a new kind of wyckednes and malice,
which seems manyfestlye to smell of heresye / for he rayseth up in to
rebellyon against the said catholyke prince his own subjects and leyge
people / assoylynge them by his deuyllysshe sayenges or wrytynges, which he
calls (for all that) apostolycall wryttes: from the oaths of fidelyte, by
which they had been, and in very truth are bound to the often rehearsed
prince. And such manner absolucyons he publyssheth and preaches every where by
certain mynystres of his myschefes: which by such manner exercise do hope or
trust to be promoted by the said bishop unto ecclesiastical offices and
benefyces.

That this work is not an apostolyke but a diabolycall deed, it is euydent.
For according to this, and by this, the said bishop with all his
complyces, ordynatours, consenters, and executers, in word, writing, or deed
/ being blind with couytousnes / with pride and ambicyon, and filled with
most great iniquyte (as it is euydent to all men) be guydes and leaders of all
them, that do give credence unto them, or that follow them, by work or deed,
in all the aforesaid sayenges or wrytynges: unto falling and going down
heedlynge in to the dyche or pytte of deadly sins. First in to manifest and
open periurye / afterward in to treason and iniurye open and plain to all
men / consequentlye he causes them to fall in to rauyne or robbrye,
manslaughter / and in a manner in to all kinds of myscheuous sins / in which
they dyenge without repentance, and being begyled by this most holy father
and his mynysters, and yet not be excused before god for their gross
ignorance: are cast down heedlonge and drowned in hell / that is to wit in
the pytte of perpetual dampened persons. For this is and ought to be undoubted
to every man that has reason, and that is able to use it, that neither the
bishop of Rome, neither any other preeste may assoyle any man from such
manner or any other lawful oath, outher given or made, or else promised. Now it
is euydent to every man, which will stand to his own conscience, and which
is not troubled with any synystre or crooked affection: that the cause which
the bishop of Rome pretends, against ye devout prince Jews and against
any other prince in like case: is not reasonable, but unreasonable, indiscreet,
and unjust / wherefore the gydynge, doctrine, and exhortacyon of this bishop
and of his mynysters, in such things, is to be eschewed and avoided / and
utterly to be despised / as the thing which leads and brings in
conclusyon unto the eternal death of souls. For it is plainly and openly
contrary to the wholesome doctrine, words, and sentence of the apostle Paul in
the, xiii. to the Romans / in the. vi. to the Ephesyanes / in the. vi. of the
first epistle to Tymothe / and in the second and third chapytres of the
second epistle to Tite. For there the apostle teaches openly, that subjects
Of true obedyence toward kings and princes, which ye bishop of rome with
his church, yet never taught.
ought to obey their carnal lords, not only being good and gentyle: but
also being hasty and froward / as saint Peter says in his first canonycall
epistle the second chapter. How much more than ought they to be obedyent
when they are bound to them by an oath? which thing the gloses also after
the minds of saints in the same places more largely do declare / saying
manyfestlye, That subjects are bound and ought to obey their lords, yea
though they be infydelles and never so froward or evil / but yet
understanding and meaning this, in such things as be not contrary outher
in word or deed to the law of god. But it is undoubted, that the words and
works by which the bishop otherwise called the pope of Rome inueheth and
proceeds again the emperor of Rome: are neither the commandments of gods
law, neither consonant or agreeable unto it / but rather dissonaunt and
manyfeste repugnaunt and contrary to the said law / as it has been showed,
by the scripture, in the. iiii. v. and. ix. chapytours of this dyccyon. Again
to obey to the bishop of Rome, or any other bishop reachynge or preaching
these things, is none other thing: than to suffer the rote of all regymentes
and gouernaunces to be cut up, and the bond and knot of every cyuylyte and
kingdom to be losed or broken in sondre, for I do suppose that such manner
root or bond is none other thing, nor it ought none otherwise to be taken,
but the oath and fydelyte of the princes and their subjects of each of them to
other. And in deed this fydelyte of the forsayde subjects (as Tullius says
in his first book intytled De officiis) is the fundament or groundesell of all
justice / which fydelyte between the governors and the subjects, whosoever
gothe about to dyssolue or break: he gothe about to get unto him self no
less thing, than that he may according to his own intent and pleasure,
ouertourne and destroy the power and high auctorytie of all princes and
governors of the cyuyle co^munyte, and afterward to bring the aforesaid
subjects, in to his own seruytute and bondage. And besides this also to
trouble the peace and tranquyllyte of all men that lives cyuylye / and so by
reason thereof or by some other means to depryue them of their suffycye^t life
in this world / and fynallye to bring them that been so dysposed in their
mind if they may thereto attend, as we have said, unto the eternal
dystruccyon of their souls. Wherefore let all Christen men despise and beware
of the vain promise of pardon and forgyuenes, for it is a thing clean
contrary against ye law of god. And the pernycyous and mad doctrine of the
bishop of Rome, or to call The virtue of the popysshe pardons.
it more truly, the seduccyon of souls, of this bishop of Rome and his
complyces which be the college of clerks or of cardynalles, worse than the
doctrine of the pharyseys / regarding Christ which counsayleth and teaches
the same in the. xv. chapter of Mathewe, when he says to all christen men,
but yet in the person of the apostles. Suffer them or let them alone / that
is to wit the pharyseys / which at that time were supposed to be the teachers
of Moses law, but for all that they were of erronyous opinion in the
understanding of the law, and in a manner contynuallye contrary unto Christ
and against him and all his doctrine of the gospel. By which pharyseys were
sygnyfyed and understood The pharysyes were a figure of our sophistical
Du^sers, and Thomatistes.
all sophistical and false teachers of holy scripture, of which sort be
these persecutours of the Romayne emperor and of other innocent true christen
people / in the person of whom being the members of Christ: these wicked
persons (that is to wit the bishop of Rome and his complyces) also does
persecute Christ and does against him with all their dylygence and labor.
And Christ shows the cause afterward why we ought to despise these false
teachers. For they are (says he) blind and the guydes of blind men /
wherefore (says he) if one blind man be guide to an other blind man: both of
them falls in to the dyche. So than according to the counsel and teaching
of christ which teaching every christen man ought to follow: these false
teachers are to be let alone and to be despised: because they are both
blind with auaryce or covetousness, with pride, and ambycion them selves, and
also the guydes of blind men, that is to wit of couetouse, proud, and
rebellyous persons. Which false teachers, also not regarding, or not
lystynge to regard the precept of ye apostle, or rather of god, saying
plainly without any metaphore in the. xiii. chapter to the Romans. Let
every soul be subject to the high powers, do teach openly Who soever
resysteth ye power of a king or head prince: is of ye devil yea though he were
an angel of heaven if it were possible, much more then a bishop, or a
preeste, a popysshe, pylled freer, monk, or chanon, or a peuysshe nun.
subjects to rebelle against their princes and governors. And such persons
so rebellynge and by their gylefull and unjust perswasyons inducynge other men
to rebellyon, do resyste the ordynacyon of god. So says the apostle in the
said chapter / who soever (says he) resysteth the power (that is to say
the seculare gouernoure) resysteth the ordynacyon of god. Of whom the same
apostle has prophesyed in the fourth chapter of the first epistle to
Timothe, and in the third of the second epistle, to the same Timothe, when he
said / This know thou, that in the last days there shall be peryllous times
toward / and there shall be men loving their own selves / covetous / proud
/ high minded / blasphemous persons / not obedyent to their parents / under
this word parents comprehendynge princes and governors / wherefore Tully De
officiis in the first book says. The princes ben the country, and our
parents / by whose great benefytes we are bounden to be obedyent, dysobedyent
therefore to their parents, is as much to say as dysobedyent to the princes,
and it follows in the saying of Paul. Unkind persons, full of myscheyfe /
unfaithful / keeping no promise / without co^passyon in any goodness, without
peace / traytoures, lecherous persons, cruel, without benygnyte, false
accusers, lewd to^ged / froward / swollen or puffed up with pride / lovers of
pleasures, more than Disobedient.
of god / having in deed the face of holiness: that is to say apperynge to do
those things / which they do, for the honor, reverence and love of god: but
in very effect denyenge the virtue of it / that is to wit of such holiness
or devotion / which thing it is easy for all men to know by their works,
according to that text in the. vii. chapter of Mathewe. Take you head and be
ware of false prophets, which do come unto you in the apparayle of sheep: but
inwardlye are rauenynge wolves / by their fruytes you shall know them. And the
apostle says comformablye to the aforesaid counsel or precepte of Christ,
and such persons avoid thou / that is to say do not believe them neither
obey them in such things. But alas it is a pytuous case, for they have
through this apperaunce of godlynes so greatly deceived and begyled men, that
now they trusting to the vyolente power which they have optayned and gotten
under the apperaunce and symylytude of holiness, partly of men's free gift,
and a great part by secret and preuy vsurpacyon, and now by open and vyolent
vsurpacyon can not well be avoided or eschewed, in doing vyolence and
persecucyon to christ's faithful people. Which also being unkind / proud /
without peace / cruel / and in very deed such manner persons in all points /
as the apostle has descrybed, affyrmynge good to be evil / and light to be
darkness / according to the saying of Esaye the prophet, by the collacyon
and gift of the ecclesyastycall offices, both the greatest, the mean sort,
and the smallest, and by the exhybycion or promising of the temporalles or
benefyces, as well of the mouables, as vnmouables, and of the tyethes, which
have been ordained for a good end / and by abomynable conuencyon and bargaynes
hereof made before: do styre up against the christen princes their own
subjects / and also their own cosens and alyaunce of strange countrees not
being their subjects / which thing although they with their complyces do
now seem to do only against the emperor The emperors ar vexed of the
bishop of rome, and so be all other kings of their bishops and clargye.
of Rome: yet let other princes learn by the example of the said emperor,
which has been so greatly benefyciall to the bishop of Rome and to his
church: that the same things may of lykelyhode chance unto them selves also
/ and that the aforesaid bishop shall be full busye to do the same things
against them also, when occasyon of such assault, shall offer it self unto
him for he is without good affection toward every man. And he affyrmynge both
by his words, and wrytynges aforesaid, that all princes and peoples are
subjects to his governance or coactyue iurysdyccyon, because of the fulness of
his power (as he calls it) which vnaccordynglye he ascrybeth unto him self:
and For what day, the bishops and clargy do wait.
coveting also and desiring greatly to bring this to effect, wayteth such
times in which there appears scysmes and contencyons of christen princes and
people one with an other / and rebellyon of subjects against their soueraygnes
or rulers / which sedycions, contencions, and rebellyons him self also
procures otherwhyles to be raised or styrred up to the intent that so the one
of the parts being at dyscorde between them selves, being weak and feeble,
or being not able to resyste the aduersarye part: may be compelled to beseech
his help or aid and to submyt him self to his domynion. For albeit that
under the feigned face or apperaunce of holiness devotion, or charity, he seems
otherwhyles to defend impote^t and weak persons, and peradventure wrongfully
oppressed / and to give unto them his seculare favor: yet for all that he
gives not this favor, except he be sure before, that they which need his
favor / and that do require it, will be content to come under his governance
or seculare domynion / hoping thereof in conclusyon that by such oppressynge
and envy of each to other, both parts being so at varyaunce, shall be
compelled to come under his domynion, wherefore such contencyons and accyons
are to be avoided, which may bring in or cause necessyte, unto any man, of
his favor or help / for at the last, they are turned in to the destruccyon
of lybertye / and in to the seruytude and thraldom of them that receive the
said favor.

So than after this manner this said bishop by little and little crepeth
successyuely through the kyngdoms of the world, that he may at the last be
able to subdue and make subject unto him self, all the empyres and domynions
of the world / which thing incessauntly he desires. He dares not attempt
such manner processes in all or many of them together at one time / but he
abides until such A cunning point of practicasyon.
time, that by little and little so great seculer power shall have grown preuely
unto him self: that he does perceive and believe, that he may without any
iopardy overcome the power of other empyres or domynyons / and than he does
boldly open and show forth upon other realms the sense and meaning of this
title of fulness of power, which he has presumed to take upon him. And does
expressly say forth that all other princes and empyres are subject to his
domynyon or coactyue iurysdyccion, likewise as he says the empire of ye
Romans to be now subject unto him / and those that would refuse (although
they might: do it lawfully) to be subject unto him, he does then pursue by
blasphemies, and other like sentences to these before, mayntayned against the
emperor of Rome and his faithful subjects / and also by vyolent or armed
power even unto their utter undoing. Thus by these means or ways, the said
bishop with his complyces have welnere seduced He studyeth to bring the same
to pass in Almayne.
and brought all the princes, co^munaltyes, and people of Italye, in to
contencions and scysmes / and he has begone to do the same, and studyeth to
bring the same to pass, contynuallye in Almayne. For he has raised up
certain of the subjects, traitors, and ungracious persons, by seculer
favors, as by gyuynge to them ecclesynstycall offices, and by exhybycion of
tyethes and money: Who ben the sons of the church as ye bishop of Rome
calls them.
unto rebellyon against the emperor of Rome / and he procures without
ceasynge, to raise up whom soever he may, both great, mean, and small persons
/ and those that shall so be begyled by him, and which shall obey him: he
calls and names the sons of the church, and true christen men / and who
soever co^tynueth, and are willing to co^tynewe in due faythfulnes, obedient
to their prince or soueraygne, he names them scysmatykes and heretykes / and
he persecuteth them as Who ben heretykes as ye bishop of rome calls them.
enemies of ye church, by blasphemynge, dyffamynge, and exco^munycatynge them
as much as ever he may, and by conde^pnynge them in their persons and goods
by seculer sentence / albeit that no such manner judgment after such fascyon
is belonging to him in that he is such one, neither by the law of god /
neither by the law of man / as it is euydent of the things before gone and
has been rehearsed heretofore.

But the most myscheuous thing of all, and the thing which does greattest
noyaunce or hurt generally: is this (whereof we have spoken somewhat heretofore,
and which may not be passed over with scylence of him that wylleth not to
fall from the law of Christ and of his gospel) that the bishop of The
bishop of Rome deuoureth the sheep.
Rome eternallye confounds and deuoureth all the sheep of Christ: whom he
says to be committed unto him self for to be fed with wholesome doctrine /
for he putting or saying evil to be good, and light to be darkness,
grants by mouth and in writing unto all men absolucyon from all manner
sin and Absolucion from sin and pain, to all that will be traitors to
their princes
pain, unto all them, that warreth at a certain time outher on horseback or
foot against the said Christen subjects of the emperor of Rome obeyinge and
willing to obey him constantlye as being their king and sovereign. Whom
also as being heretykes and reblles to the cross of Christ: he pronou^ceth
by him self or by other men, as well by word of mouth, as by writing: that
it is lawful by all manner means to impugn, to rob, and finally to
destroy. And which also is abomynable to be herd he preaches it openly,
and causes it to be preached openly every where by certain deceyptfull and
false frears which hunger and thryste after ecclesyastycall dygnytes or
promocions, as if it were as acceptable to god, as to fight against the
paganes in the parts over the sea / and to destroy them, which deceyptfull
and false pardon or forgyuenes the said bishop grants likewise unto
them: that are not able for feebleness of body to fulfill and perform that
myscheyfe, if at their own propre costs and charges they shall procure it to
be done by other men or shall give a suffycyent su^me therefore unto his cursed
and ungracious exactours or gatherers. Notwithstanding according to the
catholyke faith and relygyon, of Let christen men be a shamed of their madness.
Christ no man ought to doubt, that to them that so war or fight, this
folysshe and vain absolucyon does no profit or good at all, but does much
hurt unto them. But yet thus he begyleth simple men, to the accomplysshement
of his own wicked and lewd desires / granntynge unto them that thing, which
lies not in his power, yea moreover he does by this mean bring and lead
them out of the right way, unto eternal death and destruccyon of their
souls For they being the inuadours of other lands prouynces and countrees,
and the unjust destroyers of them, and the troublers of the peace and quyetnes
of innocent christen men, whom they do know to be true catholyke men, and
the defenders of their own country, and the obseruers of fydelyte to their
own true and lawful lord, prince, or governor of the said country. I say
in tobbynge or killing or otherwise impugnynge such manner persons, they are
made not the Champions of the devil and not of christ
champions of Christ, but the champyons of the devil. For they do committee and
fall unto rauynes / brynnynges / theftes / murders / fornycacyons /
aduoultryes / and well nere all other kinds of Crimes and trespasses / whereof
it is euydente and undoubted, that they do not deserve pardone or forgyuenes:
but rather that He calls hi^ self the vicar of christ he ought more truly
be called the vycar of the devil.
they are made gyltye and detters of eternal dampnacyon, to the doing whereof
and for the which things they are seduced by his sayenges and probacyons of
the holy scryptures, which calls him self, though he be not: the vycare of
christ in earth. And this blodsheder and gylefull man, being not contented
nor thinking it enough that such horrible things are exercysed by lay men
at his commandment, or through his entysementes and persuasyons, has sent
over a certain preeste one of his brethren or complyces, whom they do call
cardynall A captain Cardynall. An abbot of cheualrye.
with a great nombre and company of horsemen and fotemen, in to the prouynce of
Lombardye. And also has sent likewise an abbot in a certain marchye of
Italye, which is called Anchone, for to impugn and to destroy the faithful
christen people, whom (because they will not obey his wicked and unjust
commandments against the prince) he does vex without ceasynge with all
manner aforesaid persecucyons / and has presumed of his wont temeryte to
call in his sayenges and wrytynges, their devout prince the aforesaid
Ludouyke, The e^perour is called of my lord abbot, a favorer of heretykes.
because he has compassyon on them and cheryssheth them according to his
power, a favorer of heretykes. In to which and in to like uses this bishop
consumes and turns the ecclesiastical temporalties, which devout christen
men as well princes, as their subjects, comunalties, and synguler persons,
have appointed and ordained to the sustentacyon of the mynystres of the gospel
/ and to the succurrynge and releuynge of impotent poor people / and also
unjustly chalengynge the temporalles bequested in testamentes unto virtuous
uses, as to the passage over the sea, and to the redemynge of the prisoners
taken of the infydels, and to other like uses, I say chalengynge them as
belonging unto his power: he gothe about to turn them in to the aforesaid
uses. Albeit that it is no work mete for the successoure of the apostles, or a
preeste, neither it does become a preeste or a man consecrated unto god, to
move weapon, or to bydde war, to be made among christ's faithful people,
and namelye unjustly / but rather by conuenyent exhortacions to call again
the same It is not only not semely but also forbeden by the law of god for
priests to be men of war.
people unto concord and unity if they shall be at dyscorde or debate among
them selves one of them with an other / as it has been suffycyentlye showed by
the auctoryte of the apostle / by Chrysostom, Hilarie, and Ambrose in the. v.
and ix. chapytres of this dyccyon / it is not therefore from hensforthe to be
permytted or suffered, that this bishop or any other shall have so general
absolute, or so great power, to give or dystrybute the ecclesiastical
temporalties / but the said power is by the princes and parlyamentes utterly
to be revoked from him: or else so to be tempted and measured that those
things which has been statuted and ordained hitherto, to the health of
christen men, both present and for to come, and contynually are ordained may
not turn to the contynuall vexacyon of them and in conclusyon to the
everlasting tornement or dampnacyon of them. Also he that is called pope even
now adays with his mynystres, whom he calls legates, have proceeded of late
days, and contynuallye do proceed with such manner processes, so laudable, and
so pleasant unto god: as every man being of right mind and not cortupted in
affection may perceive, against the foresaid Ludouyke king of the Romans.
And so they have proceeded against his deputyes, and faithful subjects namelye
in the prouynce of Lombardye, of Tuskayne, and of the matches of Anchone.
Among whom, most specyallye The bisshops ben false bacbyters and slau^derers
of virtuous people: spiritually of such as write or speak a gaynst their
abhomynacions.
and syngularlye he has hitherto persecuted the gentle, noble, and famous
catholyke man, syngulare among all other Italyons in honestye of manners, and
in grauyte, Mathewe of good remembrance sherefe and by the emperyall auctoryte
his lyefe tennaunte vycare or deputy in Mylayne with a very great multitude
of christen people adherentes unto him / for this said Mathewe, the aforesaid
bishop (though very unjustly) by his profane and wicked sayenges and
scryptures, does pronounce to have been of a shameful life, and of an evil and
dampened memory. But not ye said Mathewe, but he by whom slau^ders and
offe^cio^s do come, and which brings forth of ye treasures of his malice
always cuylles: is counted openly of dampened memory before god and man, and
it shall be more largelye accounted and laid to his charge both before his
death and after his death, according to the manashynge of Christ, which is
very troth in the. xviii. chapter of Mathewe, where he says / woo be to
that man by whom slander comes, and again in the same chapter / who soever
shall offend one of these little ones, which believes in me, it were more
expedyent for him, that a mylnestone be hanged in his neck, and that he be
drowned in the depthe of the sea, which sayenges he nothing markynge or
regarding, likewise as he regards not the other monycions and counsayles of
Christ (as being froward / and vnpenytente) contynuallye without ceasynge,
does persecute and blaspheme very many other noble men, for the prosecutynge
of their faithfulness and constancye to ward the said prince or emperor of the
Romans / whose fame being sweet, both before god and man, by his aforesaid
prophanacyones, and blasphemies he gothe about to spotte and defyle. This is
the bishop, the judgment of whom and of his church, god does not follow
/ because he judges by surrepcyon and ignorauncye / as the master of the
sentence says in the. iiii. book the. xviii. dystynccyon and the. vi.
chapter. And the cause hereof saint Iherome shows upon that text in the.
xvi. chapter of Mathewe. And to the I shall give the kayes of the kingdom of
heuyns. For he says which I am not grieved to rehearse. Certain men not
understanding this place (as for example this bishop understand thou, take
unto them selves somewhat of the Note well these words of Iherome upon the.
xvi. of Mathewe.
pride or high mind of the pharyseys, that they do suppose them selves to
condemn innocents / or to lose and assoyle malefactors and gylty persons /
and it follows afterward to the same purpose, albeit that in very deed before
god not the sentence of the priests but the life of the persons accused is
sought for. God therefore does not follow the judgment of such manner
preeste, bishop, or church, being so unjust and contrary to equytye /
wherefore the blasphemies of him and of his accomplices, are not to be dredde or
feared of any Christen man, as we have said: for they do not enter in to the
flock of Christen men, but they have learned rather by the power of god to
stryke and light upon the The unjust curse of any bishop, hurts no man,
but him self
foul bodies, and the cursed and wreched souls of them, that braste forth in
to such blasphemies. These than which we have rehearsed are the true
begynnynges of the things inquyred / and those things which also have both
duelye and vnduelye procedyd and gone forwards / albeit that by reason of
long time, and the folysshenes and idleness of men they are fallen out from
the syghtes and memoryes of them and in the stead of these things, through
custom of herynge false and feigned things: certain falsehodes have been
brought in secretelye, and fastened in the souls of very many christen men,
which things are contrary clean to truth. The beginning and fountain
thereof was auerice, or couytousnes, and Ambicion, or pride. And no little
instrumente of the increase and mayntenaunce thereof, has been that execrable
opinion and saying, The mayntenaunce of all myscheyfe
by which the bishop of Rome and the company or college of his clerks or
cardynalles do affirm, that unto the same bishop in the person of saint
Peter the apostle, was granted and given by Christ fulness of power. But after
much dylygent and labourfull searching and exquysycyon of the scryptures of
god, from the scryptures of men (which certain bysshoppes of Rome had
confounded and almost set at naught the said scryptures of god, and mengeled
the one with the other, and wrestynge it to their pleasures, supposing and
beleuynge, yt of such menglynge and gatheryng of them together, the same
auctoryte which is due only to the holy scripture should be common to their
own instytucions and ordynacions) we have determined the senses of the said
title / and have suffecyently opened and declared in the. xxiii. chapter of
this dyccion to all that uses reason, at the least wise which are not
troubled with crooked affeccions: that the said senses are false / and most of
all other, that sense, unto which the bishop of Rome has last translated
the aforesaid oracyon, that is to wit ascribing by it unto him self
universal or highest iurysdyccyon coactyue (which under Iurysdyccyo^
coactyue, or y^ temporal sword.
a metaphorye of words he calls the temporal sword) upon all princes
co^munytyes and peoples of the world / albeit that he does now express this
title only against the emperor of the Romans, as we have said, and have
showed also for what causes / but in time to come he shall express the same
title against all the resydue of princes, when he shall perceive and se
sedycyon to be in their realms / and shall se also that himself has vyolent
power to usurp and to occupye or win them. So than the fulness of power,
through cowardenes being permytted unto the bysshoppes of Rome, they have
hitherto used about cyuyle acts / and contynuallye do use, and shall use in
time to come worse and worse, if they be not stopped or let / for they have
made certain olygarchycall laws, by which they have exempted the college or
company of clerks, and certain other married men, from ye cyuyle laws duelye
given or made to ye most high preiudyce of princes and peoples. And yet not
contentyd to keep them with Of the judgment of offycyalles and of other.
in these bonds, they do now cause lay men to be cyted and called before
their offycyalls or judges (as they are called) and will there punysshe them /
utterly destroynge the iurysdyccyon of the princes or governors. And this is
the syngulare cause of strife and cyuyle dyscorde, and very secret in the
beginning of it which we purposed even from the beginning to show and
declare. For many christen men being deceived and begyled through the
darkness and mynglynge together of the scryptures of god, and of the scryptures
of men: have been induced and brought in mind to believe, yt the bishop of
Rome, with his clerks whom they do call cardynalles: may make statutes and
decrees upon christen men, what soever he and they lust / and that all men are
bound by the law of god, to observe the same / and that the transgressors of
them ben bounden unto eternal dampnacyon, which thing we have showed of
suertie heretofore, neither to be true, nor yet nere to the truth, but
manyfestly contrary to the truth. This again is the cause as we said in our
prolouge or entresse, whereby the kingdom of Italye has been of long season
combred, vexed, or dyseased, and is co^tynually vexed, and this contagyon is
now no less ready to crepe in to other cyuylyties and realms / yea and has
somewhat all ready infected them all / and in conclusyon if it be not stopped or
let, shall infecte them utterly, as it has enfected the empire of Italye
/ wherefore it is expedyent unto all princes and peoples, by a general
counsel to be called together, to interdycte and utterly prohybyte the
bishop of Rome, or any other bishop, to have or use this title / least
through custom of hearing false doctrynes: from hensforthe the people be
seduced and begyled. And the power is to be revoked from him, of gyuynge and
dystrybutynge ecclesiastical offices, and temporalles or benefyces / and that
because this bishop of Rome abuses them to the hurt of the bodies, and to
the dampnacyon of the souls of faithful chrystened men. And this to do all yt
have iurysdyccyon, chefelye kings: are bound by the law of god. For herefore
they are constytuted Take heed ye princes unto your duties.
and ordained: to do judgment and justice / which thing if they be neclyge^t
and do not regard to do: from hensforth they are in excusable, in asmoch as
they do know the hurt yt grows of such omyssion forbearynge or rather
neclygence. And let him which is bishop of Rome with his successors in the
aforesaid seat, and all other priests and deacons, and spyrytual mynystres /
to whom I speak these words not as to enemies, I call god to witness against
my body The protestacion of Marsilius of Padway.
and soul, but rather as unto my fathers and brethren in Christ: let them I
say study and enforce them selves to follow christ and the apostles /
renounsynge utterly and putting away seculare empyres, and domynyons of
temporal things. For I have ope^nlye reproved and rebuked them, which do
sin in the sight of all men / according to the doctrine of christ and of
the apostle / and I being the common herolde of truth: have gone about by
the deuyne and humayne Herolde or messanger of truth.
scryptures, to reduce and bring them again unto the pathe or way of the
truth that they, and namelye the bishop of Rome which seems to have gone
most largelye out of the way: may avoid that indygnacyon of all mighty god
and, of the apostles Peter and Paul, which he syngulerly often times
threteneth to other men. Wherefore let him regard the order of charity so that
first avoiding the said indygnacyon him self, consequentlye he do teach
other to avoid the same. For he is not ignorant, or at the lest wise shall not
from hensforth be ignorant, that beside and without the commandment of god,
yea clean, moreover against the precepte or counsel of christ and of the
apostles, he sets upon the empire, and unjustly lets and troubles the
emperor. Again he is not ignorant, yt through the slander or occasyon
raised by certain of his predecessors and him self, in Italy: many batayles
have spro^ge: by reason whereof so many thousands of christen men have been
slain by vyolent death / whom it may be presumed of lykelyhode, to be
eternally dampened, for asmoche as very many of them have been preuentyd with
death being full of hatred and evil will toward their brethren. And they
that are left alive of the same sort are wretches abiding the same, or very
like ieopardous chance and miserable end: except the helping hand of god
be their succoure or leche / for hatred has entered in to ye minds of them
with strife and contentacyon, whereof afterward, fyghtes and batayles do
follow. And moreover also honest manners and dyscyplynes being corrupted: in a
manner all kinds of vices, wantonness, myschefes, and errors have utterly
possessyd and occupied the minds, and the bodies both of men and women. The
succession of their children is cut away / their substance or goods are
consumed / their houses are plucked in sondre, and destroyed, great and famous
cities are empty and destytute of their inbabytau^ce / the feldes untilled and
no we being deserte: are dyswonted and have ceased to give their wont fruytes.
And (which is the thing most to be bewailed and sorowed) the true deuyne
service and honourynge of god, has ceased in the same place being in a manner
utterly dystroyed and put away / and the churches or temples have remained as
deserts or wilderness, being destitute of preachers / unto all which said
miserable and pyteous things, the wretched inhabytau^tes blinded in mind,
through hatred and dyscorde among them selves one to an other: have been
provoked and prycked and co^tynually are prycked and provoked by that great
dragon the old serpent, The great dragon and old serpent antychryste of Rome.
which ought and may be worthy called the devil and Satan for asmoche as
with all his power and enforcement he seduceth and gothe about to seduce or
begyle all the whole world.

what so carlysshe or vnmanerlye sone of this country or mother of Italye,
(which in old time was so fair and beutefull, and is no we so evil favored
and torn) seeing these things, and having knowledge and power: can find in
his heart to keep scylence, and not to cry out unto the lord, against them
that do so unjustly hale or draw her here and there or pluck her in pieces /
for to such a sone it shall be said very truly, as the apostle says, that
he tenounced the faith, and is worse than any infydell or heathen person. As
touching to y^ fulness of power and the manners or sygnyfycacyons of it / also
concerning the beginning, and increase or going forward thereof, and again
after which sygnyfycacions, and in what wise the bishop of Rome has taken
the said fulness unto him self, and how he has used the same both as
touching to the ecclesyastycall customs and ceremonies, and also about the
seculer cyuyle acts of men: let it have been determined in this wise as is
before gone.

Of certain obieccyons or reasons, that may be made against the things
determined in the. xv. chapter, and the other chapytres consequentlye
following, of this present dyccyon.
The, xxvij, chapter,
But peradventure some man doubting, and not without cause, of the things,
which we have said heretofore in the. xv. chapter, The a^swere of all the
obieccyons, that been made in this chapter ben contained and set forth in the
next chapter.
and the other chapytres consequently following of this dyceyon: shall first
show that the dygnytie of a bishop is greatter, yea and also an other sondrye
dygnyte in kind, than is the dygnyte of him that is but only as they call him
a simple preeste / and that not only by the instytucion made by man, which
before we have called the seperable auctoryte: but also by the ordynacyon of
god, which we have before called the essencyall or inseparable auctoryte. And
it seems or appears, that this may be prouyd by the. x. chapter of Luke,
where this text following is had. Afterward the lord appointed also other.
lxxii. and sent them by payers or couples before his face / upon which text
Bid says thus / as there is no man, that doubts the. xii. apostles to
represent or show before. the form or fascyon of bishops: 1
so there is no man also that doubts these. lxxii. dyscyples to have borne
the figure of priests of the second order. Again the same is prouyd by the.
v. chapter of the first epistle to Timothe: when the apostle said / receive
none 2
accusacyon against a preeste: except it be under. ii. or. iii. records or
witnesses / it follows of these words, that Timothe was superyoure in
dygnytie to the other priests / but not by the eleccyon of the priests or of
the christen multitude: ergo by ye ordynation of god. Again the same appears
by the epistle of Cleme^tpope, whose superscrypcion is, to James the cosen of
our lord. This also 3
seems to have been the mind welnere of all the bysshoppes, which are said
to 4
have succeeded saint Peter or saint Paul in the epyscopall see of Rome / as
appears euydently by the aforesaid book of Isodore. Moreover it appears,
that this may be proved, that saint Peter was superyour to the other apostles,
in power or auctorytie given to him imedyatly of christ, and not given by man
or other men unto him / and so consequently, that the successors of him are
superyours to the successors of the other apostles in the same auctorytie. And
this appeteth to be so / first by the. xvi. of Mathewe, where christ said
seuerallye unto 5
him. And I say to the, that thou art Peter and upon this stone I will build
and edyfye my church / and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it /
and to the I will give the keys of the kingdom of heuens. By which words,
christ seems to have expressed, that Peter shulo be the heed and fou^dacion
of the church / namelye christ being deed / where the gloss says in this
wise / he granted that power and auctorytie specially unto Peter: that he
might call or provoke us to unity / for therefore he did constytute or make him
the cheyfe or pryncypall of the apostles: that the church should have one
pryncypall vycare or deputy of christ, unto whom the diverse members of the
church should have recourse, if peradventure they were at dyscencyon, and
could not agree among them selves / for if there should be diverse heddes in
the church: then the bond of unity should be broken. Again the same is
showed by ye. xxii. chapter of Luke, where christ 6
said specially unto him / and I have prayed for the, Peter: that thy faith
may not fail. And thou ones being converted, confyrme and strength thy
brethren / By this it seems to follow, that the pryncypall pastoral cure, and
the confyrmacyon of his brethren, that is to wit of the apostles and of other
christen men: was committed or betaken unto saint Peter, because of the
fyrmytie and stedfastnes of his faith, for which christ seems specially to
have prayed, that it should not faint or be quenched, neither in him neither in
any successor of him / where the gloss says thus. Confyrme thy brethren /
seeing that I have made the cheyfe or pryncypall of the apostles. And this is
not to be understood only of the apostles, which were at that time, that
they should be strengthed of Peter: but of all christen men. And a little after
it follows in the gloss / by repentance he obtained (that is to wit Peter) to
be the pryncypall bishop of ye world Again 7
the same is showed by the. xxi. chapter of John^, where christ said
severally to him. Feed my sheep / feed my lambs / feed my sheep / rehersynge
the same word thryes. It appears therefore, that he was instytuted and made
pryncypall and general pastor or herdesman i^medyatlye of christ: seeing that
no partyculare flock of sheep was determined or appointed unto him / where
Chrysostom says in this wise / for Peter was the most excelllent of the
apostles, and the mouth of the dyscyples, and the heed of the company /
wherefore his negacyon being put out of remembrance, he co^mytteth or betaketh
to him the ouersyghte or prelacye of his brethren. Fynallye this is confyrmed
by the auctoryte of many saints and doctors, upon that text in the. xxi. of
John^. if I will, that he shall contynewe or remain until I come, what is that
to the? But follow thou me / for saint Augustyne says. The church knows,
two lives to be showed unto it self from god above / of the which, the one is
in faith or believe, and the other is in hope. This life, that is to wit in
faith, is sygnyfyed or marked forth by Peter the apostle, because of the
prymacye or pryncypalyte of his apostleshyp. Again Theophilus in the same
place says thus / he has instytuted to him the prelacye of all christen
people. And Chrysostom says thus. if any man will say or ask the questyon,
how or after what manner than took James unto him self the epyscopall seat of
Jerusalem: this truly I will say / because he has intronisated or stalled
Peter master of the whole world. And the same Chrysostom says afterward.
To him (that is to wit to Peter). Also the ouersyght and governance or
prelacye of his brethren has been committed or betaken / again the same
Chrysostom says / therefore because the lord had showed and said before
great things unto him (that is to wit to Peter) and had committed or betaken
to him the whole world. And again Theophilus upon that text / if I will that
do remain, says thus. For the I do dymytte or send now to the office of
the ouerseer or bysshopryche of the whole world / and in this follow thou me.
Moreover if christ had not instytuted a heed of the church in his absence: he
should have left it heedles or without a heed / and should not seem to have
ordered it according to the better or best dysposycyon / but now this is to
be believed, that he has left it ordered and dysposed after the best wise and
manner: wherefore it is to be holden that he has instytute and made a heed of
the said church / but there is none other more conuenyent heed than Peter
wherefore it may be concluded, that saint Peter was superyoure to the other
apostles in auctoryte by the i^medyate instytucyon and ordynacyon of christ.
Again we may prove the same thing in kind, by showing that saint Paul was
8
not egall to saint Peter in dygnyte or auctoryte / for in the second chapter
to the Salatya^s is red this text following. Again after. iii. years I came to
Jerusalem, to se Peter / and I tarried with him. xv. days / and a little
afterward it follows. And furthermore after. xiiii. years, I went up to
Iherusalem again with Barnabas and Titus / taken with me / and I conferred or
compared with them the gospel, which I do preach among the gentylles / and
specially with them, which seamed to be greatly esteemed and of auctoryte /
lest peradventure I should ro^ne or else had ro^ne in vain / where the gloss
says. Paul showed here, that he was not out of fear or doubt of his
gospel: except it had been co^fyrmed and strengthed by the auctoryte of Peter,
and of the other apostles. For asmoche than as Paul has taken securyte of
his gospel, of Peter, after the mind of the gloss: it appears that he was
not egall to Peter in auctoryte / wherefore it seems to follow of necessyte,
as well of this reason as of other before rehearsed: that all the other bishops
of the world, are subjects to the bishop of Rome, as being the syngulare or
specyal successor of saint Peter, by ye ordynacion of god / and that the
church of Rome is the heed and pryncypall of all other churches: because the
bishop of it being the successor of saint Peter, is judge, pastor, and
herdysman of all other men / which thing I sodore more largelye expressing
in his book before rehearsed, in the chapter whose title is Incipit prefacio
Niceni co^cilii: he says in this wise. It is verelye to be known / of all
catholyke people that the holy church of Rome has been preferred and made
superyour to all other, not by any synodall decrees: but he has obtained
prymacie or superyoryte by the words of our lord and sauyoure in the gospel,
where he said to saint Peter the apostle. Thou art Peter / and upon this stone
I shall edyfye and build my church / and to the I will give the keys of the
kingdom of heuens. etc. which prymacye or superyoryte, all the bishops of
Rome have used hitherto without any grant of the princes or emperors: from
the time of saint Peter, unto the times of Constantyne the first emperor of
Rome / both making Canons or rules and Decrees: and co^maundynge them to be
observed throughout all churches / as euydently does appear by the process of
the said book. Again I confyrme or 9
strength this by reason / for faith is but one, according to the mind of
the apostle in the. iiii. chapter to the Ephesians / wherefore it follows that
the church also is but one / but it is none otherwise one, but because it
has but one heed pryncypall / which can be, none more conuenyent, neither so
conuenyent, as the bishop of Rome the synguler successor of saint Peter,
which was the stone, whereupon christ said, that he would build his church.
Again this same 10
may be confyrmed by this reason / for because likewise as temporal things
are reduced to one heed or pryncipall, that is to wit to ye prince, king, or
emperor: so also it seems that the spyrytuall things ought to be reduced
unto some one heed or pryncipal, that is to wit to the bishop or pope of Rome.
Again it may 11
be confyrmed by an other reason / for likewise as in one church or diocese,
it is necessary, and expedye^t, that there be but one bishop / lest if every
preeste with in the same church or diocese did draw and pluck the church
unto him self, it might break the unity of christ's church, as we have here
tofore alleged in the xv. of this dyccyon of the epistle of saint Iherome to
Euandre: so it is more expedyent and necessary, that in the universal church
of christ there be but only one heed, for the co^seruacion of the unity of
christen men / for by how much such manner good thing is more common, and
the mo yt are parttakers of it: by somoch it is ye more godly and the more
worthy to be desired or chosen / wherefore it is red in y^ xv. chapter of
John^. And there shall be made one fold of sheep, and one herdysman. 12
Now verelye it seems, that such herdysman or such manner heed is the pope
of Rome most conuenyently of al other: for the causes here tofore assygned. And
of the aforesaid things it follows of necessyte, as it seems: that only 13
the bishop of Rome is the pryncypall effectyue cause of the secondarye
instytucyon of all other bishops, both medyatly and i^medyatly, because of
his universal auctoryte, that he has upon all other bysshoppes and priests
and all other mynystres of the churches or temples. To which sentence, the
auctorite of saint Ambrose does agree in his epistle De tradendis basilicis,
where he says thus / Ambrose.
it is the church of god, or the church is gods own / it ought not
therefore to be ascrybed to Caesar. The temple of god can not be the right of the
emperor / wherefore it follows also consequently, that the instytucyon of
priests in the same temple does not appertain to his right, which said
instytucyon we have called here to fore in the. xv. of this dyccyon the
secondarye auctoryte of them. And if it be so, that the gift of the churches
may not appertain to Caesar: much less than may the said gift belong to
any other seculer prince or governor. This auctoryte therefore shall belong
only to him which is the heed and cheyfe or pryncypal of all other priests,
the bishop of Rome, by the auctoryte of god: if it may not be the right of any
prince or seculer governor / hereof also it seems necessarylye to follow,
that to him also belongs the auctoryte of dystrybutynge or gyuynge the
benefyces or the temporalles of the church / for these manner things are given
for the exercysynge of their offices. Of the aforesaid things also it seems 14
that it may be inferred and concluded yt the same pryncypall bishop has
coactyue iurysdyccyon upon all other bishops of the world, and all other
mynystres of the temples or churches / for they are subjects unto him by the
ordynacyon of god: as it is euydent of the reason before made / which thing
also may be confyrmed and fortyfyed by the aforesaid both book and chapter
of I sodore for among other things there, he writes so as here follows. But
in that 15
counsel the prince or emperor did a meruaylouse deed, which I do suppose
is not to be passed over with scylence / for when the bishops were come
together almost from all places, and (as it is wont to be) had brought
certain braules or co^tencyons of diverse causes among them selves he was
often times called on / and lybelles was offerde, and crimes were offerde of
each one of them / and they gave their minds more unto these things, than to
that thing for which they were come / but he seeing and perceiving, that
through such braules and co^tencions, the cause of the highest and greattest
busynes was hyndred, backed, or frustrated / he set and appointed a certain
day, when every one of the bishops should bring in his complaynte, if he had
any such matter of complaynte. And when he was set: he received of each one
their lybelles / which all together holding in his bosom, and not opening
them to se what was contained within them / he said to the bishops. God has
ordained and made you priests / and has given to you power to judge of us
also / and therefore it is welldone and right, yt we be judged of you / but you
may not be judged of men: wherefore abide you or tarry you for the judgment
only of god, between you / and your braules or contencions what soever they
be: let them be reserved to that judgment of god / For you are gods, given
unto us of god: it is not co^uenyent, that any man do judge gods / wherefore,
to conclude: the auctoryte of iurysdyccion upon them appertains to him, which
is the god of such gods in earth, as he is called, that is to wit the
bishop of Rome. And of the same things also it seems, that the same bishop
has auctoryte to call together and to command general councelles 16
of priests, and in the same cou^celles to propou^de or put forth, and to
determyne such things, which he shall think in his mind worthy to be put
forth, and to be determined about the law of god, and the ecclesiastical
custom and ceremonies. Concerning the auctorite of gatherynge a general
counsel. I sodore in the preface of his said work says thus. But the
auctorite of gatherynge synodes, has been committed by pryuate or peculyar
power and auctoryte to the apostolyke see. Neither do we read any synod to
have been of effect or strength: which has not ben co^gregated and
strengthed by the auctoryte of the said see. These things the canonycall
auctoryte witnesses or records. These things the ecclesiastical history
fortyfyeth and confyrmeth. These things the holy fathers also confyrme / and
as touching to the power or auctoryte of defynynge or determining the sense
or menynge of the scripture: the same I sodore speaking in the same book and
chapter, says in this wise. Furthermore we have set forth to sight in this
volume ye Decrees of diverse cou^celles, both greake councelles and latyne,
which have been made outher before or after, in dystyncte and sundry chapytres,
under the order of nombres and times / putting after also ye other Decrees of
the popes of Rome until saint Bregorie, and certain epystles of him, in which
the auctorite of the apostolyke see is egall to the auctoryte of the
councelles. It follows than that the pope by the auctoryte of his own self
alone: may determyne that thing, which the auctoryte of the general council
may determyne / for asmoche as his auctoryte is not unequal to the auctoryte of
the general cou^celles, after I sodores saying. The 17
same also seems to have been ye mind and opinion of saint Iherome, in his
epistle intytled of the exposycion of the catholyke faith / where he says
thus. This is the faith. O most blessed pope, which we have learned in the
catholyke church / which we have always holden or kept / in which if happily
any thing has been put either not learnedly, or to openly: we desire that it
may be amendyd by you, which do keep the faith and seat of Peter / but if
this our confession be approved and allowed by the judgment of your
apostleshyp: who soever shall be willing to spotte or defyle my name, he shall
prove him self to be vnlarned or evil wylled, or also no catholyke person,
and not me to be an heretyke. And 18
as touching to the power and auctoryte of ordaynynge or decreynge those
things, which appertain to the ecclesiastical customs or ceremonies and to
eternal health: it appears by the oracle or saying of christ in the. x.
chapter of Luke / for there he says to the apostles, and to all bishops or
priests in the person of the apostles / who soever despyseth you, despyseth me
/ and who soever despyseth me, despises him that has sent me. It follows
therefore, that the statutes of priests are to be observed and obayed of the
necessyte of salvation. Therefore of these powers assygned to the bishop of
Rome, and other more large, saint Bernarde making a colleccyon to Eugenius
pope in his second book De consideracio says in this wise. Now are the rest
to be repeted, if at ye lest any there be, of the place which we have
declared or dysputed of / go to, let us search yet dylygentlye, who thou art /
that is to wit, what person thou doste bear for the time in the church of god
/ who art thou? A great priest / highest bishop / Thou art heed or pryncipall
19
of bishops. Thou art heir of the apostles / thou art in prymacie A bell /
in governance Noye / in patriarcheshyp Abraham / in order Melchysedeche / in
dygnyte Aron / in auctoryte Moses / in judgment Samuel / in power Peter /
in a noyntyng christ. And it follows by and by after in the same chapter. And
thou alone, art pastor or herdysman, not only of the sheep: but also of all
pastors or herdysmen. Ask thou whereby I do prove this? by the words and
sayng of chyrst. For to whom (I do not say of bishops, but of the apostelles
also?) has all the sheep ben committed so absolutely and generally without
excepcion, as to Peter? when he said Peter if thou love me feed my sheep / and
a little after he says. To whom is it not plain and euyde^t, yt he did not
appoynte or make out any certain or pertyculer flock? there is nothi^ge
exceptyd or out taken: where no dystynccion or difference is made. And
afterward again in the same book he says. Hereof it is, yt the other 20
apostels have taken to their porcyon, each on of them one nation or peopled
knowing the mystery of christ's words. Finally James which semyd to be one
pyller of ye church: was contented with Jerusalem alone leauyng unto Peter the
university or general cure of the whole flock. And afterward co^cludynge,
he says thus in the syxte. According to ye Canons, other bishops ar called
in to 21
part of cure / but thou art called in to fulness of power the power and
auctoryte of other bishops is contained within certain lymytes: thy power is
extended also unto them, which have received power and auctorite upon other.
May not thou, if a cause shall rise: shytte heaven to a bishop? may not
thou depose him from his bysshopryche, and also give him to Satan, by
exco^munycatynge or cursynge him. Thy pryuylege therefore stands sure and
stable unto the, and unbroken as well in the keys given unto ye: as in ye sheep
committed or betaken unto the. And Bernarde 22
did not say here that the bishop of Rome had only auctoryte upon
ecclesiastical mynystres, as bishops, priests, and the other inferior
ordres: but also the same Bernarde seems to ascrybe unto the same bishop,
coactyue iurysdyccion upon all princes and governors / which iurysdyccion ye
same Bernarde calls under a metaphore, the te^porall sword / wherefore he
says to the same Eugenius, in the. v. book and syxte chapter, in this wise /
why should thou go about to usurp the sword: which thou wast ones
commanded to put up again in to the shethe, which sword for all yt who soever
denies to be thine: as me thinks he does not suffycye^tly regard or mark
the words of our lord, when he said. Turn thy sword in to the skabarde. So
than the sword is thine / and peradventure it is to be drawn out of the
sheth, at thy will and commandment: albeit not with thine own hand / for
else if the sword did no manner way belo^ge unto ye: christ would not have
made answer to ye apostles, when they said, lo here. ii. swerdes, under this
manner as he did, saying it is enough, but he would have said it is to much
/ it follows therefore, yt both swerdes belong to the church / that is to
wit both the spyrytuall and the material sword / but this materyall sword is
to be drawn out for the church, and the other spiritual sword is to be
drawn out also of ye church / the one is to be drawn out with the priests
hand: the other with the hand of the souldyer or man of war, but at the
will of the preeste, and commandment of ye emperor. There be other very
many auctorytes of saints, whereby the aforesaid things might be co^fyrmed,
but I have over hypped them here, first because that they are of the same or
very like virtue and strength with the auctorites before alleged / and again
because the manner of making answer both to them and these, is al one or very
like. And last of all because of shortness to be had in this our process.
Moreover these same things as it appears may be co^fyrmed and strengthed by
certain Decrees and decretalles of the bishops of Rome / for in the^ it is
provided and ordained, that all the ecclesiastical offices, and the benefyces
instytuted and ordained for the same offices, ought to be given by the bishop
of Rome and other bishops and in no wise by him that is prince or governor by
the auctoryte / it is ordained also by ye same Decretalles and decrees: that
priests and clerks ought not to come under Plain trayson and heresy i^ the
decretalles.
the coactyue judgment of the said prince and governor, but rather yt the
princes ought to be under their coactyue judgment and by ye same Decrees and
decretalles also it is co^fyrmed, yt all the powers do belong unto the bishop
of Rome: which saint Bernarde ascrybeth unto the said bishop, in his words
before rehearsed.

Of yt answers to be made unto ye aforesaid obieccio^s or reasons.
The, xxviij, chapter,
THe resyde we of the second part of this book, is to expound co^uenyently
and accordyngly the auctorytes of the scripture, and to dissolve the humayne
reasons and obieccio^s, which have been brought in, in the. iii. chapter, and
also in the chapter i^medyatly before gone, of this dyccyon / which appear and
seem to prove the contrary, of our determynacyons / but first it shall be
very expedye^t and welldone, to call to remembrance that, which we have said
in the. xiv. chapter of this dyccion, according to ye mind What scryptures
we are bound to believe and to give credence unto
of saint Augustyne, and an infallyble reason grounded upon ye scripture / that
is to wit, that we are not bound of necessyte of soul health, to believe
suerly, and to confess any scripture to be undoubtedly true, save only those
scryptures which are called holy scryptures, that is to wit those which are
contained in the body and volume of the Bible / and those also which necessary
follows of the said canonycall scryptures / wherefore we shall follow utterly
the manifest lytterall sense of such How much the exposycyons of old
ancient doctors do bide and when they are to be admytted, and when with
reverence to be refused.
auctorytes of the holy scripture, which needs not any mystycall exposycion /
and in such as needs mystycall exposycion, I shall leave and cleave unto y^
more prove able sentence and mind of saints. And as touching to the
sentences, which they have spoken forth of their own propre auctoryte, beside
y^ scripture: such as are consonant and agreeable to the scripture or holy
Canon, I will receive and allow / but such as are dysagreynge unto the said
scripture, I shall reverently deny and refuse / but yet none otherwise than by
the auctoryte of scripture, whereunto I will always leave and cleue fast / for
the holy exposytours and saints otherwhyles do not agree together, but are of
contrary opynyons and sentence / both about the scripture, and also in other
things beside the scripture / as Iherome and Augustyne dysagre about the
text in the second chapter to the Galatians / the words ben Iherome and
Augustyne. dysagre.
these. And when Peter was come to Antyoche, I resysted him openly to his face
because he was reproueable / and again Ambrose and Iherome dysagre about the
vyrgynyte of Iosephe / yea moreover otherwhyles one of the saints speaks at
Ambrose and Iherome dysagre.
one time contrary to that which him self spoke at an other time / as it
shall manyfestly appear and be open of those things which hereafter follows.
Now therefore to make answer first unto y^ obieccio^s made in the last
chapter before Answer made to the first obieccyon, in the chapter last paste.
gone / where it is reasoned, yt bishops are of greatter essencial or
inseparable dygnyte, then simple priests (as they are called) by the. x.
chapter of Luke, where it is said / that the lord marked forth or assygned
also other. lxxii. etc. by whom after the exposycion of Bid is fygured the
order of priests, which he calls the second order, that is to wit the
next after the order of bishops, it is to be said, that according to the
mind of the apostle, and to those things which have been brought in and
alleged of the auctoryte of saints in the. xv. chapter of this dyccyon, by
these. lxxii. is fygured more conuenyently the order of deacons, than of
priests / or else it may be said co^uenyently, that it follows not hereof of
this, that a bishop has a greatter essenciall order than has a preeste. But
that sendynge, whereby christ sent them in to the world to preach, did
sygnyfye rather the humayne eleccion or instytucion, by the which in deed one
of them should be preferred unto an other in the ecclesiastical I conomye or
admynystracion / for christ did not than give unto them any essencyall
dygnyte, when he said. Go you therefore and teach all nacyons: but he had given
the essencyall dygnyte unto them before that time / and the case put, that at
one or like time he had given to them both dygnytes or auctorytes: yet I do
say, that the sendynge of them to preche, did not add unto them any
intrynsecall perfeccyon, which they had not before, when they received
preesthode by the holy ghost / and this seco^darie instytucion of the apostles,
above other that should be made priests, was done by christ, for because that
at yt time there was no multitude of christen people, by whom such manner
eleccyon might be celebrated / and though there had been: yet could it not
have yet ben done so co^uenyently by any multitude, as by christ him self. For
which cause the apostles also, after the passion and resurreccyon of christ,
reduced and brought them selves to eleccion in deuydynge the prouynces among
them selves / for it is red in the second chapter to the Galatians thus,
James, Peter and John^, gave the right hands of socyetie and fellowship unto me
/ and Barnabas, yt we should go and preach among the gentyles, and they unto
the Jews / and therefore the case put, that this choosing of the. lxxii. had been a figure such as Bede says of the state of priests: yet I do say, that a
bishop has not any greatter intrynsecall dygnyte, or perfeccyon, or characte
given i^mediatly by god, than has a preeste being no bishop / and the cause
hereof has been suffycyently assygned in the. xv. of this dyccion. And to the
second obieccyon taken of the. v. chapter An answer to the second obieccyon.
of the first epistle to Timothe, against a preeste. etc. I do say, yt Timothe
received of the apostle no seco^darie instytucion essenciall, over the other
priests of that prouynce / the instytucyon and will of the which said
apostle, was equivalent and of egal strength to an eleccyon / because of the
lack and insuffycie^cie or rudyte and ignorance of the multitude of christen
men / wherefore the apostle in the. iii. chapter of the first epistle to the
Corynthians, says in this wise. And brethren I might not speak to you, as to
spiritual persons: but as to carnal / as unto babes in christ: I have given
you milk to drink, and not meat / for you were not as yet of strength, no
more you are of strength now / for you are yet carnal persons / and this
text we have opened and declared more largely in the. xvii. chapter of this
dyccion and the. vii. part. And as for the auctoryte which is alleged of the
To the tfyrd obieccyon. The epistle of Clement. Suspecte Canons.
epistle of Clement, which is intytled to James the cosen of our lord: I do
not receive it as undoubted / for it is very greatly suspected, that it should
not be ye epistle of Clement, for cause of many things that are contained in
the same epistle. Again these canons or epystles are suspected / for in that
epistle which is intyteled of the sacraments, of the apparel or vesture, and
of the vessels unto James the cosen of our lord, and also in that which is
intytled of the common life of the apostles, it is written as if Clement did
tell unto James those things, which christ did or wrought with his apostles.
But this should have been a great ignorance, because I will not say a great
presumpcyon, of Clement: that he would go about to give knowledge of these
things, which he had only hard, and as it were to teach them unto him which
had been present at ye doing of them, and had him self seen christ and his
apostles, of whom him self also was one / for who could better instruct the
dyscyples which were in Jerusalem, of the life of christ, and of his apostles:
or whether ought to know more of the ecclesiastical custom or usage, ye
apostle think ye, or he that was but the successor of an apostle: there is no
man I trow that doubts / wherefore the epystles are to be accounted among
the apocryse scryptures / but though we did grant that the said epystles
were the epystles of Clement (so as some men do affirm) trusting and
groundynge them selves upon fables and lyenge tales, yea in somoch that they do
say, Clement because he was bishop of Rome, to have been of greatter auctoryte
Clement bishop of Rome
in the church of god, than James the apostle / of whom this questyon
conuenyently may and is to be asked, why the epystles of Clement are not put in
the body of the holy Canon or bible, as well as y^ epistle of saint James is
put there? yet for all yt I will make answer unto these things, which in the
said epystles shall seem to beconsonaunt and agreeable to the sentence and mind
of christ and of the apostles when we shall treat of the auctorytes of
scripture, whereupon they seem to be grounded. But unto that obieccyon, which
says, that this has been the 4
sentence or opinion and mind of all the bishops which has succeeded saint
Peter in the episcopal see of Rome. Answer is to be made, as we have answered
to the first obieccion / that their meaning was so as we declared there / or
if they understood or meaned otherwise than so, we do leave or forsake them,
and do follow the apostle and Iherome in the. xv. and. xvi. chapter of this
dyccion. But 5
unto those auctorytes of the Canon or holy scripture, wherein it seems to be
showed and proved, that saint Peter was superyour to the other apostles in
dygnyte, not only by man's law, but also by yt i^mediate ordynacion of christ.
And first where it was alleged of ye. xvi. of Mathewe. Thou art Peter and upon
this stone I shall build and edyfye my church / and to the I shall give ye
keys of the kingdom of heuens. etc. by which words christ should seem to
have made and instytuted Peter the heed and fundame^t of the church, at the
left wise in his own absence: I do say that there has been, and also is but
only one heed, and fou^dacion or grou^dwarke of the church, by the i^mediate
ordynacion of god, and that is christ / as we have proved undoubtedly by the
scripture. Therefore unto that auctoryte or text / upon this stone I will
edyfye my church: I do say accordyngly to the gloss, ye upon Christ is the
stone.
this stone, betokens upon christ, on whom thou beleuest / where the gloss
between ye lines, therefore called ye gloss interlinear: adds the words
following. Thou art Peter, yt is to say of me which am the stone / but yet so
that I do reserve and retain unto my self the dygnyte of the fou^dame^t or
grou^dwarke. And christ called him Peter, that is to say constant in the
faith / which thing we The interpretacion of Peter.
do not deny / for though we do grant that he was more constant and more
perfyte in merit than the other apostles: it follows not therefore yt he was
before them in dygnyte / except only peradventure in time / as we have
euyde^tly proved by the scripture in the chapytres before alleged. And this
sense which we have said to be ye sense of the scripture, the exposycion of
saint Augustyne helps upon the same place. For Augustyne says, and it is
taken of his book of retraccio^s / I have said in a certain place of the
apostle Peter, that upon him as upon ye stone the church is edyfyed or builded
/ but I know that I have afterward very often times so expounded that
saying of our lord / thou art Peter and upon this stone I will edefye or
build my church: that it should be understood to be buyi^ded upon him,
whom Peter confessyd, saying / Thou art christ the sone of the living god /
as if Peter called or having his name of this stone, should figure ye person
of ye church, which is builded upon this stone / for it was not said to him
Tues Petra. i. thou art the stone, but Tues Petrus. i. Thou art Peter / but the
stone was christ / whom Simon co^fessynge likewise as the whole church
confesses him, was called Peter. And ye reason or cause hereof may be assygned
according to yt scripture. For Peter as loge as he was a pilgrim in this
world might err and sin by the liberty of his fre will / wherefore he is
red to have denied christ / and otherwhyles not to have walked aryghte
according to the veryte of the gospel / but such one could not be the
foundament or ground stone of the church / but christ only was this stone
(as it appears in the third chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthya^s)
which could not err or do amysse / for from the first instante of his
concepcion, he was so confyrmed and establysshed in grace: that he could in no
wise sin / wherefore saint Paul in the place before alleged says. No man
may put any other foundacyon, than that which has been put or set: which is
christ Ihesus. And as concerning this addycion. To the I shall give the keys
of the kingdom of heuens this addycion I say, gives none auctorite to Peter
upon or above ye other apostles / for this self same iudiciarie power he gave
also to the other apostles, after the mind of saint Iherome, and of Rabane /
whose exposycio^s or gloses we have brought in here tofore in the syxte
chapter of this dyccyon, and the third part. Moreover because christ seems
not by these words to have given to him the power of the keys / for he
Christ said I shall give the keys and not I do give.
says I shall or will give to the / which sounds it for to come. He said
not I do give / but in the. xx. of John^ he said indyfferently to all the
apostles. Receive you the holy ghost / and whose sins you shall forgive: they
are forgyuen. etc. But this admytted that Peter by these words had received
this auctoryte: yet it is not concluded nor follows hereof, but only that he
was instytuted pastor or herdysman before other in time. And in that that christ
vouchedsafe to give these keys syngulerly to him, albeit it were so in deed,
yet he would no more thereby, but sygnyfye and betoken the unity of the church
in faith, unto which unity christ has called or provoked christen men, by
the synguler tradycion or promise of the keys, as the gloss says. Or else
peradventure, because Peter did first of all other confess boldly, openly, and
plainly, that christ is the sone of god: therefore he in time is first endowed
and is honored with the keys given to him, or is promised to be honored / yt
by such reward promised: an example should be given to the other also, so to
confess christ openly and boldlye / but yet for all this it is not therefore
proved, that he was superyour and before other in dygnyte or auctoryte. Albeit
yt some of the exposytours seem to say this of their own self, not That
Peter was not superyour.
having this of the scripture / and that I do say the troth: the text of the
gospel here following does infallybly sygnyfye and declare, which is had in
the. xx. of Mathe we, where christ openly determining this questyon, said
that none of them was superyour one an other, for there was a contencyon risen
or made among them, which of them should be greattest. And the same is had in
the. xxii. of Mathewe. For christ said unto them. But be not you in will to
be called master / among your self one to an other / for you have but one
master and all you are brethren / that is to say all you are equal. It
follows therefore that he excepted not one / in as much as he said all you
are brethren or fellows / An exposytour is not to be credeted be fore a plain
text.
and it is a meruaylouse thing if we ought rather to give crede^ce to ye
auctoryte of the exposytoure or gloss maker: than of christ him self, who
soever that exposytoure is / yea though he be a saint / and specially seeing
that he speaks this not as an exposytoure or gloss maker, but of his own
propre mind. For the text of ye scripture is so open and plain, that it
needs no gloss in this thing. Moreover because the gloses selves say the
contrary, expoundynge the second chapter to the Galatians / as it has been
declared in the. xvi. of this dyccyon. And we have treated this matter
suffycyentlye and seryouslye in the. iiii. and. xv. of this dyccyon / neither
we will Iterate or rehearse again all the probacyons, because the thing is
euydently known / and for cause of speed and shortness to be had. But to the
other auctoryte taken of Luke in the. xxii. chapter, where 6
Christ said to saint Peter / but I have prayed for the, Peter: that thy
faith shall not fail. And when thou art ones converted, confyrme thou thy
brethren. Of which text some men do infer and conclude two things / the
one is that the faith of the church of Rome only can not fail / because
that christ by the faith of Peter, understand also the faith of the
successors of Peter / and consequentlye, that the bishop successoure unto
him is the cheyfe and pryncypall of all other. The second is, that by these
words Christ made him prelate of the other apostles / but I do say, that
neither of these two things do follow of the words of Christ, by the virtue
and strength of the words. For in this consequence or argument, the contrary
rather of that that is inferred and concluded, stands with the antecedent or
with that whereof it is inferred. Secondarylye I do prove by the scripture that
neither of them does follow / and that by the words of christ him self and
none other. The first of the two, that is to say, that the faith of the
church of Rome only can not fail, I prove to be false, in that that christ
said to them all in the last chapter of Mathewe. Go you therefore and teach
all nacyons. etc. And loo I am with you at all times even unto the ending of
the world. If christ than did promise him self to be with the other
apostles, at all times, even unto the world shall be at an end, it follows
than that he understood also of y^ successors of the other apostles, if ye
other aucthory ^ie brought for them, ought to be understood of the
successors of Peter. Again if the bishop of Rome be called syngularelye or
specyallye the successoure of Peter, it is undoubted and euydently known, that
a certain heretyke, or certain heretykes have been made bysshoppes in that see
/ as it has been showed of Liberius and of certain other popes and it has been proved in the. xvi. of this dyccyon: that the bishop of Rome is not
syngularlye or seuerallye the successor of Liberius pope.
saint Peter / for the causes assygned according to the scryptures in the same
chapter. And the second consequence or argument likewise is of no strength
that is, that the bishop successor unto Peter is the cheyfe and pryncypall of
al other which thing I prove also by the scripture. For Paul gave somewhat
unto Peter, and did profit and help him in the gospel, and not contrary
wise Peter unto Paul / as we have alleged heretofore suffyciently of the
second chapter to the Galatia^s in the. xvi. chapter of this part. And
(which is a more euydent thing) The words of christ before alleged of the.
xx. of Mathewe, and of the. xxii. of Luke: destroys this consequence, by
which words plainly and openly christ defyned and has determined the
contrary / wherefore the gloss expou^dynge this place says thus. As I have
defended the by my prayer, yt thou should not fail: so do thou comfort the
weak brethren, by the example of the penance or repentance, that they do not
dyspayre of forgyuenes / understanding and meaning by brethren indyfferently
all christen men / which words also he speaking to Peter: gave knowledge to
the other apostles, that they should do the same / wherefore in the. xiii. of
Mark he said. That I say to one, or else after the other letter, but coming
all to one sense. That I do say to you, I do say to all. Or peradventure he
spoke these words, specially to Peter (and this seems also to be y^ mind of
the gloss) because christ knew before, that Peter should deny him, wherefore
thou being ones converted and repentaunt, co^formeth and strength thy
brethren, by the example of thy repentance, because he would that he which
had optayned forgyuenes, should by his words, and example of him self,
comfort or co^fyrme syngulerly those yt were weak in the faith, that they
should not dyspayre of for gyuenes. And to the other auctoryte of ye scripture
taken of ye. xxi. of John^, by 7
which certain men go about to prove and conclude the same, because that
christ said to saint Peter, feed my sheep / feed my lambs: it is to be said
first, that after the mind of y^ gloss this is the sense and meaning of this
text, that to feed the sheep: is to comfort them that believes, that they do
not despair, and To feed sheep what it betokens.
to provide earthly subsydyes, succor, or releaue, if need be: to their
subjects / to give them examples of virtues / to withstand the adversaries of
the faith / to correct or amend them that sin or do amysse / and it
follows in the gloss. And when he hereth the third time, that Peter does
love him: than he byddeth Mark this.
him feed his sheep. This knowledgynge of his love toward christ three times:
is set against his thryes denyenge of christ / that his tongue should no
less do service to love: than it had before done service to fear. But yet it
is not hereof prouyd or concluded, but only that christ did instytue him
apostle or feder of sheep and it follows not for all that hereof, that he made
him superyour or before the other apostles in auctoryte or dygnyte / neither
again it follows hereof, that the other apostles have not ben instytuted
pastores and herdysmen. For the contrary of both these conclusyons: stands
with the auncedent / that is to wit with the words or saying of christ
before recyted / and that these aforesaid things are true: it may be prouyd
by this, that the catholyke church syngeth one preface The preface of the
Mass upon ye feast of any of the apostles, is allone.
indyfferently of all the apostles, which is this following. Verelye it is
according, and right, reasonable, and wholesome, humblye to beseech the at all
times, that thou which art the eternal pastor do not forsake thy flock: but
that thou do keep them with contynuall proteccyon by thy blessed apostles, that
it may be governed by ye same governors and rulers: whom thou have given to
the same church as pastores or herdysmen, vycars and debytes of thy work or
office. Lo here yt the church calls ye apostles in ye plurell no^bre
governors, vycars, and herdysmen by ye i^medyate collacyon or gift of christ
/ and she does not call any one of them alone, a gouernoure / vycare, or
herdysman constytuted by christ / and to him that will ask, why christ spoke
these words syngulerlye to Peter: it is to be answered / that christ sometime
dyrected his speech to a man in his own proper person / as in the forgyuenes
of sins / in the healynge of sick men / and in the reysynge of deed men to
life / and otherwhyles he did dyrecte his speech to one in the person of all,
or of many as in the. v. chapter of John^, when he said, Christ dyrecteth his
spech sometime to one in the person of all.
go and sin no more lest it chance or happen worse unto the / wherefore
christ in co^myttynge or betakynge that office to Peter: he spoke unto him in
the person of all the apostles / as he him self witnesses or records this
manner of speaking of his own, in the. xiii. of Mark, when he said, that
which I do say to one, or to you: I do say to all / but yet he dyrected his
speech specially unto Peter: because he was more ancient or aged, or because
he was more fervent in charity / or else because he would sygnyfye and give
knowledge to the church that was to come after, what manner herdysmen ought to
be i^stytuted / that is to wit, men ripe in age / by which is betokened
wisdom or knowledge, and also men Mark this my maystres of the church for
your dyscharge.
fervent and full of charity / by which is sygnyfyed cure and dylygence,
which herdysmen or curates ought to have. Or else peradventure lest Peter
might seem more abiecte or vile, and more out of favor, because he had denied
christ / which seems to be the mind of the gloss, where it says / against
his thryes denyenge: he now makes thryes confession or knowledgynge / that
his tongue should not do less service to love, than it had done before to fear
/ for this is sure and undoubted, that it was said indyfferently to them all
in the last chapter of Mathewe, Go you therefore and teach all nacyons or
peoples / and he said not to Peter go thou and send thou other / in which
thing he sygnyfyed them all to be of egall auctoryte, as we have also before
alleged of the. xiii. of Mathewe, when he said unto them, be not in will to be
called master / understand thou, one in comparyson of an other, or one upon
an other or other of you / for you have all but one master, and all you are
brethren. Or else it is to be said, and very probablye, and as me think
agreeable and according to the truth, that for so much christ said unto
Peter, feed thou my sheep: that he would committee and betake specially unto him,
because of his constancy and boldness, the people of Israel or of the Jews
which was a styfnecked and stubburne people toward god / as it appears in
the. xxxiii. of Exodus, and the apostle alleges by Esaie the profit, in the
last chapter of the acts / for christ came pryncypally to co^uerte and save
the said people / wherefore he said in the. xv. of Mathewe, I am not sent but
unto the sheep, which are perysshed of the house of Israel / understand thou,
I am not sent pryncypally. And therefore he seems to have committed the cure of
this people specially unto Peter, when he said / feed thou my sheep. And this
also seems to be the plain and open sentence of the apostle, when he said in
the second to the Galatians when they had seen and perceived, that unto me was
committed and betaken the preaching of the gospel unto the Gentyles, as unto
Peter was betaken ye preaching of the gospel unto the circumcised people of
the Jew. etc. where the gloss after the mind of saint Augustyne, says /
when they had seen, that the gospel of incyrcumcision was betaken unto me (as
being faithful, and pryncypally) as the gospel of cyrcumcysion was betaken
to Peter. For christ had given unto Paul, that he should mynystre the gospel
to the Gentyles: which also Peter preched to the Jews and Paul to ye gentyles.
had given to Peter, that he should mynystre the same to the Jews / but yet
for all that this dyspensacion was so dystrybuted unto them, yt both Peter
might preach to the Gentyles, if a cause had required it so to be done: and
Paul also to the Jews. And I do not se or perceive, that Paul or any other
saint could take or gather of any other place of the scripture, that the
people of the Jews was specially and pryncypally betaken unto Peter: but
only hereof: because christ said unto him, feed my sheep, seeing that Paul
does say in the second chapter to the Galatians, that the preaching of the
gospel to the Gentyles, was betaken to him: as the preaching of the same to
the cyrcu^cysed people was betaken to Peter. For if the preaching of the
gospel universally or generallye had been committed unto Peter more than to
Paul, or to the other apostles: than truly Paul should have spoken the
aforesaid words inconuenyently / yea more over all his speech had been vain,
and the comparyson which he made in it / according to the gloses of saints
and of other doctors. Upon these three points of the scripture aforesaid: we
shall speak in the end of this chapter, lest it might chance us to iterate
or reherce again one and the same thing very often.

But unto the saying of the apostle in the second chapter to the Galatians 8
by which it seemed that he was inferyour or less than Peter in auctoryte, for
as much as he said, I conferred or compared with them the gospel, which I do
preche among the Gentyles, lest I might run or had run in vain. etc. It
is to be said first, and answered according to the gloss of saint Augustyne
upon this place / for he says. And I have not learned of them, as being
greatter or superiors unto me: but I have conferred with them, as being nyghe
friends and egalles. And as touching to that, which the gloss brings in
according to the mind of saint Iherome upon the text, lest I might run in
vain. etc. he shows here (says the gloss after Iherome) that he had not
securyte, nor was out of doubt of the gospel that he preached, except it had been confyrmed and strengthed or fortyfyed by the auctoryte of Peter and of the
other apostles: I do say with reverence, yt this gloss outher should be
contradictorye and plain against it own self, in that which is said
afterward after the mind of the same Iherome, if it be so understood, as
he does seem to intend, which is adversary to this sentence, which we have
said: or else this gloss after the mind of Iherome must be understood,
according to that which follows in the same gloss after the mind of saint
Augustyne. For this was not the cause, why he did confer his gospel with
them, for that he doubted that he had not the certaynte of the gospel: but
this was the cause of the said conferring, that it should be the more be ^he
cause w^^ Paul co^ferred with Peter and other
leued of the herers, when he said, that he had conferred it with them, which
had been conuersaunt with christ / whose witness or testymonye was the more
probable and like to be true / wherefore that saying, lest I might run in
vain or had run. etc. ought not to be referred to the defaulte of ye apostle
by him self, or of his own part: neither to any doubting which he had in
the gospel / for this gospel he received or learned not of man, neither by
man, but by the imedyate reuelacyon of god / as he says his own self in the
first to the Galatians. Moreover in the second chapter to the Galatians the
apostle making mencyon of this collacyon or comparynge of his gospel: says
in this wise. And they which seemed to be of auctoryte and greatly esteemed:
gave no thing unto me: but I to them / where the gloss after ye mind of
Augustyne says / as who should say, I do not therefore have recourse again the
former things, done by me, for they are suffycient for the co^mendacyon of me,
seeing that they which seemed to be somewhat, that is to wit, Peter and other
which were with the lord, have given, that is to say, have added nothing
unto me / wherein it is euydent, that I am not inferyor unto them, which am so
made perfyte of the lord and of god that there was no thing, that they could
add to my perfeccyon, in this conferring of my gospel with them. For he that
gave wisdom and knowledge to those iii. unlearned men: he has also given
knowledge unto me. And it follows afterward in the gloss after the mind of
saint Iherome. They gave or addednothynge to me: but I gave or added somewhat to
Peter / and again afterward / I resysted or withstode him, as egall unto him
/ for he would not have been bold to do these things: if he had not known him
self not to be unequal. Therefore that saying lest I should run in vain.
etc. ought to be referred unto the Lest I should run in vain.
hearers which peradventure would not have given credence else unto him: or
at the lest wise not so much credence unto him / and by the reason thereof
should have remained void or empty / and he likewise should have been void in
them / that is to say, should have been dysapoynted and have myssed of his
purpose and intent in them. For asmoche as he should not have engendered any
faith in them, which he intended by the course of his preaching. And this is
it also which follows afterward in the same gloss after the mind of saint
Augustyne / for the apostle Paul being called by a voice from heaven, after
the ascencyon of christ, if he should not co^munycate and be partener or fellow
with the apostles, and should not confer his gospel with them so that it might
appear that he was one of the same fellowship or company: the church would
give no credence to him at all / but when the church had known, that he did
preach the same gospel that the apostles did, and that he lived in the
co^munyon and unity of them, such miracles also being done by him, as they
did work / then by such co^mendacyon of the lord he deserved auctoryte, and
to be regarded in the church, that his words be so herd in the church: as
if christ were herd speaking in him, as he him self said most truly. Than
it follows of these words of the gloss, that Paul deserved auctoryte or to
be regarded, by the co^mendacion of christ / and he said not, Peter or the
other apostles co^mendynge him / or causynge him to be accepted. And it
follows a little afterward in the gloss, after the mind of the same
Augustyne / wherefore he conferred his gospel with them, and took their right
hands. For he preachyd the same word of god that they did: though he Why
saint Paul co^ferred the gospel with the apostles.
received not it by them. For that conferring of his gospel with them, showed
yt it was all one kind of doctrine: all spots or dyuersite of leprye clean
shaken away. This than was the cause of his conferring of his gospel with
them / that all scrupules and doubtfulnes of the varyete and dyuersyte of his
doctrine and theyrs, should be rydde and taken away from the hearers. And this
is it which the gloss had said before: after the mind of Augustyne. For he
said I went up again to Iherusalem. etc. I went up I say, with Barnabas
which was of the Jews, taking also Titus unto me, which was of the gentyles
/ As who should say, I have wytnes and records of both nacyons / by which it
should be plain and euydent, that it was not true, but false, that I did
preach one thing to the Jews, and an other thing to the gentyles. And I did
ascend not only after this dysposycyon and order, as I have reherced: but
also according to the reuelacyon of god. And I have not learned of them as
being greatter than I or superyours to me / but I have co^ferred with them, as
with my fre^des and egalles, the gospel of christ which I preach among the
gentyles. This thing he did for the assercion and defending of his own
preaching for many men were in doubt of the doctrine of the apostle, the
Jews trowbelynge and disquyetynge their minds which scruple and doubt it
pleased god to take away. And therefore not by the delyberacion of man, but by
the reuelacyon of god: the apostle, (as he says him self) went up to
Jerusalem, to confer his gospel with them / not for any doubtfulnes that he
him self had of his gospel that he preached: but that the said scruple or
doubtfulnes should be ryd out and taken away from the minds of his hearers.
And where it was alleged of the gloss upon the second chapter How Paul was
an hyndermore pastor than Peter was.
to the Galatyanes, that Paul was an hyndermore pastor than saint Peter the
apostle: it is to be said, that ye gloss maker spoke properly. For saint Paul
was called the later of them two unto apostleshyp / and therefore he was
posteryor, that is to say hindermore in time / but he was not therefore
inferyor in auctoryte / neither did the gloss express this: but rather the
contrary / so than of the aforesaid and now rehearsed things, it appears
euydently, that neither Peter, neither any other of the apostles was greatter
than Paul: but that he was friend and egall to them, in the auctoryte
i^medyatly given unto them by christ. And if there have been any pryoryte
among them: it is to be co^sydered to have been peradventure by ye eleccion of
them among their self or else after such manner, after which we said saint
Peter to have been hedde or cheyfe of ye apostles, in ye. xvi. chapter of this
dyccion. And to the saying taken of the book of Isodore, in ye chapter, whose
title is Incipit p^fatio Niceni co^cilii, where it is said thus: it is to be
known verily of al catholyke men, yt the holy church of Rome is preferred to
other and made pri^cypal, not by any synodal Decrees: but it has obtained
prymacie by yt voice or words of our lord and savior in the gospel, so also
understanding of the bishop of the same church: the saying of Isodore, and
of who soever says so beside Isodore without the Canon: is to be denied / for
the church of Rome The church of Rome has been preferred unto other by man's
law only.
has been instytuted and made most pryncypall and the heed of the other
churches, by the Decrees of the Romayne emperoures, and by the consent of the
other churches, as it were by a certain eleccion. Moreover that does not
follow of the aforesaid auctoryte of the Canon: which Isodore does infer. But
the illacyon or argument of him may be put by, or if any other man, who soever
shall so say by those things which have been determined of us in the. xv.
chapter of this dyccion in the. viii. part of it / and in the. xvi. chapter
in the. xiii. and. xiiii. part. And unto the auctortye whereby he gothe about
to fortyfye these saynges, taken of the. xvi. of Mathewe, Thou art Peter and
upon this stone I wylledyfy my church. etc. it has been answered heretofore.
And unto yt reason or argument, 9
by which it was deduced that the church is but one / and that there is but
one pryncypall or highest bishop, because of the unity of the faith,
according to the mind of the apostle in the. iiii. chapter to the Ephesyans:
it is to be said, taking the church in his propre sygnyfycacyon for the
multitude or congregacyon of christen people: that there is so but one church
as there is but one faith. One church.
And because there is not one synguler faith in nombre, in all christen men,
but one faith in kind or in general: therefore ye argument concludes not,
that the One faith in kind.
church is otherwise one than so, that is to wit in general / And when it is
added, that the church is not one but by the reason that there is one
syngulare bishop in nombre, which is superyoure to all other. I deny this /
and though I did grant it, yet to the other yllacyon yt this pryncipal
bishop or heed is the bishop of Rome by the instytucion of god imedyatly: I
deny this yllacyon or argument with all his probacyons. For asmoche as neither
Peter was the stone, upon which the church was grounded or builded, but
christ, as we have showed here above in this present chapter, and in the.
xvi. chapter of this dyccion, by the scripture / and again because the
bishop of Rome is not so syngulerlye or specially the successor of saint
Peter, or of any other apostle imedyatly, by the instytucion of god, that any
superyoure auctoryte should be therefore dew unto him in comparyson of the
other bishops / as it has been showed in the chapter of this dyccyon before
alleged / but if any such syngularyte be in the said bishop: it belongs
to him by the instytucion or eleccyon of men. And to the co^fy: 10
macyon of this reason, where it is said, that there ought to be one bishop
or bysshopryche, which should be as the pryncypall and heed of all spyrytuall
men and things, likewise as there is one prince or cheyfe gouernoure of all
temporal men and things in one realm, this comparyson or symylytude may be
denied / for It is necessary that there be but one prince in one realm. 11
it is necessary, that there be but one prince or heed gouernoure in nombre in
one realm, for all the contencyous acts of men / as it has been showed in
the. xvii. of the first dyccion / which munerall unity is not necessarely
required to be in any of the other offices of a co^munyte or realm. And to the
other reason or argument, where it is said, that as in one temple or church
there is but one bishop, so likewise it ought to be in whole chrystendome /
it is to be said first, that it is not of the necessyte of health, neither by
the precepts of gods law, that there is but one bishop in one church /
but there might be many bishops in one church as we have showed in the. xv.
chapter of this dyccion, by Many bishops in one church. By what auctoryte
there is but one bishop in every diocese.
the. xx. chapter of the acts, and by the apostle in very many other places,
and by the epistle of saint Iherome to Euandre / but that afterward in later
time there is instytuted but only one ouerseer or bishop so called by
excellemye, in one church or diocese, which is preferred to other priests in
the Iconomye or ordering of the church: this comes imedyatlye of the
instytucion of man, and not of any necessyte compellynge thereunto by the law of
god. And if there were any such necessyte compellynge hereunto by the law of
god: yet the symylytude holds not. For it is not all one and the same
necessyte that there be but one orderer or gouernoure in one house, and that
there be but one gonernoure in a whole city or co^munyte or in many prouynces.
For they that be not in one and the same house or family, needs not to have
one orderer or gouernoure in nombre, for as much as they are not partakers one
of them with an other, of meats and other things necessary to their
sustenaunce / of mancyon and of bed and board / neither ar conuersaunt
together in such manner unity, as they be which ar of one famylye or
household. For this reason should conclude also that there ought to be but one
orderer or governor in nombre, in the hole world / which is neither
expedyent, neither true. For it is suffycyent to the quyete conuersacyon and
living together of men, that there be but one prince or head gouernoure in
nombre, in every one prouynce, as we have said in the. xvii. of the first
dyccyon or part. But it seems not yet to have been proved, that there ought to
be but one coactyue judge of all men of the necessyte of eternal salvation,
albeit that the unity of such a coactyue judge seems to be more necessarelye
required among christen men than ye unity: of one universal or general
bishop / for because yt a general prince may keep christian people in unity:
more than may an universal or general bishop. For in the old times
sysmatykes were compelled by the princes to keep the unity of the faith, But
they could not have been compelled by the bishops, because they lacked
auctoryte coactyue, which said auctoryte is not due to them nor sitting or
semely for them in that that they are bishops, as it has been prouyd in the.
x. chapter of the first part of this book, and has be more largely confyrmed
by the scripture and auctorytes of saints, and by other reasons in the. iiii.
v. viii. ix. and. x. chapytres of this dyccion. And unto that auctoryte of
Ihon^ in the. xv. chapter, that there shall be made one fold, and one pastor,
or 12
one herdysman: it is to be said that christ spoke of his own self / for he
only was the general herdysman, and the head or cheyf and pryncypall of all
pastores One pastor or herdysman
and herdysmen, and none other after him likewise as he only was the head and
fou^dacyon of the church, as we have showed in the. xvi. of this dyccyon and
also have repeted in very many other places / and this was the open and plain
lyteral sentence and mind of saint Peter. For in his first canonycal Epistle
and the. v. chapter he says / when the heed or pryncypall pastor shall come
(speaking of christ) you shall receive glory that never shall fade. This also
is the sentence and mind of saints upon this place / for the gloss after the
mind of Gregory says / he makes as it were one fold of two flocks / for
he joins together the people of the Jews, and of the Gentyles, in his faith
/ Lo how and after what manner there is One fold, and after what manner.
made one fold / that is to wit, in the unity of faith / saint Gregory did not
say that there was made one fold, because that all christen men are set or put
under the bishop of Rome, or any other one bishop beside christ. Again
Theophilus says upon yt same place / for there is all one and the same seal
or mark of baptysme, to all men. One herdysman, ye word of god. Let Manicheis
therefore take heed and mark, that there is one fold, and that there is one
herdysman, of the old and the new testament / for the making of this unity
of the fold, in no place Peter or Paul or any other apostles is named, but
only the unity of faith, and the person of christ / which alone by the
imedyate ordynacion of god, is heed and foundation or ground work of all the
church, and pryncipall or cheyfe of al herdysmen / as we have said by the
premysses, and have showed of certaynte in the. xvi. of this dyccyon. And to
the other obieccyon or argument, whereby it is 13
concluded, that the bishop of Rome alone, or with his college of cardynals
one lie, is the pryncypall cause effectyue of the secondrye instytucyon of all
other mynystres of the church / and that it is in his power outher medyate, or
imedyate, or else both, to assygne or determyne temples to the same mynystres
/ I make answer denrenge it. And when it is co^fyrmed by the auctoryte of
Ambrose, of De tradend is basilicis, which says, that it can not be the
right of Caesar, to determyne or instytute priests to temples or churches,
because the church belongs to god, it is to be answered and said, that
Ambrose spoke this therefore, because at that time, and in those days, it was
ieoperdouse to permytte the gift of such manner offices, that is to wit, the
cures and charge of souls, unto the Emperors of Rome: because they were not
yet suffycyently co^fyrmed and establysshed in the faith, but rather certain
of the said emperoures and romayne princes, did fauer more other whiles the
priests yt were heretykes than those priests which were verily faithful and
in the true belefe. As did the same Uale^tiniane ye Ualentinian the Emperor.
emperor, to whom saint Ambrose wrote and dyrected the aforesaid epistle, De
trade^dis basilicis / but yet for all yt, the faith being roted and
establysshed both in subjects and in the princes and in such manner co^munyte:
ye eleccion and instytucion of bishops, and of other curates, having charge
of man's soul, is both more suerly and safely, and also more profytably, and
more co^formably to ye law of god* made or done by ye auctoryte of the
christen princes: than by the will of one preeste, which we do se lyghtlye, and
in a manner daily, to be perverted and corrupted, through prayer, or money /
love / or hatred / or else by some other synystre and crooked affection.
Neither did Ambrose ever say, that this auctoryte did belong to the bishop
of Rome, or else to any other bishop / but for the aforesaid cause he said,
that the church or temple belongs only to god, and to his faithful
multitude of christen people, as being the church in his pryncypall and
first sygnyfycacyon, of the which church christ is the heed. Neither did
Ambrose outher say or think the contrary hereof. And it is a sign hereof,
that is to wit, that Ambrose as being a bishop and herdysman of christen men,
did strive only herefore, that ye christen flock should not be committed to
the governance of an evil preeste or being an heretyke: for as much as he
said in the first epistle to Ualentiniane in this wise. And would to god I
knew suerlye and euydently, that the church should not be committed to the
Arrianes I would than wyllyngly of mine own The church is not to be committed
to heretykes. A bishop infected may be deposed.
mind offer my self to the will and pleasure of your majesty. And that he
must needs have meaned so about the tradycion and gift of churches, as we
have now said, and have manyfestlye proved also in the. xvii. of this dyccyon.
For if a bishop or preeste, which were infected with heresye, should occupye a
rometh in any church in a co^munyte of christen men, and would not give place:
it is undoubted, that such manner person may laufully be compelled and
ryghtfully, by a judge coactyue, and by power of arms, according to the laws
of men. But this coactyue, judgment and power is not the auctoryte of any
preeste, as the same Ambrose witnesses, and truly, in his epistle, which is
intytled Ad plebem / that is to say to ye common people / for he says.
Against the Goths, and men of war also, my tears are mine armoure and
weapons. For such are the munymentes and defense of a preeste / otherwise I
neither may, neither ought, to resyste / how beit this thing also has been
concluded by demonstracyon, in the. xv. and. xvii. of the first dyccyon / and
has been also confyrmed by the auctoryte of scripture and of saints, and by
other probacions also, in the. iiii. v. viii. and. ix. of this dyccyon. And
therefore it is safely to be holden, that saint Ambrose did so mean as we have
said. For the apostle Paul also appelled unto Caesar / as we have heretofore
alleged of the. xx. chapter of the acts. So than it seems to appertain to
the auctoryte of the prince and governor, to give the temples or churches to
be dysposed and ordered, and to instytute priests in them / which thing also
the catholyke kings of France do in certain churches / recognysynge neither
bishop or preeste, as from whom this auctoryte should be deryued unto them.
And so we do believe and suppose, that Ambrose did mean, and ought to mean,
if he meaned truly. And if he meaned contrary to this, which we do know and
Remember ever yt the auctoryte of doctors, is of no force with out the
auctoryte of holy scripture.
believe to be the sentence of the holy Canon or scripture: than leaving his
opinion, which we are not compelled or bound to believe of the necessyte of
salvation, for asmoche as his scripture is not canonycall / and cleauynge to
the canonycall scryptures: I do hold the sentence, which I have said as being
true, And where as it seemed, of the same auctoryte of Ambrose to be inferred
and concluded, that unto the bishop of Rome appertains by the auctoryte of
god i^medyatly the highest iurysdyccion of the ecclesiastical te^poralles,
which for their offices are given to the euangelical mynystres: it appears of
the aforesaid things, that this illacion or argument is weak, and of no
strength / as we have also suffycye^tly concluded in the. xvii. chapter of
this dyccion / which sentence in this point saint Ambrose also does confyrme
in the aforesaid epistle De tradendis basilicis. Ambrose.
i. of the gyuynge of churches, where he says thus. If he desires trybute
(that is to wit the emperor) we do not deny it him / the lands of the
church pays trybute. If the emperor desires the lands: he has power and
auctoryte to challenge them. None of us lets or stops him. The collacion
or gift of the people may be suffycient and more than enough to poor men /
let them not make envy of the lands, let him take them if it pleases him I do
not give them to ye emperor: but I do not deny them to him / but peradventure
some man will obiecte, which secheth always to defend the lands, saying
that these lands are the right of the spouses of christ (having little care
for the defending of the true spouses, that is to wit, of the holy catholyke
faith) as the king and kingdom or The holy catholyke faith is ye true spouses
of christ.
realm of Armenye can manyfestlye bear witness unto him, that saint Ambrose
spoke these words, not because that the lands of the church of right ought
to pay trybute: but because it was required of them by the violence and
oppressyon of the emperors. Forsothe this is a false exposycion, which
certain also of the bishops of Rome with their co^plyces oftentimes does use
for to declyne and avoid the coactyue iurysdyccion of the princes or emperors
saying that their selves in deed are brought violentlye, and not by right or
laufullye in to seculer judgment / for christ said the contrary in the. xix.
of John^ / and we have alleged his words here tofore in the. iiii. chapter
of this dyccion. And this is it which Ambrosesaythe afterward, according to
the sentence which we do hold agreablye to the Canon or scripture, when he
says these words following / we do pay to Caesar, those things which
belongs to Caesar / and to god: those things which appertains to him.
Trybute belongs to Caesar: it in not denied him. Therefore trybute, and
iurysdyccion upon the ecclesiastical temporalles belong The churches pay
trybutes. 14
to the emperor, not vyolently: but of right. And to the other illacyon or
argument, by which it seems to be concluded, that all the college of clerks
is subject to the bishop of Rome by coactyue iurysdyccion, because he is
cheyfe and heed of all by the ordynacyon of god: the auncedent is to be denied.
For it has been showed before, that no bishop or preeste is by the i^medyate
ordynacyon of god, or by the law of god, inferyor or subject to the bishop
of Rome, in any auctoryte, outher essencyallye or accydentallye dew to a
preeste. And as towchynge to that which is consequentlye brought in of the
book of I sodore, 15
of the words of Constantyne, it is to be said, that it was a word of speech
of exortacyon and of monycyon, by which the said honorable and devout
Constantyne did show what manner men bysshoppes and priests ought to be / For
they ought to be such manner men both one of them to an other among
themselves, and also unto other men / that they ought not, or need not to
contend or strive in seculer judgment / according to the doctrine of the
apostle in the. vi. chapter of the first to the Corynthyans / wherefore do you
not (says he) rather take iniurye? why do you not rather suffer damage: than
have judgments among you. etc. And to that which is added, of the saying of
Co^stantyne. God has given unto you power to judge of us. etc. it is to be
said, that it is true by I think this to be a loudelye forgyd in the name of
Co^stantyne, as was the gift, called the donacyon or gift of Co^stantyne. The
bishop of Rome is no more gods vycare, nor bears his stead in earth
otherwise, than an other bishop.
judgment of the first sygnyfycacion, but not coactyue of any man in this
world of which judgment it has been spoken suffycientlye, in the. vi. vii.
viii. and ix. of this dyccion. And yet it follows not of the aforesaid text
brought in of Isodore, whether it were spoken of Constantyne, or not spoken:
that the other bishops are subject in iurysdyccion to the bishop of Rome.
For Constantyne says / Abide you or wait for the judgment of god only
between you / and your braules or stryfes, what soever they be: let them be
reserved to that dyuyne judgment: he said not to the examynacion or judgment
of the bishop of Rome. And where it is added that the bishop of Rome is
gods vycar and bears gods stead in earth: it is to be said that he
bears no more the stead of god by the ordynacion of god imedyatlye: than
does any other bishop / as it has been showed and said here tofore: Neither
if he did bear the stead of christ in earth / as touching to the teaching
and mynystrynge of spyrytuall things: yet for all that it follows not
therefore, that he bears the stead of christ as touching to coactyue
judgment upon any lay man or clarke / as it has been showed heretofore of
the. iiii. and. v. of this dyccion, and very many other places / but in this
thing that is to wit, in coactyue judgment: the princes are the mynystres of
god / as the apostle Paul said in the. xiii. to the Romans / and saint
Peter in the second chapter of his first Canonycall epistle. Again I put
the case that Co^stantyne had affyrmed and said openly this to be true: I
would deny his saying. Co^stantynes sayenges are not Canonycall / or any
part of ye Canon or scripture.
For it is neither Canonycall, neither necessarelye following of the Canonycall
scripture / but if he had ordained this to be observed by the manner of a Decree
or constytucyon: it should be expedyent that it were observed and kept as other
laws of men, but not as a thing imedyatly ordained by the ordynacion of god /
but it appears euydently and openly of the very words of Isodore, that all
bishops are subject to the emperor of Rome by coactyue iurysdyccyon / for
the bishops of their own accord, and uncompelled did bring their
contencyons and stryues to the judgment of the emperor, and not to the
judgment of the bishop of Rome / desiring his examynacion and judgment / as
Isodore tells in the same place. And when it is furthermore inferred of the
same auncedentes, that 16
it belongs to the auctoryte of the bishop of Rome alone, or else of him
with his college of priests only, to call together general councelles of
priests, and of other christen men, and to ordain other things in the same
counsel, whereof we have made mencyon in the argumentacyon or obieccyon. The
illacyon or argument is to be denied with his auncedent. For the contrary of
the auncedent, and of the consequence is true. And to the confyrmacions hereof
grounded upon the auctoryte or saying of Isodore, because they do not suffer
or receive interpretacyon, for asmoch as he has expressed this sentence: I do
answer denyenge them all / because they are dissonaunt and disagreynge from
the holy Canon or scripture / and from the demonstracyon or argument grounded
upon the same scripture. And unto that which Iherome said in his epistle,
intytled the exposycion 17
of the catholyke faith, in which exposycyon dyrectynge his words to the
bishop of Rome, he says in this wise. We desire to be amended of the, which
kepest or hold the faith and the seat of Peter. In which words he seems
to mean, that the bishop of Rome is syngularely and specially the successoure
of saint Peter: it is to be answered and said, that saint Iherome for so much
said, that the bishop of Rome holds or keeps the faith or seat of
saint Peter, because saint Peter is red to have sit as bishop in the church
of Rome / and because this church by the statute and ordinance of man is the
heed and pryncypall of all other churches, therefore he names it, and the
bishop thereof to be the successor of the most worthy and most perfyte
apostle. Albeit that by the imedyate ordinacion of god: Peter neither is,
neither has been, in any auctoryte immedyatly given to him by christ,
superyour to the other apostles / as we have heretofore brought in and fully
proved in the. xvi. of this dyccion / and to that which Iherome adds / But
this our co^fessyon be approved and allowed by the judgment of thine
apostleshyp and in which saying Iherome seems to mean, that it appertains
to the auctoryte of the bishop of Rome alone, to defyne and determyne the
doubtefull sentences of the law of god, also in the artycles of the faith: it
is to be answered and said, that Iherome did not so mean / but he spoke these
words only for somoche, because it did belong to the bishop of Rome, to
give answers of such doubts, which had be defyned and determined by the
general counsel, about the catholyke faith / and about the ecclesyastycall
customs and ceremonies. For the bishop of Rome and his church was for this
cause made heed and most pryncipall of al other churches. And a token that
Iherome did mean so as we have said, is this / for that in his epistle to
Euandre, repreuynge and rebukyng certain vsages and customs or manners about
the deacons: of the church of Rome he says thus / if auctoryte be sought for:
the whole world is greatter than a city / that is to say the auctoryte of
all the churches of the world: is greatter than the auctoryte of the church
of Rome. But yet if it had been so, that Iherome had meaned that the bishop of
Rome alone, had this said auctoryte appertaynyng to him: I do refuse his
sentence, as being not canonycall / neither necessarelye deduced and concluded
by the canonycall scripture. And to yt which was brought 18
in of the. xv. of Luke, he that hereth you hereth me. etc. it is to be
answered and said, that it is true, who soever hereth you in teaching the true
word of god / and speaking accordynglye and agreablye to the scripture, and
not blasfemynge unjustly / after which manner christ said of the pharysyes.
Do such things as they do say / that is to say, do such things which they
do say according to the law of god, as saint Iherome says in ye. xxiii.
chapter of Mathewe upon this saying of christ imedyatly before reherced. Or
else thus / who soever hereth you. etc. in the things commanded or prohybyted
by the law of god, he is bound. And to the reasons of Bernarde, and first of
all unto that, which is taken of the second 19
book De consideratione, unto Eugenius pope, who art thou? (says Bernarde)
and the same making answer, says / a great preeste / highest bishop. It is
to be answered and said, that if he understood this by the imedyate ordynacion
of god, or Sacerdos magnus.
by the commandment of gods law, his answer is to be denied / for so it
should not be co^sonaunt and agreablye to the holy Canon or scripture, neither
to ye things necessarelye deduced and following of the said scripture. But if
he did understand this prymacye or pryncypalyte to agree or belong unto him by
the eleccyon or instytucion of men than it is an other thing. And when he
adds, thou art the pryncypall or cheyfe of bishops, it is true taking this
word princeps Princeps episcoporum.
largely / yt is to say more pryncipal by the aforesaid institucion / but
taking this word princeps strayghtly and narowly, ye saying of Bernarde is
not to be granted. For the same Bernarde denies the same Eugenius, and
consequently any other bishop to have domynyon or soueraygnte / as we have
alleged heretofore in ye v. chapter of this dyccion, of the first book, and
the. v. chapter to the said Eugenius. Thou art the heir or successor of the
apostles / so also are ye other bishops Thou art (says Bernarde) in
prymacie Abell / that is true, thou art taken Abell.
chosen for him, but yet by the eleccyon of men, or for the reverence of him,
which in time was first of all the apostles. In governance thou art Noe.
This is Noe.
true by the instytucion of men, among clerks and above clerks / In
patryarkeshyp thou art Abraham. This is true in mynystrynge spyrytuall
things Abraham.
only, and by the instytucyon of men. Thou art the father of all spyrytuall
fathers / In order Melchisedech. This is true as touching to preesthode,
which was fygured of christ, by Melchisedech / after which manner all other
priests are Melchisedech
also. But not as touching to kingdom / for as touching to this: Melchisedech
fygured christ only (and sygnyfyed none other preeste else) which was both
king and also preeste / and yet for all that he did not figure christ in
this, as touching to worldly kingdom. For christ neither came to raygne,
neither would raygne after this manner / that is to wit worldly / as we have
showed in the. iiii. of this dyccion. But Melchisedech which was both a
priest, and a worldly king: fygured the preesthod of christ, and his heavenly
kingdom, not worldly. And so much the less than he fygured earthly or worldly
kingdom or domynion in any priest or bishop. For saint Bernarde denies such
manner kingdom to belong unto the bishop of Rome, in the place before
expressed / and more expressly / neither also as touching to the prymacie of
preesthode. Melchisedech did figure any other besides christ: but this prymacie
or principalite is in other priests (as we have said) by the instytucion of
men. In dygnyte Aron. This is true, as touching to the Aron.
symylytude of prymacie and preemynence among priests, but yet after a
diverse manner and sundry fascion. For Aron was cheyfe preeste by the imedyate
instytucyon of god / but not so the bishop of Rome or any other bishop being
the successor of the apostles. In auctoryte Moses. The same Bernarde said the
contrary Moses.
hereof openly in the first book De consideratione, in the. v. chapter / and
in the. iii. book and first chapter. For Moses was prince and governor as
touching to coactyue law / as it appears in the. vii. of acts / which
thing Bernarde denies to belo^ge to any successor of the apostles in the
place before alleged. Again Moses had this by ye imedyate ordynacion of god,
and upon al Israel. But ye bishop of Rome has this imedyatly by the grant
of man only, and only upon the eua^gelycall mynystres and the mynystres of
the temples. In judgment Samuel / this Samuel.
is true, to the lykenes of Samuel / but yet after a diverse and sondrye manner
and fascyon. for. ii. causes. First because not by the imedyate ordynacion of
god, as Samuel. Seco^darylye because only upon priests and other inferyor
mynystres of the gospel / but Samuel was indyffere^tlye upon al ye people of
Israel. In power Peter / this is true in the essenciall power, and by the
workynge of god imedyatlye / Peter.
and so is also every other bishop or preeste / but yet every bishop of Rome
has his prymacie above other bishops or priests, only by ye instytucion of
man imedyatly: whether Peter had it by the imedyate instytucion of god, or not,
or else by the eleccion of the apostles / which thing rather we believe or
suppose according to the scripture, if it be so that he had any such prymacy
at all as we have showed in the. xvi. of this dyccion. Inunccion christ. if he
do mean by vnccion, the vnccion Christ.
of grace or of the holy ghost, which is given with the carecte of priest hode
it is true / which vnccion every preeste also does receive / but if by vnccion
he do mean / prymacie upon all the church, by the imedyate instytucion of
god, and not of men, which christ only and none else has had upon all
priests: than I do refuse his sentence / because the apostle says the
contrary in very many places of the scripture / as it has been showed in the.
xvi. of this dyccion. And to that which he does add afterward. Thou art
not only the pastor or herdysman of the sheep: but also thou alone art the
very pastor of all herdysmen / if he dydmeane by the instytucion of men
imedyatlye: I would grant his saying / but if he do mean by the ordynacyon
of god, or by the statute of the law of god, so as he appears to intend:
than I refuse his sentence / for it is not canonycall, neither necessarelye
deduced and following of the canonycall scripture / but rather the contrary.
And when he go the about to fortyfy his sentence or saying by the scripture,
saying afterward / ask thou where I do prove it? by the saying of
christ. if thou love me Peter feed my sheep / for to whom (I do not say of
the bishops, but also of the apostles) was the whole flock of sheep so
absolutlye committed, and without any dyuersyte or dystynccyon / to whom is it
not plain, that christ appointed or marked not forth any pertyculer flock
of sheep unto the? there is nothing excepted or outtaken: where no dyuersyte
or dystynccion is made. It is to be answered but always with reverence, that
this questyon is to be meruayled at, by which he demands, to whom of the
apostles he does not say only of the bishops, the whole flock of sheep has been so absolutely committed or betaken and without any dyuersyte or dystynccyon
made / I do say, that to all the apostles both jointly and seuerallye. Ask
thou whereby I do prove this? by the words and sayenges of christ more
euydentlye, than he / for in the last chapter of Mathewe, and in a manner last
of all his precepts. Christ said to all the apostles. Go you therefore and
teach all nations or peoples. etc. And I say more The sheep were ro^mytted to
all the apostles
euydentlye than he. For christ said in the. xx. of John^. Feed my sheep /
but he said not all my sheep / now it is undoubted that he comprehends mo
sheep, which delyuereth all vnyuersallye, than he which delyuereth them only
indefynytely, sayengs feed my sheep / for which cause, again with reverence,
the scripture which Bernarde alleges and brings in: seems to receive an
other interpretacyon and more agreeable to the scripture / which interpretacion
we have touched A place of Bernarde is declared.
heretofore in the. ix. part of this chapter, and it greueth me not to
rehearse it again / for christ in the. xv. of Mathewe is red to have said, I
am not sent but to the sheep which are perysshed of the house of Israel /
which oracle and saying of christ, after the interpretacions of saints,
ought to be understood, not truly as Iherome says, but that he was sent
also to the Gentyles, but he was first or pryncipally sent to Israel. etc.
But Remigius says, and more to the purpose and more agreablye to the lettre,
he was sent specially to the salvation of the Jews, that he should teach them
also by his bodily presence. Albeit that christ according to the exposycyon
of saints, was sent to the salvation of all men, yet specially and
pryncypally he was sent to the salvation of the Jews / as the words also of
christ do sound in the gospel of Mathewe, when Christ was sent to the Jews.
he said. I am not sent but to the sheep which are perysshed of the house of
Israel. These sheep than he did appropryate unto himself, when he said,
which are perysshed of the house of Israel. And because this people has
always ben hardnecked, and sturdye or stubburne, as it appears in the. xxxii.
chapter of Exodus, and also a kyller of the prophets, as christ, which is
very trouche itself, said in the. xiii. of Luke. And because christ knew
Peter to be more constant The Jews were reco^me^ded unto Peter, when christ
said to him Peter feed my sheep
in the faith, and more fervent in the love of him, and of his neighbor,
therefore he did reco^mende these sheep syngulerlye and specyallye unto him /
when he said. if thou love me, feed my sheep / that is to say, specyallye
labor to teach the people of Israel. And that this is true, it is a token,
seeing that it is written thus in the second chapter to the Galatyans. When
they had seen, that the preaching of the gospel to the Gentyles was
committed unto me, as was the preaching of the gospel to the people of
cyrcumcysyon was committed unto Peter. etc. Neither could this saying of the
apostle be confyrmed by any other place of the gospel: than by this, feed my
sheep. And again in ye same chapter to the Galatians. They gave their right
hands of socyetie and fellowship unto me and Bernabas / that we should go and
preach unto the Gentyles and they unto cyrcumcisyon / that is to say unto the
Jews. Christ therefore, when he had said unto Peter, feed my sheep: he did
not by this committee a more general cure or charge unto Peter, than unto
other, but rather a more special charge of a certain people. For there can
not be a more general cure or charge than that, which he gave to all the
apostles in the last of Mathewe / and in the. xx. of John^ / when he said. Go
you therefore and teach all nacyons. And take you or receive you the holy ghost
/ whose sins you shall forgive: they are forgyuen. etc. For by these words
all the apostles received pastoral auctoryte and cure / and that in comparyson
unto all men indyfferentlye / as saint Augustyne also By what words the
apostles received auctoryte
did say in his book of the questyons of the new testament, in the. 94.
questyon, and we have alleged and brought in his words heretofore in the.
xvi. chapter of this dyccion. Let Bernarde also tell, what more general cure
christ has committed to any man, than he did unto Paul, in the. ix. of the
acts: when he said, he is a vessel of eleccion, or a chosen vessel unto me,
to bear my name before the Gentyles, nations and kings and the sons of
Israel. And as for that which 20
follows in Bernarde, when he says, hereof it is, that each one of the other
apostles has taken to their part, one pertyculer nation or people: it
appears to be dyssonaunte and dysagreynge from the scripture / neither the
tyxte of the epystles of Paul agrees unto it / neither can it be proved by
the scripture: but rather the contrary / as we have showed heretofore. And
where he says afterward 21
in the syxte, according to the canones, the other apostles are come in to
part of the cure and charge or busynes. etc. if it be meaned by the imedyate
instytucyon of god, than I refuse the sayenges both of the said Canones of
Eugenius, and also of Bernarde agreynge unto the same / because neither they
are canonycall / neither ought to be called canonycall scryptures, but only
scryptures: framed of their own brains. And also because we have oftentimes
by the scripture proved the contrary, of that which they do say. But if they
do mean or understand, that full power, by the instytucyon of man
i^medyatlye, than I do grant his saying to be true. And again to yt which
he adds saying. The power and auctoryte of other is coarcted and restrained
within certain lymytes or bounds / thine auctoryte and power is extended also
upon them, which have received auctoryte upon other. May not thou, if a
cause rise: shytte heaven to a bishop? etc. it is to be said as before, yt by
the i^medyate ordynacion of god: ye bishop of Rome or any other bishop has
no more auctoryte upon the resydewe of bishops, than they have upon him. For
the bishop of Rome may not exco^munycate or depose an other bishop, for any
crimes or trespace, by the auctoryte given to him by christ i^medyatlye more
than they may exco^munycate or depose him / as it has been showed and proved
by the scripture, in the. xv. and xvi. of this dyccion. And has also ben
latelye repeted and reherced again in this chapter But if Bernarde do mean
this prymacie, which he has by the grant of man i^medyatlye, than he has
that prymacye, which has been granted to him above other, by the humayne
power. And to that which is added last of al, as touching to this oracyon.
Thy pryuyledge therefore stands unbroken and inuiolated, unto the. etc. it is
to be said, that it is true / for the bishop of Rome has power and
auctoryte, to bind and loose men from sins / and to teach them, and to
mynystre the sacraments of eternal salvation. And so has every other bysshyp
or preeste, by the law of god / but if by pryuyledge, Bernarde does mean and
understand any prymacye due to the bishop of Rome upon other bishops, by the
law of god, or by the i^medyate ordynacyon of god: than as I did before, so do
I now refuse his sentence / for the causes before assygned. And to the other
saying of the same. Bernarde in the. iiii. book, and chapter to Eugenius, by
which 22
he seems to mean, that unto the bishop of Rome belongs coactyue
iurysdyccyon, which under a methaphore he calls the temporal sword, not
only upon clerks, but also upon lay men, when he said, which sword truly
who soever denies to be thine: me thinks he do not mark well, or
suffycie^tly give head to christ's words. etc. And in the end co^cludynge he
says. Both swerdes therefore belongs to the church / that is to wit the
sprytuall sword, and the materyal sword: it is to be said with reverence, and
with no less meruaylynge that the same Bernarde has openly spoken in this
matter, dyssonauntly and contrarylye Bernardus non vidit omnia.
to his own self. For in the place i^medyatly before alleged, speaking of
this auctoryte and power: he said / why should thou (that is to wit the
Pope) go about again to usurp the sword: which thou have ben ones bydden,
to put up again in to the sheth or scabarde. And it is undoubted, that the
thing which We usurp those things which are not our own but belongs to
an other man
any man usurps: belongs not to his auctoryte. But Bernarde or his
interpreter shall say peradventure, according to that, which Bernarde said
in the end of his speech or oracyon, that though the auctoryte now said
does belong unto a preeste yet the execusyon thereof ought not to be done by a
preeste / which he called the drawing forth or exercysynge, of the materyall
sword / But this answer is not according to the intencyon and mind of the
scripture For Christ did not only refuse and deny from him self, ye
drawing out of this materyall sword. But also that iudge^ment, and bidding
or co^maundynge it Christ refused both the sword and also judgment or the
office of a Judge.
to be drawn out / when he said in the. xii. of Luke, to him that desired such
manner judgment of him. Thou man who has made me judge or deuyder over or upon
you? Of which sayng of christ, with certain other sayenges, both of christ and
of the apostles, saint Bernarde treating in the first book and the. v.
chapitre De co^sideratione, as we have alleged in the. v. of this dyccyon:
destroys the interpretacyon of him that does so expound or declare him in
this place. For this he says to the same Pope. Harken what the apostles mind
is concerning such manner auctoryte. That is to wit of judging temporal
things and it is Bernarde
in the. vi. chapter of the first to the Coryntheans. Is there not so wise a
man among you, which may judge between brother and brother? And it follows
I do speak it to your rebuke and shame. Those, which are most contemptyble
in the church, make and ordain them judges. And therefore after the mind of
the apostle, thou do unseemly, which being an apostolical person, do
usurp unto thy self a vile office, and the degree of conte^ptyble persons.
Mark here yt he speaks of the office, not of the execucyon / wherefore the
apostle Paul also instructynge a bishop, that is to wit Timothe, said in
this wise. Let no man that is a warryour to god: entangle him self with
seculer busynesses / but I spare or forbere the / for I speak not strong
things, but possible things. Supposest thou that men now adays would
suffer, if when men did strive for erthlye inherytaunce, and required judgment
of the, thou dydest answer them with the words of christ, O men who has
made me judge upon you. In to what manner judgment should thou come, and what
would be judged of the? what would a rustycall and unlearned man say? Thou
know not the prymacye and preemynence. Thou dyshonourest the honorable and
most high feate / thou doste derogate the apostles dygnyte / and yet for all
that they that so shall say (as I suppose) will not show, where at any time
any of the apostles has sytte as judges of men, or as dyuyders of terms, or
bounds and dystrybutors of The dyscyples were judged and did not judge.
lands. To conclude I read, that the apostles have stand to be judged / but
that they have sit judging: I do not read. This shall be in time to come / it
has not ben yet. Is the servant than a dymynyssher of the dygnyte, if he
will not be greatter than his lord and master? or the dyscyple, because he
will not be greatter than he that sent him? or the sone, because he will not
pass beyond the bounds or lymytes, which his fathers has set? who has
ordained me judge upon you? says that lord and master. And shall it be
iniurye to the servant and dyscyple, except he do judge all men? Saint
Bernarde therefore, yea rather Christ and the apostles, do remove or take a
way from their successors the bysshoppes and priests, not only the
execucyon of seculer judgment: but also the office or auctoryte of judging of
such manner matters / wherefore the same Bernarde says afterward. These
worldly things have their mete judges, the kings and princes of the earth /
why do you invade the bounds of other men? why do you extend or put forth
your sithe, in to an other man's corn? This sentence again he does repete,
confyrme and fortyfye, in the second book, and. iiii. chapter / and we have
alleged it here to fore, in the. v. of this dyccyon / where, unto the purpose
here intended: he says thus / did he (that is to wit Peter the apostle) leave
dominion and lordshyp to his successors? here what he says his own self,
not having dominion, or being lords over the clargye: but being made the
example of the flock. And because thou shalt not suppose, this to be spoken
of humylyte, and not rather of truth, it is christ's own words in the
gospel. The princes and rulers of the Gentyles, have dominion and lordshyp
over them / and they which have power and auctoryte upon them: are called
benefyciall. And it follows / but you shall not do so / it is plain here,
that domynyon and lordshyp is utterly forbidden the apostles. Go thou than, and
be bold to usurp to thy self outher apostleshyp, being a lord: or
lordshyp, being an apostolyke person. Verily thou art prohybyted from both
(understand thou from having both together.) And this is it which the same
Bernarde adds afterward / if thou couete to have both together at one
time, thou shalt lose both. For else think not thy self to be excepted from
the nombre of them: of whom the lord god complayneth thus. They have reigned:
and not by me. They have been princes and rulers, and I have not known them.
Again he expresses the same sentence, in a certain epistle to the
archebysshop of Senone, where he says thus. So says these suggestours and
councellers of dysobedyence / but christ both commanded, and also did
otherwise. Give you (said he) unto Caesar, those things, which are belonging
to Caesar / and unto god: those things which are appertaynynge to god. And
this which he spoke with his mouth: he did give dylygence to fulfill anon
after in his deed. He that was the creator and maker of Caesar: was ready
without delay, to give trybute to Caesar. For he has given example to you,
that you should do likewise. And how should he deny dew reverence to the
priests of god, which cared or regarded to give this reverence even to the
seculer powers also? Christ than would not have temporal domynyon upon the
princes of this world, but he would be subject unto them / and also give unto
them due trybute and reverence, gyuynge an example to all his successors,
first to the apostles, and in conclusyon to priests and bishops, to do the
same. Again expressing the same sentence afterward more plainly: he says
thus / why than O relygious men, does the auctoryte of priests grieve you? do
you fear infestacyon and noyaunce? but if you do suffer any thing for
ryghtuousnes sake, you are blyssed / you contempne and despise secularyte, that
is to say seculer princes. But no man was more seculer or worldly, than Pylate,
before whom our lord stood to be judged. Thou should not have (said he) any
power over me: if it were not given to the from above. Even than he spoke for
his self, and had experyence on his own person, of that which he cried
afterward by the apostles, in churches or congregacyons. There is no power
but of god. And who soever resysteth the power: resysteth the ordynacyon of
god. Go your way now than, and resyste the emperor the vycare and depute of
christ: when christ did not resyst, no not his aduersarye or say, if you
dare, that god does not know the dygnyte of the bishop of Rome, when christ
grants the power even of the Emperoures deputy in Rome, to have been
ordained upon or over him self, from heaven above. The bishop than usurps
the office of an other man, and extends his sithe in to an other man's
corn: when he presses him self in to the judgment of seculer acts between
men, of what so ever condycyon or estate they be. And as Seculer judgment
appertains not to be a bishop
towchynge to that, which Bernarde says in the aforesaid obieccyon, which
sword for all that who soever denies to be thine: he seems to me, not to
mark suffycyentlye the words of christ. etc. I do say, that no man that
ever I have herd or seen, has denied that, or can deny it more expresselye:
than he him self has done / as it is euydent of his saynges before brought in
and reherced. To which this also is to be added with reverence / that the
exposycyon of other saints, is always more conuenyent upon this place. For
(as all men does agree) the locucyon or speech of christ was metaphorycall,
when to the dyscyples saying. Lo here two swerdes: he answered, it is enough
or suffycyent / wherefore Chrysostom says / for if he had wylled, that they
should use worldly subsydye and Chrysostom
aid: An. C. swerdes would not suffyce or be enough / but if it was his will,
yt they should not use worldly subsydye or aid: then even two are
superfluous, and mo than needs / wherefore it appears, that the sense of
christ's words was mystycall / which thing even his own words euydently
sygnyfyeth, in the. xxvi. of Mathewe and in ye. xviii. of John^, when in ye
time of defense if any defense ought to have been made by those swerdes: he said
unto Peter. Turn thy sword again in to his own place, or in to the skaberde
/ in which saying, he sygnyfyed him self not to have commanded, that any
defense should be made by the apostles with the swerdes, but that they had
spoken mystycallye. After which sense, saint Ambrose suffycyentlye regarding
and markynge the saying of our lord: he expounds the aforesaid words
saying in this wise. Two swerdes are permytted / the one of the new
testament, and the other of the old testament / by which Two swerdes are the
two testamentes by Chrysosto^mes exposycion.
we are armed and fenced, against the dysceptes of the devil. And it is said,
it is enough or suffycyent, because he lacks no thing at all, which is
armed and fenced with the doctrine of both testamentes / but these priests
which have great desire, and do labor also with all outward enforcement,
though unduly and vnaccordynglye, to usurp domynyons and kyngdoms, they
receive wyllynglye and gladly strange exposycyons of the scripture, which
seems to taste or smatche of their own corrupt opinion, and lewd or crooked
affection. And yet for all that, though the words of christ were taken
lytterallye. yet are they nothing against our sentence and opinion. For the
materyall sword is not dominion, neither the judgment of secular acts /
neither also after the metaphore, according to the sentence of christ, it
may sygnyfye domynyon or the office of a seculer judge: which christ has
committed to Peter or to any other apostle / as the same Bernarde has proved
manyfestlye in an other place, as we have alleged / and brought in here
tofore, and also have undoubtedly proved by the scripture, in the. iiii. and.
v. chapytres of this dyccyon. And where the said Bernarde says after
following. Peradventure the sword is thine, and to be drawn forth at thy
bidding and commandment: I do say, that he says here peradventure, albeit
that he ought not to doubt in this, unless peradventure he do mean this,
that a prince or seculer governor in drawing forth the sword, ought to have
regard and respect unto the bidding or will of the preeste that is to say
to the counsel of the preeste in general or special counsel, after as the
deed chaunseth to require, as in making war, if he do doubt, whether he
shall do iustlye after the law of god, he ought to use the counsel of
priests: lest he do run in to deedlye sin / likewise as he ought to do
in all other his monastycall and cyuyle acts / namelye in which he doubts
through ignorance to run in to deedlye sin / not therefore because he is
subject to a preeste in such manner office. For after this manner also in
gyuynge lycences of dyscyplynes, and in expellynge of leprouse persons out of
the city / he ought to use the counsel of expert and welskylled men, to
whom for all that he is not subject in iurysdyccyon / as we have said in the.
x. chapter of this deieccyon / wherefore Bernarde in the end of the aforesaid
sentence says / that this sword ought to be drawn forth at the bidding
of the preeste, and the commandment of the emperor / he did not therefore by
bidding understand commandment or coactyue auctoryte / but counsel. For
this auctoryte he has expressed to appertain to the emperor or prince.
Albeit that the bishop of Rome very often Bysshopps reyse wars unjustly.
times unjustly commands, the sword to be drawn forth also among
christen men, one of them against an other. And to be short and speak at one
word / if Bernarde by these words understand and mean, that such manner
office or judgment does appertain to the auctoryte of any preeste or
bishop, as being in this superyour to any seculer prince, according to
judgment of the third sygnyfycacyon, in this world: I do say, that
manyfestlye and openly he does say both against his own self, and against
the holy scripture, which he brings in and alleges, as it appears of the
premysses / wherefore utterly in The auctoryte of doctors may be refused.
this place I do refuse his sentence (if it be such manner one) as being not
canonycall, but dyssonaunt and contrary to the canonycall scripture. But to the
sayenges of saints and doctors, and namelye upon the scripture alleged of
the. xvi. of Mathewe. Thou art Peter and upon this stone. etc. And again upon
that text in ye. xxii. of Luke, but I have prayed for the Peter. etc. Again
upon that in the. xxi. of John^, if thou love me feed my sheep, by which
sayenges they do seem to intend, that power and auctoryte has been given to
saint Peter above the other apostles, by christ i^medyatlye, calling him the
prince or heed of the apostles, and universal or general pastor or herdysman,
yea and some of them also calling him the heed of the church: it is to be
answered and said, but yet with reverence, that christ i^medyatly gave unto
saint Peter none auctoryte essencyall (which we have called the auctoryte of
preesthode) neither any accydentall excellencye or preemynence of a pastor or
bishop, upon the other apostles / But all such manner auctoryte of one of them
above an other among them selves Priests are egall in dygnyte.
he took away both from Peter and also from the other / as we have showed
euydently in the. xvi. of this dyccion, by the scripture, and by the exposycion
of saints and doctors. And after a certain manner we have reherced it again
about the beginning of this chapter / wherefore I following christ, and the
apostle, and the sayenges of certain of them in other places, what soever
sentence they do seem to say upon the places of the scripture now recyted and
any other like places, concerning such manner prymacye or pryncipalyte,
otherwise than we have said in the. xvi. and. xvii. of this dyccion: I do
refuse it. For such sentence is neither canonycall, neither necessarelye
follows of the canonycall scripture / yea moreover some of them in expoundynge
the scripture in other places: has said the contrary / but here they speak
such things without the scripture, of their own propre minds / following
the custom / and regarding more certain common famous sayenges: than the
words of the scripture / for who will not marvel, that, when the apostles
did contend and strive among them selves, which of them should be greattest.
Christ answered, that there should be equalyte always among them / and that
none of them should be superyoure in auctoryte to other / if he did intend
that saint Peter should be more pryncypall and heed among them: why did not
christ also give a commandment or charge to the other apostles, that they
should be under Peter in pastoral office: least so great a mystery might be
hyd from them and their successors, how great was the heed of the church?
for it is not read any where in the scripture, that Christ gave any such
commandment to the apostles. How also did Peter than give the right hand
of society and felowshyppe unto Paul? Nay he ought rather to have given him
commandment, as being superyoure unto him. And to say at one word all the
whole scripture where this matter is touched: say the openly the contrary
hereof. Again, though we did grant, that pastoral cure of the other
apostles had been committed to saint Peter by christ i^medyatly, which thing
for all that we have denied according to the scripture / yet could it not
therefore be proved by the scripture, that the bishop of Rome or any other
bishop, after the death of saint Peter, is pastor of all the other
bysshoppes, by the i^medyate ordynacyon of Christ. And when it was brought
in, that the church than should be without a heed, and not have been ordered of
christ, after the best dysposycyon and order, if he had left it with Heed of
the church.
out a heed in his absence: we may say after the mind of the apostle, as
before. That christ has always remained the heed of the church / and all
the apostles and ecclesyastycall mynystres are members / as it appears
plainly in the. iiii. Members of the church.
chapter to the Ephesyans, and in very many other places, of which we have
brought in and recyted many, in the. v. part of the. xxii. chapter of this
dyccyon. And this, christ him self also did manyfestlye sygnyfye in the last
of Mathewe, when he said. And I am with you until the end of the world. And
let him that makes this obieccyon and reason, say, whether the church also
be not without a mortal heed oftentimes, when the Romayne seat is vacant and
without a bishop / and it is euydent and undoubted that yet / And yet it is
not therefore to be granted, that it was left inordynate or evil ordered of
christ / wherefore we must return again to the things aforesaid, and to
those which we shall say in the solucyon of the obieccyon following / but to
satysfye and make answer more largelye to the reason, which is apparente,
let us say formablye or in form. For when it is deduced and inferred of it,
that christ has not ordered the church after the best dysposycyon or order
/ if he had not left a determynate man to be heed unto the same church in his
absence: the illacyon or argument is to be denied. And as towchynge to the
saying of Augystyne, upon that text of John^, if I will have him to abide so,
what is that to the? where he says, that the life which is in faith, is
sygnyfyed or fygured Prymacie or pryorytye in time.
by Peter the apostle, for the prymacye of his apostleshyp / I do say, that
Augustyne meaned the prymacye or pryoryte in time. For Peter among other was
first called by christ unto apostleshyp / likewise as the same also first in
time receyuyd the promise of the keys / after the mind of the said
Augustyne, in the. xvi. of Mathewe, upon that text. To the I will give the
keys of the kingdom of heuens. For the life which is in faith, that is to
say of this corruptyble world? in time gothe before that life, which is in
hope, that is to wytthe incorruptyble life of the world to come. And unto that
confyrmacyon of the obiccico^s which was brought in of ye Decrees or
Decretalles of the Popes of Rome: it is to be said generally, to all such
manner scryptures and sayenges being not such as we have said, that we are not
bound to believe or confess and knowledge them to be true / no more we are in
such things wherein they do contain the contrary of the aforesaid sentences
which we do hold accordynglye to the We are not bound utterly to give
crede^ce to ye Decrees and Decretalles.
scryptures. But we do refuse them and openly deny them. And where they will
conclude specyallye, that unto the bishop of Rome alone, or else with his
college of clerks, auctoryte belongs of instytutynge persons to
ecclesyastycall offices, and of gyuynge the temporalles or benefyces appointed
for the said offices: it is to be said, that if by the ecclesyastycall
offices be understand the instytucyons or determynacyons of priests and of
the other said officers, to the cures and charges of souls, outher greatter
or smaller, in certain places and to the gouernynge of certain people / I
say that to instytute such offices, or to make the determynacyons of persons
to the said offices, and to dystrybute The benefyces are to be dystrybuted by
the prince
or give the ecclesyastycall temporalles, appointed for the said offices /
appertains to the christen prince, after such manner as we have said in the.
xvii. of this dyccyon. And it is to be said that generallye and every where,
this does not belong to the auctoryte of any one bishop, or one college
of priests alone / neither it were expedyent so to be / as it has been showed
in the. xvii. of this dyccyon. Therefore where the contrary of these things is
objected and laid against us, by the Decrees and Decretalles of the bysshoppes
of Rome, it is to be said, that albeit such manner Decrees or Decretalles, and
any other like scryptures or sayenges, may contain very many documentes and
counsayles, profitable both for the state of this present world, and of the
world to come. Yet in that that they are made by the bishop of Rome with
his college of clerks: and also, without the license of the christen prince
and gouernoure, such statutes do bind no man to sin or pain, and namely
temporal. For The makers of the Decretalles are dysposed as were the pharisyes
they that make such manner tradycyons are likewise dysposed, as were the
pharysyes and scrybes, to whom Christ said in the. vii. chapter of Mark.
But they worsshyp me in vain / teaching the doctrynes and precepts of men.
For you forsake the commandment and teaching of god / and do hold or keep
the tradycyons of men. And a little after it follows / you do well make void
the commandment of god / that you may keep your own tradycyon. That is to
wytthe Decrees and Decretalles, concerning the usurpation of temporal
things. The Decretalles are neither gods laws, neither man's laws.
For the Decretalles, in that that they are such / are not the laws of god or
of man / but narracyons or documentes / and very many of them in many points,
are certain oblygarchycall statutes / wherefore the makers of such manner
statutes or Decrees, against the form and manner, and without the auctoryte
before said / and inducynge any man to the obseruacyon of them, and as it were,
compellynge him, by threatenynge eternal dampnacyon to the transgressors of
The canonystes ben they yt make scysme and diuysyo^ and styre up treason.
them / or inferrynge or sendynge forth against any man blasphemies, curses,
or other maledyccyons outher by word or by writing / are to be punysshed
corporallye with extreme punysshement, as being conspyrers, and the reysers of
cyuyle scysme and dyuysyon. For this is the most greuouse kind of treason,
that may be. For it is dyrectlye committed against the office of the
soueraygne or prince and gouernoure of the realm or co^munytye, and it
brings also to the pluralyte cheyfe governors / and so consequently of
necessyte unto the undoing and destruction of all manner cyuyle governance,
and also of all common weals.

Of the solucyon of the obieccyons, brought in of the scryptures in the third
chapter of this second part to show or prove, that coactyue iurysdyccion
does belong to bysshoppes, in that they are bishops, and that the highest
coactyue iurysdyccyon does belong to the bishop of Rome.
The, xxix, chapter,
ANd to the other obieccyons brought in of the scripture in the third
chapter of this dyccyon, by reason of which, it might seem peradventure to
some man, that it might be proved, that the bishop of Rome or any other
bishop is judge (after the third sygnyfycacyon of this word judge) upon
all clerks, or indyfferentlye upon all men, of every realm or co^munytie,
without the instytucyon of the prince, or princes, but by the i^medyate
ordynacyon of god / it is to be said or answered, and first to that obieccyon
which was taken of the. xvi. chapter of Mathewe, when Christ said to saint
Peter, I shall give to the the keys of the kingdom of heuens. etc. That by
these said words Christ gave none other power or auctoryte to saint Peter or
to The power of priests.
any other apostle or apostles / than to bind and lose men from sins / as
saint Bernarde says expresselye to Eugenius in the first book De
consideratione, and the. v. chapter / and we have brought in his words here
tofore in the second part of the. v. chapter of this dyccion / where is
showed of fulness of power and also of the keys of the kingdom of heuens. Of
which power also it has been spoken seryouslye in the. vi. and. vii.
chapytres of this dyccion. Neither gave Christ the fulness of this power to
Peter nor none other of the apostles / otherwise than it has been said in
the. xxiii. chapter of this dyccyon / wherefore the bishop of Rome, or else
any other bishop or preeste, has not by the reason The keys of the kingdom
of heaven not of this world
of these words received of christ in the person of the apostle or apostles,
any coactyue auctoryte or iurysdyccion in this world, upon any clarke or lay
man. For it was said I shall give the keys of the kingdom of heuens, to ye
dyffere^ce of the worldly kingdom or domynyon. For from such manner regyment
and domynyon, Christ by the example of his own self, sygnyfied every one of
the apostles and every successoure of them bishop or preeste, to be excluded /
when he said in the. xii. of Luke. Thou man who has ordained or made me judge
/ that is to wit of erthlye things. And the same also is proved by other
things here tofore brought in, in the. iiii. and. v. chapytres of this
dyccion. And after the same or like manner it is to be said also unto the
auctorytes taken of the scripture in ye xviii. of Mathe we and the. xx. of
John^, when Christ said to his apostles / what soever things you shall bind
upon the earth. etc. And whose soever sins you shall forgive / they are
forgyuen. etc. For by these words Christ gave unto them none other power,
than this aforesaid, and that after such manner as we have said. And unto the
other auctoryte, which was taken of the. xi. chapter of Mathewe, when christ
said. All things are given to me of my father: it is to be said, that it
follows not. All things are given to me of my father, ergo I have given power
of all things to the apostle or to the apostles / as we have said also in
the. iiii. chapter of this dyccyon. For by this inquysycyon it is not doubted,
what power and auctoryte Christ might have given to the apostle or apostles
and to their successors: but what power it was his will to give, and what he
has given to them in very deed / and from what power he has prohybyted
them, by his counsel or precepte. For these things have been suffycyentlye
showed in the. iiii. v. and. vi. and. ix. chapytres of this dyccyon / wherefore
Bernarde also inte^dynge and meaning this same in the third book and first
chapter De consideratione unto Eugenius pope: says in this wise. For I do
not suppose that utterly and all manner ways. But as me think after a
certain manner, dyspensacyon has been committed to the, upon it, that is to
wit, upon the world and not possessyon thereof to have been given unto the /
if thou do hold on to vsarpe the world: he speaks against the, which
says. The world is mine, and the fulness of it. Thou art not he, of whom
the prophet says. And the whole earth shall be his possessyon. Christ is he
which chalengeth the possessyon hereof unto him self, by the right and title
of creacyon, and by the merit of redempcyon. And the same Bernarde speaks
ino things afterward to this same purpose, which I have left out and
ouerhypped here, because the premysses are suffycyent, and also for the more
speed and breyfnes of our process. Therefore christ did not give all things
to the apostle or the apostles, that were given unto him, and after such manner
as they were given to him of his father / but he committed only certain
things to them and after a certain and determynate manner or fascyon. Moreover
after the exposycyon of all saints and holy doctors upon this place, Christ
intended and meaned this gift of all things to have been made unto him self,
as touching to his godhede, by which he was eternal / which thing could
not be agreynge to any of the apostles or of their successors. Wherefore these
words of christ, do not so much as apparentlye infer or conclude any
thing contrary to the sentence which we do hold. And to that obieccyon
which was taken of the xxviii. of Mathewe, and the last chapter, when
Christ said. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth: it is to be
answered and said likewise as unto the obiectcyon last before gone / for
although we do grant that christ as touching to his humanyte also, had
received all manner power in earth / yet it follows not therefore, that he has
given all manner power to the apostle or apostles / but only that power whereof
it is spoken in the last of Mathewe and the. xx. of Ihon^ / which power we
have declared also in the. vi. and vii. chapytres of this dyccyon / for after
such power only, Christ came to reygne. Wherefore saint Iherome upon this
place says thus / power was given to him in heaven and Iherom
in earth: yt he which raygned before in heaven: might raygne in earth, by the
faith of them that should believe in him. And unto that obieccyon which was
taken of the. viii. of Mathe we and the. v. of Mark where it is red that the
fendes or deuylles prayed him saying. Byue us leave to enter in to the swyne,
it is to be answered and said, that this text also does not make against the
sentence which we do hold. For though we do grant (as the truth is) that
christ had, if he had would, all domynyon and power of temporal things, even
as touching to his humanyte also / yet can it not hereof be concluded of
necessyte, that he gave like power to the apostle or apostles, or to the
successors of them. Nay rather Christ, both by his works, and also by his
words, taught them to flee and esche we the possessyon and domynyon of
temporal things / and so all coactyue iurysdyccyon or judgment of any man in
this world / as it has been showed in the. iiii. and. v. chapytres of this
dyccyon / and has also ben repeted or reherced again in the chapter last
before gone. And if it so be, that at any time Note here well how christ
sometime used coactyue iurysdyccyon, and note the answer to the same
Christ has used the power or domynyon of such manner things / yet he did
not use it after the manner of a worldly prince or judge / but wonderfullye,
and very seldom, by the power of his godhede rather than of his manhede / as
in the expulsyon of these spyrytes whereof mencyon is made in this present
obieccyon / and in the dryenge up of the fygge tree / willing by this to
sygnyfye unto his apostles the nature of his godhede / by reason whereof he
might strength them the more in the faith / or else also for some better
intent and purpose unknown to man and known to him, as Chrysostom and
Iherome says upon the same place. That the occasyon (says Iherome) of the
salvation of men might be, by the kyllyng of ye hogs. And therefore christ did
not teach them to do miracles / as we The hogs drowned of the feendes.
have brought in here tofore in the. iiii. of this diccion, of saint Augustyn
De ver bis dn^i in the. x. sermon upon Mathewe. And therefore much less he
would, that they should exercise power to the hurt or offendynge of other men.
Wherefore he did not exercise such manner things, to the intent that they
ought to exercise such things: but that he might show unto them him self to
be very god. And to the obieccyon which was brought in of the. xxii. of
Mathewe, the. xi. of Mark, and the. xix. of Luke: where it is read. Than
Ihesus sent. ii. descypses, saying unto them. So you in to the castle
which is over against you: and you shall find an ass bound. etc. it is to be
answered, likewise, likewise, as unto the obieccy on imeoyatlye aforegone. And
that obieccyon of the two swerdes, which is taken of the. xxii. of Luke, and
the other of the fedynge of the sheep, taken of the. xxi. of Ihon: does make
nothing against, neither does infer or conclude any thing necessarely,
which is contradyctorye to the sentence which we do hold / as we have showed
seryously in the chapter aforegone. For Christ by these words did not give to
saint Peter, or to any other apostle, or to any successoure of them,
iurysdyceyon or judgment coactyue of any manner in this world: but he gave to
him only the office of a pastor or herdysman, of which office we have spoken
suffycyently in the. ix. of this last part. And as touching to that which the
apostle says in the. vi. chapter of the first epistle to the Coryntheans, Do
you not know, that we shall judge angels? How much more than shall we judge
seculer things? This text is neither it self co^tradyctorye, neither
infers any thing contradyctorye to the sentence, which we do hold. For
Paul in the aforesaid words or scripture did not monysshe / speak / or
counsayleth unto preeses only / but generallye unto all the christen people
of Corinthe he wrote that epistle, as appears and is euydent by his
salutacyon. For they did contend, and strive one with an other, about seculer
things, drawing one an other before heathen judges / wherefore the apostle
monysshed them, as a pastor or herdysman gyuynge them council, that they
should constytute and make judges unto them selves of the company of christen
men. And chose not bysshoppes or priests, but other that were not bysshoppes
or priests / wherefore the apostle says i^medyatlye following. Therefore if
you shall have seculer judgments / ordeyne and set them to be judges,
which are contemptyble in the church. I say it to your rebuke / is there
none so wise a man among you, which may give judgment between his brother
and brother? but does one brother contend and strive with an other brother in
judgment, before infydels and heathen judges? which text of the apostle the
gloss expoundynge, after the mind of Ambrose, Augustyne, and Gregorye, says
in this wise. In like manner as he has repreued them, for that they pleaded
causes, and strove in judgment before infydels, despysynge and smally
regarding christen men / even so now he rebukes them, because they made
conte^ptyble persons judges, althought they were christen. And therefore he
says if you shall have seculer judgments, because such judgments are not
to be had, but rather to be despised / but if you have such judgments,
ordain and set to give judgment, those contemptyble, that is to say,
indiscreet and vile persons, which are in the church. That is to say thus
have you done, by reason whereof, the brethren might be compelled, to have
recourse agayn^^ unto infydels or hethen judges. The apostle repreueth and
rebukes this in them, speaking Ironycallye / that is to say, meaning the
contrary to that, that his words does sound. And because it was not semely
or conuenyent that they should do so therofre he says by and by after. I
speak to your shamefastnes / or to your reverence / that is to say, I do not
command / but I do speak, that you should be asshamed / and you ought to be
ashamed, that there is not one man among you so wise / that he is able to
judge between his brother and brother, but that you must nedelye make fools
judges. And yet for all that these fools are to be made judges, rather than
you should go to heathen judges, if there want wise men among you. I say is
there not so wise a man among you, but does one brother strive with an other
brother, in judgment? which is an evil thing / yea and that before heathen
judges / which is a worse thing / or else thus. Therefore if you shall have
seculer judgments. etc. Because the apostle had said, that they might judge
of these least or smalest things, therefore he does now determyne, who are to
be ordained and appointed judges to the determining of such matters / that is
to wit, the contemptyble persons, which are in the church. For the greatter
or more worshypfull persons ought to give attendaunce to spyrituall things.
But you which ought to judge, for asmoche as you must judge: yet do after this
manner. If you have seculer bysynes or matters / ordain or set them to be
judges, which are contemptyble in the church / that is to say, some wise
men, which for all that are of less merit / for the apostles, which went
about to preach the gospel, could not give attendaunce to such busynesses.
The apostle would therefore, that those wise christen and holy men which
continued and abode still in one place, and not those which ran about from
place to place to preach the gospel / should be the examyners and judges of
such manner bysynes and causes. From which we can not excuse our self by no
manner ways: although we would. For I call god to witness and record that I
had lever each day work somewhat certain hours with my hands, and to
have certain hours at liberty, to read, and pray, or to work somewhat of
the dyuyne scryptures, than to suffer the troublouse perplexites of causes
concerning seculer matters and busynesses or stryues which are outher to be
decyded and ended by judgment, or else to be prevented and put away by
entreatynge or going between. I say, ordain you or appoynte you contemptible
persons, and this I do say to your reverence / that is to wit, that they
should examyne and judge erthly causes / which have gotten the wisdom and
knowledge of exteryoure or outward things. And they which are enryched with
spyrytuall gifts, ought not to be entangled with worldly matters or busynesses
/ so that whiles they are not compelled to dyspose these worldly goods, they
may be able to do service to the superyour or celestyall goods. But yet it is
greatly to be provided and taken head of, that they, which are excellent in
spyrytuall gifts, do not in any wise utterly forsake the busynesses of their
we ache neighbors, but let them outher committee the said busynesses to be
ordered and brought to an end, unto other mete and conuenyent persons, or
else take the same matters in hand their own selves. And these scryptures of
the apostle and of saints, are to be noted and marked / for first it appears
by the said scryptures, that all contencyons (between what soever persons)
about such things which do not appertain to the law of god, are seculer
and not spyrytuall and do belong to seculer judgment. For the apostle
speaks generallye / and so like wise does the saints upon this place /
making no dyfference (as there is none in deed) between the temporal or
cyuyle contencyons of priests among them selves one with an other, and
generallye of clerks, or which are between priests and lay men, and between
them which are among lay men selves, one with an other. For let the
sophyster or mysuser of words (I beseech him) which calls that spyrytuall,
which is utterly seculer after the mind and calling of the apostle and of
saints, let him, I say, tell me, whether a preeste doing iniurye to his
brother being outher preeste or not preeste in word or deed, does a
spyrytuall iniurye, more than does a lay man, if he do like iniurye. For to
say so, it is a folysshe and a scornful saying / and to believe it, is
vttermoste madness. The outward offense of a preeste is more seculer a great
deal then is the offense of a lay man.
For without doubt the iniurye which is done by a preeste, is more seculer
and more detestable iniurye than that which is done by a lay man / For he
synneth or trespasseth the more greuouslye and more shamefully, which is
bounden to teach an other man, both by his words and also by the example of
his works, not to do iniurye / as it has been seryouslye showed in the. viii.
chapter of this dyccyon. And that such acts of clerks are seculer and not
spyrytuall, and that they ought so to be called, saint Augustyne witnesses
openly in the before said gloss, when he calls the contencyouse causes of
priests and of clerks, which were pleaded before him which was a bishop,
troublouse perplexites of causes about seculer busynesses / making no
dyfference of these causes or co^tencyons, notwithstanding the condycyon or
estate of the persons / for this dyfference of a preeste, and of him that is
no preeste, as touching to this thing, is but accydenttall / likewise as the
dyfference of a hoope or ring being of gold, and of a ring being of silver
/ which dyfference no crafts man or cunning man does assygne, because it
makes or causes none essencyall dystynccion in the effect or thing wrought.
It appears also secondarylye, that the judgment or to be judge of such manner
acts belongs not to priests. And that to instytute such manner judge, does
no more, but peradventure less appertain to the auctoryte of them, than of
other christen men as it has been showed in the xv. of the first dyccion. And
therefore the apostle said not to any bishop or preeste. Constitue yt is to
say ordain or appoynte thou. For where any thing was to be done, which
appertayned to the office of a bishop or preeste, he gave charge syngulerlye
to him, that he should do it, as to preche the gospel / or to exercise other
offices, which are properlye belonging to a preeste or pastor / wherefore in
the first chapter to Tite, he says. For this cause I have left the in
Cretelande that thou should correct or amend those things, which are
wantynge / that is to wit, as touching the wholesome doctrine and manners / and
that thou should co^stytute and ordain priests, throughout all Crete in
every city: so as I have dysposed and ordered to be done / but yet he said not
to him, appoynte thou, or ordain thou a judge to examyne seculer busynesses or
matters. Neither when he wrote to the Coryntheans, did he say, the bishop or
preeste shall constytute or appoynte to you judges, but gave them council, or
told them what was best to be done / wherefore the gloss upon those words I do
speak it to your shame, says thus / as who should say, I do not command
you: but I do tell you that you should be ashamed. For the apostle knew very
well, that to instytute such manner judges, did not appertain to his office /
and by so much the less than to any other preeste or bishop. Neither moreover
did he council, that any priest or bishop should betaken or chosen to the
exercysynge of such manner office: but rather the contrary. For no man (as he
says) that warreth to god: entangleth or wrappeth him self in seculer or
worldly busynesses. But he councelled, that He calls them co^te^ptible,
which were not mete to preach, not because they ben so indede, but after a
manner of speki^ge, wherein he meneth by co^te^ptible men, lay me^.
judges should be appointed and ordained, out of that sort which were
contemptyble in the church / that is to say out of the nombre of christen men
and such persons, as were not able nor mete to preche / howbeit not all / but
after the exposycyon of saints the apostle wylled or counsayled that they
should examyne and judge erthlye or worldly causes: which had gotten knowledge
of outward things / but they which are enryched with spyrytuall geftes:
ought not to be entangled or wrapped in seculer busynesses / which thing
saint Bernarde said openly and plainly to Eugenius in the first book and
the. v. chapter De consideratione / and we have brought in his words, in the
chapter i^medyatlye aforegone. But peradventure some man shall obiecte, and
lay against us the saying of saint Augustyne in the gloses before rehearsed.
For saint Augustyne speaking of the judgment of seculer contencious acts:
says thus / from which we can not excuse our self although we would /
whose sentence also Gregory co^fyrmynge in the same place: says thus
moreover. But yet it is greatly to be An obieccion that priests may be judges
and apoynte judges.
provided and seen unto, yt they, which are excellent in spyrytual gifts. etc.
But let the bysshoppes outher committee these judgments of seculer acts, to
be taken in hand of them, which are persons co^uenyent and mete thereunto: or
else let them selves exercise the said judgments. So by these words than
it seems, that to judge such matters, and to ordain or appoynte judges of
such matters, does appertain to bysshoppes or priests in that they are
bysshoppes or priests / seeing that after the sentence and mind of saints,
the bysshoppes and priests may not be excused from such judgments. And
that they must greatly provide. etc. But to those obieccyons, and to other
like sayenges of saints and doctors, An answer to the foresaid obieccion.
let us answer and say / that in the old time, and in the times of the
aforesaid saints, for the reverence of the estate of preesthode, and for the
confydence of the manners and virtue of priests at that time, and for other
causes whereof we have spoken in the. v. part of the. xxv. of this dyccyon: it
was granted by the christen princes, to bysshoppes, and to the pryncypall
pastores and curates of souls, to exercise the office of a judge in the third
sygnyfycacion, over or upon the persons of clerks and their temporalles / to
the intent, that they should be the less vexed or troubled from the dyuyne
service / and that they should be the more honestlye entreated in seculer
causes. And because certain of the saints a foresaid were made bysshoppes in
the prouynces or places, whose princes or inhabytau^tes had given the iudycyall
office to the bysshoppes: except they would have renounced and refused or
forsake the bysshopryche they could not have been excused from such manner care
of the seculer causes or matters between clerks. But here again some man shall
doubt not without a cause, and ask a questy How riches possessions, and
judgments crept in to the church.
on, why holy men as saint Syluester, and many other have taken unto them
selves seculer judgments, and powers, and the possessyon, and admynystracyon
of temporal things: if such manner things be not agreynge, neither has been
agreynge, or conuenyent, to the office of priests, bysshoppes, and other
prechers of the gospel? I suppose it is to be answered and said, according to
the verytes before brought in, namely in the. xvii. and the. xxv. of this
dyccyon, that the church or multitude of christen people being very little or
small about the beginning and so consequently also alonge season after
suffered oftentimes of the heathen princes and subicctes, very many
persecucyons, even unto martyrdom and death / and lived in great pouertye /
wherefore the holy bysshoppes, and true pastores or herdysmen, for the
salvation, augmentacyon, conseruacyon, and sustentacyon of the flock: obtained
and gate of the devout christen emperoures, being favorable unto them,
graces, and favors, grauntes, or pryuylegyes, or else received them when
they were offered: to the intent, that they might do good to the christen
people, and defend and comfort them. So than the holy bysshoppes, for these
said causes cheyfly, took unto them the judgments of seculeractes and
contencyons, namely between clerks. So also they took the admynystracyon and
charge or ordering of certain temporal things, without possessyon, or
domynyon, or auctoryte of chalengynge them: that this might turn or redounde
to the profit and succoure of the pore christen people. Wherefore saint
Ambrose De tradendis basilicis, in ye place heretofore alleged says in this
wise / if the emperor do desire the lands, he has power and auctoryte to
challenge Ambrose.
them / none of us does let him, for the collacyon of the people may be
suffycyent and habundau^t to the poor folk. None of the preests than or of
the bishops did strive or entreat for the lands. For they following christ
and the apostles: renounced the domynyon of them / but they strove constantlye
and boldly for the faith: even unto the death notwithstanding that our
bysshoppes now a days, and namely the popes of Rome, do fight stronglye and
manfullye for lands and seculer domynyons. And for the same do on every side
raise up wars between christ's faithful people, saying that in this they do
defend the The bisshoppes of Rome ben warryours.
right of christ's spousesse. Albeit that in very deed they are not the ryghtes
but the wrongs of the said spousesse. And in a manner they do nothing at all
regard, to defend the very true spousesse of christ, that is to wit the
faith, the doctrine, and manners of christen people, that she be not corrupted
by crooked and The spousesse of christ.
lewd uses or acts, or by the cruel vyolence of infydels. For these causes
therefore in the old time some of the saints received such manner offices and
benefyces: which the bishops and priests now a days might conuenyently
renounce, at the least wise in the co^munytes of christen people, the clargye
being suffycyently defended from oppressyons / yea the clargye can scarslye be
repressed, from offendynge and hurtynge other men. But to renounce such manner
seculer offices, and the possessyon and domynyon of temporal things: is not
the purpose The purpose of our prelates now a days.
of our prelates and pastores now a days / but their purpose is to fight
also with armed power, not only for the conseruacyon and mayntenaunce of such
manner things which they have all ready: but also to usurp the resydew of
such manner things which they have not as yet / (as every man be he never so
unlearned: may learn by his senses, if by none other thing) very greatly
slaunderynge and offendynge the hole multitude of christen people: by this
example of ambycyon / not regarding the co^mynacyon of christ, in the. xviii.
of Matthew, when he said / who so ever shall offend, or give occasyon of evil
to one of these little ones. etc. Where the gloss says thus / after the mind
of saint Iherome. Albeit that it may be a general sentence against all men,
which do give occasyon of evil to any man: yet after the process of the
text, it may seem also to have been said against the apostles / which in
that they asked who should be greattest: seemed to contend and strive among
them selves about dygnyte / And if they should have continued in this vice:
they might by their occasyon and example given, have hurt them whom they
called to the faith, whiles they should se the apostles strive and fight among
them selves about honor. And that which Iherome says of the apostles: is
to be understood also of all the successoures of them, bishops or priests
/ which for all this if they will not of their own good wylles renounce and
forsake such manner iudycyall offices, and the auctoryte Iudycyall of fyces ar
to be revoked from priests.
of dystrybutynge temporal things: but do mysuse them: the christen princes
may lawfullye, both acordynge to the law of god and also of man, yea and
ought in deed to revoke the said offices and temporalles from them / as it
has been showed and proved in the. xv. of the first dyccyon, and in the. xvii.
of this dyccyon. And as to wchyng to that which was objected of the apostle in
the ix. of the first to the Corynthyanes and in the third of ye second to
the Thessalonianes, have not we power etc. it has been dissolved and answered
unto, in ye. xiiii. of this dyccyon. For such power (as it was said there) is
not power of iurysdyecyon: but power of asking lawfullye according to the
law of god (how be it yet not in coactyue judgment) meat, drink, and
clothing, due to him self for the mynystryng of the gospel, of such as are
able to give such things. And to that obieccyon, which was taken of the. v.
chapter of the first to Timothe, when the apostle said. Against a preeste
or senyour receive thou none accusacyon. etc. It is to be answered and said
that the apostle understood and meaned here if a preeste ought to be openly
rebuked of his superyour pastor, or doctoure. For the apostle did not bydde any
bishop or priest to exercise coactyue iurysdyecyon upon any man because he
knew, this thing not to appertain to his auctoryte nor to the auctoryte of any
successoure unto him. And the apostle sygnyfied here that the correpcyon,
which belongs to a prelate or pastor: is only by words, as it appears by
the words that follows. Rebuke sinners before all men: that the other may have
fear. And he said not, take them, or enpryson them. But he taught, that such
which were incorryble and would not be amended with words: should be eschewed
and the company of them avoided. Wherefore in the third to Tyte he says,
Eschew or avoid his company that is an heretyke: after the first and second
correpcion, for because he is condemned by the judgment of his own self.

Of the solucyon of the reasons or arguments, brought in, in the same third
chapter also, for the same purpose / and of the translacyon of the romayne
empire, and of any other empire or domynyon, as much as may be and ought to be
done according to right reason.
The, xxx, chapter,
THe resydewe and the last chapter of this dyccyon is, to solue the reasons or
arguments, which also we brought in, in the third of this Answers to
obieccyons, made in the third chapter of this part*
dyccyon, to confyrme and fortyfye the error of them, which do say that
coactyue iurysdyccyons does appertain unto priests or bishops, in that they
are priests or bishops / and that the highest coactyue iurysdyccyon of all in
this world / does belong to the bishop of Rome. To the first therefore of
the said reasons, where it was said, that as the body has it self in
comparyson unto the soul / so likewise has the gouernoure of The first
argument. Answer.
the body, him self unto the gouernoure of the soul: this proposycyon, if it
be universally taken: it is false / For albeit yt there is a distynccyon or
dyfference between the soul and the body, because the soul is not the body:
yet for all that, there is no prince or governor of the body, but the same is
also some manner way prince or gouernoure of the soul, and likewise backwarde
again / taking this word prince in his proper sygnyfycacyon as it appears
in the. viii. and. ix. chapytres of this dyccyon. But if by the prince or Ruler
of the body, after a metaphore, be understood the physycyon, which has the
cure and governance of the body as an operatyue or practyke doctoure, and as
touching to the acts and operacyons of the unreasonable and nutrytyue part of
man: and if also by the prince or gouernoure of the soul, be understood the
sprytuall leche, and the teacher or operatyue master, as touching to the
acts and operacyons of the reasonable and appetityue part of man, as well in
the state and for the state of this present world, of which sort be the
doctors and teachers of the humayne scyences or dyscyplynes, as for the state
of the world to come, of which sort be pastores and curates and priests:
than the said proposycyon taken indyfynytlye but not generallye / may be
granted. For if it be taken genreallye: it might always be impugned and
reasoned against by manyfolde obieccyons. For there are many dyfferences
between the soul and the body, or between the reasonable porcyon of man and
the brutysshe, which same dyfferences are not between the gouernoure and
teacher, as touching to the works of the one part, and the governor or
teacher as touching to the works of the other part. For the reasoble part
made unto ye lykenes or Image of the Trynyte: can reason and make syllogysmes.
And the unreasonable part, can not do so / and yet this dyfference is not
between the gouernoures and teachers as touching to the acts of these said.
ii. parts / and so likewise in many other things. Though we therefore do
grant this proposycyon in some sense, that is to wit, that likewise as the
reasonable and appetityue power of the man is more noble than the body, as
touching to the nutrytyue power, so in like manner the teacher and gouernoure
of A doctor or teacher is more noble than a leche or physycyon.
the reasonable part of man. etc. Is more worthy and noble than he which is
orderer of the body / or if this comparyson or symylytude also be made between
the orderer of the body, for the state or end only of this present world,
and him which is teacher of ye soul for the state or end of ye world to come
/ I say though we do grant the one teacher to be more perfyte than the other
/ yet it does not follow hereof, that he which is the perfyter of these two
is ruler, judge, or prymate over him that is the less perfyte, by judgment
coactyue. For so should the mathe matycall doctor or teacher be prince or
governor and coactyue judge over the physycyon and very many other
inconuenyences manyfestlye should follow hereof. But if by the governor of the
bodies be understood the prince or coactyue judge of men: or a judge of the
third sygnyfycacyon, in the state, and for the state or end of this present
world only or pryncypallye, and by the governor of souls be understood
he, which is judge after the third sygnyfycacyon, pryncypallye, for the state
or end of the world to come (so as the maker of the reason or argument seems
to intend) this comparyson or proposycyon and symylytude might be granted,
after some sense, if it be taken indefynytly. But taken universally, (as we
have said before) it may be proved false by diverse and many reasons. And when
it is added or put to afterward, that the body is under the soul, or that
the unreasonable part is utterly or else after a certain manner under the
reasonable part: though we do grant the body to be under the soul as
touching to perfeccyon: yet it follows not hereof, that the one is under the
other, How the body is under the soul.
as touching to iurysdyccyon / for he that should make that illacyon or
argument should committee the vice or fault of argumentacion called fallacia
consequentis. And though we did grant (albeit not for this argumentacyon)
that the prince or gouernoure of the bodies, that is to wit the coactyue
judge of men, for the state of this present world only, is under, as
touching to iurysdyccyon, the coactyue judge of souls for the state of the
world to come: yet it follows not therefore, that any prince or coactyue judge
of this world, is as touching to iurysdyccyon, under any bishop or preeste.
For no bishop or preeste, in that he is such one, is prince or coactyue judge
of any man for the state of this present world, or yet of the world to come /
as it has been showed in the. iiii. v. and. ix. chapytres of this dyccyon. For
the coactyue judge of souls, or for the state of the world to come Christ is
the only judge coactyue of souls.
is only christ: wherefore it is written in the. iiii. of James, and it greueth
me not to repete it again. There is but one law maker and judge: which may
destroy and deliver. But this judge purposes not to judge any mortal man by
sentence irreuocable, neither he does ponysshe fynallye or reward any man in
this world / but he purposes to punysshe or to reward only in the world to
come / as we have said, and have proved by the scripture, in the. ix. of this
dyccyon Now the bishop of Rome, with other prelates or pastores, is the
teacher of souls, The byssop of Rome is but a teacher.
and as it were the leche or phisycyon of them: but not prince or coactyue
judge of them / as we have showed in the place before alleged, by the text of
the gospel and by the apostle, Hylarye, and Chrysostom, and also by strong
reason. And as touching to the reason, which we brought in moreover, that
likewise as Obieccyon.
corporal things are in comparyson of sprytuall things, so is the governor
of corporal things in comparyson of him which is governor of sprytuall
things: for as much as it is grounded upon the same rote in a manner with the
reason aforegone: it is to be avoided and disolued in a manner under the same or
like manner. For the first proposycyon of this reason may be impugned and proved
false The answer. Obiccyon. Answer.
many manner ways. And as touching the second proposycyon of this reason
where it is said that corporal things are under sprytuall things, if by
this words be understood that they are less perfyte: it ought to be
granted, if these words sprytuall and temporal be taken in, in their propre
sygnyfycacyons. But when it is said afterward that the bishop of Rome is
prince or judge of sprytuall things, if this word judge be taken according
to his first sygnyfycacyon, and as speculatyue or operatyue judge of these
things: it is true, that the bishop of Rome and any other bishop is or
ought to be such manner judge. And hereof it is concluded that he is perfyter
than that man which judges by such manner judgment only of corporal
things. Namelye because of the goodness of the things which are judged. But
it follows not herefore, that such manner judge of sprytuall things is
superyour to the other manner judge in iurysdyccyon or coactyue judgment. For
so he that consydereth sensyble creatures, should be prince or coactyue judge of
the astronomer or geometrycyon / or contrarywyse / and yet neither of these for
all that is necessary true / but if they do inten de or mean, that the bishop
of rome or any other bishop is judge of spyrytuall things after the third
sygnyfycacyon of this word, that is to wit coactyue judge: than this
proposycyon is to be denied, as being manyfestlye false / as we have alleged
here tofore of the. iiii. of James, both in this chapter, and also in the. ix.
of this dyccyon. For christ only is such manner judge / unto whom we never
have denied, neither do deny the judge of this world to be subject, as
touching to coactyue iurysdyccyon for the state of the world to come /
wherefore the apostle in the. vi. to the Ephesyans, and in the last chapter to
the Collossyanes says thus. Their lord or master, and youres: is in heuens
/ other than only Christ / wherefore the judges of this world: shall be judged
of this judge only, by coactyue judgment. And they which have offended:
shall be ponysshed by coactyue ponysshement / but yet in an other world,
according to his own law, as it has appeared in the. ix. chapter of this
dyccyon. This said reason therefore is a gylefull reason, and did begyle by the
reason of equyuocacyon or manyfolde sygnifycacyons The second argument.
of this word judge. And as touching to that argume^tacion or reason, which
says, that as the one end has it self in comparyson of the other end and
the one law in comparyson to the other law, so likewise the one judge has
him self in comparyson to the other judge: this proposycyon if it be taken
generally, Answer.
may be denied / but yet if it be granted taken indefynytly and the second
proposycyon joined unto it: it follows and is concluded peradventure in good
materyall consequence or argument, that he which is coactyue judge according
to the law of god (that is to say christ) is superyour to him that is
coactyue iudgs according to the law of man, that is to say, to the prince or
princes, which thing we have granted here before. And than if it be said,
moreover that the bishop of Rome, or any other bishop, is judge
according to the law of god. A dystynccyon is to be made of this proposycyon
because of the many fold sygnyfycacyons of this word judge. And it is to be
denied in that sense, according to which the maker of the argument gothe
about to conclude, that the bishop of Rome or any other bishop is
coactyue judge in this world, or in the world to come, according to the law
of god. And as touching to that Obieccyon.
reason which says, that he, whose accyon or operacion is the more noble,
ought not to be subject as touching coactyue iurysdyccyon, unto him whose
accyon or operacyon is the less noble or the less perfyte / and that the
accyon or operacyon of a bishop or preeste is more noble, than the operacyon
of a prince or seculer gouernoure, for it is a more noble and a more perfyte
thing to consecrate the sacrament of the altar, and to mynystre the other
sacraments of the church, which is the work of a bishop or priest, than to
judge and give commandments of the cyuyle or contencyouse acts of men
which is the work of a prince or gouernoure, or of him that has coactyue
iurysdyccyon, only, in that he is such one Answer.
the first proposycyon of this reason or argument is false, and to be denied
if it be taken generally, as it must needs be taken here, for else this reason
should not have co^uenyent form. And ye second proposycyon also if it be taken
generally, for what soever preesthode or priest, may likewise be proved false
by manyfolde reasons. For the accyon of priests in other laws: is not nobler
than the accyon or operacyon of the prince or seculer gouernoure as the
contrary has been before showed and proved in the. xv. chapter of the first
dyccyon or part. But in the law of christen men only, the operacyon of
priests is the most perfyte operacyon / which thing for all that we do
hold by faith only. The first proposycyon therefore of this argumentacyon is
false / for nothing lets, but that he which has the more noble and more
perfyte operacyon absosutly: may in some things and some manner way, depend
of him, that has the less perfyte operacyon. And so in some point and some
manner way be more imperfect / For the body of man, which absolutlye is more
perfyte than all manner bodies outher simple or composyte and myxte, at the
lestewyse which are generable: as touching to some thing that may be
assygned, is less perfyte than many simple or myxte bodies. This also may we
se in the parts of one hole thing. For though the iye be a membre or a part
more perfyte than the hand or the foot, because it works a more perfyte
operacyon / yet nevertheless it hangs of them and receaueth some operacyon
or mouynge of them. And they likewise again do depend of the iye. For by the
iye they are dyrected unto the end, unto the which they move or are moved /
so also the apostle said in the. xii. of the first to the Coryntheanes. But
the iye can not say to the hand: I need not thy help or labor. And after
this or like manner verelye the prince and gouernoure also depends and
receaueth some things by the accyons or operacyons of some inferyor parts of
the co^munyte (of which we have spoken in the. v. chapter of the first
dyccyon) howebeit not as touching to coactyue judgment. And yet do those
inferyor parts of the comunyte as touching to some better and more perfyte
thing, and as touching to coactyue judgment, depend of the prince and
gouernoure / as it has been showed in the. xv. of the first dyccyon. So than
priest hode or priests do depend and receive some what of the prince or
seculer gouernoure: and the prince or seculer governor depends and receaueth
some thing of the preeste. For the priests do receive of the prince and
seculer gouernoure, in stytucyon of their cyuyle acts, and defense from
Iniurye that they shall neither do iniurye to any other man, neither any other
man to them, in the state and for the state of this present world / for this
is the office of the prince or high gouernoure, and of none other part or
membre of the co^munyte as it has been showed in the. xv. of the first dyccyon.
And this also the apostle expressed in the. xiii. chapter to the Romans /
and we have brought in his words in the. v. chapter of this dyccyon / this
same also he mened in the. v. chapter of the first epistle to Tymothe, when he
said / I beseech therefore, that obsecracyons be made, first for kings, and
all that are in high auctoryte, that we may lead a quyete and peaceable life.
Likewise again on the other part, the prince depends and has need of the
accyon or operacyon of the preeste. For of the preeste, he receaueth doctrine,
and the sacraments dysposynge men in this world, and remouynge or putting
away such things as are contrary to salvation or eternal beatytude, for
the state of the world to come. But yet dyfferently and after a diverse manner
they work and receive these operacyons each of other. For the prince being
coactyue judge in this world by the ordynacyon of god, may lawefully exercise
or impresse his operacyon, by coactyue power by doing ponysshement upon any
preeste: yea though he be not willing or content, if he has been a
transgressor of the law of man, which is not contrary to the law of god / as
it has been showed and proved, in the. v. and. viii. chapytres of this dyccyon
and in the. xv. of the first dyccyon. But the byssoppe or preeste, because he
is not according to the law of god coactyue judge of any man in this world
(as it has been showed in the. xv. of the first dyccyon and in the. iiii. v.
and. ix. of this dyccyon) but is a judge after the first sygnyfycacyon of this
word judge, and as it were an operatyue teacher, as a leche or physycyon: he
can not by his operacyon or precepte, compel any man / neither he ought to
compel any man, by pain or ponysshement outher real or personal, as
touching to this present life. So than the first proposycyon of this said
argumentacyon was false, wherein it was said, that what soever thing works
the more perfyte operacyon, ought not as touching to iurysdyccyon to be under
the thing that works the less perfyte An inconuenyent or absurdytye.
operacyon. For of this proposycyon with the aforesaid proposycyons joined
unto it, there follows necessarely an other manyfeste inconuenyent and a false
proposycyon / that is to wit, that no speculatyue dortor or at the lestewyse
that the highest or pryncypall philosopher or metaphysycyon is not under the
iurysdyccyon of the prince or gouernoure according to the law of man. For as
much as none of the practyue habytes or scyences and qualytes besides faith,
in the prince and gouernoure, or else in any other man, neither any operacyon
procedynge and brought forth of the said habytes or scyences, is egall in
perfeccyon to the habyte or science of the methaphysycyon, or to the accyon or
operacyon brought forth by it which habyte or operacyon, it may chance a
prince or gouernoure for to lack. And where as it was afterward objected,
that it seems an inconuenyent, and an unseemly thing, that the bishop of
Rome, or else any other bishop, ought to be under the coactyue judgment
of him, that is prince and worldly gouernoure, it is to be answered and said
that it is none in conuenyent at all, that he or any other bishop be under
that same or like judge, under whom the lord and master of the said bishop
of his own fre will has determined to be, for a co^uenyent ordynacyon or
order of this world to be observed / For christ, which was both god and
man, wyllynglye submytted himself to the coactyue judgment of ponce Pilate,
which was the vycare or deputye of him that was Emperor / so also did the
holy apostles and taught other also to do the same, accordyngly unto the law
of god / as it has been plainly and euydently showed by the scripture and by
the saynges of saints, and of other doctors, in the. iiii. and. v. of this
dyccyon / and has been also repeted or reherced again in the. xxviii. of this
same dyccyon / wherefore also in as much as the servant is not greatter than
the master, neither the apostle greatter than he that has sent him as we
have alleged and brought in of the scripture, by the saying of Bernarde, in
the. xxviii. chapter of this dyccyon. For Bernarde among other things:
says thus, in the first Book and the. v. chapter De consideratione unto
Eugenius. Is the servant thanne a mynyssher of the dygnyte: if he wylleth not
to be greatter than his Lord and master? or the dyscyple, if he wylleth not
to be greatter than he that sent him: or the sone if he will not goo beyond
the terms or bounds which his Forefathers have set? Our master and lord
said, who has made or ordained me a judge? and shall it be iniurye to the
servant and dyscyple: except he may judge all men? It is not inconuenyent
but very conuenyente, and also necessary to the quyetnes and tranquyllyte of
cyuylytye or the common weal / that any bishop and preeste and clerk be
under the coactyue judgment of the princes and seculer gouernoures. And the
contrary hereof is utterly inconuenyent, and intolerable. Furthermore,
because the bishop of Rome or any other bishop is not the vycare of
christ, or his mynyster, to exercise all manner office in this world: but only
as touching to a certain determynate office / as for example as touching to
preesthode / in which office, in that it is such one: there is not regarded
or considered any coactyue judgment, neither superyoure or inferyour as
touching to such judgment: as we alleged openly of the words of
Arystotle, in the. viii. part of the. ix. chapter of this dyccyon. But the
prince or seculer gouernoure The prince, is ye vycare of god.
is the vycare or mynyster of god, as touching to the office of a prince or
gouernoure / in which office is considered and regarded a superyour and an
inferyour or subject as touching to coactyue power / wherefore in the. xiii.
to the Romans the apostle exceptynge none of the priests or bysshoppes:
says. Let every soul be subject to the high powers / and he puts the
cause hereof forth with, saying / for he is the mynyster of god. Se now how
the prince is the vycare of god, not vyolent / but coactyue of evil men in this
world. And therefore it follows. A ponyssher for wroth unto him yt is an
euyldoer. But it is so, that a bishop or priest may be an euyldoer / to whom
neither christ, neither any apostle, has assygned at any time, any other judge
outher by their work and example or else by their words: as it has been showed
in this dyccyon in the place before alleged. And to that obieccyon which is
put forth by the manner of a couclusyon, where it is said if it should be
expedyent and necessary, to correct princes and An other obieccyon.
gouernoures, when they shall trespace and offend against gods law or
man's law: that it seems that they may not conuenyently be corrected, for
asmoch as they have no superyor in the cyuyle regymente, at the lestwyse the
pryncypall and highest of them. And therefore that they ought to be under the
coactyue judgment of priests and bysshoppes: it is to be answered and said,
that a prince or gouernoure offendynge or treaspassynge against the law of god
or of man, Answer. How a prince or gouernoure is to be corrected.
may and ought to be corrected conuenyently by the ecclesyastycall mynyster,
bishop, or preeste, by words of exortacyon / or of increpacyon, and
rebukynge / but yet after a sobre a dyscrete and mesurable manner, according to
the doctrine of the apostle in the second and also the. iiii. chapter of the
second epistle to Tymothe and to the exposycyon of Chrysostom, which we have
brought in heretofore in the. ix. chapter of this dyccyon. But in no wise by
coactyue power and auctoryte. For such manner power does not appertain to a
preeste or bishop, in that he is such one: upon any man in this world / as
it has been oftentimes proved and repeted heretofore. And as touching to the
reason which was fynallye added, that he is, as touching to iurysdyccyon,
superyor unto the emperor Another obieccyon.
of Rome, and may of right instytute and depose the said emperor, which
has translated the empire from the Greeks unto the Germaynes in the person
of great Cherles, as it has been said and that he that made this translacyon
was the pope of Rome, ergo the pope is superyor to the Emperor and may of
right instytute and depose the Emperor: it is to be answered and said. that
if the first proposycyon of this argument be taken indefynytly and not
universally, Answer.
than of it with ye second proposycyon nothing can be inferred or concluded,
for as much as no syllogysme may be made of an indefynyte proposycyon and a
partyculer proposycion. But if it be taken universally, so that it be said,
Every translator of the Romayne empire from the greeks unto the germaynes, is
superyor The translacyon of the to main empire.
to the emperor. etc. Except the subject of this proposycyon (that is to wit
translator of the empire. etc.) be determined / this proposycyon might be
proved false by very many true reasons. For if any man had i^very deed but yet
not of right, translated the empire, or else if he had done it not by his own
power, but by the power of an other man given unto him as unto a proctour or
deputye: this person I say which had so translated the empire, should not
therefore him self alone have superyor iurysdyccyon unto the emperor, neither
ryghtfull power and auctoryte to instytute or depose him / but if the
aforesaid proposycyon be this determined, that every mortal man which has
translated, or may iustlye and ryghtfully translate the romayne empire from
the greeks unto the germaynes, by his own propre auctoryte not granted to
him by any other person, is superyor in coactyue iurysdyccyon to the emperor
of Rome, and may ryghtfullye instytute and depose him / this proposycyon so
granted: than the second proposycyon which is joined unto this, that it is
the byssoppe or Pope of Rome, which has translated the empire / as it has been said / is to be denied as utterly false. For the contrary of this
proposycyon, has been proved in the. xv. of the first dyccyon. And also the
contrary both of it, and of the conclusyon which is inferred of it, has been
certyfyed and surely proved by the scripture, and by the saynges of saints and
other catholyke doctors, in the. iiii. and. v. chapytres of this dyccyon / and
has been repeted or reherced again in very many other places. And thus it
has been observed in deed without reclamacyon or grudge of the old fathers and
pastores of the bysshoppes of Rome. Thus than to have gone through the doubts
moved in the third and the. xxvii. chapytres of this dyccyon / let it be
suffycyente. And thus we make an end of the questyones pryncypallye purposed
and intended of us in this work.

Thus ends the second dyccyon or book,
The third dyccyon or part of this work, entytled, the Defender of peace /
which is, as it were a table of the two first dyccyons.
Of the rehersall, and calling to remembrance again, of the things
pryncypally intended and determined in the first and second dyccyon / and of
a certain sequel, and necessary following, which the things that shall be
spoken in this book: have unto the things which have been said in the dyccyons
aforegoynge.
The first chapter.
FOr as much, as in the dyccyons aforegoyng, we have assygned and marked
forth the synguler and special cause, that now is of cyuyle dyscorde,
intranquyllyte, and unquietness of certain realms, and certain co^munytes,
and which same thing, shall also be hereafter the cause of debate, and strife
in all other co^munytes, except it be let and stopped be times: that is to
wit the existymacion or opinion, and the desire, and enforcement, by which
the bishop of Rome, and the company of his clergy, syngulerlye and
especyally labor to possess seculer domynyons, and temporal things
superfluouslye / of the which domynyons or souereygntes, the said bishop
endeavors to challenge the highest unto him self, by the title of full power,
which was pryncypallye granted to him (as he says) by christ in the person
of saint Peter, as we have said in the last chapter of the first dyccyon.
And as it has been not with out a reasonable cause repeted oftentimes and
rehearsed in very many chapytres of the second dyccyon: where as in very deed,
not only not the highest domynyon or governance, but also no domynyon at all
or judgment coactyue of any person in this world is conuenyent or agreyng to
him, or to any other bishop priest, or clerk, in that they are such manner
person, neither jointly, neither seuerallye, as we have euydently showed and
proved in the first dyccyon, by certain humayne and worldly reasons. And have
also confyrmed the same, in the. iiii. and. v. chapytres of the second
dyccyon, by the testymonyes of everlasting troth, and also by the
exposycyons, and declaracyons of the holy interpretours thereof, and of many
proved doctors and teachers of the same, and afterward also the. vi. and
the, vii. chapytres of the second dyccyon we have by the scryptures and
certain reasons, assygned and showed what, and how great, and in what things
is the power and auctoryte of priests and bysshoppes. To all whom, or to some
one of them, we have showed in the. xxiiii. chapter of the same, that such
fulness of power does not belong, neither ioyntlye or severally, which fulness
they had taken them selves and usurped, namely the bishop of Rome. By reason
of the which things so of us declared and showed it seems and appears, the
rotes of that synguler malygnyty very often named in our prohemy or preface to
be suffycyently cut up, wherefore now that ye branches, twigs, and graffes
of dyscorde and strife, which this pestylence or myschefe has brought
hitherto, yea and cesseth not yet daily to bring in to realms and co^munytes,
may y^ sooner dry up and not be able hereafter to have issue or ofsprynge: or
to sprede any further we shall of the. ii. dyccyons aforegone bring forth ye
third dyccyon, which remains behynd / which dyccyon shall be nothing else,
but a necessary and a plain, clear, and euydent inferryng of certain
conclucyons, following of ye things before written, being outher evidently known
of them self: or else suffycie^tly proved: to ye which co^clucyons, if good
dyligent attencyon be given, both of medytacyon and study, and also of workyng
and execucyon / ye aforesaid pestylence or myschefe, and also ye sophystycall
cause thereof, shall easly be excluded and driven out from realms / so yt from
hensforth they shall be stopped out from having entrance in to them and other,
co^munytes.

Of the clear and euydent inferrynge of certain conclusyons necessarely
following of these things, which have been determined in the. ii. first
dyccyons or parts of this book / by the attencyon and dylygent markyng of
which conclusyons princes or gouernoures, and also their subjects may the
sooner: and the more easily, attain the end purposed and intended by this
book.
The second chapter.
Of the which said conclusyons to be inferred: we will make this the first.
THat there is no scripture, which of necessyte, we are bounden to believe, to
believe to be undoubtedly true save only the dyuyne or canonycall scripture /
or what soever other scripture it be, which necessarelye follows of the same

The second conclusyon.
That only the precepts of god in the new law, or else such as
necessarelye follows of them, or such things, which according to right
reason; are conuenyente to be done or left undone, are nedfullye for the
obtaynenge of everlasting salvation to be observed and kept / but not all the
precepts of the old law.

The third conclusyon.
That in the precepts or prohybycyons of the new law: no mortal man may
dyspence.

The fourth conclusyon.
That there is none other humayne or worldy maker of laws, but only the
prince or his perlyament, or (where it is so used) hole university and
congregacyon of Cytezens: or else the bygger and more part thereof.

The fyfte conclusyon.
That the Decretalles or Decrees of the Popes of Rome, or of any other
bysshoppes, which ben constytuted or made by them, jointly or severally,
without the grant of princes do oblygate or bind no man to any pain
temporal or punysshement of this world. This is declared of certaynte in the.
xii. of the first and. xxviii. chapter of the second dyccyon.

The syxte conclusyon.
That in the laws of man: only the prince or else some other man by his
auctoryte, may dyspence. This is proved in the. xii. chapter of the first
dyccyon.

The seventh conclusyon.
That there ought to be but only one chief soueraygne in a realm / this is
euydently proved in the. xii. chapter of the first dyccyon.

The eight conclusyon.
That it belongs only to the auctoryte of the king according to the laws
or approved customs: to determyne the persons, and the qualyte, and nombre of
them, which shall be officers of therealme and also to determyne all civil
matters by them selves or their deputyes.

The. ix. conclusyon.
That no bishop or preeste, in that he is such one: has any soueraygnte or
coactyue iurysdyccion over any clarke, or lay man, although he be an
heretyke. This is euydentlye proved in the. xv. chapter of the first dyccion
/ in the. iiii. the v. the. ix. and. x. chapytres of the second dyccion.

The. x. conclusyon.
That only the prince or soueraygne: has iurysdyccyon coactyue, both real
and personal, upon every partyculer or synguler mortal person: of what so
ever condycion or estate he be / and also upon every partyculer college or
company of lay men and clerks.

The. xi. conclusyon.
That it is not lawful for any bishop or preeste, or for any college or
company of them: to exco^munycate any man / or to interdycte or forbid the
dyuyne service to be done / this is proved in the. vi. chapter of the second
dyccyon.

The. xii. conclusyon.
That all bishops are egall in the auctoryte which they have i^medyatly by
christ / and that it can not be proved according to the law of god, that one
of them ought to be above, or under an other in spyrytuall or temporal
things / this is euydentlye proved in the. xv. and. xvi. chapytres of the
second dyccyon.

The. xiii. conclusyon.
That the contractes of matrymonye or wedlock, prohybyted and forbidden in the
law of god, can not be dyspensed by any mortallman / and that to dyspence with
the matrymonyes forbidden by the law of man, does belong only to the
auctoryte of the prince. This is euydently proved, in the. xii. chapter of the
first dyccyon.

The. xiiii. conclusyon.
To legyttymate basterdes, and those that be begoten out of wedlock: so that
they may succeed by inherytaunce, and receive or take cyuyle or
ecclesyastycall offices and benefyces / belongs only to the prince of a
realm. This is proved in the same places which were rehearsed in the last
conclusyon before this.

The. xv. conclusyon.
That it appertains only to the princes to judge the persons which are to
be promoted to ecclesyastycall ordres / and also to judge the suffycyencye ^^
habylyte of any such person, by coactyue judgment. And that without the
auctoryte of princes it is not lawful for any bishop or preeste to promote
any man to any such ordres this is proved in the. xv. chapter of the first
dyccyon / and in the. xvii. of the second.

The. xvi. conclusyon.
That it belongs only to him that is cheyfe gouernoure or soueraygne,
according to the laws of christen men / to measure or set the nombre of
churches or temples, and of the priests, deacons, and other officers, which
ought to mynystre in ye same. The certain of this co^clusyon is had in ye
places last rehearsed.

The. xvii. conclusyon.
That the ecclesyastycall offices which we have called separable or
accydentall, with benefyces, and other things ordained for godly and
charytable causes / ought to be given, and likewise may be taken away, only
by the auctoryte of princes. This is proved, in the. xv. of the first and.
xvii. of the second.

The. xviii. conclusyon.
That to ordain or make notaryes, or other publyke and common cyuyle
officers: does appertain to no bishop, in that he is such one / neither
ioyntlye with an other: neither severally / this is proved in the. xv. of the
first part.

The. xix. conclusyon.
That no bishop, in that he is such one may grant outher jointly, or
seuerallye, license to teach, or work or practyse openly in any art or
dyscyplyne / but that to grant these lycencyes appertains only to princes
or to him that is head gouernoure / this is proved in the places last reherced.

The. xx. conclusyon.
That the king or prince may lawefully and agreably to ye law of god, use the
temporalles of the church or clergy, outher in the hole, or in part of them,
for the publyke or common vtylyte, or defense of the common weal, after that
the necessyte of the priests, and other mynysters of the gospel, and of those
things which appertains to the worshepynge and service of god, and of the
impotent pore folk, is suffycyentlye provided for, and satyssyed / this is
proved, in the. xv. of the first and in the. xvii. of the second dyccyon.

The. xxi. conclusyon.
That it belongs only to the cheyfe governor or soueraygne, to dyspose all
temporalles, which are ordained for charytable causes, and to almosse deeds and
the works of pytye. As for example such things which are bequeste in
testamentes, for the meyntenaunce of souldyers against infydeles / or for the
raunsomynge of prisoners being in their hands / or for the sustentacyon and
releaue of impotent poor folk, and such other like things / and that to him
only it appertains, to order the said things, according to the
determynacion, intencyon, and mind of the testator / or otherwise gyuer / this
is proved in the places last reherced.

The. xxii. conclusyon.
That it appertains only to the auctoryte of princes to grant the vowson of
what soever college or relygyon / and the same to approve and to allow: or else
to reprove and dysalowe / this is proved in the. xv. of the first, in the.
viii. the. x. of the second dyccyon.

The. xxiii. conclusyon.
That it appertains only to the auctoryte of the governor or soueraygne, to
judge by coactyue judgment, heretykes, and all trespasers, and malefactors,
and those which are to be ponysshed by temporal pain or ponysshement / and
to inflycte and enjoin peynes personal and real / and the same pains real
to apply unto what use they list. This is proved, in the. xv. of the first in
the. viii. the. x. of the second.

The. xxiiii. conclusyon.
That no subject, or person, which is oblygated and bound to another, by a
lawefull oath: may be losed from the said bond, by any bishop or preeste,
with out reasonable cause, which is to be judged (by the judgment in his
third sygnyfycacyon) of the prince or king / and that the contrary of this
conclusyon: is against all true and right doctrine / this is proved, in the.
vi. the. vii. and. xxvi. of the second dyccyon.

The. xxv. conclusyon.
That it appertains and belongs only to the princes and gouernoures, in
the co^munytes of christen people, to gather by coactyue power a general
cou^ceyll, or else a partyculer counceyll, of priests and bysshoppes, and of
other christen men.

The. xxvi. conclusyon.
That the co^maundynge of fastes, and the prohybycyons and forbyddynges of
certain meats, ought only to be made by the auctoryte of princes. And that
only the aforesaid princes may enterdycte or forbydde the workynge and
exercysynge of handcraftes / or the teaching of disciplynes, which are not
prohybyted by the law of god, to be exercysed and used in almaner of days /
and that it appertains only to him that is governor to constrayne men, to
the obseruyng and keeping of the same commandments or prohibycyons by
temporal payneor ponysshement.

The. xxvii. conclusyon.
That it may be lawful always for him, that is a suter, or stryueth in the
law: to appele from the coactyue judgment, which has been granted to any
bishop or preeste: to him that is prince or gouernoure.

The. xxviii. conclusyon.
That a multitude, or synguler person, to whom the gospel is mynystred: is
bound according to the law of god, and after their or his habylytye, to
exibyte and give to bishops, and other euangelycall mynystres those things,
which shall be necessary and needful to their nourysshement and clothing /
at the least wise their daily food necessary to the sustentacyon of their
life. But in no wise tyethes or any other thing, if it shall be superfluouse,
and more than shall be necessarelye required, to ye supplyenge of the needs of
ye said mynysters.

The. xxix. conclusyon.
That the faithful lawemaker, or he that is gouernoure, by the auctoryte of
the said lawemaker: may in the prouynce subject to him, compel as well
bysshoppes as other euangelycall mynysters, for whose food and clothing it is
suffycyentlye provided: to celebrate deuyne service, and to mynyster the
sacraments of the church / this is proved in the. xv. of the first and in
the. viii. of the second.

The. xxx. conclusyon.
Other conclucyons, both very many in nombre, and also very profitable,
might be inferred, which by necessyte follows of the determynacyons made in
the two first dyccyons or parts. But yet that notwithstanding, at this time
we will hold us contented, with these: which we have all ready deduced. For as
much as they do the give easy and suffycyent entrance and occasyon to the
reder to geather and infer other such like mo, and be suffycyent also to the
cuttynge away of the aforesaid great myscheyfe, otherwise called the
bishop of Rome and also the cause thereof.

The end of the third dyccyon or part / of the work: which is called, The
defender of peace,
The peroracyon or conclusyon of / the work to the reader.
THou haste here most gentle reader, A work, which albeit that it is not
perauenture set forth with painted words, and eloquent speech / yet is there
wisdom in it not to be despised. This said work, it has lyked and pleased
the auctor thereof: to entytle Defensor pacis / that is to say in English:
the defender or maynteyner of Peace / because in it he has dylygentlye and
faythfullye gathered together, and also has in goodlye order set forth,
all the ways and means: by which most cheyflye, empyers, realms, or any
other cyuyle socyetes, or felowshyppes of men, among them selves are or may
be best holden, or kept, and considered, or joined together, by a certain
contynuall favor and love of the officers or rulers and of the multitude or
co^munes each to other establesshed, and made fyrme and sure, without fear or
dread of any sedycyon, dyscorde debate or strife, both parts keapynge
themselves within their own right, as it were within a certain lymytes or
bounds: and neither of them chalengynge or usurping any things unto
themselves, save only that, which the laws will give them leave. Which
consent, and concord, or agreement between the orders, degrees or estates,
because it has not ben so dylygently regarded and seen unto, as was mete and
according that it should have been: and whiles the one sort, to boldlye,
against right and law, does hurt the other how great hurtes, and troublouse
storms, it has always styrred and raised up, not only in temporal matters,
but also in sprytualte matters: both the times of our elders and forefathers
partly, but specially and cheyfly these present times, vexed with so many
inco^modytes, and myscheuouse euylles and troubles by reason hereof, does
euydently declare and prove. Against which euylles, would god that some
conuenyent help and remedy were found, before it come to that pass that they
be utterly paste remedy: by those persons, which worthelye both ought and
also might remedy them. But I exorte and desire the, most good and gentle
reader: dylygentlye to turn over and to labor this work, called the
defender of peace. Thou shalt find in it the Image of these our times most
perfytly and clerlye expressed and set out. And also, that even before these
days, every one of the best Emperors has been contynually sore vexed and
troubled with the same tyranny of Romanystes: wherewith now all good men be
accombred, greaued, and noyed, not without the cruel and deadelye iniurye of
the common weal.

THis work was written in the latyne tongue two hundred and ten years now fully
passed / and now prynted in english, for none other intent and purpose (I
take god to witness) more then to help further and profit the christen
common weal, to the uttermost of my power, namely and pryncypally, in those
busynesses and troubles: whereby it is and before this time has been iniustly
molested vrxed and troubled by the spyrytuall and ecclesyastycall tyrauntes.
And that to the great hurt and calamyte of the same common weal, that by many
such hystoryes of old men, set before the iyes and sight of all men: at the
last, the very troth might appear and show itself / and that all darkness
dyscussed, and put away, the same may come to light. Wherefore good
indyfferent reader, take thou that also in good worth, which we have done
certaynlye, of a very good mind and purpose.

Explicit,
Prynted by me Robert wyer / for wyllyam marshall / and fynysshed in the month
of July in the year of our Lord god a, M, LLLLL, xxxv, And in the. xxvii. year
of the Reygne of our most gracyous soueraygne lord Henry the eight, by the
grace of god, of England, and of France king, defender of the faith, and
lord of Irelande / and supreme head under god of the church of England.

With the privilege of our most gracious soueraygne Lord / for six years,

printer's or publisher's device ROBERT WYER




