TWO SERMONS Preached before his Majesty, in his Chapel at Whitehall, the
one, the xi. of February, the other the xxv. of the same month.

By Richard Meredeth, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary.



AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Simon Waterson. 1606.

Text.
Micheas Chap. 6. verse. 3, 4, 5. O my people what have I done unto thee, or
wherein have I grieved thee? testify against me, surely I brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt, and delivered thee from the bondage of servants, and
have sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. O my people remember what
Balaac the King of Moab has devised, and what Balaim the son of Beor
answered him from Sittem to Gilgal, that thou may know the righteousness
of the Lord.
THat Gods exceeding goodness toward the Jewish nation and their extreme
unthankfulness again toward him, might the more clearly appear, being
compared together, the mountains, that is as S. Hierom. faith Hierom in
Michea^^ Cap. 6.
the elect Angels of heaven, and the mighty foundations of the earth, that is
the great Monarchs and Potentates of the world, being sommoned to be witnesses
of this controversy and quarrel between God and them, the spirit of the Lord
God in the mouth of the Prophet Micheas, the pen of a ready writer, makes
protessation in this place of the one, and provoke him by open challeng, to
avoid if they can in reason, the shame of the other, and therewithal licenseth
them to dispute their own cause for themselves, and to plead against God,
either to convince him of wrong done unto them and injury, or else to condemn
themselves of too much ingratitude toward him and wicked obstinacy. O my
people (says God) what have I done unto thee? etc.

It is not my purpose (most honorable) to call to your remembrance the manifold
benefittes and blessings which God from time to time, under good leaders,
captains, judges, and kings, has bestowed upon the Jewish nation, that might
be tedious unto some, superfluous unto others, and impossible to me, at this
one time, for so I might at this time begin and not be able to make an end, my
purpose is to come nearer home unto our selves, and to apply in particular the
circumstances of this Scripture unto these present times and present occasions,
men consider with better attention those things which they feel to be done
unto themselves, then they do those things which they hear done unto others,
we believe the report of the one, because we have heard it, our selves can
testify the certainty of the other, because we have seen it, as we have
heard concerning them, so also have we seen concerning our selves in the house
of God.

God has as little grieved us, as ever he grieved them. 1. God has as
abundantly blessed us, as ever he blessed them, 2. We for our parts have
dealt as unkindly with him, as ever did they before us. 3* And therefore he for
his part, may as justly contest against us as ever he did against them, and say
unto us and against us.

O my people what have I done unto thee. etc. Policarpus Eusebius. eccl. hist.
lib. 3. cap. 9.
being required by an Infidel Judge, to blaspheme Christ, made him this
witty, and devout answer, 86. peers have I lived, neither did he once harm me
in any one thing, why then should I blaspheme my God, which has neither
hindered nor injured me. We cannot charge our God with any wrong, our gracious
Lord with any hardness, injury, or unkindness toward us, but must always and
ever with Polycarpus acknowledge his exceeding bounty and unspeakable goodness.
There be but 3. things in the world which the Lord has always used as 3.
notable instruments, for the filling up of his sury, and for the spending of
his plagues upon the nations, to wit, Famine, Pestilence, and the Sword,
choose says the prophet Gad unto David, whether (...) wilt have 3. days
Pestilence, or whether thou will have 7. years Famine in the Land, or whether
thou will fly 3. months before thine enemies, and with which of these 3. has
the Lord grieved, I cannot say wronged us, if so be, it be a blessing and not a
punishment, to stand still void and exempt of all affliction and trouble.

First as touching Pestilence, albeit it be a special punishment appointed by
God himself unto all those which stubbornely disobey and transgress his
commandments, for so speaks God by his servant Moses: If thou shall not
hearken unto the word which I command thee this day to do it, I will make the
Pestilence to cleave unto thee, until it have consumed thee from the land, and
smite thee with the botch of Egypt, etc. And no one nation under the cover of
the cope of heaven (that we flatter not our selves) more sinful people then we
have been, yet so far forth has the measure of Gods mercy and goodness
exceeded the measure of our sin and wickedness, that the fault remaining too
excessiuely amongst us, the punishment for the most part has been taken away,
yea in the very time of vengeance and destruction, our God bethought himself
of mercy and preservation, for in the winter season he commanded the Angel to
smite, and in the summer season (a mercy beyond all expectation) he commanded
the destroyer to forbear, in one year he constrained this mighty Nin^iuie the
great City of London, to drink of the cup of the wrath of his vengeance,
the next year following spared them, and enforced all the noble Cities of
this mighty Kingdom to suck out the dregs which were left in that cup. At
this time he has gathered many of the arrows of this his displeasure into his
Quiver, but suffers some of them to remain scattered, that we may learn to
fear him which has power over the plagues, to take up betimes with God, lest
a worse thing happen unto us and so occasion be given unto GOD to fill up the
measure of that vengeance which he has begone, and so sweep us all, top and
tail, root and branch, great and small, young and old, superior and inferior
sweep us I say al with that Besom which the holy Scripture speaks of, the
Besom of destruction.

For the other instrument of Gods justice, (famine of bread and scarcity of
food) this Land has not this many years been grieved and afflicted, the
Lord has opened his good treasure unto us, even the Heavens to give rain unto
the earth in due season: and the earth to give her increase, the Trees of the
field to send forth their fruit, the Lord has made us happy in the blessing
of Joseph, even in the fattnesse of the earth and the dew of Heaven. The Lord
has heard the heavens and the Heavens have heard the earth, and the earth has
heard the Corn, and the Corn has heard Israel his people. Howbeit least our
long peace should breed us too much plenty, and our over much plenty should
make us too proud, and our pride should prick us to play the wanton children
against our gracious GOD, he has in his Fatherly providence tempered our
prosperity with some gentle (...) of moderate correction: to this purpose some
eight or nine years since, the seed became rotten under the cloddes, the
meat was cut of before our eyes, our old store was spent, our garners were
empty, our flocks of sheep were destroyed, our herds of cattle were ^oded,
the starte of bread (...) in every place, the tongue of the suckling Child did
even cleave as it were to the roof of his mouth, many asked bread, very few
brake and gave unto them.

For the third instrument of the scourge of Gods justice, (war and the
sword,) of this these many years we have not: and I pray God many more years
we do not taste. Inquire the generations of old which were before time, since
that God created man first upon the earth, and ask from one end of the heaven
to the other, was there ever any nation unto whom, and upon whom God has
bestowed greater kindness and favor then he has done upon us in this behalf,
ye lord has done as much for us in this little Island, as ever he did for ye
children of Israel in the land of Goshan: through out the whole la^d of Egypt
there was swarms of Flies, and Liece, and Caterpillars, and Blasting, and
Thunder, and Mildew, but in the Land of Goshan where the children of Israel
were, there was none of all these, insomuch as the Lord says, he would deal
wonderfully even between the beasts of Israel and beasts of Aegipt. Altour
near neighbors and emborders round about us, have dronken of the fierce cup
of the wrath of Gods indignation, he has made his arrows surfeit with blood,
and has made his sword to eat the flesh of the one, and of the other, but as
for us his beloved, in this little Island, he has kept us in safety in a Land
which flows with milk and wheal, and honey, and has multiplied us, and has
blessed us, and has increased us, and has enriched us, both in increase of
our kine and flocks of our sheep, and herds of our cattle, and has
commanded the heavens that they should drop upon us the fatnes of their dew,
as some times they did upon the little hill of Hermon, he has amazed the Duke
of Edom with our happiness, he has cast the terror of us upon the mightymen
of Moab, he has made the inhabitance of Canaan to quake, and yet for all this,
is not the goodness of our God ceased toward us, but yet there is mercy
powered on us still, it is much that he has given us the Gospel, it is more
that he has given it without any public Cross and calamity.

Surely he has brought us also out of the Land of Aegipt, and delivered us
from the bondage of servants: speaking of this point, I may justly say where
may I begin, or where may I end, the matter I am to speak of is much, the
time allotted me to speak in, is but short, loath I am to offend any chaste or
Godly or religious ears, but something must be said of it, that we may show
our selves thankful for our deliverance: of religion we are sometimes
persuaded that it consisted only in the observation of a few outward rites and
ceremonies, as touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish with the
usage, and after the doctrines and traditions of men. 2. Of faith, that it was
only a bare speculation, full of fear and terror, without any certain
knowledge of, or sure confidence in the word of God. 3. Of works, that a man
might work out his own salvation, or if so be he had none of his own, he
might buy the overplus of the works of other men, which they call the work of
supererogation, which they call also the treasure of the church. 4. Ofdeuotion,
that ignorance was the mother of it, and pilgrimage the nurse. 5. Of prayer,
that it may be used in an unknown tongue, and offered to stocks, to saints,
and to Images. 6. Of the sacrament of Baptism, that it might be applied to
bells in a mockery, and encombred besides with infinite superstitions. 7. Of the
sacrifice of the Mass, that it was a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and
the dead, as if the sacrifice of Christ once offered up upon the altar of his
cross, had not been sufficient. 8. Of the Church, that it could not possibly
err, although it departed from the express word of God. 9. Of the word, that
it was but a dead letter written with Pen and Ink, insufficient without
traditions, ambiguous without the interpretation of the Church of Rome. 10. Of
the Pope, that he was Christ his general Vicar upon earth, above Kings, above
Princes, above the word of God, greater and of higher authority then the
Apostles. Of these things were some of us and our fathers sometimes persuaded,
in the doctrine of these things were they trained up, they worshipped vanities,
and honored lies, or if they refused so to do, the talkmaisters were ready to
lay more heavy burdens upon them, then ever were laid upon ye Israelits in
Egypt, their goods were spoiled, their houses ransacked, their livings
forfeited, their lands extended, their bodies imprisoned, themselves martyred,
their goods, houses, and children ransacked, look what cursing, what banning,
what hangman, what gibbet, what torment, what torture, was able to do, the
Saints of GOD did not only taste of it, but in full measure drink of, faggot
and fire was as common in their mouths, as Ad leonem Christian in Licinius his
days, but God which was able to deliver Daniel out of the Lions den, and
Jonas out of the whales belly, and the three children in the fiery furnace, and
Israel in the Redsea, whose eyes are evermore over the righteous, and which is
near enough to al them that call upon him faithfully, working their deliverance
when things were most desperate, sometimes by means, sometimes without means,
sometimes against all means, even he in the abundant riches of his mercies,
has freed us from this slavery and tyranny of our consciences, ye Gospel which
was defaced, he has restored unto this maruailous light, and has made the
beams thereof so to shine over al parts, and corners and quarters of this
excellent kingdom: the rich, the poor, the learned, the unlearned, the great
mighty men and potentates in the world are become defe^dors and maintayners of
the same, not only by their profession and by their word, but by their forces
and their sword, when as they have protest with their dearest blood, and yet
for all this, is not ye goodness of our God ceased toward us, but yet there is
mercies powered out still.

He has sent before us also Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, if the wish of our
hearts were given unto us in two things, as it was given to King Solomon in one
thing, we could not desire two greater blessings to be given from heaven unto
earth by god unto man, then Moses and Aaron: a good king to rule us, and a
good priest to instruct us, now if God in the multitude of his mercies has
given us the fruition of both these, how justly then may he say unto us as unto
the Jews. What can I do more?

S. Paul is very earnest with the Corinthians that they should learn to know
themselves, which is as some think the first point of wisdom. Know your selves
(says he) what do you not know your selves? so give me leave a little to
importune, know your selves, what know you not your own state, after God in
the multitude of his blessings, had given unto you to be governed for the space
of 45. years under the regiment of a most heroical, gracious, virtuous, and
religious Queen he has in the abundance of his mercies, given you a King to
reign over you, O how honorable is the name of a King, for God and the King
enterchange names, for the King is a God upon earth, and God himself is a King
in heaven.

I will express all whatsoever I mean to say concerning this matter in an
Emblem or mystery. The Lord past by, and a mighty wind rent the mountains and
tare the rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind, and after 1. King 19.
the wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake, and after
that came fire, but the lord was not in the fire, and after the fire, came a
small still voice, and the Lord was in the voice.

In the days of king Henry the 8. of renowned memory, true religion began to
appear and to show forth her head, but this was brought to pass with much
tumult and hurliburly. Here the L. passed by us in a mighty strong wind renting
the mountains and tearing the rocks, but yet the Lord was not in the wind,
Deus in turbine. It pleased not God to have a temple erected unto him in his
days, I think it was because he was a man as David was, a man of Blood.

After him succeeded K. Edward the 6. and in his days the very foundations of
Popery began to be shaken, whereupon sundry violent insurrectio^s were
attempted, and most dangerous conspiracies were prevented, here the L. passed
along by us in an earthquake, but the L, was not in the earthquake. Deus non in
commotione, no religion established in K. Edward the 6. days.

After him succeeded in the kingdom, Q. Mary, and in her days was seen in
England such a fire, as was never seen from the beginning, and I hope never
shall be seen to the ending. Here the Lord passed along by us in the fire, but
the L. was not in ye fire. Deus non in igne.

After her succeeded in the kingdom Q. Elizabeth of most happy and blessed
memory, and she albeit she was the voice, yet she was not the small still
voice, the ouerswaying faction of Popery at home, and the manifold suspicions
of practices abroad, enforced her to carry her Ensign under his ba^ner whose
name is the L. of hosts, only in the old Testament, but ever the God of peace
in the new Testament. As a voice she gave forth Tanquam ouis ad mactationem, as
a voice she gave forth, Posui deum adiutore^ meum, but the noise of the
warrior, and the report of the Cannon, and the tumbling of garments in blood,
and the rumors of wars, and the just suspicions of Armadoes and invasions
would not permit her to be the small still voice, Sibilus aure tenuis, she
found the Gospel professed, by her accompanied by the sword, as our Savior
foretold, Tinke ye that I am come to send peace Mat. 10.
upon the earth, I tell ye no, I am not come to send peace but a sword.

But we have lived to behold him, who is both the voice and the still voice, Et
sibilus, and sibilus aure tenuis, as a voice he gives out behold, The Lamb of
God Mat. 3.
which takes away the sins of the world, as a still voice he writes for his
word, Beati pacifici. 2. as a voice he protests, This is the way walk in
it, turn neither to Mat. 6.
the right hand, nor to the left, as a still voice he has made peace with them
that are a far off, and with them that are near, Pacem his qui long, Pacem
his qui prope, as a voice resolves come of it what may, I and my people will
serve 1. Sam. 17.
the living L. as a still voice he engraueth, Faciem eo in ge^tem vnam. 4. as a
voice he publishes, Exurgat Deus discipentur inimici, as a still voice he has
done more then any of his noble progenitors, for although Henricus rosas, yet
Regna Iacobus, as a voice he studieth, he disputes, he Ephe. 2.
conferreth to make us al to be of one religion, on god, on faith, on baptism,
as a still voice he labors to make us al to become one nation, Vt fiat vnus
pastor et vnum ouile, 1 Reg. 9. Ephesians. 4. Cassiodor.
vnus Rex, vna lex, vnus dux, vna lux, vna ciuitas vna communi^as, omnia sunt
vnum inquit Milissus. We have lived therefore to enjoy him which is ye voice to
enjoy him which is the still voice, et sibilus, et sibilus aure tenuis, the Lord
no doubt of it is in the voice, the Lord is in the still voice, and I give a
reason, for wars, and tumult, and sedition, and faction, and scismaticall
contention, is like unto a Cannon stone, which makes two walls of one, but
peace, and concord, and amity, and charity, and unity, and union, is like
unto Christ the corner stone, which makes one wall of two, peace and truth in
the days of Ezechia, we read it, we beleene it, the Gospel and all quietness
in the days of King James, we have it, we enjoy it, we have found him
therefore of whom the scripture says, Rex Pacificus magnificatus est super 2.
Peg. 9.
omnes reges vniuersae terra.

I dauve not up with untempered mortar, neither do I power out the precious
oil of flattery, to break that head which under Christ in his Church is the
head of us all, but I speak the words of truth and sovernesse, of truth in
respect of the matter, of soberness in respect of the fashion, and in very
reason, flattery uses not to commend that which is, but that which is not, but
rather to this end and purpose have I spoken, that which I have said, that we
may be thankful for the benefit, and with the prophetical King David, break
out into praises of our peaceable King, saying, Praise thy God O Jerusalem,
praise thy God O England, for he has made fast the batres of the gates, and
has blessed thy children within thee, he sets peace in thy borders.

Now as God has given us a good Moses, a meek King to reign over us, so if
he have given us good Priests withal, we must needs confess that he has
laden us withal his benefits, as well spiritual as corporal, and temporal,
commonly they go not far a sunder, the one is subordinate unto the other, a
good King will take order that there be good priests So Solomon a good king,
drpased Abiathar the high priest, and set up Saadoc: Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
so lustinian a godly Emperor, deposed two Bishops of Rome, Siluerius and
Vigilius, and anthorised others, the same Justinian was wont to say, that he
had no less care of the church of Christ, then of his own soul: so
Constantius, Theodosius, and Valentinianus, were wont to call themselves
Vassallos Christi, the vassals and servants of Christ, and how can Kings serve
Christ the King of Kings better, then to provide for his church a faithful
Ministry, in that state that the flock is that has no shepherd to lead it,
or a ship tossed in the floods and tempests, in the sea, and has no Pilot to
guide it, or the sucking child that has no nurse to seed it: in such state are
men's souls unless they have the Ministry of Gods word abiding amongst them,
you are as children, the Preacher is your nurse, you are as a ship tossed with
the manifold surges and tempests of this trouble some world, the preacher is
your Pilot, safely to conduct you to the harbor of rest, you are as a flock of
sheep, your preacher is your shepherd to lead you from dangerous bogges, to
the most wholesome pastures of Gods sacred word.

It is therefore a most incomparable benefit, even as much as the salvation of
men's souls, to have a learned Tim. 1.5.
clergy, and a virtuous Ministry, learned, or else how should he be able to
discharge his duty, to teach, to instruct, to correct, to reprove, to rebuke,
to confute, that the man of God may be made perfect being most absolute to
every good work, and therefore it is recuited, that he be such a one which
has been bred up at Oxford, where the University is, and not at Stanford
where the University never was, that is of no University, virtuous, otherwise
he will pull down more by his evil life, then ever he will be able to build
by sound doctrine: the saying of Gregory the great is most true, we find it
by experience to be so, culpa Sacerdotis ruina populi, in signification Lib. 2.
Miralium.
of both these, the Priest had always a Tablet before his breast in the old
law, in which was written in great letters of gold, Vrim and Thummin, in token
that he should be a man, both perfect in life, and full and about dant in the
word of God.

Concerning our selves, modesty forbids me to say much, yet necessity
inforceth me to say something, it is true indeed, neither I, nor any man else,
with any face, can justify all those that are amongst us, as amongst the best
orders that ever were, so also are there some at this day amongst us, false
prophets, devouring Wolves, wily fores, insatiable dogs, deceitful workmen,
sowers of sedition, unsavory Salt, idol pastors, which have months and speak
not, and if they had months could not eat as they devour, all were very Idols
as they are no pastors, Magus buieth, Judas sells, and some Balamits
inuesteth, this is the great cancker and calamity of our time, and no marvel
though it be so amongst us, for even amongst the best always that ever were,
are some faulty. Ruben amongst the Patriarchs, Saul amongst the Prophets,
Nicholas amongst the Diacons, Judas amongst the Apostles, the devil amongst
the Angels, thieves and murderers in the Temple of God, abbomination of
desolation in the holy place.

Notwithstanding, howsoever our ministry be debased or disgraced by some, for
these and such like other enormities, yet for all that, this is true, and the
judgment of those which are very wise, learned, and of great expeperience, and
much reverence, confirm the same, there never was a more sufficient and a more
learned Clergy, then at this day. Albeit in contention of learning I may be
worst heard for to speak, being the most unlearned of all my brethren, yet for
all that, we are not so far to seek as our adversaries would make the world
believe, as if we were such men which followed only the tide and stream of
the time and Parliament, religion as they call it, and had never seen, nor
read, nor saluted a far of, the Fathers, the Counsels, the Schoolmen, or
Ecclesiastical histories.

Saint Paul in a like matter of comparatiue contention between him and the
false Apostles, was enforced Galat. 3.
to justify his ministry after this sort, they are Hebrews, so am I: they are
Israelites, so am I: they are the seed of Abraham, so am I: they are the
Ministers of Christ, so am I: so may I say, and most justly say, between them
and us, they have skill in the tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, they have
read the Counsels, the Fathers, the Schoolmen, the Ecclesiastical Histories;
so have we: they have studied the Arts and Sciences, so have we: now if they
can be learned doing these things, I what unfortunate and unhappy men are we,
which are so unlearned, and yet do the same commonly this luck follows all
them which are professors of the truth.

Now as these men mislike, as if we lacked learning, so are there others which
mislike as much, as though we had more then sufficient to live upon, our ship
is tossed between two dangerous gulphes, Scylla and Charibdis. Aram before,
the Philistines behind, the Papists seek our lives, the Atheists seek our
livings, our Preachers now adays, say they are no better then Paul, then
Peter, then James, which were poor men, poverty with them is a commendable
estate, with like devotion as Judas did, what needs this waste says he, this
might have been sold for much, and given to the poor, not because be had any
care of the poor, but because he was a thief, Psalm. 92.
and carried the bag, and here for Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and
for Ierusalems sake, I will not keep silence.

The world has been disposed to make themselves sport with men of the Church,
as Dionysius did by Jupiters Tull. de natu. deor.
Idol, who coming into the Temple of Apollo, and finding Jupiter clothed
with a very stately rich pale of gold, takes it away clean off from his
shoulders, and gives him a coat of Linsie-woolsie: O Sir says he, this is a
great deal better for you, it will keep you warmer in the Winter, and colder
in the Summer.

Afterward, finding Aesculapius his son, set out for the ornament of his
person, with a very fair goodly long heard of gould, plays the Barber with
him, shaues him roundly, O sir says he, you are but a young man, there is no
reason that you should have a beard, your father has none. The rest of the
Images in the temple holding forth as it were in their hands certain costly
rich platters, and vessels of gould and of silver, upon which this was written
and engraven, Bona Deorum. I mary says he these are the goods of the Gods,
and you do well to offer them us, great reason we use the goodness of the gods
and so leaving a scoff took the gold away clean.

As he did then so have some others done heretofore, I cannot say justly
speaking the truth that it is done now: the land and yearly revenues which our
ancestors of renowned memory have bestowed upon churches freely for the
maintenance of good learning and laws, is now altogether taken away from us,
the good use of them, for ye evil abuse sake, this pale of gold was too heavy
for our shoulders, a garment rather of Linsiwolsye must become us better, I
would God they had given us for it either linen or woollen, for then we should
have seen by the way of exchange to have had something, they have taken away
al stone, timber, lead, iron, glass, manors and lands, and have left us just
nothing by way of recompense.

Our Bishops, which heretofore did wear long beards of Gold even down to
their girdles, have been if not altogether shaven, yet so nearely cropped and
shorn, and wot you by whom? forsooth by their sheep, there is one abuse added
more to those 12. abuses, which S. Augustine noted in his time, Senex sine
moribus etc. The sheep most monstrously and most unnaturally have flieced and
shorn their shepherds.

The whole body of the Clergy of this land whom our ancestors before us had
endued with very great and sufficient livings for the maintenance of themselves
and relief of others, whom also these men might have spared, if it had been
but for this cause only, because the Lord has challenged as his, and called
them his own portion, toward them how have these men behaved themselves? some
of them they have polled, and some of them they have pilled, and some of them
they have fleed, and some of them they have fleeced, and some they have
impropriated from them and appropriated to them selves, what by prodigality on
way and Simony another way, the 2. horsleaches daughters, which cry out, give
give, the faces of the poor clergy of this land have been so grinded, and
grated, that after so many years past, that we have had Kings to be our
noursing fathers and Queens to be our Joel. 1.
noursing mothers, we may begin with S. Paul in ye Primitive Church to make
tents ye residue of the palmer woorme has the cankerworme eaten, and the
residue of the cankerworme has the grasshopper eaten, and the residue of the
Grasshopper has the Caterpiller eaten, all men sees this to be most true, which
now I make bold to deliver to this mighty presence, many find it, some feel
it, few will speak it, no man goes about to redress it.

Only that most devout, and religious act against the deminution of the
possessions of Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics (O King) proceeding on from
your most royal munificence, and princely piety and care, has made a stop
and a stay against all future sacrileges, alienations, depredations, honors,
hereditaments and possession of the Church: for this cause shall the holy Vrim
and Thummim of Leui shine refreshed, out of ye most gracious hea^es of the
light of your charity, his devotion shall ascend sweeter then any incense in
the presence of God, continually to entreat for you, Habes enim multos
intercessores, his prayers shall be as so many Legions of angels everlastingly
to guard you, against all plots and practizes, against all treasons and
treacheries, the naked loins of the poor shall bless him, I mean Leui being
covered with his fleece, the empty bellies shall bless him, I mean Leui,
being filled with his morsells, and we all shall bless the memory of you most
dread Sovereign, which has enabled Leui to give, and so by giving to receive
a blessing.

He reigns unprofitably, which is horn and deserves not to reign, says
the golden-mouthed Chrysostom, but he that comes unto us in a double right
of nature and so much grace; all the blessings of both the testaments rest on
him, rest on his, even so, Amen. And yet I give my note in conclusion to this
point: Moses and Aaron are joined together in my text, and in a 100. places
besides of holy Scripture, they should never be made base, by any vile
contempt, or abject beggary, which follow kings so near in the word of God.

It follows in the Text, Remember what Balaac the King of Moab has devised.
As touching the devise of Balaac, it was on this wise: After that he saw that
he could not induce Balaim to curse Gods people, he devised a new stratageme by
the daughters of Moab, suborned some of them through their wanton allurements,
to entice the children of Israel to commit first fornication with them, and
afterward Idolatry, that in so doing, they might be brought to stincke in
the nostrils of God, and being cast out of his favor and protection, be made a
present prey to their enemies the nations. This was the devise of Balaac the
King of Moab, the end of it was to make havoc of the people of God, the mean
to effect it, was first fornication, and afterward idolatry, the instrument, a
strange woman.

The devise of Balaac the King of Moab, was a devise coming from flesh and
blood, and a devise to be wrought by a special instrument of flesh and blood,
viz. a woman. The devise of this last traiterous, Heathenish, uncircumcised
Moabites, was a devise not coming from flesh and blood, or any humane nature,
but from the devil and his Angels, for seeing their doctrine is a doctrine of
devils, it follows accordingly, that their devises, be the devises of devils,
as the tree such is the fruit, a proper kind of religion which dispenceth with
Fornication, and maintains rebellions. Of hell, the Prophet Esaias says, the
nourishment of it is wood, and much fire, and the breath of the Lord like a
stream of Brimstone Esaias. 10.
does, set it on fire, of this we may say the nourishment of it should have bin
gunpouder, and much fire, and the breath of the devil, like a stream of
brimstone should have set it on fire.

The Devil when he threw down the house upon the children of Job, threw it
down when they were doing il, to wit, eating, drinking sporting, and
pastiming, these men, worse then their father the devil, would have blown up
the Parliament house men being assembled together to do good, the King, the
state, the Clergy, the nobility the gentry, the commonalty, all being
assembled together in one to set down wholesome laws, for the good of Gods
glory, quietness of the church, and peace of the commonwealth, what a strange
monster is treason, which diueth down to hell, and beneath hell, the very
bottomless pit of hell, for to hatch devises: for this is the resolution of
treason:

Flectere si nequen superos, Acharonta mouebo. The Poets feign of Cerberus the
Dog of hell, that he is a Dog of many heads and we read of Hydra the
Serpent that he is a Serpent of many heads, which being cut off spring up
again as fast as they be cutts off. Treason the very Dog of hell, the very
head of Satanas, the old subtle Serpent is like unto Hydra a Serpent of many
heads, which being cut off, springs up again as fast as they be cut off. It
is to be wished, nay it is to be prayed for, that the sword of Gods justice
may so cut them off, or rather sear them up in these last Traitors, that
they never spring up again, and if they do, let them know there is a decree
against them more firm, then the decree of the Meads and Persians, which never
changes, God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hayric scalpe of
such a one, which goes on still in his wickedness.

Remember what Balaac, the King of Moab has devised.

That which the Lord would have remembered, may not be forgotten. Remember what
these heathenish Ethnicall, rebellious Moabites had denised, seeking they
sucked that device from the smoke and breath, and brimslone of the Locusts of
hell, I mean the Jesuit the fouls Puritant Papist, remember it therefore to al
kind of circumstances, remember the place, they would have blown up the
Parliament house, a place next the Temple consecrated to holiness: remember
what time, when all the whole estate was included in one: remember the engine,
by fire and gunpouder, the fuel of hell: remember the instrument, the one
Sinon like, which was in Vtramque paratus, he thought to purchase heaven by
foul destructions and massakers: remember to what end, Caligula-like, at one
blow to have taken away both King and state, and root and branch, and Church
and religion, and commonwealth and laws.

Can this pestilent devise of this Heathenish Moabites be forgotten? no, no, it
will be remembered wheresoever it goes by the mark of infamy. Jeroboam the
son of Nebah, that made Israel to sin, Jeroboam the son of Nebah which
made Israel to sin: the Jesuit yt child of perdition, that made Israel to
rebel: the Jesuit the child of perdition, that made Israel to rebel. Let it
be remembered to continue more durable against them, and against their plots,
and against their practices, and against their devises, and against their
designs, then yt pillars of Hercules, as Gregory Nazienzen Oration prima in
Iulianum.
of his orations against Julian the ranagate, Hanc a me habes sempiternae
ignominiae columnu^ Herculeis columnis sublimiorem and insigniore^, so let this
wickedness of theirs stand against them more durable, then the pillar of
Absolo^, then the tower of Babel, then the pillars of Hercules, then the black
Marble pillar in Paris, then all the Pyramides of Egypt, to what end? marry to
make them stink in the nostrils of them that are living, like a dead carrion,
to moderate their excesses and their outrages for the present, and to terriffe
the posterities and generations to come.

Let it be remembered, that we being the children of God in imitating God, may
learn out of evil for to draw good, for as old Origin says, God were not
omnipotently good, unless he were able to draw good out of evil, Malitiam
deus Origin. in 4. cap. Exodus
non fecit, sed factam vtitur ea ad necessarias causas, so it may stand with
the good and Christian policy, to use these wicked actions of disloyal men,
to make more sure preservatives, for godly Princes, and faithful subjects:
Serpentum venena depelli medicamentis confectis exserpentibus perhibent, which
speak not bloudily to incense, for what has the pulpit to do with strangling
of blood? and I know that this presence before whom I stand, resembles upon
earth the mercy seat of God, and goes unwillingly constrained, and sorrowing
out of the same, as God himself did, when he said, Ah I must ease me of mine
enemies, and avenge me of mine adversaries, and therefore I express my
meaning, and pray, that the divided heads, and the divided hearts, and the
divided legs, and the divided arms, and the divided quariers of these last
traitors, so justly executed for their foul offense, may ensample the whole
world, never to carry a divided head, or a divided heart, nor a divided part,
nor a divided tongue, nor a divided soul, nor a divided thought against our
dearest Sovereign.

Notwithstanding, so many plots defeated, and so many deliverances, deliverance
upon deliverance, wrought upon this a most memorable day of the week, make the
King as confident as a Lion, for he knows, that it is God which has set a
crown of gold upon his head. and therefore all traitors may as well fly upon
the wings of the wind, or remove mountains out of their places, as to depose
and transplant the royal estate of Princes, therefore as King David said, so
King James may say, Thou have made my mountain so strong that it cannot be
moved, yea although Gunpowder lie under it.

It is a vain thing for Mole-hils to rise against mountains, as the same
little creatures which we call Wants or Moales, dig frenches, make breaches,
and raise hillocks, yet by certain breaches and vents, and hillockes of their
own making, they are discovered, so to their very letter, albeit these
traitors did dig under the earth never so secretly, and carried their
conspiracies never so covertly, yet by certain vents and breaches of their
own making, they have been discovered, and as the hand writing appearing unto
Baltasar, prognosticated ruin and destruction unto him, so a hand writing
coming from their selves, has wrought confusion unto their plotte, and I hope
shall work confusion to all plottes and practices, issuing from all fancies
and factions for evermore.

As touching the answer of Balaim to Balaac it was this, Though Balaac would
give me this house full of gold and silver, I connot pass the commandment of
the lord, as the lord shall put in my mouth, so will I speak, I cannot pass
the commandment of the L. Balaim could not, nor would not pass the
commandment of the L. Popish Balamites curses them who^ the Lord has blessed
and blesses them whom the lord has cursed, but let us see by the way of
comparison whether they be in better state whom the Lord has blessed, and the
Pope has cursed, or whether they be in worser state, whom the Lord has cursed
and the Pope has blessed, and this is evident, god has made them to yield
unto us, and not us unto them, he has set us above and not beneath, he has
made us the head, and not the tail he has sent a faintnes into the hearts of
our enemies and sorrow upon the inhabitants of Palestina, the L. has made us
plenteous in goods, we have lent unto others, and not borrowed our selves, in
our strength and fortifications, the multitude of the valient men of this
kingdom, are as the dust of the earth, and as the sand upon the sea shore
innumerable. In ye fatnes of the earth and the fertility of a plentiful soil,
we eat our bread in plentiousnes and are fully satisfied, the lord has
blessed us at home, and abroad in all the works and labors of our hands, and
all the devises and executions of our counsels, and that which is more then all
this, he has chosen us to be a holy, and peculiar people unto himself, and
has imparted unto us his law and commandment. O how beautiful therefore are
thy tents, O Jacob and thy habitations O England, as the walls are they
stretched forth, as the gardens by yt river side, as the Alloe trees which the
lord has planted, as the Cedar trees by the rivers of water, and therefore we
care not although the Pope curse us, the more ye pope Numb. 22.
does curse us, the more the L. does bless us, and therefore no doubt the L.
does bless us, because the pope does curse us.

All the works of God are done (how soever they be done in mercy or in
justice) to the honor of Gods glory. Now the end why he has done these and
more then these for us, is that we may know the righteousness of the Lord, how
good and gracious our God is to us, that he has not immeasurably grieved us
above that we can conveniently bear, that he has kept us from the noysomnes
of pestilence, biting teeth of famine, and violence of sword, that he has
freed us from the bondage and slavery of our consciences, in comparison whereof
the making of brick in Egypt had bin very tolerable, that he has given us a
most mild, a most peaceable and a most religious Moses to govern us; a
learned and sufficient Clergy to instruct us, that he has defealed and
disappointed clean both Balaac and Moab, and all their heathenish devises; and
that he has turned the curse of Balaim into blessngs, and has done for us
more then for any other nation under heaven, all this he has done that we may
know the righteousness of the Lord.

O that we were wise, then would we understand this, we would consider our
latter end, why should God thus hem us in on every side? why should he set us
still as a signet on his right hand? why should he thus tender us as the apple
of his eye? why should he deal otherwise with us then with ye rest of the
nations? our part, our mess, has bin Beniamins mess, five times as much as ye
rest of our brethren. In every one of these things, God knocks still at the
door of every one of our consciences, he would come in to us, and he would sup
with us, he has besought us for these many years, eue^ as a father his
children, and as a mother her daughters, and as a nurse her babes, yt we would
be his people, as he is our God, and that we would be his children as he is our
father, or despise we the riches of the bountifulnes and patience, and long
sufferance of God, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads us to
repentance? or if not so? I fear me he may say of us as heretofore he did say
of the^, he that should have bin upright when he waxed fat sporned with his
heel thou art fat thou art gross, thou art laden with fatnes, therefore
they forsook. God that made them, and regarded not ye strong hold of his
salvation, God has as abundantly blessed us, as ever he did the Jewish
nation, with whom he contested so earnestly in this place, if we deal as
vntha^kfully with him as they did before us, we which know what has befallen
them, cannot be ignorant what in time may befall us.

God of his infinite mercy, for his dear son Jesus Christ his sake, grant
that our end be not worse then our beginning, and continuance hitherto has bin
thou O Lord have sent forth strength for us, stablish the thing which thou have
wrought in us for thy temple sake, O Lord God at Jerusalem. O give salvation
unto Israel out of Sion, and perpetuate the same, keep us, and preserve us
under the shadow of thy wings from this time forth for evermore. If it be thy
will from the noysomnes of Pestilence that it never infect us, from the biting
teeth of famine, that they never devour us, from the violence of Sword that it
never come near us, and as by a mighty hand thou hest delivered us from the
bondage and slavery of our consciences, so keep us good lord we pray thee, in
this freedom and liberty of the gospel which we al enjoy under our mild
Moses, that he may long reign over us under a faithful clergy, that they
may carefully instruct us. O let yt malice of ye wicked come once to an end,
the pestilent devises of Balaac, and the deuilish imprecations of Balaim, and
bless thou thy people: greater blessings O Lord then we have already received
we cannot ask or desire: we pray O Lord for the continuance of these things,
and grant our request O Lord, even for thy dear sons sake, unto whom with
the holy and blessed spirit, 3. persons in Trinity, one God in unity, be
rendered all power, dominion, glory, majesty, and service for ever and ever.

Amen.
The second Sermon.
Text.
Ioh. 16. verse. 23. Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in the Sonnet name,
shall be given unto you.
A Promise we have in these words, more excellent, more certain, and more
universal, then ever as yet has come, or ever at any time can come out of the
mouth of any prince or Monarch, universal, for that it promised all, and
excluded nothing, more certain, for that he promises which never deceived,
Dabit vobis, what so free as gift? most high and excellent, because he promised
to give from the highest, a Patre, from the Father.

Out of the coafer the treasure may be taken, the coafer is as it were the
Father, the treasure is all grace, quicquid: the Key in nomine meo, will open
to this treasure.

From the cipher letter, the sense is to be found, the letter is as it were the
father, therefore ask the father, the sense is all grace, quicquid, the
expositor in nomine meo, will find out the sense. Therefore that ye pray, and
pray effectually in your prayers. 1. Know whom you are to ask. 2. What things
you are to ask. 3. And what manner you are to ask. 1. Whom you must ask, the
father, petite patrem. 2. What things you must ask, quid, or quicquid, that
which is worthy of the name of a thing. 3. In what manner, in nomine meo, in the
sons name: of every one of these, and first of the person whom we must ask,
and that is the father, petite patrem. The most merciful name of father in
holy Scripture, gives us many things to understand in God, to wit,
assentialitie, eternity, antiquity. 1. Generation, spiration, production. 2.
Predestination, providence, government. 3. Creation, disposition, distinction.
4. Adoption, guvernation, education. 5. Instruction, redargution, correction,
many more remain.

But principally in asking graces, the name of father implies two things,
which we ought always to set before our eyes in prayer, to wit, the power of
God, and the will of God, the might of God, and the mercy of God, his great
ability, and his great love; for so it falls out amongst men, in asking any
thing of a man, I consider whether he can do it of his power, and if he can do
it of his power, whether he will do it of his love, and so it is with God.

Therefore these two conceits of power and will, of might and mercy, Mary
Magdalen had when she prayed Ioh. 11.
in the behalf of her brother Lazarus. Lord, he whom thou love is sick:
Lord, is a name of power, therefore thou can, he whom thou love, therefore
I am to persuade my self, that in mercy thou will restore him.

These two conceits of power and will, the Leaper had when he prayed, Lord if
thou will thou can make Math. 9.
me clean, vis, there is the will: potes, there is the power: and our Savior
answered to both, to the will, volo, to the power, mundare, in the Imperative
mood.

These two conceits of power and will, of might and mercy, our Savior
himself had when he prayed; Father, althings are possible unto thee, if thou will let this cup pass away from me: All things are possible unto Math. 27.
thee, there is the power: if thou will, there is the love.

Here the Prophet David does will, that men join together in their prayers,
these two; Semel loquutus est Psalm. 62.
Dominus duo haec audiui: God spoke once, and heard these two things from his
mouth; Power belongs unto God, and mercy unto the Lord, for that he will
render to every one according to his works, note it: God speaks only one
thing, he wills me in my prayers to call him father: but by this one word
father, he will have me to understand two things, his power and his love, his
might, and his mercy. And as touching the power, who is more able then the
father. 1. The father can do every thing in his son. 2. The father of the
household in the family. 3. The father of heaven in heaven. 4. The father of
the world in the world. 5. The father of all can do every thing in all. And as
touching the will, who loves more then a father, and what natural father so
much as our spiritual and heavenly father? Math. 6.
If you being evil (says our Savior Christ) can give your children good
things, if so be they ask them, how much more shall your heavenly father give
you good things, if so be you desire them?

Wherefore as the witty Bees, when they go about to make their sweet
hony-combes, lick first upon the sweetest flowers of the fields and gardens of
the world, and then carry the sweet joyce into their hiues, so before you
enter to your prayers, fix your cogitations upon these two sweet flowers of
power and love, which you find in the name of the father, and then carry the
pure joyce of them into the inward hiues of your souls and consciences, and so
shall you make a most precious hony-combe of all spiritual devotion.

The consideration of these two things, will breed in us two other things, 1.
humility, out of the consideration of the power of a father. 2. Confidence out
of the consideration of the love of a father.

A most potent father, but to so great mightiness what profound humility will
be sufficient. The Prophet David, to humble himself in his Prayers, sometimes
reckons up his natural defects, as where he Psalm. 22.
says: I am a worm and no man, a very scorn and derision amongst men:
sometimes his original sin, as where he says; I was borne in wickedness,
and in Psalm. 51.
sin has my mother conceived me: Sometimes his actual sins, as where he
says, We have sinned with Psalm. 110.
our Fathers, we have done wickedly.

And how many things are there to humble us before the majesty of God? speak
we one word, make we one beck think we one thought, but in God and from God,
in him we live and move and have out being. O poor wretched miserable beggars
that we are, that which a great King said of himself may be said of any, Ego
aute^ mendicus sum, let us ask then as beggars, acknowledging Psalm. 29
our deep sores and wounds of sin craving like beggars kneeling like beggars,
following like beggars, importaning like beggars, let us ask the father,
petite patre^, let us ask yt father we great renerence even for this, because
he is a father of great power, pater potestatis, ask ye father we great
reverence, because he is a father of great power, ask the father we great
confidence, because he is a father of much merey, Pater misericordiarum, Ephesians. 2.
Confidence and assurance in asking graces, is the only strength and marrow as
it were of all our prayers, therefore the holy Ghost says, Si fiduciam habemus
apud Deum, if we have confidence with God, what soever we 1. Ioh 2.
ask we shall obtain, now the name of a father implies all confidence. 1.
The father is merciful, therefore Saluum me fac propter misericordiam tuam. 2.
Great are the merits of the son of so loving a father, therefore Respice in
faciem Christitui. 3. True are the promises of the father, therefore fulfill
thy word unto thy servant, Vt in sermonibus tuis iustificeris. 4. Can my
faults, can my defects, can my vanities set a bar against me, and the father?
I set against my faults the mercy of the father, against my defects the merits
of the son, against my vanities, the inward comfort and consolation of the
holy Ghost, and therefore I implore, I beseech, I entreat I importune, I am
instant, in season and out of season only let not my heart condemn me of any
soul or gross thing, and then praying to the father in Thrists name, and for
such a thing as I ought to do, I shall be sure to obtain: so the holy
Scripture, Si cor nostrum nos non reprehendit, tunc fiduciam habemus apud Deum.
1. Ioh. 2.


Have you ever marked that when you would look upon the sun, your eyes
being not able to behold so great a light, ye use the defense of your hands,
and the same sun causes the reflection of a shadow from both your hands unto
your breasts, I must tell you, God the Father is the true bright clear sun,
unto whom you may not approach with so confident an eye to ask graces, without
the interposition of these two hands of power and leave, which you have in the
name of Father, and the interposition of these too, will cause a shadow to
reflect upon your breast, that is, will work in you good desires, good
purposes, and virtuous actions whiles out of the consideration of the power of
the father, rises humility, and out of the consideration of the love of the
Father rises confidence, these are 2. legs, 2. arms, 2. wings which will
carry us into heaven, two things very needful and necessary in our prayers,
and both are produced in considering God as a Father.

Secunda pars.
But to rise a point higher, from the person whom we must ask, to the thing
what we must ask, what may we ask, nap what thing may we not be bold to
ask? Si quid, si quid, without any limitation, quicquid, quicquid, without any
determination. All favor, al goodness, all grace, all glory, all this may I
ask as much as you can see, as much as you hear, as much you can belecue, as
much as you can hope for, all this may you ask, temporal things for the
world, spiritual things for the soul, corporal things for the body,
eternal things for glory, all this may you ask.

What will ye that the heavens be shut up? Elias asked it and obtained, that
the heavens be opened, the same desired it, and had it. That the Sun stand
still, Joshua asked it and obtained it, that the Sun go back ward, Ezechias
desired it, and had it. That fire come down from heaven, Elias asked and
obtained it: that waters spring out of the rocks, Moses asked it and had it.

That the floods and waves sustain ye? Peter asked it and obtained it: that
the dead rise again, sundry have asked it, and have had it.

What will ye, wisdom? Solomon asked it and obtained it. Grace? David asked it
and had it.

Heaven and Paradise? the Thief asked it and obtaned it, quicquid, quicqud,
without any limitation, si quid, si quid, without any determination, and to
the reason, we may ask all of him, which can give all, we may ask all of him
which will give all, voluntate labiorum non fraudabo te, says God, I will not
defraude the desire of thy lips, you may ask all therefore, even as much as
your tongue can speak, or heart imagine.

And for this cause we Christians, though we be poor, yet are we the richest
of all other Creatures, note it, for Cattle and brute beasts, nature has
provided food and sustenance, and many gets it only by his work and labor
God has clothed beasts which skins, and the trees with bark, man only is
borne poor and naked, the beasts have for armor to defend them both horns
and hoofes, and teeth and cloves, man only is borne disarmed in all, the open
air hurts not them, man scarce defends himself with houses and
buildinges, the life of all other things is quiet and secure, and this life of
ours, we know not how to term it, a life or a death, surely, if not a
perpetual shipwreck, yet a continual warfarre, nevertheless the beasts make
no request, but man requesteth, these Creatures use no prayers, man prays,
now if by this mean of prayer, he may get, all what soever is behoueable for
him, quicquid petiaritis, who can be more rich, or who can be more wealthy then
a Christian?

All vniuersalitye is in this word quicquid, or si quid, we may ask and
obtain it, so that it be quid, that is worthy of the name of a thing, now
he that prays God will further him in his sins, prays not for quid, but
for nihil, Sine ipso factum est nihil, God made not sin, so does Saint
Austine conster it, Sin destroys in us the true quid, which is goodness,
and makes a man as nothing, or worse then nothing, Quia melius nihil esse quam
infaeliciter Mat. 15.
esse.

Therefore it is said of the child of perdition, that it had been good for him
he had never been borne: that man therefore that prays that GOD will help
him in his sins shall not be heard, because he asks not quid, but nihil,
witness the Prophet David, Si iniquitates asperunt in cord meo, dominus non
exaudiet, If there be any iniquity in my heart, the Lord will Psa. 14.
not hear me.

Again, note farther, not only he that asks not quid, receives not quid,
but he that asks nihil, receives nihil, he that asks nothing, receives
nothing, he that asks sin, receives sin, for in asking a sin, he
commits a new sin, and so his very prayers are turned into sin,
according to that in the Psalm, Fiat oration eius in peccatum, Let his prayer
Psa. 102.
be turned into sin.

In an other sense does Gregory the great expound this word, this word
quicquid, as si quid, that is, that ye ask quid, and not quale, that is, that
ye ask substances and not accidents, that is, that ye ask substantial
things, and not vain things, that is, that ye ask permanent things, and not
transitory things, for all these corporal and worldly things being compared
to spiritual and eternal things, are not quid, but quale, vanities, toys,
leaves, trifles, shadows, smoke, nay that are nothing, or very near nothing,
they are the nihil, or very near to the nihil, I say, and will prove it.

1. Either nothing for this cause, because many in seeking after them by
sundry fears and cares, and turmoyles, and tumults, and labors, and
vexations, do waste and consume their vital spirits, and so bring themselves
to nothing, according to that of S. Austine, propter talia se homines
a^nihilant imitando, insidiando, machinando, bella^do. Ad fratres in eremo.


2. Or nothing for this cause, because they avail and help us nothing in the
fearful trial of examination, and severity of judgment, according to the
censure of the Psalmist, Dormierunt somnum suum and nihil inuenerunt: Psalm. 54.
the rich men of this world have slept their sleep, and found nothing, for
their bodies must to the earth, their riches to the world, their souls to
judgment, and so there is nothing left of all that ever they had to plead for
them.

3. Or nothing for this cause, because they never satiate or content the soul,
for the soul having received many of them, desires still to receive more of
them, as if she had received nothing at all, according to that experiment,
which Salomo^ found to be true in his own heart. The eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with Eccles. 4.
hearing. Can honors satiate the soul, many great honors were unto Hamon, and
yet he is discontented in respect of Mardochay. All this can nothing avail me,
says he, as long as I see Mardochaie the Jew sitting at the Kings gate.

Can pleasures satiate the soul? Solomon had his eyes, his ears, his hands,
his heart, full of pleasure, and yet he cries out: All things are full of
labor, and man cannot express them, can riches satiate the soul? Of and
against covetous rich men, God says: Ye eat and are not filled, ye drink
and are not satisfied, ye cloth, ye, and Hagge. 2.
ye are not warmed, he that earneth money, puts the same into a bottomless
bag. Can humane learning, can learning satiate the soul? the Philosophers
excelled in this, yet Saint Paul obbraideth them, where is the scribe, where is
the learned, where is the disputer of this 2. Cor. 4.
world, is not the wisdom of this world foolishness before God can
territories, can dominions, can Empires, satiate the soul? Alexander hearing
that there were three worlds weept because he had got but one of them of whom
this verse was made.

Vnus Pilleo iuueni non sufficit orbis. For de opibus praua, of riches comes
wicked things, de voluptatibus turpia, of pleasures comes filthy things, de
honoribus vana, of honors comes vain things, all Innocentius
tends to that which the Prophet Jeremy an eye witness saw, aspexi terram et
ecce erat inanis and nihil, I bebeld the whole face of the earth and behold it
was empty Ier. 4.
and nothing, empty, for that it had no fullness in it to satiate the soul,
and nothing, for that it was full of sin to defile the soul. And therefore
pray not so much for honors, or riches or treasures, or pleasures, or health or
wealth, or prosperity, and such like: these are not the essential quid, but
the accidental quale, nay they are nothing in comparison of the true quid,
hear the Eccl. 7.
censure of the wisest King, diuitias nihil duxi in comparatione illius, I
esteem riches nothing in comparison of wisdom, and if he esteem riches
nothing in comparison of wisdom, the whole world esteems all the rest nothing
in Comparison of riches for.

Et genus et formam regina pecunia donat. And therefore for honors and riches
and treasures and pleasures, and health, and wealth, and prosperity, we pray
not absolutely but conditionally, so far forth as they tend to the true quid,
that is to the glory of God, and bettering of our souls, for that petition for
temporal things, Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis, has always a reference
to the other petitions for grace and glory: idueniat regnum tuum, fiat voluntas
tua, to shut up all in one, if ye ask that which is evil, you sin and ask
nothing, in that ye ask that which is worse then nothing, if ye ask temporary
things only, ye err, because ye ask not the substantial quid, but accidental
quale, shadows not substances, if ye ask them in a disorderly manner,
preferring temporal things before spiritual things, you ask amiss, because
you would employ them upon your lusts.

If you ask them conditionally, so far forth as they tend to the true quid,
to the good of the glory of God, and salvation of the soul: you ask that
which by good usage may be made quid, although in it self it Antonius.
be not the true quid, for as a witty Schooleman says, Temporal things stand
as things indifferent between quid and nihil, the good usage of them makes
them to be quid, the bad usage of them brings them Sermon 3. (...).
to nihil, for as holy Barnard says; Vsus eorum bonus, abi sus malus,
sollicitudo peicr, questus turpior, the use of them is good, the abuse of them
is naught, over much care to get them is worse, and being euilly gotten, and
prodigally spent, they prove worst of all: but the best way is always to ask
that which is quid, which is worthy of the name of a thing. Four things may we
ask which are the true quid: to wit, Remission of sins, Grace, Perseverance,
and Glory: in the te Deum, which is sung in the Morning prayer, you have all
these; for remission of sins, Lord save thy people: for grace, And bless
thine inheritance: for perseverance, And govern them: for glory, And lift
them up for ever.

Three things you may ask which are the true quid: Mercy for that which is
past, Grace for the present, and illumination for the future. In the Psalm
which is said in the Evening prayer, ye have all these: for that which is
past, God be merciful unto us: for that which is present, And bless us: for
that which is to come, And show the light of thy countenance upon us.

Two things ye may ask which are the true quid, to eschew evil, and do
good, Declinare a malo, facere bonum, What will ye that the quid be one and
singular? Hear the Prophet David, Vnum petij a Domino, Psalm. 88.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, and I will not cease to require the
same, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, to behold the beauty of his
countenance, and to visit his Temple: But in this one thing there are all
things: And therefore as Saint Austine says; Ama vnum bonum in quo sunt omnia
bona, Love one thing, in which are all things: Pete vnum bonum, in quo sunt
omnia bona, and ye have enough.

For 1* if ye be delighted with beauty, here the just shall rise, and shall
shine as the firmament; and they that lead many unto righteousness, shall
shine as the stars for ever and ever, 2. if with a long and healthful life,
here shall be healthful eternity, and everlasting sanitie, for the bodies of
the Saints shall live for ever, and their health is from the Lord. 3. If for
fullness and satietie, here the Saints of God shall be made drunken Bonauent.
de diala salutis.
with the rivers of Paradise, they shall be filled with the beauty of Gods
countenance. 4. if for concord or charity? here the Saints of God shall love
God better then themselves, and their brethren as themselves, and God shall
love them better then they can love their own selves, and they shall love God
and themselves, and their brethren, for Gods sake; and God shall love them all
for his own sake. 5. If for power and ability? here the will of Gods Saints
shall have an omnipotent operation, for as God can do all things whatsoever he
will by himself, so they shall do all whatsoever they will thorough God. 6.
If with honor and dignity, here God shall make his faithful servants,
honors over much, even heirs of immortality, and heirs of a kingdom, and
fellow heirs with Jesus Christ: Therefore ask this one thing with the Prophet
David* and ye have asked the true essential quid, in which are all things,
and so much of the second.

Pars tertia.
In the third place, I observed the mean how we come to obtain all those
things which is needful and behooueable for us, and that is by offering up
our prayers in the sons name. In the same little instruments which are made
with many wheels, one within the other, and each of them having imprinted upon
them sundry letters, until you turn them forward and backward, in such sort,
that the straight line do direct to every letter, it is impossible that the
order of opening should be disclosed or that drawn out which is fast enclosed.
The Father is the fountain and original of graces, from the abundance of
whose stream, all manner of grace and goodness does flow, so says Saint
James, Every good and perfect gift comes from above, and proceeds from the
Father of lights, howbeit as Saint Paul says, He dwells in the light which
no man can attain unto to discover him, therefore unto us, and to open all the
treasure enclosed in him, behold the straight line, behold the true letter,
Petite in nomine meo, ask in Christ's name, and you shall obtain.

But here it may be demanded what it is to ask in Christ's name, Chrysostom
says, that then we ask in the name of Jesus, which signifies salvation, when
as we ask nothing else, but that which appertains to salvation, S. Austine
says, that then we ask in the name of Christ, which signifies anointed when
as we are anointed in the faith and virtues of Christ: the word Nomen
according to the Scriptures, sometimes signifies authority, as to baptize in
the name of Christ is to baptize out of the authority of Christ: sometimes to
have such a name, signifies to be such an one as his name shall be called
Emanuel, that is by interpretation God with us, sometimes the word name is taken
for the virtue of the merit of Christ, as where it is said, At the name of Jesus
Christ, every knee shall bow, the things in heaven, the things in earth, and
underneath the earth, That is, give thanks for the virtue of Christ's merit,
Angels in heaven shall bow their knees, for that implentur ruinas, there
seats are filled up, and men on earth, for that their sins are remitted, and
the bodies of faithful persons under the earth, for that they are to be
restored to the fullness of life, and therefore with Cirrell I take the word,
Nomen, in the last sense for the virtue and merit of Christ, and say that
Petere patrem in nomine Christi, Is to desire him, not to look upon any
unworthiness in us, but upon the worthiness of his son, Respice in faciem
Christi tui.

Thus you see, it is not enough in your prayers to ask such a one, that is
such a person, such a goodness, or such a gift, or such a grace, but you must
have a special care in virtue, of whose merit you ask that gift, not in the
virtue of the merit of Patriarch, or Prophet, Angel or Archangell, Saint, or
Saints, but in the virtue of the merit, and satisfaction of Christ Jesus in
nomine meo, there is the mean.

The Prophet David uses many arguments and reasons, by the which (as he
thinks) he might and should prevail with God in his prayers, of the which
some are drawn from GOD, some from himself, others from external things. 1.
From GOD, hear me O Lord for that thou art mighty, hear me for thy mercy
sake, hear me for that thou use to take compassion, hear me that thou
might be justified in thy sayings. 2. From himself hear me, for that in
comparison of others, I may seem to be righteous, hear me for that I have
washed my hands in innocence, hear, me for my soul trusts in thee, hear
me for that I am abandoned of all others. 3. From external things, hear me
for the reproach of the enemy, hear me, why should he triumph this day over
me, hear me, why should he say to my soul there, there, so would we have it,
hear me, why should the enemy blaspheme thee thus daily? thus the devout king
David labored by all possible means, to prevail with God in his prayers.

But to say truly, we have a more pregnant and urgent motive to obtain at
Gods hands, and that is Petere patrem in nomine Christi, a name which the
Sinagogue never used for ordinary, for they never went higher then to pray,
propter Abraham, Isaac, et Jacob: Ierem. 12.
calling on the father Enigmatically in the virtue of the promised seed, which
was to issue out of these Patriarchs loins: and the most illuminate amongst
them, never used this name but figuratively when they prayed, Respice in faciem
Christi tui, nay the Apostles themselves were not come to this high manner of
praying as to ask in Christ's name: And therefore our Savior tells them in
this Chapter: Vsque modo nihil petieritis, hitherto ye have asked nothing in my
name, and exhorts them, ask and ye shall obtain.

And as the Apostles of Christ, so the Church of the Apostles, learned to offer
up their prayers in the name of Christ: concluding every prayer and Collect as
you may see in the communion book with this clause, Per Iesum Christum Dominum
nostrum, Through our Lord Jesus Christ, O most bountiful Lord of whom we may
say. Petimus te, per te, et propter te. We ask Gloss. ord. in loco.
thee, we ask by thee, and we ask for thee, we ask thee in that thou art
God, we ask by thee, in that thou art our mediator, we ask for thee, in that
by the virtue of thy merit, all our prayers are founded and grounded.

To make your prayers to be effectual, many conditions are to be required.
1. Let your prayers be fitly and aptly prepared, for a medicine which is
prepared, helps, and not prepared, hurts. 2. Let it be innocent and pure
for the spouse then pleases the Bridgrome best, when she is a Virgin, and
beautiful* 3. Let it be mental and votall, as occasion is offered, for
devotion like the fire of Willowe, unless it be blown, it will go out and
die. 4. Let it be well desposed and quiet, for the harmony delights not
where there is a noise. 5. Let it be discreet and wary, for salt is always
convenient to a sacrifice. 6. Let it be faithful and humble, for humility
aduanceth us, and faith makes God to stoop. 7. Let it be lifted up on high,
for a pigme must be lifted up above his own measure, to talk with a giant. 8.
Let it be devout and sincere, for the incense unless it be put on fire
sinelleth not. 9. Let it be forcible and strong, for the darte with the more
force it is cast, the farther it flies, and deeper it pierseth. 10. Let it be
full of love and ardent, for the Iron burning, pierseth more then when it is
cold. 11. Let it be moist and weeping, for with that temperature the hardest
stone is dissolved. 12. Let it be bold and importune, for the silly whelpe
after the repulses, obtains the morsels at his masters table. 13. In a word
to say all, let it be in Christ's name, for an ointment powered forth, made the
whole house to smell, and Christ's name is an ointment powered forth, oloum
effusum nomen tuum, not only an ointment, as holy Barnard well notes, quia
lucet praedicatum, for it shines while it is preached, pascit ^ecogitatum, for
that it feeds, whilst it is thought upon, lenet inuocatum, for that it
quieteth the conscience whiles it is called upon, but oloum effusum, an
ointment powrod forth powered forth, for that majesty took upon it, humility,
power took upon it infernitie.

The mighty GOD became the prince of peace, the wounderfull became the
councellor, Ego dominus, et ego dominus, became misericors, et miserator
Dominus, powered forth upon men, upon Angles, upon Saints, upon sinners, upon
bond, upon free, upon male and female; powered forth from heaven unto earth,
from the east to the west, from the Jews to the gentles, from the Grecians to
the Barbarians, from the known word, to the vnkowen world, from Jerusalem, to
Tubal, and Iapan, the Isles a far off, powered forth like the oil of the
widows cruse of Sa^repta, took greater advantage, for of one Christ, is risen
a whole world of Christians, powers forth like the precious ointment which
ran down Arons beard, unto the skirts of his garment, for we have all
received of his fullness, grace for grace: powered forth, for the holy ointment
of the Arc of Gods Testament, the savor and sweetness of that ointment, drew
on all the Jews to follow the Arc, and the sweet savor of Christ's virtues,
had drawn on all the world in the name of the son to worship the father.
Petite in nomine meo, Ask in my name, a name of greatness, a name of
majesty, a name of salvation, a name of glory, a name of greatness, his name
shall be called wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
father, the prince of peace, a name of Majesty at the name of Jesus Christ,
every knee shall bow, the things in heaven, the things in earth, and things
underneath the earth, a name of salvation, there is no name given us under
heaven, by the which we may be saved, but only in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, a name of glory, in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom, knowledge
and understanding, because it pleases the father that in him all fullness
should dwell. Petite in nomine meo, ask in my name, which has bin derided by
the Gentles, scorned of the Jews, abused of the Heretics, persecuted by
tyrants, and trembled at by the devils, but within short time shall eat
idolatry from the Gentles, superstition from the Jews, the Church usurped from
the heretics, the fierceness to shed blood from tyrants, and the very seats
of heaven from the reprobate flocks of devils, Ask in my name, and ye shall
receive, and my heavenly father Dabit vobis, shall give unto you.

You will say perchance, ye have asked many times in this name, yet have not
been heard: but I say unto you, that ye were more then heard, when as it
seemed unto you ye were not heard. Four ways there be by the which God
imparteth his favor and goodness, and graces unto us. 1. By deferring grace.
2. By changing grace. 3. By denying grace. And 4. by kindling our zeal to ask
grace. What says the zealous man and woman? that they have prayed for feruor
of spirit, and could not be heard, ye but if God has given unto them to be
sorrowful, with a godly sorrow, for the want of this fervor, behold grace
granted unto them, by deferring of grace. 2. What say the sons of Zebedie?
that they have asked dextram and sinistram, and could not be heard ye but if
God has given unto them, to drink of the bitter cup of his passion, that for
this they might receive a greater crown of glory, behold grace given by
changing of grace. 3. What sales the luxurious? what say the wantons? what say
the ambitious? what say the covetous? that they have asked pleasures, and
honors, and riches, and could not be heard: I but if God had given them, they
would have misspent them upon the lewd shameful lusts, behold grace here given
by denying of grace. 4. What say the hipocrits, the worldlings, the Athiests?
that they have prayed in his name, and could not be heard: I but they prayed
faithlessely, I but they prayed coldly, I but they prayed Kemissely: when they
shall pray faithfully, and fervently, and devoutly, they shall be heard, behold
grace here granted, in quickening our zeal to ask grace. And surely that
oftentimes ye ask and do not receive, ye seek and do not find, ye knock
and it is not opened unto you, either it is because when ye pray, ye curse,
and that is, to say the Popes and devils Pater noster: or else it is, because
ye ask amiss, as Saint James says: or else it is because although ye ask
honest things enough, yet not according to Gods will, as Saint Paul did: or
else it is because ye pray vainly, as Zebedeus the wise did, or else it is
because ye pray proudly, as the Pharasies did: or else it is because ye pray
with your hands full of blood, as the Jews did: or else it is because ye pray
ignorantly as the Papists did, or else it is because ye pray faithlessely and
coldly, as the Athiests do. If any fault be, the defect is on our side, on
Gods part, this promise remains firm, quicquid petieritis, whatsoever ye
shall ask the father in the sons name, shall be given unto you.

O most powerful, and profitable, and holy prayer, the comfort of the soul,
the key to grace, the Ladder to heaven, the entry to salvation, a most rich
field of Manna, a most endless fountain of Paradise, the heart of the spirit,
the spirit of the life, the life of him that lives well. Now the reason why I
have thus magnified and extolled this holy exercise of prayer, is to diminish
and abate the credit, of a certain newfangled, and ouerlicentious opinion
which is of late conceived amongst men, to wit, that all the chief parts, and
points of the christian religion consists in the reading of scriptures,
frequenting of Lectures, and hearing of Sermons, and here it is necessary that
I preface, least I be mistaken. Therefore as S. James is not to be understood to
dispraise faith, when as he preferred charity before it, in respect of
continuance, nor alms deeds, nor martyrdom, when as he preferred charity
before them both, in respect of the daily use, nor the operation of great and
mighty works, and the speculation of high knowledge, when as he preferred
charity before them both, in respect of piety: no more would I be thought to
dispraise reading of Scriptures, frequenting of Lectures, and hearing of
Sermons, when as I preferred prayer before them all, in respect of the
incessant use we have of it: in the daily service of God, let every thing be
placed in his proper room and order, because they are given, and proceed all
from him, which likes so well of order, that he vouchsalfeth to be called the
God of order.

Surely, as touching reading of Scriptures, and hearing of Sermons, we must
needs confess both these to be great helps unto the man of God, in yt cause
of salvation. Whence is faith? but of hearing, whence is hearing but of the
word, howbeit let the vngenerate man hear the Apostles preach strange tounges,
he esteems them as drunkenness, let Festus hear S. Paul preach of Judgment
to come, he judges it as madness, let a multitude come to the hearing of the
one of the self same sermon, some by the hearing of the same are converted,
some by the hearing of yt same are preuerted, some believe, some doubt, some
disdain, what is the reason? they use not al alike, the ordinary means of
illuminating their minds, and rectifiyng their wills, and that is prayer:
witness truth it self ask and ye shall receive seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you, and therefore he which comes to hear a
sermon having not prepared, and santified his heart before hand with prayer, is
like unto a mariner which would govern his ship without a rounder, or like to
a wayfaring man which will come to his ioyrnies end, by going a diverse and
contrary way: prayer therefore unto our preaching and your reading, is the most
necessary external coagiuant means, which makes them both effectual, for
to read the word is to receive it more confusedly, in great gobbots and
morsels, to hear the word preached, is to receive it more orderly divided and
cut, to think upon it seriously is to chew it with the clean tooth of godly
meditation, but to pray unto God, to have the true understanding of the same in
our minds, and a lively feeding of it in our hearts, and consciences, this
thoroughly to degest it in every part of our bodies, and in every power of our
souls: prayer therefore unto our preaching and your hearing, is even as the
salt, which quickneth ye sacrifice, it is as ye leaven, which seasoneth ye
lamp, it is as the soul which gives life to ye body, it is as the sun
which gives light to the world.

And certainly I am persuaded that as we preach the word sometimes unto men,
so if they did pray at the same time together with us, not for a fashion sake,
with show to the eye, but in truth and earnestness and from ye ground of the
heart: this long planting, watring, and sowing which has bin bestowed, in
husba^dring the hearts of ye men of our age, would have yielded more fruit of
piety and godliness, to the praise of the glory of God, bettering the whole
world, and stopping of the mouths of our adversaries on both sides, which have
spoken and written so much evil of us. But as it was said of Zeched* short in
stature, so it may be said of the children of this generation, they are short,
they are dwarfs, they are little in stature, little in faith, little in work,
little in modesty, little in sobriety, little in temperance, little in chastity
little in piety, little in hospitality, little in charity, little in virtue. To
make you men of better groth, tall trees are strong pillars in the house of
God, as you come diligently to hear, so remember also devoutly to pray, to
pray I say unto him which has the keees of David, opens, and no man
shuts, shuts and no man opens, that he will illuminate the beams of our
understanding, that we may know, and direct the streams and courses of our
affections, that we may do accordingly. A soldier goes not to war without
his weapons, a Christian, not without his prayers. Cassiodor


Be pleased I most humbly beseech you to hear the explication of one argument
more, which induces me in respect of the common necessity to magnify prayer
above hearing of sermons. Prayer in all extremities remains like a Christian
tried companion which never leaves his friend, but hearing of Lecturers, and
preaching of Sermons, in diverse cases fails. 1. A man may be silenced from
preaching, as we know Micheas was, but he cannot be silenced from praying,
though he be silenced from the vocal prayer of his tongue, yet can he not be
silenced from the mental prayer of his heart. 2. A man may be cast into
prison, and fettered in cold irons as Joseph was. 3. A man may be captiuate,
and carried away prisoner with the Turks and Sarisons, as we know the people
of God were, with the Syrians and Babilonians. 4. A man may walk up and down
in the wilderness, solitary, distressed, and afflicted, as diverse of the holy
men of God, did before the coming of Christ. 5. A man may come into a place
which is full of the botch of Egypt and dangerous infection of pestilence.

In some of these cases, nay in every one of these, how can a man conveniently
be edified by preaching, I mean for the present? I deny not, but if he had bin
a diligent obseruer, he may call to mind sundry things, which he had heard and
read, and so ease his oppressed and distressed soul by them But as S. Paul
said of charity, it never falls away in respect of continuance, so we may say
of prayer, it never falls away at any time, in any place, or upon any
occasion Jeremy by prayer can comfort himself Aug. 12. ser. de tem.
in prison. Daniel by prayer, can rejoice in the greedy Lions den, the three
children by prayer can triumph in the fiery flaming furnace. Job can pray unto
God lying on his dunghill, the thief can pray unto God hanging on the tree,
Non est locus vbi non est Deus, God is in every place and every place a man may
power out his prayers to God, yet the heddy, giddy, presize disciplinarian
cannot persuade himself that he can be edified by coming to the Church,
unless there be a sermon, he must have a sermon, to inform his understanding,
he will come to the Church for that, I tell him, he has as great need of
prayer to sanctify his soul and body, let him come to the Church for that: 1.
Unless he be an infidel, a profession, is to be made here of his faith. 2.
Unless he be too much a Puritant a confession is to be made here of his
sins. 3. Unless he be a scismatike, his consent is required here by saying,
Amen, with the congregation assembled. 4. Unless he be a Traitor his prayers
are to perse forth here for the good of the king, the state, and the country.

Tell me do thou ever read that Gods house was called the house of preaching,
this thou read not, but to show that the most usual and ordinary exercise
which God will have to be practiced in his Church, is prayer, he thought it
best to call the place of his worship by the name of the one, and not by the
name of the other, the Church was sanctified for preaching, thou will come unto
it while this is a doing, the church is sanctified for prayer, and has his
name of prayer, Domus mea, domus orationis. Come unto it also while this is a
doing. Solomon upon, and after the dedication of the temple, went into the
temple to prayer, it is read of the Publican and Pharisie, that they went both
to ye temple to pray. Peter and John went both into the temple at ye 9. hours,
at the appointed time for prayer: old Anna and Simeon continued daily in the
temple praying, the temple then to those men, was ye conuenienst place to
prayer, so thought the good, so the bad, so the believer, so the infidel, so
the Publican, so the Pharisie, what a strange Cockatrice egg, has the
madness of certain Scismatikes hatched amongst us, they will come forsooth to
ye church, but not to prayer? O how much impiety. O how much profanenes has
the liberty and licencionsnes of this our age brought forth? we read of certain
of the au^tient fathers, that they made their knees as hard as Camels hoofes,
with continual praying, we read of S. Jerome in moderate fastings, and
wonderful humiliations of himself in watchings and prayers: we have S.
Austins meditations and soliloquia, solitary speeches, which he used unto God,
we see oratoria, not auditoria, oratories, churches, Colleges chapels, so many
signs and tokens of our parents manificence, and vneo^parable devotion these
men thought these to be the godly exercises of religion, to water their couch
day and night, for the sins they had committed, with David to chastise the
rebellions of the flesh, with saint Paul to meditate upon their frail state and
miserable condition, with holy Job to intertain poor, needy, naked, distressed
souls into their houses, and at their tables with faithful Abraham: al these
are forgotten, nay, which I speak with the grief of my soul, they account
them vanity, and superstition, and men think that they are come to the very
mount Nebo, the height of religion, if so be they are come to the church,
turned over their books, found the text, look on the preacher, mark his
division, heard the sermon, where is wounding of the conscience, where is
compunction of yt heart? where is mortification of the flesh, where is
detestation of sin, where is satisfaction for the wrong to thy brother, where
is pity and compassion, where are sighs, where are tears, where are strong
cries and gronings, where is the wish of the prophet Jeremy, to have rivers of
waters in your heads, to weep day and night, for the manifold sins ye
committed against the majesty of god? The end of preaching is to teach men to
live well and virtuous, hear S. Paul. The grace of God brings salvation unto
al men, has appeared, and reaches us, there is the preaching what to do? mary
to deny ungodliness and worldlines, and then we should live soberly, justly,
and godlily in dispraise of the world: make not thy porch bigger then thy house
it is a foolish kind of building, it is the property of an Athenian to know
much, and do little, it is the duty of a christian to hear often, and do still
that is to pray still: for it is written, pray continually. This is the perfume
made of the gal, and liver of the fish in the took Job. which drives away al
kind of devils, Exterminabit omne genus demoniorum, al kind of devils, al Tob.
6.
kind of plots, al kind of practices al kind of treasons, all kind of
treacherers: oh as the Angel acuised Toby in that place, that you would give us
leave (and so you do) which stand up in these pulpits, as upon the banks, and
speak in your ears, which lept too too many times beyond your bounds, like to
the great fish of Tybris, used to devour, to take hold of your souls, to pack
your affections, from the fluxible watery cogitations of al worldly affairs,
unto the immovable centers of heavenly meditations, to set your gauls and
your livers, and your bowels, and your entralls, that is your hearts, and
affections, upon the burning coals of the incomparable love of God, and Jesus
Christ his Son: undoubtedly this will not only make a persume which will drive
away all manner of devils from us, but will make for your good, to the good of
Gods glory, and the good of the Church, and the good of this noble Kingdom, a
most sweet, and adoriferous savor in the nosestrills of God, I will speak
what I intend more plainly. Your sacred presence (most dread and mighty
Sovereign) at the morning and evening Sacrifice, will induce others to present
themselves, they will come, they will run, they will prostrate themselves,
they will worship, they will adore in the holy Sanctuary of God, the sweet
odor of the ointments of this your gracious devotion, has, and does, and will
draw on others, yea many others for to follow: yea the strange children will
be brought to follow, unto whom all that ever we could do, both our preaching
and praying, were the savor of death unto death, even an abhominatio^: for
this cause of set purpose have I compiled this Sermon, according to the measure
of grace which is given unto me, have preached the same in the ears of
Majesty, the holiness of holiness, which was a^nointed with the fullness of
all graces, confirm and continue your gracious heart, in this most holy and
Christian exercise of piety and godliness, that that may be spoken and
written, spoken to them that are living, and written to the posterities to
come, of the most religious King James, that was spoken and written of the most
zealous king Josias, that 2. Reg. 23.
you may match him in all things, even by being a king as young and younger then
he, like unto him was there not any before him, neither arose there any after
him, which turned unto the Lord his GOD, with all his heart, with all his
mind, and with all his soul, to love him, and to fear him and to serve him,
and here imitating the wise governor, reserved the best Wine for the last, I
end. Now unto God immortal, invisible, and only wise, the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, three persons in trinity, one God in unity, be rendered
all power, dominion, glory, majesty, and service, for ever, and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

