A SERMON OF NOBILITY. Preached at White Hall, be fore the King in February
1606.

By GEORGE MERITON Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Or
dinary; and Parson of Hadleigh in Suffolk.

Thus says the Lord God of Israel: Them that honor me, I will honor: but
they which despise me, shall be despised.

1. Sam. 2. 30. Imprinted at London for Thomas Clarke, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Angel in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1607.

To the Right Noble Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Barron of Walden, Lord
Chamberlain to his Majesty: One of the most Honorable Priuy-Counsell, and
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter* etc, increase of true honor and
everlasting happiness,
NOble Earl, vouchsafe I beseech you, to accept of that Printed: which was not
long since Preached. It is a Sermon of Nobility: and unto none may it more
justly be offered, then unto your self: whom Nature, Virtue, King, and God,
adornes with eminent Honors. It is also a small testimony, of my unfeigned
duty: who am the Son of him, that was once your L: poor Tenant: borne under
the roof of your Honors house: and in my youth esteeming my self, as one of
yours, First affections makes deep impressions: and therefore I shall ever
remain

Your Honors to be commanded. GEORGE MERITON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN REAders all Christian Graces.
NOble or Gentle Readers. I have here published a short Sermon of Nobility. It
is published: and perhaps I was drawn hereunto by some authority; or else
provoked by much entreaty, if by neither of these: yet know, that it is now a
fashion, to preach, and then to print. And though I be but merum rus, a
Country Minister, I would not be thought to be worn out of fashion. It is a
short Sermon. For it was preachea, not at the Cross, but at the Court: The one
place requiring length, the other expecting breuity. It is a Sermon of
Nobility. Before Nobles, of a noble Argument* Words of good worth, if
unseasonably uttered, sustain that reproach which Judas received from the
Priests and Rulers in Jerusalem, quid haec ad nos, what are these to us? but
that which is fitly spoken in his time, and place, is, says the Wiseman, Like
Apples of Gold, and pictures of Silver. Proverb. 25. 11. Precious in it self,
yet as John said of CHRIST, John the first Chapter, and 15. verse, He that
comes after me, is preferred before me, so must we think of these two, (how
socuer the account of the world be otherwise) that the latter is far the
better. Martha did well, in making provision for the food of the body: but
Mary did much better, who received from Christ's mouth the food of her soul:
The one, it is but the staff of life mortal: Leuit. the 26. the other, the
seed of immortalisty, the first of Peter and the first Chapter, and powerful
to salvation, unto all belecuers, Romans the 1. Chapter, and 16. verse. From the
former, upon a fulness, we ought to forbear: for the fulness of bread, was
a sin of Sodom, Ezekiel. the 16. Chapter: but of the latter, there is never
enough; thy belly shall eat it, says GOD, and thy bowels shall be filled
with it, Ezekiel. the third Chapter, and third verse. In this Chapter I meet with
two sorts of men: The first are certain troublesome Jews of Thessalonica,
which (like worldly men) savor bread, the things of this world, more then the
things of GOD. The second, are a company of honorable men of Berea, more
honorable then those of Thessalonica, who judge rightly of the word of GOD, and
show their love unto it, by a ready receiving, and daily searching. The meeting
of these noble Gentlemen is profitable unto us, yielding by their presence and
practice a threefold instruction. First, that there are Nobles: ( These were
noble men.) Secondly, that there are differences, or degrees, of nobility. (
These were more noble men then those of Thessalonica.) Thirdly, that they have,
and are known by their fruits, ( They received the word readily, they
searched it daily, etc.) A Treatise of Nobility, (if I err not in conceit)
will not be unprofitable to such as are young Nobles, who may hereby be more
stirred up to propagate and enlarge the same: will not be distasteful to old
Nobles, who seeing the seed, and true form of Nobility shining in themselves,
may behold with a glad heart the fruit of it in their posterity: neither will
it be unfitting ingenuous men: for Nobility, and the condition of all such kind
of persons are by a happy knot conjoined together. Hear therefore with
patience most honorable, and ingenuous, and Deus faxit argumentum hoc, tam sit
commodum, quam est accommodum, and GOD make this argument as profitable unto
you, as it is fit and suitable for you.

There be Nobles. These were Noble men. Stoics the old brokers of parity, and
their successors the English Switzers of these our days, supposing Nobility to
be but a mere fiction, or device of men in higher place, have made a foolish
doubt, whether there be such a thing in the world or no? Let us endure awhile
to hear them to speak: Nature ( say they) is an equal parent unto all, a
stepmother unto none: God made but one Adam, not one of silver to be the father
of Nobles, and another of earth to beget the common sort: none are barred of
their way to virtue, or hindered of their course to true felicity. Not Scythia,
or any other region under heaven does hurt the mind, neither is one kindred to
be accounted more ancient then another: God took his first King from seeking
of Asses, and his second from following the Sheep great with young: to set up
pictures in Galeries, and the names of Famelies in a long row, with Coats, and
Crests. Notos magis facit quam nobiles, does give knowledge of men, but no
honor unto them: the flower and the branne comes both out of the same root:
and every man in himself is but as a figure of 1. give him riches there is a
cipher 0. then may he stand for ten: give him riches and authority, there be
two ciphers 00. then may he stand for a hundred: add savor of his Prince,
there is a third cipher 0 then may he stand for a thousand: Thus every man in
himself is but as a figure of 1: distinguished only by empty ciphers. No more
for shame. Me thinks I hear either the prophecy of Esaias fulfilled in his third
Chapter and 5. verse, That the vile should presume against the Honorable. Or
else as Esdras speaks in his first book and 3. Chapter, that they be the
words of men in wine, who neither remember their King, nor their Governors.
Did but reason instruct, or common experience rule these sellowes, they would
abhor their tongues as blabbs of their own baseness. In metals of the same
kind (which Plato resembles unto the souls of men) some are found to be
purer then others. In Plants there is a great difference of seeds and branches.
In Cattaile there appears no small force of the breed. So is it amongst Men
(for in these things we are like to other creatures) it avails much from what
stock one descends. I confess that Aurelius was unhappy unto Room in
nothing, sed quiagenuit, but in Commodus his incommodious son. That amongst
the Kings of Judah for the most part good Fathers had bad Children: Ne virtus
videretur esse haereditaria, that virtue might not seem to come by
inheritance. And bad Fathers begat good: Ne vitium esset infinitum, least vices
should exceed above measure. Yet for all this commonly it comes to pass,
that inclinations of minds do follow the originals and dispositions of bodies:
and the Poet Horace says truly, Est in iuuencis, est in equis patrum virtus
etc. Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis. As the matter is affected whereof we
are molded, so grows there ( even in nature) diverse and distinct differences
betwixt us: some are noble, some ignoble, some ingenuous, some base: some quick
of apprehension, some dull: some fit to rule, some to serve. Neither is this
repugnant unto the law of Nature who although she has made those things which
are Necessary; common to all* yet out of the variety of those which receive
them, caused by Private beginning, and opinionate matter, does there arise
diverse conditions of Singulers and many fold dispositions, and affections of
men. If children often times, carry the marks of their fathers, grandfathers,
great grandfathers, in there bodies: may we not judge, that they retain in
there minds, the propensions, inclinations, and as it were the sparks of there
ancestors? Which if it sometimes happens other wise, yet in a dubble respect
that matters not: first, Because that is to be considered, which comes to
pass often, not which seldom chances; Nature being wont, for the Most part
to observe her laws. Secondly because it must be granted, that education,
discipline, and usage, are very forcible, to the informing of manners, and
confirming of habits: which we do not say, do of Necessity follow the bodies
temperature: and yet again it may not be denied, but that the pure naturalls
in some, are better then in others, for the procreation of moral, or civil
virtues the region where we live: our behavior in our youth or kinds of life;
of diet: of affections of minds, and differences of such like things produce a
variety of Next causes: and then a conclusion in Reason and experience is this;
That from hence must arise, a diversity of effects. It is not Reason nor
experience alone which pleades. In this cause Seneca coming to his farm and
seeing his house which he had builded, decayed, a tree which he had planted,
rotten: a boy which he had brought up, now with a gray head: says thus to him
self. Quocunque oculos converto, video documenta meae etatis. I find documents
of my age on every side, To like effect may I speak in this case of nobility*
Quocunque oculos conuerto video argumenta verae nobilitatis. Reason
instructs, Experience teaches* behold I am coo^passed with a cloud of
honorable witnesses. King, Prince, Nobles are present; besides all these,
Divine writ does warrant the same. In the sixth of Ezech. and the third verse
GOD speaks to mountains hills, rocks, and valleys, and under these, to for
Rivers Hier* reads Rocks.
men of diverse ranckes* to valleys, to common people: Tor^^ks: to soldiers, To
hills, to gentlemen, To mountains, to nobles. Abraham's posterity were of two
sorts, I will multiply thee as the dust of the earth. Here is an obscure and a
dusty generation. I will make thy seed as the stars of heaven, here be true
Nobles, like stars, shining, and growing light unto the world. These in the
first of Number. and the sixteen, are called the famous in the congregation* in
the second of Samuel the 23. and 23. verse the worthyes of the land, in the. 5.
of (...)
Esaias and 13. the glory of the Kingdom: in the Epist of Jude the 8. verse*
Dignity, Glories, or Majesty's in the 26. of Ezekiel. and 11. verse. The strength
of Israel. Has God given these names to things which have no being? it was one
of the high degrees of misery in Iudaths captivity, to have her Nobles slain:
Jeremy the 39. And Paul in the 1. to the Corin* the 1. and 26. speaking of bad
ones, tells us heavy news, That not many Nobles are called; here are many but
not many called. To hold any longer a Taper to the Sun, were but a point of
folly: my text is clear: These were Noble men.

There be differences or degrees of Nobility. These were (More) noble men, then
those of Thessalonica The Kinds of nobility are four: I ascribe nothing to
Fortune though I will use the word.
One is by nature, an other by riches or (as we say), of fortune, a third
Moral, a fourth Divine, first, that by Nature is by Aristotle in his
politiques thus defined.

Est virtus Generis, et alicuius familiae congruens quedam facultas procreandi
viros ingenuos, et ad vertutem faciles, sucessione confirmata. It is a power
incident unto a stock, or a certain congruent ability, of a house or famely,
to beget an ingenuous progeny, apt to embrace honorable virtues, and confirmed
by succession. This Kind then, is not so much in one indiuidual to be
considered, as in a continued race or line of many; and such is the nature of
it, as that it may, and is many times, retained without the other three, it is
not impossible to be Noble by birth, and thereby procliveto honest, and
honorable designs, and yet bad education, to fall to vice, and thereby become
void of Moral and divine nebility: yea and some times of that also which
comes by Fortune. Such as be vicious stain the noblenes of their houses, yet
do they not altogether extinguish there Nobility, because being noble by
Nature, still they retain a power, to beget others which are procline to
moral honesty. For as Laban will either be a Laban, or a Nabal, or Nabal
either a Nabal, or a Laban, turn them backwards, and forwards they will
remain rude rustickes, either a foolish clown, as Nabal, or a frowning clown,
as Laban, for Mercury cannot be carved out of every block. So is it with
Nobility by birth, it will not soon degenerate: as one man cannot well be said
to get it unto his stock, so being once gotten, it cannot be overthrown or
lost, by the wicked life of one. Now as on the one side, Vice does greatly
blemish it, so on the other, Virtue in a Noble personage by nature is far
more excellent and worthier estimation, then in a man by birth ignoble: for in
him, it is more firm, and constant, more deeply rooted, and as it were
wreathed, and strengthened with the virtues of his Ancestors, so as by a kind
of necessity, he is constrained to tread in their steps: yet in this, is virtue
more admirable, more properly his, and formed in him with greater difficulty.

Nobility, shining in the goods of Fortune, which does dazzle and deceive the
eyes of common men: whence it was that Simonides accounted those to be Noble,
which were descended in a long course of time, from wealthy Progenitors. This
is not opposite unto vice, as the truest Nobility is, for diuites in arca, may
be pauperes in conseientia, rich men in cofers, poor men in conscience: and
though Dives seculi, was Discipulus Christi, Ioscph of Arimathea, a disciple of
Christ, yet corpulent birds cannot fly high. He that is superfluously rich,
currit ad libitum, and corruit ad illicitum, says Bernard: wealth and
wickedness, are seldom while at odds, whereupon it was not said amiss, That
the riches of Midas were not more noble, then the poverty of Aristides, and yet
are riches also reckoned a part of Nobility. First, because they make it
popular. Secondly, for that they be the instruments by which virtues are, or
may be attained. Lastly, because (being attained) they likewise serve as
means whereby those virtues by actions do manifest themselves.

moral, which is nothing else but a composition of manners confirmed by the
habits of virtues, which also may be called the nobility of the mind. This
depends on our own industry and endeavors, being most propper unto those
which have it, because they be the first founders or authors of the same: and
it is not so joined to that by birth, but that it may be separated. In the
eight Chapter of John, Christ calls the wicked Jews the sons of the
Devil, there was in them then no moral noblenes, and yet by nature were they
descended from honorable Abraham: the worst of them could say, we have Abraham
to our father. With this kind have there been some so far in love, as that
more out of affection then judgment, they have pronounced, Nobilitas sola est
animum quae moribus ornat, that the Moral is the Total; the Soul, the Sole
Nobility. I know it little benefits a River to come from a clear Spring, if it
self be muddy, that Esops Iay did boast of other birds feathers; that it
smally profits a blind man to say that his Parents could see; or a feeble
man, that his Ancestors did wrestle for the Garland in Olympus. Such as covet
to excel in Honor, must labor to exceed in Virtue. Magna haec est, great
surely is this kind, sed non sola, but not the only kind; in the opinion of
many like Abishai amongst David's Worthies, who had the name amongst three, the
second of Samuel the 23. Chapter, and let it ( for me) bear the bell amongst
the former, yet must it yield to the fourth, which is the last: Divine or
Christian Nobleness, in comparison of this, that other is at the most, but as
Joseph to l'harao, the second in the kingdom.

Divine Nobility: It is an elevation of our degree, or nature unto GOD, a
coming unto him, a conformity with him: the top of this kindred is GOD
himself, and then does it most appear in us, when neglecting mortal things
we aspire unto heavenly, imitating herein our holy predecessors the spirits and
souls of the righteous, striving to live as they do, fearing to degenerate
from them, and ever remembering with S. Paul Philippians the 3. Chapter, and 20.
verse, that our (...), our conversation be in heaven.

There are then (you see) four kinds of Nobility, first, external by riches,
secondly, internal by virtue, thirdly, natural by birth, fourthly*
supernatural by grace.

External, or purse Nobility, though it glittereth in the face of the world,
yet is it but seated in the hands of Fortune, quae vitrea est says Seneca, a
very brittle Shee-friend, sitting upon an unconstant wheel, and pictured by
the Poets with a double face, white before, but black behind: her riches are
runnagates ( uncertain) says the Apostle Paul in the first to Timothy the
sixth Chapter, and 17. verse, like evil Servants, who love often to shift their
Masters* Job that could say Dominus dedit, the LORD has given, in the same
verse also said, Dominus abstulit, the LORD has taken away. The whole world is
always in motion, and delights in change; the heaven has not one face long;
the earth has four coats in the year, and the estates of the richest are
very sickle; as a blasing star, to night apearing, to morrow gonne; as an
Actor on the stage, sometimes a great personage, sometimes a poor pesant: as
swans neasts in the water: errantes insule, wandering Islands: yea the mighty
potentats of the world are but Ludibria fortunae, Fortunes scorn. Haman to day
highly honored in the Court at Shushan, the next day hanged upon as high a
gibbet: Geliner a puissant Prince of the Vandalls, but brought so low within a
while, as he was enforced to request a loaf of bread, to slake his hunger; a
Procopius.
sponge to dry up his tears, and a harp, to solace him in his exceeding
misery. Bellisarius, in his time the only man living, but having his eyes put
out, he was at last led in a string to beg; crying: Date obolum Bellisario.
Henry the fourth a rich and victorious Emperor who had fought 52. pitched
feilds, yet in his old age driven to that exigent, as he became a suter for a
poor prebend in the church of Spire, to maintain himself. Thus do men
totter as it were upon the ridge of a wave, and are turned (as we say) upon
Fortunes wheel. And therefore such as only strive thus to Ennoble
themselves, do fitly resemble those Arcadians and Romans; who (as Phutarch
says did wear the Picture of the Moon upon there shoes, to tell them that
as there Nobility did increase, so would it decrease again, and soon be
ecclipsed. Nobility internal; (so much applauded; as if Noblenes were nothing
else, but a famely beautified, with the best virtues,) is but a habit, gotten
by use, powerful ( in some measure) to perform moral actions: study, care,
diligence, Bona ^^irps bona propago.
right, consultation, fit pre-election, are the best fountains from whence it
does spring, the beauty of it, consists in Action, and the testimony of it
is but out ward Honor.

Nobility by birth, that (...) as the Grecians called it, has but a weak
foundation; the temperature and right constitution of Mortal bodies, whereby
Some men are made Only procliue, to honorable actions; and have a facullty
to procreate others, with sparks of honor, like to themselves: And such are
the ruins of time, as there remaynes not so much as foote-stepps of many
ancient famelies: (To omit hom-bread examples.) The Iulij, Fabij, Metelli, are
so buried; as he that now should but say he descended of them: would be mocked
and hooted at, as if he had told a dream of Pythagoras. Only Christian
Nobility is best which admits of noe exception: in regard whereof all the rest
are but shadows, and shapes of noblenes: for in CHRIST JESUS says Saint Paul
Gala. the sixth and fifteen ( nether circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision; but a new creature (Not Circumcision) not the pre-eminence of
the lewe; which was much every way Romans the third and first, for to them
appertayned the adoption and the glory and the covenants, and the giving of the
law, and the service of GOD, and the promises: Romans the ninth and fourth
verse. Not Uncircumcision, not the honor of the Gentiles, with, al their
wealth, wisdom, policies, pedegrees, and whatsocuer is of high account, and
glorious in the eyes of the world. All privileges, all prerogatives, all
dignities, all regalities; they must stoop, and lie down, at the feet of a
new creature. Paul (whilst he was a Jew:) was a citizen of Rome, a Pharisy, a
great Rabby, instructed at the feet of Gamaliel, of the tribe of Beniamine,
circumcised the eight day: after his conversion, (being a christian) he was an
Apostle, taken up into the third heaven, etc. yet all these things, did he
think, but as loss, and doung in respect of his being a new creature in
CHRIST JESUS. This indeed is the ornament of the blood, the best part of
Noblemens scutchions, the finest flower in their garlands, and be they of never
so great an estate and want this they are but (...) wretched and vile and
miserable, Apoc. the 3. and seventeen. To have wisdom, wealth, strength,
beauty, is in comparison nothing: first Cor. the first: and 25. 26. 27. verses.
To be King or Kesar: is in comparison, nothing: for the King may not lift up
his mind, above his brethren. Deutro: the 17. and 20. ver and Caesares essent
Christiani si Caesares non essent secule necessarij aut si Christiani
potuessint esse Cae ares, says Turtulian of the Caesar's. To be the Mother or
Brother of CHRIST, is in comparison nothing, for if these had not been allied
unto him by spiritual adoption, as well as by natural propagation, they could
not have been saved, Luke the 11. Chapter, and 27. verse, and Mark the third
Chapter, the 33. and 35. verses. Only a new creature shall stand, when all
things else shall fail, and then are we truly honorable, when our pedigree
runs upwards with Christ's (in the third of Luke) to this height, Which is
the Son of Adam, which is the Son of God. I call not there a Christian
Noble: A new creature, as if he lately came out of Africa, or had never been
heard of in the world before: for (as Bildad speaks in the 8. of Job) these
are not men of yesterday: Though the name of Christian began first to be
published at Antioch, yet before Christ was borne, was this brood honorable.
Who can exclude Moses from it, who preferred the reproach of Christ before the
Court of Pharao? Or Jacob, who beheld Christ leaning on the top of the ladder,
and did him reverence? Or Abraham, who saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced
exceedingly? These (and many more) were all noble Christians, endued with
Christ's spirit, and yielding service unto him, so that some went before, and
some followed after, but the song of all was one, Hosanna in the highest. The
worth and dignity of Christian Nobility consists in this, that it makes the
Sons of men the Sons of God, not by the grace of Creation, as Adam was in
his innocence, nor by the grace of personell union, as Christ is in his
manhood, but by the grace of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, the acts
whereof is double, 1. acceptance, 2. regeneration: by the former, we are all
equal to those which are the best: by the latter, we are made not Sons more
then others, but yet better Sons of God And then are these Nobles borne, when
the Son of righteousness arises in their souls, enlightening their minds, and
offering unto their inward viewes the judgments of God for sin, hic dolor
est partus, this is the pain of their birth, haec vespera est says Barnard,
this is the sorrow of the evening, and necesse est addimatutinam laetitiam, and
for a full deliverance, the gladness of the morning must be added, a sweet
excusing joy of conscience, a laetitia, that is a latitia, which makes the
heart far more wider then the mouth, and thus is their birth consummate, when
evening and morning are made one day. As they have a birth, so have they also a
growing: they increase in years, and with years grow in favor both with GOD,
and Man, let John the Baptist, who was not only in high esteem amongst the
people, sed magnus coram Domino, Luke the first Chapter, but great likewise in
the sight of GOD, deriuing not only their descent from the King of glory, but
having also this King their most loving Father, being all Kings sons, and
beloved of their Father, all Brothers to Christ, the first borne among many
brethren, all younger brothers indeed, but (which is wonderful) all Princes
apparent, Reuelat, the fifth Chapter and the tenth verse: and that to Crowns
incomparably preticus, both for their value, for they are Crowns of life,
Timoth. the 2. Chapter, and 4. verse: and also for their glory, for they are
incorruptible Crowns of glory, Peter the first, and 5. Chapter and 4. verse.
Having yet further the Holy Ghost for their unspeakable comforter; dwelling in
them, speaking to them, praying with them, and crying for them, with sighs,
and groans, which cannot be expressed: whose garments are the unstained roabes
of their Saviors righteousness, whose Chain, is the golden Chain of their
salvation, the links whereof are described Romans the 8. Chapter and 24. verse:
whose good cognoscence is a good conscience, whose signet is the spirit,
pledging and sealing up their hearts to the assurance of life, whose Jewels and
ornaments are the graces of that spirit, as joy, peace, humility, faith, love,
hope, patience, etc. whose diet, more choice then Manna, is that living bread
which came down from Heaven, whose vassals are all the creatures, and whose
attendants are the Angels, pitching themselves round about them, Psalm. 34. and
verse 7. ministering unto them: ministering unto them for their good: for the
good of their salvation, Hebr. the first Chapter and 14. verse. These be those
unto whom GOD bears an especial affection, whom he has elected before the
world, called out of the world, justified in the world, and whom he will
glorify in the world to come. Tell me now, is it not the greatest honor to be
a true Christian Noble? What shall be done unto the man whom the King will
honor? the question is answered in the 6. Chapter of Hester, He shall be
arrayed with royal attire, with the Kings ring on his hand, his princely
diadem set upon his head, and withal a Proclamation shall be published, The
Viceroy in the kingdom. Here be singular aduancements, yet the highest of
these is far inferior to the least and lowest, which GOD bestows upon true
Christian Nobles. Our honors, are of a higher strain, darkening the royalties
of the world, as the Sun obscureth the light of lesser Stars. It was a high
step of earthly honor to which Moses was mounted, when he was called The Son
of Pharaoes Daughter: doubtless it is a great blessing of GOD, to be borne of
any honorable parents; the Son of GOD, though he came poor into the world,
yet would he not descend of anignoble stock, and Paul, in the Epistle to the
Romans when he would magnify the dignity of CHRIST in both natures, says of
him, that he came of The lineage of David, according to the flesh. Nobility, it
is in earth the image and splendour, of GODs divinity. O what is then Christian
Noblenes? how matchless ablessing is it, to be allied unto divine nature? to
call the high GOD of heaven, our father? was it such an honor that David
should become the Son of Saul a wicked King of Israel? and can it seem a
small thing, to become the Sons, of the holy one, the GOD of Israel? O
behold, what love the father bears us, that we should be called, not servants
any more but friends, John the 15. and 15. verse Nay more* the Sons of GOD
not so much the Sons of Men, as the Sons of GOD. It was not our birth day,
when we first sam light, and were borne into the world but when GODS
countenance did first shine upon us, when salvation in CHRIST JESUS, was
offered unto us. The Grecian virgins reckoned their age, from their marriage,
says Homer, and then began Christians to live, when first we are espoused unto
our husband CHRIST. Let other men therefore, show the images of their Ancestors,
let them fetch their pedigree from Hercules, or if they think it so fit, let
them derive themselves from lupiter, so as we may have this honor of the
Saints, to call the immortal GOD our Father, so as we may say: Our Father
which art in heaven. Which we may boldly do, if we feel the power of the
spirit within us, if GOD has anointed us with the oil of gladness above
others, if we have our parts in Divine Nobility.

Nobility has and is known by fruits.

They received the word readely, they serehed it daily. etc.

I may not belong in measuring out of frutest to prescribe in this point, were
with doting Phormio, to entreat of warfare before Captain Hamball, in general
therefore a word, or two for the finishing of my text.

Nobles, may not resemble the Noblest trees such as were consecrated to the
Heathenish Gods: for they for the most part, were either barren, or without
good fruit as the Oak, the Beech, the laurel, the myrtle. They may not be like
Beasts, whereof the Noblest, are the cruelest: nether are these the virtues of
Noble men, to dice well, to drink well, to waste lauishly, to wanton it
veneriously; to forget that they were ever borne, or that they shall ever die:
say not we have Abraham to our father: stand not so much upon the blood you
have; as upon the good you do: fruits you must bring forth, and good ones
toe: every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire. Luke the 3. there is danger else unto your selves: and the seed
of the wicked shall not be renowned for ever. Esaias. the 14. and 20. verse, here
is Danger else unto your progeny. Again to whom much is given, much is of
the^ required, where the Lord sows liberally, there he expects a plentiful
crop; and the better the fruits arc, the more they argue a true Nobility.
Justice, Wisdom, bounty, Magnificence greatness of mind, seen in iminent
dangers; fortitude, gentleness and clemency with many such like; are good
fruits common to all the kinds by which they are made profitable not to
themselves alone; but do shine as stars, and are helpful unto others. And
hence it comes to pass that even by instinct of nature, we do willingly
obey a generous and noble personage; this caused the sheepheardes to yield
obedience unto Romulus, though brought up as a shepherd amongst them: they
beheld in him a noble spirit, and notable virtues, directed not so much to
private as to public good. There is a question moved by Piccolo ^ineus.
a Philosopher of our age, concerning men, being noble by Nature, and quality
of mind, yet oppresied with pouerry, and having the world to frown upon them,
what calling they may choose, and life profess wherein they may be fruitful?
His answer is good, that in noe case they may practice any base, or
mechanical trade, wherein men of low degree may be employed with praise, and
commendation; but either (says he) they must addict themselves unto
atte^dance upon their Prince, in some honorable office: for the pleasure of a
king, is (not a wealthy) but in a wise servant, Pro. the 14. and 35. or they
may give themselves unto Chevalry, and lead a martial life: for it is a
piece of happiness to a country, (if there can be happiness in war) when as
Captains are gentlemen, and gentlemen Captains, or lastly they may be
Priests. I wot well, that this sort of people, for the space of many years,
have had little honor by Parliament given unto them: except standing by a
rogue whilst he is whipped, and keeping a beggars regester may be called honor.
Yet to be a Mayor of a Town or City, or a Justice of Peace in the Country (I
might go higher) cannot sort so well with noble estate, as Priesthood may:
herein may Nobles live, and deuote themselves unto Gods service without
disparidgement. The Prophet Samuel was a Priest, a man of God, an honorable
man, says the text the first of Samuel and the 9. Chapter. The Patriarks were
Priests and Kings in their families, Vos genus electum, regale Sacerdotium, Ye
are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, the first of Peter the second
Chapter and 9. verse. Ecce cum regia dignitate Sacerdotium Hieron. (...).
copulauit, Priesthood is joined with regalitie. Rex non est mere laicus, a
King may be a Priest without dishonor. Many of your Ancestors ( Right
Honorable) have lived in this order, and thereby not only retained their
noblenes, but amplified also, and enlarged the same: which craves unto us the
continuance still of a good regard at your Honors hands. What kind of men may
better entertain the word of God, then the Ministers of the word? Who use more
diligently to search the Scriptures, then Ministers, the interpreters of the
Scriptures, and yet are these the only notes whereby the Apostle does commend
unto us here the most Honorable men. The fruits then of the best Nobles are
these, with readynesse to receive the word: with diligence to search it. Two
actions, to Receive: to Search. Two conditions: readily: daily: the object of
both, the word of GOD, the end of both, to be confirmed in the truth. Zegedine
tells us of four fruits whereby true Christian Nobles may be discerned.
First, they acknowledge CHRIST to be their Savior. they are endued with his
spirit. Thirdly, they abhor to serve sin. Lastly, they are strong in faith,
all which are couched in the words of my text: for he that receives the word,
must needs acknowledge CHRIST; he that receives it with all readiness, has
assuredly his spirit: he that searches the Scriptures daily, attends not
unto sin: he that searches (with these Baereans) to confirm himself,
grows from faith to faith, from strength, to strength, till he comes to be
a perfect man in Christ Jesus. To receive the word, does not barely signify,
to take it, but to retain it, Acts the 3. Chapter and 21. verse, and like
good ground to fructify, Mark the the 4. Chapter. To search, is not an idle,
but an earnest inquiry: to search with lights, Zophany the first Chapter, to
look into hearts and reins, Psalm the 7. into every cranny and corner, very
narrowly. To receive readily, argues a willing mind; to search daily, an
industrious spirit: to search for to learn, an humble, and an honest heart.
The sum of all then, is this, The best Nobles makes best account of the
Gospel of Christ: they hear it with a glad heart, they study it, to amend
their lines by it; they say unto it, as Elisha said unto Elias, I will not
forsake thee, and with noble Joshua, they meditate in it, day, and night. Let
your Lordships therefore be pleased to give me leave (as Peter speaks in his
second Epistle and third Chapter) to stir up, and warm your pure minds, and
though you have knowledge, yet to put you in remembrance of these duties. If
you care to be in the number of those who are the best: If you tender the
continuance of that Honor which the Lord has already powered upon you; or
expect any future access thereunto (as Hierome said to Salu^na) Semper in
manibus sit diuina lectio, Let the word of GOD dwell in you abundantly.
Persist in honoring the highest with your hearts, by giving glory unto him with
your lives, by adorning his doctrine with your countenance, and riches, by
encouraging the practices and profession of piety: and as when the Lion
roareth, the beasts of the Forests do tremble and quake; so when the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah speaks (though but by a mean messenger) you that be of his
Court yield him reverence. These be the paths beaten by the noblest Christians:
in these stands the whole duty of men most honorable: upon performance
whereof, and no condition else, the Son of GOD himself made challenge to the
glory of his Father, John the 17. Chapter and 3. verse, I have glorified thee
on earth, and now glorify me with thy self in heaven. Blessed be the GOD of
glory, who has bedecked this Land with such glorious lights, so many noble
Christians: and if that Kingdom be happy, whose King is the son of Nobles,
Eccle. the 10. Chap. and 17. verse. then assuredly great is our happiness: having
in the midst of Nobles, so Noble a King, in all kinds of Nobility, Noble by
nature: a King, not by election, but by birth, descended from a most ancient,
and matchless samely. Noble by fortune, having his lap filled with all her
favors: being owner of Kingdoms, Countries, and Cities, wealthy and populous,
which adds a splendour, and Majesty unto him. Noble morrally, possessed with
heroical virtues, and beawtifyed with a true Idea, of a princely mind.
Divinely Noble, the Defender of the true faith: who is the Son of Adam, who
is the Son of GOD. Noble by an exact conspiration of all kinds together.
Whose spiritual, and immortali seed, is Nobility from Heaven: whose
Material, is Nobility from Nature, whose immediate form, is nobility of
manners; whose isntrumental and external fulgor, is nobility of Fortune. This
is the most perfect, and most rare Nobility in the world, shining in some few
Christian Princes and Nobles, from GOD, Nature, Virtue, Fortune.

The Lord bless your Royal Majesty, that as you have received the word from
your youth, so you may defend the faith with constant resolution, and love the
Gospel unto your lives end. The Lord bless all your Nobles, that as they be
by their best title, ( Christian) so their fruits may be ever answerable to
their calling. The Lord bless the worthy Prince, with the rest of the young
and Honorable Branches of this Land: and make them know, that if Angels fall,
they become Princes of darkness; that if young Nobles degenerate, they become
the common calamities of their Country; that they are as so many Lucifers
fallen from Heaven. The Lord for his mercies sake bless us all, that having
GOD to our Father in this life, we may reign with Father Son and Holy Ghost
in the life to come. Amen.

FINIS.

