A SERMON OF REPENTANCE.

Preached By GEORGE MERITON Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary.



Imprinted at London for Thomas Clarke, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Angel in Paul's Churchyard, 1607.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Sheffeild, Lord President of York, and
Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter: increase of Comforts in this life,
and after death, a Crown of Glory.
RIght Honorable: my desire is to cast my Mite, into the Treasury of the
Church: and for want of Gold, Pearl or Precious stones: to bring a Rams skinae
or twain, and a little Goats Exodus 35. 23.
hair, to the building of the Lords Tabernacle* I may seem ( perhaps) to
pass the bounds of modesty, in craving your Honors protection for so small a
thing. The smaller it is, the more needful to be protected. And sithence you
vouchsafed not long since, to hear part of it with patience: I will now
presume upon your L* favor for the whole. I do not dedicate it unto you, as
doubting of your Honors care, in this point of Repentance, your love to
Religion: Zeal to the Truth: practice of Piety: have made you Honorable, not
in your self alone; but also ( as Samuel 1. Sam. 9. 6.
was) in the hearts of the people. Yet give me leave 2. Pet. 3. 1.
( Ibeseech you) to stir up and warn your pure mind, That as you have begun
to cleave unto CHRIST, with a good purpose of heart: So you would continue to
aoe it still: and to do it more and more. Remember always (Noble Lord) that
blood unstained before Men, is stained blood before GOD; if it be not
continually restored by the blood of CHRIST. This Sermon then, I commend unto
your Honor, and it, to the good blessing and holy protection of GOD. Hadleigh
in Suffolk, May the 26. 1607.

Your Honors to be commanded: GEORGE MERITON.

Except ye amend your lines, ye all shall likewise perish.

Luke 13. verse. 5.
OTher Men's afflictions, are our instructions: and the punishments which are
laid upon some, are, or should be profitable unto us all. The Dog, is beaten
in the presence of a Lion; that by the stripes, and cries of a Dog, a Lion
might be tamed; The Thunder bolt, falls, and burns, but in a narrow Iud.
verse. 7.
compass, yet is it terrible to a great number, round about: so the calamities
of a few, are set forth for ensamples unto the rest, to work amendment in
them. This true use of judgments, did not many of the Jewish people make:
Pilate had destroyed some, and mingled their blood, with their sacrifices: The
Tower of Siloam fell down upon others, and bereaved them of Verse. 4.
their lives. Those who escaped these punishments, (as the Nature of man is)
favoring them selves too much: being wise abroad, and fools at home (as the
Poet speaks:) having their eyes in their purses, when they should behold
their own deformities, like Lamia in the Fable, and staring in their heads,
to gaze upon the sins of others, with the proud Pharesie in the Gospel:
concluded from hence, like badde Logitians from weak and slender premises:
that, Therefore they were more righteous and holy then their fellows. Our
Savior CHRIST, to cross this vain supposall, answers them here
Laconically: (...): Nay: And least that being ouer-blinded in themselves, they
should all fall into the ditch: to prevent their ruin, he denounces out a
threatening, that, Unless they amended, they should all likewise perish.
Threatenings they are forcible means, to draw sinners unto GOD: For although
good promises, are alurements unto good men: yet such (for the most part) is
the corruption of our hearts, as that we are more moved with fear, then
with love; more with the rod of Aaron, then with heavenly Manna: more with
severe threatenings, then with friendly promisings: Injuries do work a deeper
grief in us, then benefits do affect us with delight: Sickness does more
weary us, then health does refresh us: and we are wont to esteem rightly of
prosperity; by the harms of adversity. For this cause therefore are these
misdeeming Jews, foretold, that unless they amended their lives, their
destruction was at hand. CHRIST launceth them, for to heal them: he
threatens them; for to draw them: he denounces judgments against them, for
to save them: his words are like the Arrows of Jonathan, which were shot
after David, not 1. Sam. 20.
to wound him, but to give him warning. In old times, thus was GOD accustomed
to reclaim his people: The writings of the Prophets are even stuffed with
woes. Take a book says GOD unto Ier: 36. 16.
Jeremy, and write therein all the evil, that I determine to do unto the
house of Judah, that they may returneeuery man from his evil way: and in the
same Chapter it is recorded, that when they heard the words of the book they
were amazed. The like course has GOD used in latter times. John's manner of
preaching, was as rough, as himself. Now is the Axe (says he) laid unto the
roots of the trees, and every tree that brings Mat. 3. 5, 6.
not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire: What
followed hereupon? Jerusalem, all Judea, and the region about Iordaine were
baptized of him, confessing their sins. CHRIST also in this place threatens
the Jews, and in them every one of us: for that which stood good against
them, stands still in force against us: Except we amendour lives, we shall
all likewise perish. How this wrought, to the conversion of these Jews, it is
not mentioned in the Scripture; how far it will prevail, for the bettering
of us, I am not able to conjecture. This am I sure of, that in former times,
threatenings have prevailed: and I beseech our GOD to make them profitable now.
The parts of my Text are these four. First, there is a duty required (
Amendment of life) Secondly the necessity thereof enforced ( unless) Thirdly
the time prescribed ( Amend) not have amended and fallen again, not will
amend, I know not when; but unless you ( Amend) do it speedily, and
continually without delay or interruption. sorrow for sin, without hope of
grace: where there is knowledge of guiltiness, without amendment of life:
where there is a killing of the old man; without a quickening of the new: where
there is the sentence of death in the Soul, and not of life in the Savior.
Though we should recount unto GOD, all our sins over, and over again; even
in the bitterness of our souls; M. chapter 1. 8
though we lament with Dragons, and mourn like Ostriges, yet had we but that
part of this grace, which even the wicked and reprobates have; Cain, Saul,
Judas, Heb. 12. 17
were greatly grieved for their sins, Esau lift up his voice, and howled out,
yet found he no place to repentance, though he sought a blessing with tears.
What was the cause of this? ( my beloved) but that there was in him penance
without desire of repentance; grief without faith, a sorrow without
conversion: whereas sorrow, faith, and new obedience, they should go together.
The first, drives to the second; sorrow, to faith: The second to the third:
faith, to conversion* Sorrow without faith is hopeless; faith without
conversion, is fruitless; the one killing, the other dead, all must concur
in true repentance. As it must have the knowledge of sin in the soul, rising
from the Law of GOD; and a sorrow for sin in the heart, proceeding from the
fear of punishment go before it: so must it spring from faith, and by faith
be finished: from the faith of science, whereby we give credance unto the
Gospel must it spring: and by the faith of confidence,, by which the heart is
converted unto GOD, is it fully perfected.

There is no part of Christian religion of that maine importance, wherein men
do more voluntarily deceive themselves: then commonly they do in this duty of
Repentance. In consideration whereof it will not be amiss, to deliver unto you
certain infallible fignes, and inseperable fruits; whereby we may assure our
selves that we have repented. S. Paul names seven fruits which (in some
measure) always follow, where true amendment goes before. Behold (says he)
your godly sorrows what care (1) it has 2 Cor. 7. 11
wrought in you* yea what clearing (2) of your selves: yea what indignation
(3): yea what fear (4). yea how great desire (5)* yea what Zeal (6): yea what
punishment (7)? Those then who are true conuertes, who do unfeignedly amend
their lives: they are not sluggish or secure in sin, but Careful to redress
what is amiss: not hiders, or excusers of cuill: but Confessors; and by humble
supplication Clearing their offenses: They are not contented to dwell in
wickedness: but vexed in soul and full of Indignation against themselves for
their sins committed, they stand in awe, and are afraid of GODS judgments.
They Desire his favor, as the Heart desires the water Brooks: they labor by
religious Zeal, to approve their lives, to GOD and good Men: and they are so
far from favoring of their faults; as that they severely punish them upon
themselves. These be good Conuerts indeed. But those who have not this care
to keep the Law of GOD. Who use not the means to clear the score: who be not
angry with themselves for their sins: who fear not GODS judgments, who
desire not his mercy: who contend not to go before others in Zeal, and
honesty of life: who revenge not their sins upon themselves: irridentes
sunt, non paenitentes (says Gregory) they are proud mockers* not true
repenters. Must then amendment of life, yield such worthy fruits? Is Care? Is
Clearing? Is Indignation? Is Fear? Is Desire? Is Zeal? Is Punishment,
required hereunto? O then ( My beloved) to repent, can be no light matter,
nor trifling labor; which a man may have at command, or perform when he
list. No, noe: As six days went before the creation of Mankind: so must we
think of our Recreation; not as if we were then converted, when as Evening,
and Morning, make the second, or third or fourth day: it is a sixth days work:
that is, much toil and travail belongs unto it. Sin cannot be cast off as
an upper garment. The hearts of sinners must suffer an Earthquake with-in
them, and tremble, and rende: There must be mortifying, and crucifying; and
sacrificing, both of Bodies and Souls. Strange words! ( Mortifiyng,
Crucifying, Sacrifyeing) arguing as strange actions. That must torment us at
the Heart, which delighted us in our Bodies: that must be sower to our Souls,
which was sweet in our Lives: we must change our Vices into as many Virtues:
and so turn unto our GOD, as if we never more would return unto sin.

Many are there (says Fulgentius) which are sorrowful for their sins, yet
leave not their sinning* but these take not away their sins by sorrowing;
because they leave not sinning after sorrowing. For as Saint Augustine
speaks, nihil prosunt lamenta vbi replicantur peccata: Mourning is in vain,
if we sin again. But more (alas) are there, which seldom, or never, are
sorry for their sins at all: Which will not learn to drink Gall with
CHRIST, which cannot abide a bitter Soul, nay in steed of sorrowing for sins,
they glory in them; they say unto them, as GOD said unto his Creatures:
increase and multiply* proclayming with a Trumpet, their own reprobation. O
let us remember, that the hearts of Eccl. 20.
foolish sinners, are like broken vessels which cannot be mended, till they
must first be melted: That (as Beda says) we must plowe up our grounds,
before we can rid them from thorns. That (as Saint Ambrose speaks) great
sins, craves great weeping, great lamentation. If Naman will be cleansed
from his leprosy, he must wash himself seven times in the water: and if
we will purge us from the filthiness of our sin, we must rench our selves
often with tears, we must undergo the Agony of Repentance: mingle our
Drink with weeping, water our Couches with Tears: yea the very blood (as it
were) of our souls must gush out of our eyes: we must be grieved, that we
cannot always be grieved.

When CHRIST considered the sins of Jerusalem, Luke 13. 34
he wept over it: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem etc. When David heard that his Son
was slain in his sin, he 2, Sam. 18.
lamented for him: O Absolon my son, Absolon my son; my son. Have these
wept for the sins of others? much more ought we then to mourn for our own
transgressions. Michah followed the soldiers; crying because they had stolen
away his Idols; and the question being moved, why he cried so piteously?
Judges. 17.
Why (says he) ye have carried my gods away, and ask ye me why I cry? Did
this Idolatrous wretch think it cause sufficient to lament for the loss of
his false gods, which his own hands had made? Judge you then ( Beloved) how
we should be grieved for our sins, which deprive us of the true GOD whose
hands have framed Heaven and Earth. Will examples move us to the performance of
this duty? Look upon repenting David, and behold there are ashes upon his
head, and sackcloth upon his back: he did not brave it in atire, nor lay
streaking upon his bed, with a bare ( Lord help me) in his mouth. Look upon
the repenting Nineuites; and behold King, and people, are strangely humbled.
Men and beasts, fast and drink water; they sat not bealching at their bordes,
saying ( Pardon Sir) and so post it over. Look upon repenting Magdalen. and
behold (says Gregory) quot habuit in se oblect amenta, tet de se fecit
hollocausta: so many pleasures as she found in her self, so many sacrifices
she made of her self. She had abused her eyes to wanton looks; and
therefore now she caused them to flow-ouer with tears: she had made her lips
the weapons of lasciuiousnes and gates of vanity, and therefore now she
caused them to kiss her Saniour: her hair once set out and frizeled after the
newest fashion, does she now make serve in steed of a napkin; her precious
ointment, that was her wonted perfume, she now powered upon CHRIST'S feet, which
her eyes had watered, her hair had wiped, her mouth had kissed. The Philistines
being plagued with Emrodes, offered Emrodes unto the Arc. 1. Sam. 6.
The Isralites being stong with Serpents, erected a serpent in the wilderness,
serpens momordit, serpens curauit. Number. 21.
a Serpent did bite, and a serpent did heal. Those that gave their Jewels to
the making of a Calfe, did afterward Ex. 35.
bestow them upon the Lords Tabernacle. And this was Mary's practice: so many
sins, so many sacrifices: such sins such sacrifices: her eyes, her lips,
her hair, her ointment, all the instruments of her death were turned (at her
conversion) into the means of life. Notable examples to teach all their duties.
Have you delighted in pride of attire? put on sackcloth: have you offended in
surfeiting, and drankennes? fast and drink water: has your mirth been
immoderate? weep; strangle that sin with the stream of tears: have you
robbed or wronged your brethren? make restitution: no restitution, no
atonement. Exo. 6. 7.
Nay further revenge that sin upon your selves; by giving somewhat of your
own: have you been unclean, fleshly livers? chastise your bodies with Paul:
demete aliquid de hordeo, as it is in the Poet, keep 1. Cor. 9. 27.
before his covenant: as Amend: and Enter: but Nis^, unless you amend, Regnum
amittitur, the Kingdom is lost, ye shall surely perish: Repentance is as
Necessary a condition to life, as a Ship is needful to him that will sail
over the Sea: or as a medicine is necessary (says S. Ambrose) unto a wounded
body. Neither is it necessary to some: but to all. All shall perish, unless
there be amendment. The whole race of Adam stand bound to this strict
condition. Not Moses: Not Abraham* Not David: not the Patriarchs not the
Apostles of CHRIST: Not any who may challenge unto themselves (either by Birth
or bringing up) the greatest prerogatives in the world, can plead exemption
from this Condition. Have thou failed in thy faith, and repented? behold GODS
mercy toward repenting Peter: Have thou robbed thy Neighbor and repented?
behold GODS mercy to the repenting Thief: Have thou couetously gained, and
repented? behold GODS mercy to repenting Zachy restored.
Zachie. Have thou burned in unclean lust, and repented? behold GODS mercy to
repenting Magdalen. Have thou committed Adultery, and repented? behold GODS
mercy to repenting David. But have thou done these and many more: and not
repented: take heed to thy self: if the condition be still broken: thou
shall surely be damned. GOD accepts of no man's person: he fears no man's
power, he is deceived by no policy; he is corrupted with no money, he is
allured by no flattery. Who would not have thought, but that the Pharisees
should have been saved, which made a show of a precise life: or that Esau
should not have been respected, who lift up his voice and wept bitterly. Or
that Ahab had not bin Heb. 12.
in good case who humbled himself exceedingly: Or that Herod should not have
gone to Heaven: who 2. King. 21
heard John Baptist gladly. But woe unto the Pharesies Mar. 6. 20.
said CHRIST. Esau did GOD hate: Achab was a Luke 11. 42
counterfeit, Herod was a cruel Tyrant. Will not a Mal. 1. 3.
seeming precise life, out-ward humility, crying for 2 Kin. 21.
Luke 3. 19. 20.
a blessing, hearing of GODS word with some gladness serve our turns? No
verily: I may say of this condition, as S. Paul speaks of Charity. Though 1.
Cor 13*
we spoke with the tongues of men and Angels: though we had the gift of
Prophesiyng, and knew all secrets: though we had faith to remove mountains:
though we should feed the poor with all our goods* though we should give our
bodies to be burned; and want Repentance: all would be nothing worth: but like
the Golden Apples of Caligula, which might please the sight of his Ghests
(says Plutarch) but not slake their hunger: or like the gold on the outside
of the Temple, which (as Origin writes) was never sanctified: Say what we
can: believe what we can, do what we can: suffer what we can: unless we
repent we shall surely perish. As CHRIST JESUS is a Lamb full of mercy Ioh. 1.
and meekness: so is he a Lion, full of wrath and fiercenes. Apo. 5.
Unto the repenting person he gives a soft heart, for his mercy indureth for
ever: he sends the comfort of his spirit: for his mercy indureth for ever:
he gives peace of conscience: for his mercy indureth for ever: and bestows
on them the joys of Heaven; for his mercy indureth for ever. But as for the
impenitent: he gives them over unto hardness of heart: for his justice
indureth for ever. He leaves them, in a Reprobate sense, for his justice
indureth for ever. He sends into them the horror of Conscience, for his
justice indureth for ever. And cafteth them at last into the torments of Hell:
for his justice indureth for Jud. 6.
ever. Did not GOD spare his Angels, but reserved Genesis 7.
Number. 14.
them in Chains under darkness? did he not spare the old World, but
drowned it with a flood? did he not spare his own people, but destroyed them
in the Wilderness? And will he spare us without our conversion? Is there now
an other way to Heaven? or a new trick to escape danger? Let no Man flatter
himself there is no Atheist, no Drunken swil-tubbe, no Covetous wreatch, no
doting Dreamer, who despises government, and speaks evil of those that are
in Authority: no Swearer, no For-swearer: no Thief, no Adulterer. In one word
no kind of sinner, without Repentance shall escape GODS vengeance. CHRIST JESUS
has spoken it: the Life that fails not: the Way that misleadeth not: the
truth that deceives not. Unless ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise
perish. Thus much of the necessity of this duty,

3. The time is prescribed. Amend insta^tly, continually.

In omnibus obligationibus, in quibus dies non ponitur, present die debetur:
In all Obligations (says the Lawyer) where no time is specified the Condition
is presently to be performed. Upon this Theme the Holy-Men of GOD spent many
of their Sermons: Look into Esaias, Jeremy and the rest, and you shall find,
that they ever beat upon the present time: Now turn unto the Lord. Now, Efa.
55.
whilst it is called to day; to day if you will hear his Ier. 35.
Heb. 3.
voice, this is the acceptable time etc. What were Psalm. 95.
they so barren headed; as that penury constrained Heb. 4.
them to harp always upon the same string? GOD forbid we should think so.
But iniquity did then abound (as now it does) and procrastination, was ever
dangerous: and therefore they judged no Doctrine so fit, as oftentimes to urge
repentance without all delay. GOD will not permit us, to give the prime days
unto the Devil: and the Dog days to him: to pour out our wine to the
world, and serve him with our dregs. Amend (says my text) here is no time
special annexed? and therefore is our payment presently required. And as we
must amend, without deferring* so must we continue without backsliding. We
may not repent by quames and startes, but go through stitch. Fat promisings
may not have lean performances. It is a principle in the Civil Law. Nihil
praesumitur fuisse actum, dum aliquid superest ad agendum. To begin a thing is
pleasant, and for varieties sake many will do so much, but the prise and praise
is at the end. Some in the world resemble Snayles, which push out a long pair
of horns, but being touched never so little, they draw them in again. Such
a one was 2. Chr. 15.
Asa, careful to do good, till the gout did take him; 1. Sam. 14. 27.
Others are like Jonathan, who will follow the chase hard, till they come where
honey is. But true repentance may not be by lease, or after the manner of
Bethulia, Judge. 7. 30.
a composition for five days: we may not say one day Gloriapatri, the second
and filio, the third and spirituo sancto: and after that come to sicut erat in
principio; Dan. 2. 32. 33.
this were Nabuchadnezers image, the head of brass the breast of baser
metal, and so nearer the end Luke 18.
worse and worse still. But we must follow repentance Genesis 32.
as the widow did her suit, keep our hold as Jacob did in wrestling. Amend to
day, amend to morrow* run on, not for a time, but even our whole time: actu
continuo with a continued act, Moderately at the first; constantly in the
midst; cheerfully to the end. All the trees in GODS Orchard must be Palms
and Cedars: Palms, which bring forth fruit betimes; Cedars, whose fruits
lasts very long.

Consider well, the manifold dangers which follows the want either of speed or
of continuance. First our lives, of all things are most uncertain. Short are
Job. 13.
the days of man says Job, who also amonst the Philosophers is but (...), a
man of a day old. Solomon Eccle. 2.
surueying man's life calls it Vain: and then thinking not that word
sufficient, corrects himself and calls it vanity: but David goes yet
further, and Psalm. 6 2.
tells us. That man is lighter then vanity too. Even as Psalm. 90. 9.
a thought in the brain, whereof there may be no fewer then ten thousand in one
day. What answer was made unto him that promised ease unto his soul many
years? thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken Luke 11. 19 20.
from thee. Young men (says Seneca) have death behind them: old men have
death before them: and all men have death not far from them. Me thinks the
Lord threatens an utter ruin unto all the World: The Earth not long since
has trembled: the Lights of Heaven have been often darkened. Rebellions have
been raised. Treasons have been practiced* Plagues have been dispersed,
Winds have blustered: Waters have raged, and what wants there now, but fire
for us, from Heaven to be consumed? And is it now time to buy, to sell, to
eat, to drink, to live securely in sin, as they did in the days of Noah,
and think of nothing else? Is it now time to say unto GOD as the Niggard does
Prou. 3.
unto his neighbor, Cras reuertere, come again to morrow? or as that drowsy
sluggard does; yet a Prou. 6. 10.
little sleep, yet a little slumber, yet a little folding of the hands? The
foolish Virgins supposed that the Bridgroome would not come like an Owl or
Ba^te in the night: there is time enough (said they:) what needs all this
have? but poor fools they were excluded. O ( My beloved) many thousands are
now, no doubt in hell, who purposed in time to have turned from their sins,
but being prevented by death are for ever condemned. Let therefore the
uncertainty and shortness of our lives, teach us to watch because we know not
the hour, to do good whilst we have Mat. 25.
Gal. 6.
time; to make have into the promised rest, and always Heb. 4*
let us esteem it, as an imminent danger, to line in that estate, wherein we
would be loath that death should find us.

Secondly badde customs are dangerous, and Job. 20. 11
greatly to be feared: He that from his youth has lived wickedly, in his old
age shall have sin in his bones. Can the Black-moore change his skin, or
the Ier. 13. 23.
Leopard his spots? no more may he do good (says GOD) who is accustomed
unto evil. It is a true speech used amongst Physicians, Custom is another
Nature. A Child brought up in closse prison, can there sport and play: when he
that lately saw light, and had his liberty: can do little else but bewail his
Captivity: The Isralites being long in bondage, Luke 13.
were loath to depart; the Woman which had an infirmity eighteen years,
called not upon CHRIST Luke 19.
as the Leapers did. Sins are not like Disseases in the body. The older the
sor^r: sed consuetudine plus quam ciues studio plus quam hosts (says Saint
Augustine) the older the sweeter, and yet the more toothsome, the more
troublesome: for Custom not resisted becomes a Necessity. Old Sinners are
compared to Lazarus in his grave. First, they stink: they are corrupt, and
become abhommable Ps. 14. 1. 3.
as the Psalmist speaks.

Secondly, they have a great stone of Custom rolled upon them, which can
hardly be removed: Ioh. 11. 43.
CHRIST must groan and cry aloud, before Lazarus can be raised.

cannot imploie them to any good action. And lastly sins, are by the Prophet
compared unto Chains: where one lincke, one sin does draw on another. First
comes secret suggestion, after suggestion, Cogitation: after cogitation,
Affection: after affection Delight: after delight, Consent: after consent an
Act: then many acts make a Custom: Custom brings Despair: despair a
Defense of sin: defense a Boasting in it: and this is the next step to
condemnation. Here is the Chain of sin: wherein every lincke is more heavy
then an other: the former, are the easier: the latter, always the harder to
be shaken off. Peter at the first did but deny CHRIST, afterward he denied
him with an oath: at last he did curse and swcare, and for-swore himself.
The Disciples of Mat. 26.
CHRIST could not cast out a Foul Spirit, that had remained in one from his
childhood. He that has had long possession, will plead prescription. Mar. 9.
A Language (says Bassill) first learned; is not soon forgotten, and a
custom long retained, is not quickly changed. It is therefore very
dangegerous, not to examine or try our selves before we be indged: not to
use physic before we be deadly sick: not to repent before we can sin no
more.

It will be too late, to come to the kaye when the ship is launched: too late,
to transplant trees, when they be grown in years: too late to apply a
medicine, where the disease is desperate: too late to resist enemies, when they
have gotten, and fortefyed the hold: too late to season flesh, when it crawleth
with worms: or to mend a house when it is on fire. So stands the case with
him that has lined long in sin: what is there no hope of Salvation for him?
Non dico saluabitur, non dico damnabitur (says Saint Augustine) I will not
say, he shall be saved, I will not say, he shall be damned. The Thief was
receined in the end of his days. Where upon Origin writes thus. There is no
man which has cause to despair of pardon: seeing CHRIST said unto the Thief,
Amen dico tibi, etc. verily this day shall Thou be with me in Paradise: and
yet may we not too much presume of pardon, because CHRIST said not. Amen dico
vobis, etc verily this day shall You be with me in Paradise. Wherefore let us
remember before we sin; that CHRIST pardoned not the multitude; and thereby
fear his justice. And after we have sinned, let us remember that CHRIST
pardoned the thief; and thereby hope for mercy. Et si paenitentia est sera,
tamen indulgentia non est fera, says Lombard* GODS mercy is above our misery:
and an evening sacrifice is accepted by him, And yet on the other side: we
never read, that CHRIST cured one blind man often; that he healed the same
Leapers diverse times: that he raised Lazarus twice. Antiochus prayed for
mercy at the end of his life and was not heard. 2. Macha. 6
He that says, at what time soever a sinner does repent, I will put away his
wickedness: says also, Eze. 33.
it is good for a man to bear the yoke from his youth: Lam. 3. 27.
for old age is like to flint, you may break it, before you can soften it:
and therefore the wiseman advises, to bow down the neck of thy son whilst
he is Eccl. 10. 12
young; to beat sin on the sides, to nippe it on the head while it is a
child: for it will else grow stubborn, and get the Mastery. In youth, sins
are few and fecble; but by continuance they grow to be as strong as Giants, and
increase into mighty Armies* Besides they are a burden; heavier then the whole
earth. They made wicked Angels to fall like thunderbolts Iud. verse. 6.
from the Highest Heaven, into the lowest Hell: they caused GOD to complain.
Behold I am pressed under Amo. 2. 13
you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. The creatures groan under
this burden; being by man's sin, subject to vanity, and corruption; and
shall Romans 8. 22.
crooked age be able to sustain it? A thousand to one we shall be
constrained to cry out with Cain. My Genesis 4. 13.
sin is heavier then I am able for to bear.

Thirdly we must remember, that the longer we Your Iniquities (says GOD)
makes a Separation betwixt me and you. And is there Esa. 59. 2.
any likelihood, that he who has been running from his GOD, forty,
threescore, perhaps fourscore years together, who with the prodigal, is
run into a far Country: can return again, in the space of six days?
six hours? six minutes? For it may be his sickness, (unto the time whereof
he deferreth his conversion) will not be six days, six hours, six minutes
long: and how is it possible then to return unto GOD? Say that the forceable
working of the holy spirit (like a great gale of wind) be able to blow thee
home upon the sudden: yet art thou not sure for to have it. Nay GOD has told
thee: Because I have called, and you refused: you shall call upon me, and I
will not Pro. 1. 28.
answer you. A doleful and heavy doom, for a dying man.

I never dyed for these, I never was whipped, crucified, tormented for them. I
never promised them eternal life, not Paradise, not the joys of Heaven. And
yet lo how they follow me unto their lives end? Avaunt Satan: in the Name
of CHRIST JESUS. And let all true Christians Amend speedily: Continually.

4. There is punishment threatened,

Ye shall all perish.

Amongst the Philosophers, to perish, does usually signify, A returning unto
nothing which the Creatures of GOD, do naturally abhor. For ever since that
first blessing Increase and multiply, there Genesis 1.
has been in the Creatures, a natural desire, to preserve themselves. In
this philosophical sense, is not the word here to be understood. It were a
piece of happiness to impenitent persons, if they might become as though they
had never been. But death shall depart from them: and as the Heart of
Prometheus was (say the Poets) always eaten with Vultures, Apo. 9.
and not devoured, so shall it be with these: They shall ever perish, and
never be consumed. In the Scriptures, To perish: is a word of a large extent:
containing in it, the plagues of the Soul, the punishment Pro. 21.
of the body, the wrath and curse of Dan. 2.
Psalm. 1.
GOD, upon the Reprobates in this world, and Ioh. 10. 28.
in the world to come everlasting condemnation. The meaning then of the word [
perish]. First, is this: You shall have in this life the face of GOD against
you: Heaven shall be as Iron, and Earth as Brass unto you. Cursed shall you be
in the City, cursed in the Fields: cursed shall you be in your Barn, cursed
in your Store, cursed in the fruits of your Wombes, cursed in the fruits of
the Earth, cursed in your herds of Cattle, cursed in your flocks of sheep:
cursed shall be your going out, cursed shall be your coming in: your Honors,
your Pleasures, Deu. 28.
your Riches, your Children: all the blessings of GOD shall be turned into
curses, until you be destroyed and perish utterly. This is the portion of the
impenitent in this world. Secondly, the meaning of the word ( perish) is this:
you shall in the world to come, be everlastingly condemned. Which the
Schoolmen have reduced, to two kinds of torments: poena damni: paena sensus.
1. the torment of loss, or wanting: 2. the torment of sense, and feeling* the
effect of both is this: you shall loose the joys of Heaven, you shall feel
the pains of hell. The joys of Heaven, are these of such valewe, or the loss
of them so great, as should move us to repentance? what those joys are, and by
consequence how great their loss is, we may behold as in a Glass darkely:
but tongues of men and Angels can in noe wise express. S. Paul being rapt
into the third 2. Cor. 12.
Heaven, heard there such things as cannot be uttered. First we may roue at
them, by that high price which is set upon them. CHRIST the Son, and only
Son of GOD, not by Adoption but by nature, loving, and best beloved: bought
them, not with money, but with blood: not with the blood of Goats and Rams:
but with his own blood: not with the blood of head, hands or feet: but with
his own heart blood. And as he prayed soundly for them himself: so has he
prized them unto his Friends, and Children. None can enter into them but by
many tribulations. They cost Paul a beheadding, Peter a A and. 14. 22
crucifiyng: Steven a stoning: millions of Martirs a racking or burning, a
torturing, a tormenting. GOD 1. Cor. 10.
who is faithful and true, has not deceived his Son, nor ouer-sold his joys
unto his Saints. And therefore unspeakable are those joys, which CHRIST has
purchased, and his Children obtained, through a world of miseries.

Secondly we may conceive of them: by taking a Solomon in all his glory, was
not like to one of these: all Salomons glory, not like to one Lilly. Has GOD
put such glory and gladness upon the grass of the field? has he so
gorgiously attired them? which to day have a being, but to morrow are cut
down, and cast into a furnace? how much more then shall Luke 12. 2^
be the glory, and joy of you, O ye of little faith?

Thirdly we have a resemblance of these joys, in face did Mat. 17.
shine as the Sun, and his raiment was as white as snow. For hereby we
learn what glory our bodies shall have in the day of the resurrection: when
(as S. Paul tells us) we shall bear the image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15.
and be like the Son in glory.

Fourthly, the place of blessedness, does inform First it is a place of
purity and holiness: no unclean thing shall enter thereinto. Secondly Apo 21.
a place of beauty, and brightness: as clear as cristal, glistring as Jasper*
the twelve gates are twelve pearls; the sireetes like gold, and shining
glass. Thirdly a Apo. 22.
place of roomth, and largeness: O Israel how great is the house of GOD, and
how large is the place of his possession? Baruch. 3^
into this pure, bright, large place of glory shall true Conuertes enter: for
where I am* (says CHRIST) there shall my servants be: and that is Ioh. 12.
not all; but Kingdoms shall be given unto them: Come ye blessed of my
Father, possess a Kingdom: Luke ^2. 29
and in this Kingdom, the Lord himself will honor Luke 12. 37
them with his own attendants: and there shall they reign for evermore.

Quorum periculum probat periuntium multitudo (says Gregory) whose dangers
appears by the multitude of those that perish) are now arrived at Heaven, for
their Haven: and are wholly freed from all their miseries: Quanto fuit maius
periculum in praelio* tanto maius gaudium in triumpho: (as Saint Augustine well
speaks:) the more dangers escaped, the more joys increased: as the most
doubtful battle, makes the most joyful victory.

Face of GOD: yet herein consists the Exo. 33. 18
highest degree of happiness, and therefore are the joys of the Saints in
Heaven super-Superlatiue* Esa. 33. 17.
because their eyes do always see their King in his glory. It is a pleasing
sight and delight-some unto the eye, to behold the Sun: Sed illud est verum
gaudium (says S. Bernard) non quod ae creatura sed quod de creatore
concipitur: but that is the true and only joy indeed, which is conceived from
the Creator, not from the Creature. John leapt in his Mothers womb, when but
the Mother of his maker came near unto him: the Wisemen rejoiced exceedingly,
when they but saw his Star. The Bethshemits were comforted at the sight of
his Ark, were these causes of great and unwonted gladness? Then are the Saints
ravished with joy in Heaven, who behold their Creator face to face. If the
people shouted for joy, so as the earth did ring again with the sound of their
noise when Solomon was 1. King. 1.
proclaimed King: O what a Hallaluiah is there in Heaven, at the sight of the
King of Peace, crowned in his Throne of Glory? Huic comparata, omnis aliunde
iucunaitas, maeror est: omnis suauitas, dolor: omne dulce, amarum: omne
decorum, foedum. (says Saint Bernard) In comparison of this, all joy, is
sadness: all sweetness, sowernesse: all beauty, blackness: yea all the
delights in the World put them together; which have been, which are, which
shall be to the day of Judgment: all, are but as a drop of water, to the
main Ocean, in respect of that blessedness which we shall drink from the
ever living fountain of the face of GOD. For if we find such store of
sweetness in a piece of one little Creature (be it Sugar, or Honey; or such
like:) what shall we not find in the Creator? if the foote-steppes of the
goodness of GOD abound in pleasures: what has not the fountain of goodness,
GOD himself? The consideration whereof caused Moses to sue unto GOD, that he
might see his glory. Compelled David oftentimes humbly to request, that he
might behold the face Psa. 27. 8.
of his GOD, and when GOD said unto him: Psa. 80.
seek my face: his heart answered as an Echo, O Lord I will seek thy face.
And as a man not contented he treble^h his request. O thou shepherd of
Israel, cause thy face to shine upon me, that I may be saved. Twice more he
prays. O thou shepherd of Israel etc. His salvation and eternal happiness,
he reposeth in the sight of GOD: for he knew full well, that in his
presence, there was fulness of joy for evermore. Let me Psa. 16. 11.
but show you now, what Saint Augustine speaks of the joys of Heaven, and
so will I pass unto that which follows. We may (says he) sooner tell you,
what they are not; then what they are. Yet take a surusie of those manifold
benefits, which GOD bestows upon our base, and ignoble bodies. Shed out both
upon good and badde, from the Heavens, from the Air, from the Earth, from the
Waters, from light, from darkness, from heat, from coldness, from all the
creatures, shed also out, by succession, to exclude a loathing. Does GOD bestow
upon our bodies, and promiscuaily upon all; these excellent benefits? Then O
Lord how great and wonderful are those good things which thou have laid up
for thine Elect in the Kingdom of Heaven? if these be so good, which thou have
given to good and badde: what shall they be, which thou have reserved only
for the good? if they be so pleasant, which thou sendest to friends, and
enemies: how sweet are those, which thy friends shall enjoy? if there be so
many comfortes in the valley of tears: what shall there be in the day of
marriage? if thou be so kind unto us, in this prison of ours: how wilt thon
embrace and hug us, when we come into thy Kingdom? Into that everlasting
Kingdom, where everlasting glory shall be upon our heads: where that which we
would have, shall be present with us: and that we would not have, shall be as
sent from us: where there shall be a measure of joy, heaped up, shaken together,
pressed down, running over; mensura sine mensura (as Bernard speaks) a
measure without measure. Where we shall have health without sickness: strength
without weakness. freedom, without bondage: beauty without blackness:
Knowledge without ignorance, plenty without want: peace without trouble: safety
without fear: life without death: glory without shame. Where we shall be
filled with joy: yet being filled we shall still desire, least our fullness
procure a loathing: and in desiring we shall always be filled, least our
desire beget a greeuing: (to conclude) neither eye has seen, nor ear has
heard, nor heart of man can conceive those excellent things that are prepared
for us. Neither can GOD give more: nor man receive more then we shall there
enjoy. And is not this then a most lamentable loss, to be debarred from these
jove's of Heaven? Me thinks the remembrance of it should dismaye the heart of
a wicked man. When he recounteth with himself that he shall be shut out
off doors with Dogs, that he shallbe excluded from those unspeakable joys,
which CHRIST JESUS has bought with his precious heart blood: that he shall
be bereft of that glory, whereof the beauty of the most glorious Creatures is
but a simple shadow: that he shall be cast out from that pure, bright, and
large place of happiness: from an Eternal Kingdom. Did the loss of the Arc
of 1. Sam. 4.
GOD cause Elye to break his neck? This then is enough to break a Pharaohs
heart in pieces; to know that after troubles here, there is no hope of
harbor, of rest, of safty in the world to come: that he shall be depryued of
the face of GOD, the sight of CHRIST, the fellowship of the Spirit, the company
of holy Angels, and blessed Saints: finally that he shall have no part in
that great measure of joy; which is so infinite as it cannot enter into us, but
we must enter into it: Thou good and faithful Mat. 25. 21
servant enter into thy Masters joy. O woeful, and insufferable loss! more
then can be counternayled by the gayning of ten thousand Worlds: Nay all the
tears which shall be in Hell: will (says Chrysostom) never be sufficient, to
bewail the loss of Heaven.

And is this all the punishment, the impenitent shall sustain? shall they
only loose the joys of Heaven? we may not stay here: They shall perish, they
shall likewise feel the terrible pains of Hell.

Many motives are there (says Saint Hierom) to stir us up to amendment of
our lives. The consideration of the tears, and of the blood, which CHRIST
shed for sinners: our own ennumerable offenses; the weakness of our bodies,
and frailty of our lives: GODS continued mercy toward us: his Justice and
revenging power: but especially the fear of loosing the joys of Heaven. All
these are as spurs to prick us forward to repentance: and as Trumpets to
rowse us up from our carnal securitye. Yet such is the dullness of many, and
so dead a sleep are some in their sins, as such motives as these will work
but small effect in them. Let CHRIST weep till his Head, and Heart ache: let
him suffer never so extreme Torments: let sins be as red as scarlet: and
lives of all things most uncertain: show GODS mercies, tell of his
judgments, Preach of the loss of Heaven. Yet were there no Hell to receive
them; or Tortures provided for them: they would easily put off all these with a
Tush: and be as resolute for their own destruction as Hester was for the
saving of her people, If we perish, we perish. Oderunt peccare mali formi
dine paenae. Wicked Hest. 4. 16.
ones, must be scarred from sin, with fear of punishments: let them then
set before their eyes the fearful and horrible pains of heil.

These in the Scriptures, are expressed by diverse Apoc. 10.
names, Sometimes they are called fire* he that is not written in the book of
life: is sent into a lake of fire. Esa. 66. 14.
Sometimes they are termed a Worm: their worm shall not die. Verme roditur
conscientia, igne cremantur corpora: (says Bernard) with the worm is their
consciences gnawed, and with the fire are their bodies burned. Sometimes
again, are they set out, by the loathsome stench of Brimstone: upon the
wicked he Psalm. 11. 6.
will rain fire and brimstone. Otherwhiles by weeping, Mat. 13. 42
and gnashing of teeth. Weeping because of the fire that will not be quenched:
and gnashing, because of the worm that will not be killed. the one coming
from Esa. 65. 13. 14.
grief, the other from rage. Sometimes they bear the names of thirst, of
hunger, of sorrow, of shame. And such penury is there in hell, as there is
nothing to relecue the damned which are therein. The rich man begged a drop
of water, and could not have it. guttam petijt (says Gregory) qui micam
negauit: he craved a drop, that denied a crumme. Neither is it a little
torment to be imprisoned, and tortured by the vgglie Fiendes of hell: by those
Etheopian Angels; (as Cyrill calls them) whose arms (says Cassian) are
like the heads of Dragons, whose eyes shoot forth arrows of fire: whose
teeth, are like the teeth of Elephants; whose tails are like the tails of
Scorpions, that is gushfull, and grisly Diuils: if the sight of one of them be
able to bereave a man of his wits: O how great will the horror be, when they
shall all appear? And what does the place of punishment afford? that place of
confusion? of darkness? of chains? of most horrible shapes? but even Math. 22.
Echoes of woes. Well then; suppose one to be burning in a lake of fire,
having a Viper at his heart, always gnawing and stinging his soul: imagine
boiling brimstone to be powered upon him; that with the heat thereof, he is
scalded: with the smoke thereof, he is stifled, and with the noisome savor
continually choked: let him weep, wayle, wring his hands, and stand gnashing
of his teeth* let him be ever languishing and pining with want of food, denay
him all things which may any way ease him. Conceive yet further that he is
bound hands and feet; that he is affrighted and tormented with vgglie
Devils, and compassed round about with horrible darkness. Think well of the
misery of such a man: and know that these are the pains of an impenitent
wretch in hell. These the pains? nay ( my beloved) these are not the tenth
part of Hels torments. CHRIST calls them Everlasting pains* As they are
extreme without decreasing, so are they endless without all redemption. Math.
25.
There are sighs, without pitying: cries Verl. last.
without moning: lamentation, without relecuing: a flood of black flimes, ever
flowing: ibi dolores torquent animas, non extorquent, puniunt corpora, non
finiunt: (as Prosper speaks) there is a Death, which always lives, and a
Life, which always dies: there he that tortoreth, faints not, and he that
suffers fails not: There is Ever parching fire, for warming love: Ever
banishment, for reconcilement: Ever heaviness, for singing; Ever darkness for
shining: Ever fetters, for crowns; Ever gnashing of teeth, for clapping of
hands: Ever miserable immortality and immortal miserve. Alas who is able
(says Esaias) to dwell in everlasting burnings? Esa. 33. 14.
It were some comfort in the midst of afflictions, to think that one day,
they will come unto an end; and the damned spirits in hell, had they but a
little hope, that after the space of many thousand, thousand years they
should be released: this little spark in the midst of their flames, would
in some sort make them joyful: but Ever to burn, Ever to boil, Ever to
weep, Ever to wring, Ever to be in chains, to suffer insufferable torments.
Everlasting pains? This is that which cutteth heart strings a sunder. Yet is
not this all. For as they are eternal without redemption: so are they
General without exception. For first; all suffer them: and judge you, hacking
and hewing, their teeth together: to hear howling and crying, Woe, woe, be
unto us, that ever we were borne: to hear one Devil, one damned Ghost,
calling unto another, to strike, to rend, to kill, to spoil, to heap on
coals, to pour on Brimstone: like one that is pressing to death, who calls
for more waights to be cast upon him. Secondly all suffer in all parts, in all
the members of their bodies, in all the powers of their souls. they have
corporal flames without, and spiritual flames with-in: no part; no power is
free. Have thou offended with thy Head? thou shall have scalding: have thou
offended with thine Eyes? thou shall have weeping: have thou offended with thy
Mouth? thou shall have howling: with thy Tongue? thou shall have scorching:
with thine Ears? thou shall have yelling: with thy Nose? thou shall have
stinking: with thy Feet? thou shall have fettering: with thy Hands? thou
shall have wringing: with thy Heart? thou shall have gnawing; in thy Soul, and
Body, burning, and boiling. Pro disparibus generibus peccatorum sunt disparia
tormenta suppliciorum (says Saint Augustine) every man shall receive according
to his several 1. Pet. 1.
works. Conjecture yet further of Hells tortures, by things of no account. Put
thy foot into a seething bath, and how do thou grieve? what sorrow do thou
conceive? if thou be vexed with a sharp burning ague; how do thou toss,
and tumble, and art out of quiet? is the scalding of thy foot, or a fit of an
Ague so grievous unto flesh and blood? which are but Flea-bitings, no though
thou did dest abide them, thy whole life long? O how then will thou be able
to endure everlasting burnings? Will CHRIST now profit thee, who stretched his
arms out upon the Cross for sinners? No, he will now (...)

NOW JESUS CHRIST our Lord, and GOD, Even the Father which has loved us, and
given us everlasting consolation by his spirit: and good hope through grace:
purge our dead consciences, and stablish our hearts in every good word and
work unto the end* that being made the servants of GOD, we may have our
fruit in holiness, and in the end eternal life. Amen.

Laus DEO.

