A CONGRATVLATION TO FRANCE, UPON THE HAPPY ALLIANCE WITH SPAIN.

Dedicated to the Queen.

With the order and challenge of the Knights of Fame, to their opposites.

LEWIS ^ THE XIII ^ KING OF FRANCE.
portrait of Louis XIII of France

Printed for T. Thorp. and to be sold by W. Burre. 1612.

To the Queen.
MADAME.
FRance has not without cause had recourse to your Majesty as to her sole
remedy, and now Spain entreats you to adorn her Crown with our Flower de
Luces, for it seems that Heaven has made you the guardian of peace, and
placed you in this world as the true Queen unto whom he has appointed the
total government thereof; showing us there by, that his pleasure is, that as
one MARY brought peace into the world, so your Majesty should distribute it to
us. For this cause Madame, your Majesty maybe pleased to give me leave to
proclaim the glories thereof, and sing them on the Theater of my labors, that
the whole world may be acquainted with our happiness. My self being your
Majesty's

Most humble and obedient subject and servant. F. de Menantel. S. Denis.

A Congratulation to France on the happy alliance with Spain.
I I is not without cause, that those Monarchies are held happy, whose
affections Heaven has united: because in the renewing of Kings, God rewards
his people according to the merit of their lives: for if I forget not, I have
read of Dionysius the tirant, Heliogabalus, and Nero, who employed their power
and authority cruelly, and to the hurt of their people, which is an evident
sign, that God had forsaken them, by giving them such cruel Princes. Our
France is free from those miseries, and without blushing may term it self
extraordinary happy, by having for a long time Kings sacred and chosen by that
great God, who calls them his eldest and most Christian sons: a matter which
may stire us up to give him thanks, and to entreat him to continue this
favor, that we may nourish our glory under the wings of his almighty power.
Do we not owe him this acknowledgment, for taking such special care of our
peace? Let us consider the greatness of the present benifit he has bestowed
upon us, having given us a Queen, who is the pearl of the world, the ornament
of Heaven, the epitome of all virtues: For this, we ought to redouble our
prayers, and seek hereafter better to please him, I mean by changing our old
conditions, and framing them a new in the model of his holy commandments: the
which we may easily do, our minds being freed from the rage of ambition which
possessed us when Spain was an enemy to our France: and now I do assure my
self our good Genius will be auspicious, so long as her Majesty shall remain
among us. What is there more to be admired then our present government? who
would ever have thought that upon the even of war, losing our great Henry, we
should have enjoyed such tranquillity? verily it is the work of Heaven, and we
must of necessity so believe it, unless we think it to be our great Henry's
fame, which peradventure has left an immortal terror behind him to awe other
Kings, who being still amazed at the report of his valor, have not dared to
make any attempt upon his lawful heir, unto whom they fear he has be
queathed his courage as well as greatness: The which we shall undoubtedly
find to be true by those lively signs which may be discerned in him. O hapyy
day when her Majesty was chosen Regent. Blessed of God are you my Lords who
gave your consents; you may truly say that the holy Ghost spoke in you at that
time when you committed the States government to her; Thereby you declare that
you worthily deserve your places, and that questionless you had a care of the
publik peace. O let your sacred Majesty's, who with a liberal hand gives us
means to serve your greatness, drawing your poor France forth of the
dangerous precipice of war, making it triumphant on the worlds Theater; You I
say who with your only looks brave the greatest powers of Europe, preserve
and make much of your lives, that you may eternize our peace, which can last no
longer then you reign in the world, where al true Frenchmen your humble
servants will beseech the divine Majesty that it may be so. For what greater
favors could we hope for then those we now enjoy? by what other way then this
could her Majesty have procured our good? There is none so simple but knows
that Spain is more then able to embroile our peace, and by consequent her
alliance most profitable for France. Her Majesty and my Lords of the Council,
whose understanding pearceth Heaven, have maturely disposed of this
proposition, and can make no appeal from this resolution, being the only
means to try our forces against the Turk and to reconquer that which our
unbridled ambition lost do we not suppose but that this consideration did
reunite the wandering affections of our Kings, who wearied with civil
dissension have resolved upon this deseigne for when did you ever read that
civil war reigned so long among the Turks, as it has done in Christendom.
Our Kings are children of a spiritual father; believe in him, live under his
law: what reason then have weee to seek and desire the ruin, of our
brethren. Let us employ our courage in making war upon that tyrant, a sworn
enemy to our religion, and not make our neighbors bowels scabbards for our
swords; this will more renown us, and our death will be more glorious before
God: the way is traced before us, and an occasion offered by the contracted
marriages of our king with the Infanta of Spain, and is doubly confirmed by
that of the Princess of France, with the Prince of Spain: all excuses are
vain. O Lord thou art mighty, thy goodness is incomprehensible and men can
not sound the depth of thy judgments: where is that dead Chaos which we thought
to have beheld? where are those preparations which our Mars had levied in France
to glut our ambition? O thou great God have thou caused a second MARY to be
borne in the East? Have thou ordained her from her birth to prevent our
miseries? I verily think it, seeing that by her alone thou have freed us from
our long troubles: Finish O good God, finish this work, least some wandering
fire fall into the trenches of our peace, and blow up the mine of our hope,
which if it should happen we were then at the pitts brinke of our former
miseries: yet I do not imagine that her Majesty and our Princes would be so
merry and joyful as to proclaim triumphs, if they were not assured of our
peace, and that thou hadest possessed them with a desire to effect it. This O
Lord we heartily beseech thee to grant, and we yield unto thee the same
thanks which thy dear servant David did after that he had vanquished his
enemies, and was peaceably seated in his Kingdom.

THE KNIGHTS OF Fames Challenge to all those that will oppose themselves
against them.
Understanding by the Oracles that the French Hercules after his travails had
builded the Palace of Felicity, and that the Destinies had reserved the first
entrance into it for us, and the proof of those which deserve the second, to
our Lances, we are come thither upon the report of the Marriages of the
greatest Kings of Europe, to procure witnesses of our victory, and to show our
selves Knights worthy of imitation. For without loosing the title of
Invincible, which our deeds have purchased, we will keep and defend that
Palace against all men, and maintain

That the beauty which we reverence is without compare, and her actions
blameless.

That they are so good as they can not be bettered.

That we alone deserve to publish her glory and that none ought to aspire to
ours.

Nevertheless the fame of the assaillants shall not be small, having such
authors of their defeat be it that they come to us as wearied with living in
the world, or else desirous to have us end their days, seeing that the honor
to fight with us is greater, then that of vanquishing all other men.

We Almidor, Leontides, Alpheus, Lisander, Arganto,
will mayntaine this challenge in the place royal of Paris on the twenty five
day of the Month of MARS, who inspire us.
THE DECREES OF the Lists, and order of the courses at the Quintyn.
THE Defendants shall enter first into the place, and none after them but those
that have charge of the triumphs, assaillants, or train.

2. The assailants shall ent^ with visards, liueries, shields, names, arms of
their houses, and impreses.

3. They shall enter the lists at one of the clock after dinner, if they mean
to run, and shall cause a certain number of torches to be brought thither.

4. They cannot enter the lists without the leave of the Judges of the field.

5. They shall run according to he order as they entered, and each of them
only with two ^ances.

6. He That breaks his lance from the chinne of the Quintin to the eyes, wins
one course, from thence upward, two; in the small shield, three; in any other
part nothing.

7. The lance shall not be accounted broken unless the staff fall in two
pieces.

8. Who loses his lance, sword plume, bridle, spur, or stirrup, loses the
course, and if he breaks not, wins nothing.

9. Who loses his sadle, or hits the great shield is to be thrust forth of
the lists.

10. He that falls from his horse incurs the like penalty.

11. The value of the reward is at the choice of the assaillants.

12. At their return from the lists, al of them shall keep the same order as
they did at their entrance. The rest is refered to the Judges.

Published at Paris the 13. day of the month of march. 1612.

FINIS.

