P. MELANCTHON



A Godly and learned Assertion in defense of the true Church of God, and of his
word: written in Latin by that reverend father D. Philip Melancthon, after
the Conuention at Katistona. Anno 1541.

Translated into English by R. R. Scene, perused, and allowed.

Esaias. 66. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that
love her: Rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her*

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree by Thomas Dawson. 1580.

To the Right Honorable Edward, Earl of Rutlande, Lord Roos, of Hamelake, of
Beauuoyr, and of Trusbuz, my singular good Lord and noble Mecoenas, long life
with increase of honor, and the perfruition of eternal Beatitude, in Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior, for ever.
GODS holy spirit in the xii. chapter of the Revelation of S. John the Divine,
(Right Honorable) describes unto us, two notable mysteries: The one, A woman
clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her feet, upon her head, a
Crown of xii. starr^s, and being with child, cried traueling in birth, and
was payned ready to be delivered: The other, A great red Dragon, having
seven heads, ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads: his tayl^
drue the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the earth, and
he stood before the woman which was ready too be delivered, to devour her
child, when she had brought it forth. etc. By the woman is prefigurate the
most blessed estate of that chaste chosen Church of God environed with the
light of doctrine Prophetical and Evangelical, who treading (as it were)
under feet the moon of man's inconstancy, or rather man's vain and wavering
imaginations and devises, is crowned with the crown of constant truth and
adorned with the xii. stars of eternal blessedness: and traueling with
spiritual fruits, as, True knowledge of God, Faith, Fear, Love of God, true
in^ocatio^, etc. being payned with adversities and calamities in this world;
cries with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Governors, Apostles, Teachers and such
like, to be delivered out of and from al worldly wretchedness, to enjoy the
promised sweet ioies of everlasting blessedness. But such and so extreme is
and has been the hatred of the old enemy Satan that red Dragon (by the heads
of his malignant church) that is by impiety, idolatry, and infidelity, and by
the Horns that is by violency, injury and tyranny of Pharao, Abimolech,
Nabuchodonosor and such like cruel persecuting powers: with his tail of
blasphemy hypocrisy and superstition, evermore envying the verity of the
doctrine prophetical and evangelical in all ages) that when gods church has
been most readyest too bring forth her sincere fruits of good life and
doctrine, then has this red Dragon, with open jaws of tyrannical power,
exalting his tail up to the skies, and as it is said ( above all that is
called God, 2. Tess. 2.) been most ready therewith too draw down the third
part of the stars, that is too say not only too obscure the light of the
true word of God, and of the glorious Gospel of his son Jesus Christ, but
also utterly too cast under foot all true testimonies thereof. Yet blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, who being careful for his elect, does now and
then raise up a mighty salvation unto his people, Luke (...) i^ sending one or
other good Michael, with his Angels, that is too say, one or other godly
religious and christian Prince with his Godly religious and christian Nobles,
Bishops, Doctors, Preachers, and Teachers, who with the sword of Truth, the
shield of faith, breastplate of righteousness and Helmet of hope unto
salvation in Christ, have borne away like victory and prize of like
Gigantomachia, with the triumph of truth according to that saying: Those shall
^ight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome the^, because he is the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: and they which are on his side, called,
and elect, and faithful. Apoc. 17. Experience of this spiritual victory
(Right honorable) does the sacred bible sufficiently administer unto us: Later
ages of the world give us also fresh memory thereof: And our time no doubt
by Gods providence can testify too his praise and glory. It is not paste
forty years agone since the trial of this was wonderfully manifested to all
Christendom, by the state of Gods church disquieted in Germany. What time a
little before the death of that noble Prince George Duke of Saxony, the city
of Franckfoorde ad Moenum was vexed with the enmity of the Romish Dragon. So
that after some preruption on both sides, it was the good providence of God to
move the minds of the noble Princes electors there, to require of the Emperors
Majesty Charles the fifth then living, a determinate conuention or meeting for
the establishing of true religion, and abolishing of Popety: which being
decreed too be had at Hagonea ad Rhenum in Germany A^no 1540. thither amongst
other learned Germans came the reverent Doctor Philip Mela^cthon. Who
thinking too have full conference by disputation, in presence of Granuellanus
President for the said Emperor: even at that time ( ipsis aduersarijs tergiuer
santibus) were utterly disappoynted of their expectation: For Ecchius the Popes
champion with his confederates seeking privy and secret shifts of lettes,
refused that conflict. And the matter being deferred till the year following
1541. too be handled at Ratisbona, thither in person came the said Emperor,
the Princes electors of Germany with their learned Divines, and the Popes legate
with his adherents the adversaries. By whom after some disputation and
concertation had, the conuention for that time was there also dismissed, upon
sufficient good considerations, and by reason of the Emperors expedition in
his wars against the Turk.

And after that, as the Reverent Ioachim^^ Camerarius testifies, (who writes
the whole discourse of his life,) this zealous Phinees desisted not in defense
of Gods quarrel, as by publishing his other works before* Namely his Confessio
fidei, exhibited at Augusta, and his Siluula addressed for the pacification of
the controversies in Franckforde: So now did he write this book entitled De
Ecclesia, after the assembly at Ratisbona. Like a Godly wise Aeoonomus in the
Lords house, and like unto the provident Scriba doctus ad Regnum Coelorum, (as
Christ says Matt. 13.) bringing forth with the good Paterfamilias this
learned assertion of spiritual treasures Nonorum and Veterum: for confirmation
of the antiquity of Gods true church, and co^tutation of man's latter
inventions. Which he dedicated unto that Godly renowned Prince and valiant
defender of the truth, Albertu Duk^ of Pruse and M^rque^ of Brandenburge. The
remembrance whereof surely as it is notable, so were it a thing injurious to
deteine from the posterity of the faithful such a testimony of profound
knowledge. And again, as Germany has bin a natural nurse to the universal
dispersed and afflicted church of the gospel long agone* so have we in
England great cause (praising God for both their prosperous estates at this
day) to embrace, and commemorate the doings of such godly learned fathers
there living, as have bin, and yet are sound faithful furtherers of Gods glory,
and constant friends of that truth, which we also now profess. Whereas, (Right
honorable Earl,) since by Gods gracious providence his church with rare and
excellent benefits is thus many years fructifiyng amongst us: Especially under
the protection of the immediate next under god supreme head thereof, so
gracious a Queen, so godly and religious a Princes our dear Sovereign Lady,
Queen Elizabeth, thus prosperously and prudently upholding her house with the
wise woman. Prou. 14. that, As the Sun shines over all the world, from the
seat of the most highest: So the beauty of so good a woman (so virtuous a
Virgin Queen and so gracious) must needs be, not only the principal
ornament of her own house, Ecele. 26. but also is a light of excellent comfort
unto the faithful throughout all Christendom: Which I pray God continue to
the end of the world. And again, since in respect of her ^ise and honorable
grave counselors, with those godly learned Fathers of the spiritually this
prosperous peace may verify that Proverb with us ( Salua res est consuliante
Seen:) Who doubts, to the glory of God be it spoken, that the church of
England is the Phoenix of the world, The Rose planted in Hierico, Eccle. 24.
yea the flower of the field, and the Lilly of the Valleys? Cantic. Canticor.
cap. 2.

The which blessed estate when every member thereof is bounden by all good
gifts to adorn: As it is my only, by simple Summum Bonum now and then too
edify my slender capacity, in translating and writing: So at this present with
the furtheraunce of the right reverend father in God my good Lord the Bishop of
London by his auctority, and by some help of a learned Divine my friendly well
willer herein, I have translated this book, and given it the name, or Title of
A Godly and Learned Assertion, etc. Now published as a true testimony of my
bounden duty and earnest zeal too the welfare of Gods Church present, and of
the posterity. And for good causes moving me, I have chosen your good Lordship
the Patron thereof: As one (whose noble progeny heretofore loyal too their
Prince, and loving too their Country, especially the Lord Roos, in the reign
of the most victorious King Henry the viii. for his noble valiant and
renoumed service in Scotland most worthy of memory) your honor deserving no
less well to be thought of for your like loyalty, learning, wisdom, godly
zeal, and like true service also, if like time of need should require. And
thus humbly craving pardon of your honor for my boldness proceeding of an
intier good will toward you: And therewith beseeching your noble bounty, to
grant the same favorable protection under the wings of your godly zeal, as
an earnest Hypotheca of my duetifull true heart toward your honor: which as
I shall perceive to be affected toward my good meaning in this behalf, so
by Gods grace shall I not only take further encouragement of duetifull
gratitude, toward your honor, and my native Country: But also as
heretofore, so still shall I rest heartily and incessauntly praying unto the
majesty Divine and Lord of Lords, too endue your Honorable Lordeshippe and
the honorable Lady your Loving Spouse with long life, perfect health,
augmentation of honor, and true renown in this world: And finally the
inexpressible joys of life eternal in the heavenly Hierarchy of the most
highest Ich^ua.

Your Honorable Lordships most humble and bounden poor Orator, Richard
Robinson.

Of the Church, and of the Auctority of the word of God.
IT was accustomed oftentimes, to be disputed upon, how much credit might be
given unto the opinions of the Church, decrees of Synodes, and sayings of
writers. For, although we hold it for a rule, that we embrace and have the
word of God in reverence, yet notwithstanding, when there seem doubtful
places in the wrytinges of the apostles, as it were to occur, What the
adversaries do argue.
or come in the way, some men do dispute, that the opinions of the church
rather are too be followed, than the wrytinges of the apostles.

Moreover they pretend that the Authority of the church, A wrong opinion
touching the auctority of the church alleged by the adversaries.
is to be preferred before the word of God: and that the Church has power to
change or alter such things as are delivered in the word of God. Unto these
opinions, do they cite the saying of S. Augustyne, which is this: I would
give no credit unto the Gospel, were it not but that the auctority of the
Catholic Church moved me therevntoo. And therefore under a false color of the
name of the Church, What the adversaries do under a false color of the name
of the Church.
do the Pope and Bishops decree and command many things for their sensuality
contrary unto the word of God, yea they confirm and stablish wicked doctrine,
and Idolatry: And also by this means the very name only of the Church
terrifieth very many nowadaies from the true doctrine of the Gospel which we
profess. Therefore needful it is that men be admonished rightly as touching
the authority of the Church.

Again, also certain more malaparte busiheades, when they imagine new
opinions out of sayings of the scriptures which are lewdely wrested, do
utterly despise the consent of the true Church, and all Synodes without
difference. Pantaleon testifies that this Michael Seruetus for holding a new
erroneous opinion of the Trinity, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, was afterward
put to death at Geneua, Anno 1553.
As when Seruetus wrangleth with the Church of al ages, and does deprave the
sayings of the word of god, in the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel, and
seeks after a more fit interpretation, as he thinks. To the end
therefore that such a malaparte busibraine should be restrained and brydeled,
the Church had need of her bounds by all means, (if I may so say) as the old
synodes and writers do allege their first testimonies, which they have taken
from the Apostles, and other Authors.

Tertullian writing against Praxeas, Examples of the fathers alleging the
Church. Tertullian his testimony.
says thus, we must hold this for a rule against al Heretykes: Rectum esse,
quodcunque primum, quodcunque vero posterius adulterinum. That whatsoever was
first, was good, but whatsoever was last, is cou^terfait. And surely he
calls that first, which the Apostles for certain did deliver, for so he does
interpret himself.

Irenaeus writing against Florinus, Ireneus.
allegeth the authority of them which were in the first age, and namely the
authority of Policarpus, who was the disciple of S. John the Apostle: for he
says that he would have detested the opinions of Florinus, if he had heard
them, and would have shunned the place (wherein they were declared) as loathsome
and polluted.

Basilius alleges his nurse whose godliness, Basilius allegeth his nurse,
for her godliness.
he says, was then specially commended: and he adds that she received her
doctrine of Gregory Neocaesariensis, which at that time for his learning and
miracles was famous: also refuted Samosatenus, and left his posterity a brief
confession of the faith, which contains an excellent testimony of the
Trinity. And it is apparent in the 7. book of the ecclesiastical history.

Origin alleges the Apostles, Origin allegeth the Apostles.
as touching baptising of infantes. For he says, that in the 6. Chapter of S.
Paul too the Romans, it appears that the Churches received their tradition
from the Apostles, that infants might be baptized.

These do rightly allege the auctority of the church. Phil. Melancthons
purpose in diffinition of the true Church of God.
Wherefore I will orderly declare what the church is, and what Church is too be
heard, and that we must use approved testimonies. And yet notwithstanding
that the doctrine is to be judged out of the word of God, that the chief
authority of Gods word may remain, according to that saying, If any man shall
teach any other doctrine, Galat. 1.
let him be holde^ as accursed.

But first, when I speak of the Church, I do not mean Popes, Bishops, and
others which do allow their opinions in this behalf: For these are the enemies
of the true church, He shows, who be the enemies of the true Chu^^^e.
some of them being Epicures, and othersome of them manifestly given to
Idolatry: But, I call the Church, the society of them which truly believe,
What, and who be the true Church, and where.
which have the Gospel and Sacraments and are sanctified by the holy Ghost, as
(in the 5. Chapt. of S. Paul too the Ephesians.) the Church is there described and
as in John. 10. Where it is said, My sheep hear my voice.

And although it be needful, that this true church should be everlasting,
because the kingdom of Christ endures for ever, and it is written. I will
remain with you until the end of the world: Mat. 28. Yet we must understand
and know that this true church, does not always flourish together in one place,
but oftentimes becomes a very small Church, and afterward again is
restored by God when true teachers are sent therevntoo: The Church (...) the
first age of the world before the deluge.
As in time of Noah; the church was in a narrow rowme and a congregation of a
few persons.

So after the deluge, Melchisedech, wc was the son of Sem, The Church i^ the
same age after the deluge*
the son of Noah, retained the true doctrine: And when Idolatry increased
amongst the Chaldees, and that the true doctrine of God was almost
extinguished every where, God, by calling Abraham, renewed his Church.
Afterward the family of Abraham and a few of his ^earers became the Church,
when as in mean time the Chaldees and Egyptians boasted themselves too be the
posterity of the fathers, that they retained the examples of the fathers, and
manner of woorshipping God, The Chaldea^s and the Egipt^^ans vainly bo^^sted
themselue^ to be the chur^^ and were not.
and openly declared themselves to be the people of God, when they retained
not Gods word amongst them, although they had retained ceremonies, whereunto
notwithstanding they devised perverse opinions, and moreover added Idolatry.

In the time of Achaz, was the church extinguished in Israel, afterward again
by Elias and Eliseus it was increased, and yet after that did it decay again.

When Christ was borne, there was a very small Church in Jury: Anno Mundi
3970. Luc. 2. ^ros. ^. cap. 22. Regnante Octaui^^ Augusto.
namely, Mary, Joseph, the family of Zacharias, Symeon, Anna, the sheepeheardes
and a few others. In the mean time Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was in the
dealing of the Pharisees and Saducees which were notoriously known a wicked
people. Also the Saducees were Epicures, and yet notwithstanding challenged
they the title and name of the people of God, unto themselves especially.

And so in time of the Prophets the true church was but sle^der as in Esaias. 1.
Where it is testified, The church in time of the prophets.
Except that the Lord had left unto us seed, we should have been made like
unto Sodom and Gomorrha.

These words most gravely do admonish us that we should not think or judge of
the church as of a worldly government, How the church is to be reputed,
accep^ed, and believed.
neither that we measure the same by succession of Bishops, or by degree, or
seat of the Bishops of Rome: but that we do acknowledge, the church to be
amongst the^ which retain the true doctrine of the gospel. In this society
there must needs be some true beleuers: For unto this society do the promises
pertain. Enemies of the church of Esayas time.
Therefore Esaias bereaueth the princes and chief bishops in his time of that
stately title, and says, That there was a small offspring in that selfsame
people, left, which was called the people of God.

And in the time of Jeremy, when the kings, and Priests set themselves against
him, the church consisted not in the multitude of those priests, Enemies of
the church in Hieremyes time.
but of them which believed the preaching of Jeremy, Amoz. 3. So and in such
manner shall Israel be delivered, That if the Sheepheards do take two legs,
or a piece of an ear out of the Lions mouth, etc.

And finally at the length there was a very small church, Al Nations except Judah
only had utterly lost the knowledge of God.
in respect of the multitude of the wicked ones, when as all nations (the
people of Judah only excepted) had utterly lost the knowledge of God.

The Scripture also foresheweth that after the Apostles times, A premonstration
of the state of the church after the Apostles time. Matt. 14.
there should happen deadly persecutions unto the Church, as in Math. 14.
Many false Prophets shall arise and shall deceive many.

Again our savior Christ says, The Romish Synagogue reputed for the Church.
When you shall see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place.
etc. Mat. 24. Here, does he signify that in the church which is so called,
shall Idolatry arise, whereby true doctrine, and true worshipping of God shall
be overwhelmed, and there shall be made a desolation of the Church, that is
too say, a solitarines or suppression thereof. And so indeed it has come to
pass. One probable testimony by the abuses of Masses, etc.
For after that the abuses of Masses and superstitions of traditions did once
arise, there have followed darkness of true woorshipping God, of faith, of
invocation in faith and of functions in vocations too be performed: Because
man's conscience beholding her own merits is not able too understand the
forgiveness of sins, nor comprehend the manner of true calling upon GOD,
and the expecting for his divine help.

Moreover it is said, The Church of the latter age.
They shall work signs and wonders, that, if it may be possible, the very
elect ones shall be deceived. 2 Thessalonians. 2. There shall happen a departing from
the faith, etc. Also Luke 18. Think you that when the Son of man comes, he
shall find faith upon earth? Again, in the 88. Psalm. Have thou made al men for
naught? For, it is a complaint upon the decay of the Church in time to come.

These sayings do witness, although it be needful, The Church ought in
the la^ter age especial^ly to be cared for and preserved.
that the Church be preserved, notwithstanding in the latter age especially
that it is little or a company of a few persons which are despised and abject
in this life, as S. Paul says, Not many wise, not many mighty men. etc. 1.
Cor. 1.

These testimonies have I cited too that end, that we may first consider,
wwhat the Church is: and that the mind be withdrawn from carnal opinions,
which imagine that the Church is the policy or constitution of the Bishops,
and do tie the same unto the ordinary succession of Bishops, as the states
of government do consist in the ordinary succession of the Princes. The
Church is not tied unto ordinary succession of human^ state: but unto the
word of God.
But it goes otherwise with the Church: For this is a multitude not tied unto
ordinary succession, but unto the word of GOD. There is the Church renewed,
where God restores doctrine and gives his holy spirit. And that Churches are
thus to be governed and preserved, The true Church.
not by ordinary succession, S. Paul does witness the same. Ephesians. 4. He
has given gifts unto men, Where, and which S. Pau^^ reputeth and teaches the
Church (...)
that the Apostles Prophets. etc For, he teaches, that, that is properly the
Church, wherein Christ is effectual woorker, and gives true Teachers.
Therefore, when as the name of the Church and the authority thereof is
objected unto us: No^^. Authority of the Church objected.
Let us first consider, whether mention be made of the true Church, either
else of the multitude of Bishops, and the politic succession thereof: neither
let us suffer our selves to be terrified or discouraged from the word of God,
under a false pretense of the name of the Church.

Secondly after that we have declared which is the true Church, More touching
the true church ^t retayneth the doctrine of the Gospel.
let us now add thereunto that this true Church, which is but small, and a
company of holy ones, does retein the true doctrine of the Gospel, or the
articles of the faith, like as S. Paul calls the same The seat of truth.
But this self same true church has her doctrine, sometime more, and sometime
less pure and manifest. She has also in her many weak and feeble members, as
the Apostles were the church, The Apostles ^^er the church, but yet they
neither knew what the church was before the resur^ection of Christ, neither
what manner ^ingdom, Christ's kingdom should be
but yet they understood not (before the resurrection of Christ) what should
be the kingdom of Christ. For Peter (after the holy Ghost was given) did yet
suppose that the rites and ceremonies of the law was needful to be used: but
when he was admonished from heaven, he then knew that the kingdom of Christ
was not a Judicial policy, but spiritual and continual woorshipping of God.

Afterward when the Apostles began to prech there did shine in the^, Example
thereof by Peter Many weak members of the Church in the Apostles time.
a pure and clear doctrine and yet notwithstanding in mean season there were
many weak members, wc albeit they were true members of the church, and held
still amongst them the articles of the faith, yet they added hereunto some
error, as they which observed the ceremonies of the law, and did not
sufficiently well understand the abrogation of the law, and what was the true
worshipping of God. This was no small error, and brought in with it some
obscurity to the articles of the faith: so did christ foreshew as touching the
church in the latter age: that there should happen great darkness which should
hinder the very elect ones of God. Christ's prophecy of the Church in the
latter age. Mat. 24.
Whereby they should the less enjoy amongst them the true doctrine.

Therefore yet remains the true Church in some place, The true Church
remains in some one place or othen effectual, from time to time.
wc retains the articles of ye faith but now and the^ less pure and obscured
with some hurtful opinions, and which have some error in the^. And as yet I
speak of the true members of the church and of the holy ones, not of others,
wc having lost the light of the word do leese ye holy Ghost: and follow the
judgment of reason, and when they think that they deliver very godly things,
they yet say clean contrary things and ungodly. Like as eue^ at this day also
there are excellently learned, of good conversation, and outward show of
holiness, which seem to themselves to speak most holy things, when in deed
they are far of from the true light, (that is) from the true understanding of
the word of God. Concerning such persons, I speak not as yet, but I only
make mention of the true members of the Church, which for the more part, are
weak and infirm.

So therefore says Saint Paul 1. An invincible ground of the true Church
mentioned by S. Paul. And a weak ground of the wrong Church subject to
overthrows.
Cor. 3. No man can lay any other foundation, then that which is already laid.
But some man builds upon it Gold, other wood, and other straw or stubble.
etc.

By the foundation, he means, The Articles of the faith, that is to say, the
whole sum and scope of Christian doctrine, and the doctrine of Christ's
benefits: but hereunto (says be) some shall add profitable doctrine and
interpretation, and true spiritual honoring of God, and these he calls
Gold. Some other shall add straw and stubble, (that is) hurtful opinions, and
which are infected with some erroures, Like as in the first age of the world,
there were ordained ceremonies which brought with them false opinions.

As I do judge S. Melanc^^on^ opinion of the builders in both churches
Ambrose to be a true member of the Church. And yet even he thus speaks of
the Lent fast: Caetera ieiunia sunt voluntatis, hoc necessitatis est. That is,
other fastings are voluntary, Fasting: stubble added by Ambrose
but this is of necessity. This opinion of Ambrose is straw and stubble, added
to the doctrine of faith.

So Basilius adds Monkerie, as straw and stubble, Monkery stubble added by
Basilius.
and commends this kind of life with immoderate and false commendations,
when as in deed he was therefore reprehended of his own Bishop.

Butch at it is no small fault too ordeine new woorshippings of God: the
Scripture warns us hereof, and this one sentence sufficiently shows the
same: Esaias. 29. ^9.
In vain do they woorship me with commandments of man. Matthew. 15. It is a
grievous sin against the first commandment, to ordeine or allow
woorshippinges not commanded by God. For the first precepte, seeing of
forbids there should be any strange Gods, does also forbid strange
woorshippinges.

Cyprian urges canonical punishments, which then was used, Punishments by
canonical law.
and he confirms opinions, as though they were necessary, Stubble added by
Cyprian.
and that by reason of them, sins might be forgeuen. Sometime again he
says, that without the^, absolution of sins is unprofitable. Peradventure
he thought more convenient herein then he spoke: Notwithstanding these are no
small erroures, but very thick stubble obscuring the doctrine of Christ's
benefits and of faith which we should have in him.

Furthermore, oftentimes, writers have written more co^modiously, then they
have spoken, because for the most part they were very negligent and imperfect
in teaching, and borrowed many sentences and methodes of the common people,
Errors of satisfaction reprehended.
wherein co^sisted some kind of errors. As for example, August. borrows the
name of satisfaction, from the vulgar sort, yea although he does openly
reprehe^d the errors of satisfactions. He troubles himself in the
interpretation of this sentence, that every sin is voluntary, where he
disputed of the sin original, when notwithstanding the Sentence is a civil
saying set down concerning external offenses.

So call they the supper of the Lord an oblatio^, The Supper of the Lord called
after the manner of the peoples oblate^n.
after the manner of the people, when it is not an oblation, but Christ himself
was the high Priest, which offered his own sacrifice. And indeed in times
past there was not made in the ceremony of the supper, an oblation of the body
and blood: but before the consecration, there was bread offered, and other
things and the Priest said that he did offer up prayers and thankesgeuing,
and all the service, which was wont there to be done. Although therefore the
oblation was not understood after one manner, yet notwithstanding the name
afterward was wrested unto the oblation of the body, whereupon have ensued
great abuses.

Dionysius in that book which contains ceremonies of the Church, Dionysius
his book concerning ceremonies.
when he does diligently describe the order of the Lords Supper, yet does he
not at all make any mention of the oblation of the Lords body. Neither does
the cannon of Basilius contain this oblation: but after this, I will speak
more concerning the Lords Supper. These things only have I added too the end
I might declare how that in times paste the ancient writers now and then have
borrowed inco^uenient speeches of the people, as it is wont to happen in all
ages.

Sometimes, The multitude holding some one Church have borne a great stroke
with some persons.
they are overcome with judgments and examples of the multitude (wc is not
godly) that they be drawn into superstitious by some humane imagination: As
in the Nicen Counsel, except Paphnutlus alone had wtstood the same, the opinion
of them had been allowed for good wc would have made a decree, that priests
should abstain from their wives.

So did custom overcome Cyprian and many others, Custom also has done the
like.
insomuch that they did allow the forbidding of marriage. Also the whole
Nicene Council, being overcome with the agreement of a multitude, or of time,
ratified the Canons of penance, which afterward brought forth intolerable
erroures. Examples of great personages apt to seduce the people into darkness.
Examples also of great personages do oftentimes deceive the Godly: Like as
the example of Antonius caused many too err.

Hitherto have I spoken of the godly, which although they be holy, yet
notwithstanding very many of them are weak. Now will I proceed further
touching those which do transgress.

Sometimes the Godly do utterly transgress, Ori^en a godly member of the
church had his erroures.
and lose the holy Ghost (as I do judge) that Origin did utterly fall,
especially if he affirmed those mo^struous errors, That there should be
innumerable worlds: That the very Devils at the last day should be saved.

Tertullian also does ungodly disallowe the second marriages, Tertul an other
had also his infirmities.
but peradventure they have afterward repented. For many having fallen in
deed both in life and doctrine, have and yet at length do amend. And very
oftentimes does it happen that holy men do thoroughly fall, and do not judge
according too the word, and spiritual light, but are deceived by the
imagination of reason, Many godly members of the Church being deceived by the
imagination of reason, have yet at length vene reclaymed.
which notwithstanding afterward do better advise themselves. The true
Church may sometime have her faults
Like as Gedeon altogether tra^sgressed, when by man's advise and counsel he
ordained strange kinds of woorshipping God.

Of all these, follows this conclusion, although the true Church, which is
but small in number, retain the articles of the faith: yet notwithstanding the
same true Church may have her faults, obscuring the articles of the faith.

Furthermore, many do so fall, that they altogether allow and ratify wicked
errors, against the articles of the faith, although peradventure some of them do
afterward amend.

First, therefore, when the authority of the Church is alleged; Authority of
the true church alleged, how to be proved.
we must search, whether it be the consent of the true Church agreeyng with
the word of God.

Secondly, Writers of the Church.
it is so to be said that the writers which are extant, have oftentimes
fallen, and peradventure some of them were no members of the Church at all.

Thirdly, In the Church are not al members likewell disposed.
an other Difference is too be added. In that society which is called the
Church, there is a great number of ungodly persons, of whom many excel the
others in authority, outward show of religion, and opinion of doctrine; such as
were the people of Judah in the time of Hieremy, Example in Hieremies time.
the Bishops and wicked priests that alleged against Hieremy the authority of
the seat, of the law, and the very promises: affirming that the law should
not perish from the Priests: they denied, that their congregation could
err, when notwithstanding they did altogether err, and disgereede in matters
from Hieremy. Also in Christ's time, there were very few godly persons,
namely, Zacharias and Symeon.

Furthermore when the ungodly multitude has authority in the Church, The
ungodly multitude first embraced Masses.
it ordains many false and wicked things in the name and under the title of
the Church. Such alyke multitude first embraced the application of Masses,
for the quick and dead, and moreover the estimation of vows, and woorshipping
of Saints: afterward the very example of these things did hurt the godly.
And such a multitude, decreede in a certain Synod, that marriages of Priests
should utterly be taken away. The ungodly multitude decreed that marriages of
priests should utterly be taken away.
For it oftentimes comes too pass in the church, that ungodly persons of
excellent wits boldly challenge unto themselves the ordinance of religion, by
man's wisdom: who when they be not moved or affected by the word of God,
but are led therevntoo by the imagination of reason, and seek for apt
opinions for their purposes, do breed wicked errors, Samosatenus, Arius, and
Pelagius, heretics, living about the years of our Lord.
like as Samosatenus, Arius, and Pelagius. Others seek to establish merits,
or seek for fair kind of government, good ordering of the people and with
these causes are moved to the institution and heaping up of sundry
ceremonies, Samosatenus, 274.
as the Monks do, Arrius, 320.
as Gregory did, and as at this day the Popes, Pelagius, 435.
bishops, Princes, and many learned me^, (desiring to ordain a form of the
church) are moved with man's wisdom: and rejecting the word of God, will
establish a church according to their own imaginations, neither do they see
it is a horrible impiety to slide away from the word of God, to seek god
without his word, to ordain means and manner of worshipping god, by ma^s
opinion, without the expres commandment of god, to change the true opinions,
and oppress the purity of gods word.

When, therefore, the authority of the Church is objected unto us, as of the
application of Masses, the church does not err, The Church has thus many
ages used Masses: Alleging of Masses.
Therefore this custom is to be observed. We must answer unto the Mayor: The
universal church, which is the multitude of them that govern in the church,
may err, as the Bishops and Priests in Hieremies time, and in Christ's time did
als^ ^rre.

And although besides that number, there are some godly persons, which retain
still the Articles of the faith: Notwithstanding even they being moved with
examples, do (...) yield unto certain erroures: whereby it comes to pass,
that they retain the same articles of faith less pure, then they ought too
do. Bernarde condiscended unto many errors.
Like as Bernarde is seen too have had better judgment, then others, although
yet he yielded and condiscended unto many errors, to the abuses of Masses, too
the Popes power, too vows, and woorshippings of Saints.

Therefore the authority of the multitude, is not at all to be alleged against
the word of God* But we must return to the rule, If any man teach any other
Gospel, let him be holden accursed: Gal. 1. Let the chief authority ^e of the
word delivered by God: The first authority being of the word of God: proves
that to be the true Church which is agreeyng therewith.
Afterward that is to be reputed the church which agreeeth with that word, as
Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, John 10. and Saint: Augustine says:
The question is, Where the Church does consist. What shall we then do?
Shall we seek the same in our words, or in the words of the chief head
thereof, our Lord Jesus Christ? I think th^^ we ought* too seek the
Church in his words, who is the truth, and (...) ^est his own body.
Objection if the authority of the Church be refused.
But here objection is made, if the authority of the Church be refused,
^henis granted too much* and (...) large liberty unto the malaper^nesse of
men's inventions. For if once the opinions of the Church be rejected, many will
devise strange and ungodly interpretations of the (...) This danger, when it
is not too be contemned, and that it is profitable too restrain that liberty,
we must then again (...) forth the authority of the Church is to be required.

For Seruetus, Seruetus the he retique his opinion.
when he renews the wicked error of Samosatenus, and denies the word^ too
be understood the person, in this saying, 1. John. In the beginning was (...)
word, does mightilly extol the authority of the Scripture, he bidde^^ that
this authority be preferred before the decrees of the church. After that he
disputes subtly saying, The word is simply too be so understood. But
whereas the Word, in the common speech of men does not signify the person,
he denies that in John 1. it is too be understood the person. As if,
Demosthenes should read this saying: In the beginning was the word, surely
he would not think that any person were to be understood.

I ask the question therefore, whether it proffit not against such to oppose
the authority of the church: Here I answer: That the Church is to be heard,
How the church is to be heard.
so far forth as the gospel commands. So I say always, the congregation
is too be heard with whom the word of God has been, and which is called
the church, even as we command our Pastors to be heard. Let us therefore
hear the church teaching and admonishing us. But we must not ground our
belief upon the authority of the church, for the church does not institute The
articles of the faith, she does only teach, and admonish us. But for the
word of God must we believe, when namely; we being admonished of the church
do understand that this sentence is truly and without subtle allegation
delivered in the word of God.

Peradventure Demosthenes would not think of a person, if he should read
that sentence, In the beginning was the word, etc. But the hearer being
admonished of the church, (that the word signifies the person, to say the
son of God) is now helped of the church, teaching and admonishing him, and
the same hearer does believe the article, not for the authority of the Church,
but by cause he sees this sentence to have assured testimonies in the same
scripture: Touching understanding [the worde] to be the second person in
trinity.
he sees there is mention made of a certain person, who taking upon him
nature of man in the world, was conversant with men. He sees that this
person is called the word: her gathers apt and firm testimonies of both
natures in Christ. For, he knows that (touching the nature of God) we must
believe the heavenly voice uttered, and that it is great wickedness too invent
opinions, as touching The nature of God, without his testimony 2. Peter 1. and
17. Math. Hear ye him.

Also, The first church of the Apostles touching dotrine, and not man's
traditions.
The first Church is of force, as The witness of the Apostles. But I speak
as touching doctrines, and not man's traditions, for they would have doctrines
too be firm and perpetual, but man's ordinances they would not have to be
perpetual and immutable. Neither did the Apostles err in doctrine: Therefore
it is profitable to retain those testimonies whereas the most ancient
writers do allege the authority of the Apostles.

As Origin, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Gregory Neocaesariens. Ancient Fathers
citing testimony of the Trinity.
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria and many others do cite their testimonies
touching the Trinity.

Who when they do witness that the doctrine of the Trinity was received of
the Apostles, do greatly stablish and confirm the Godly. Therefore such
testimonies are not at all too be despised nor contemned.

And I said also, that the writers are to be heard as now in like manner we
say, How writers of former ages are to be heard
that our Preachers are to be heard, because there do some remain still in the
Church, which do retain and embrace the truth, in some place more pure, in
some other places, less pure and corrupt. But here, we must add this, That
they which are heard, are too be judged by the word of God, which thing the
rule of doctrine instituted, always admonishes.

Examples.
Augustine, (touching original sin) more sharply contendeth, Examples of the
same writers.
then the rest. Therefore he does both teach and admonish, and when we see
him truly and without subtilety to recite any sentence of the scripture, we
the^ believe the article, not for Augastyne, but for the word of God, and we
see, that the writers named have held the same opinion, although they have not
handled this article so copiously or so plainly.

An other.
Peter Bishop of Alexandria contending against Meletius, affirms, that such
as slide away from the faith are to be reentertained, and he alleges an
ancient authority. Opinion of an ancient father touching such as slide away from
the church.
For these words Epiphanius recites as the doctrine which has come to us in
our age does declare: Therefore the same Bishop of Alexandria does both teach
and admonish, that such as slide away are to be reentertained. Thi^ do we
believe, not for this Bishop: but because we see this sentence is expressed in
the word of God, and hereunto testimonies of the ancient Church do
condescend also.

Synodes or Councels.
The same do I say touching Synodes or Councels: Examples. How Syno^^ or
Councels ^re to be heard.
That they are also too be heard* which, when they do dispute touching the
word of God, do teach and admonish us: but thereunto let judgment be
adjoined, and when they deliver unto the world things which are true, let us
give credit unto them, for the word of God: As the Nicene Council taught
both godly and profitably, and admonished al posterity, of the son of God.
But we believe the article, not for the Synod or Counsel, but because we see
it so expressed in the word of God.

The other things, which are without the Scriptures are not so well to be
embraced, As the Council of Nicene, instituted Canons of repentance, which are
ma^s traditions, besides the scriptures, and have been the seeds of many
superstitous opinions.

Sampsons guestes could not expound the ridle which was proponed at the
feast, but that his wife was first asked the question: Wherefore, ^udicum,
cap. 14. ^ comparison ^or trial too ^now where the ^^urch of God (...).
Sampson said unto them, except you had first plowed with my heckfer you
should not find out my question. So likewise, must we diligently look
about and make inquiry where the Church is, which has the word of GOD, and
we must see which multitude of the fathers or of Councelles is the purer and
vncorrupt: that is, which of them have the less opinions besides the word of
god. These things does the church teach, admonish and testify. But we must
see whether those things which she proponeth or decrees, have the firm
testimonies of Gods word, yea or no.

And truly it becomes the godly too acknowledge and confess that the fathers
have deserved well of their posterity, The godly must acknowledge that the
fathers of the Church have well deserved of their posterity.
which with sharp and earnest contentions have defended and retained godly
doctrine: that benefit is not smally to be accounted upon. Hereunto pertains
that saying of S. Augustyne, I would not believe the Gospel, were it not but
that the authority of the Church moved me therevntoo. Augustynes opinions
touching the Church.
Augustyne does not here think that the authority of the Church is greater,
tha^ of the word of God, or that the church can abolish articles expressed
in the word of God: but he thinks that the church is the teacher, and
Testimony of those articles. We would not believe the Gospel, but that the
church does so reach us, and that it did testify, that this doctrine was
delivered us from the Apostles.

And this saying is of force to confound strange opinions. which were never
seen in the Church, like as the Manichees have invented new doting opinions.

For, the doctrine necessary too edify in godliness, must needs be seen in
the beginning by the preaching of the Apostles. Therefore, strange and
altogether unknown opinions not used in time of the apostolic at Church are to
be rejected. But concerning the saying of Augustyne, in other places more
amply it i^ disputed upon. The Church has none authority to ordain any thing
contrary unto the word of God.
Surely he does not grau^^ that the Church has or may have any authority of
ordayning any thing contrary too the express word of god: or of abolishing
articles delivered in the word of GOD: either else of making new or strange
articles of the faith.

A Resytal of Testimonies by the Author.
I will collect a few examples of the councels, and Fathers, Testimonies of
Councels.
as it appears, that in them there is matters of testimony in some of them,
differing from others some, least (without difference made) all the sayings of
all men, or all the ordinances of ancient fathers, should be reputed and
taken as necessary.

Like as truly the foolish and ignorant people are so in love with antiquity
that they will have al ancient traditions of men to be restored in the church,
The common sort have always held antiquity in great estimation.
even as if now they of Sparta would have al ancient ordinances restored unto
the state of their common wealth at this day: seeing that ordinances devised
by men, are partly faulty, and partly allowable: yet notwithstanding they are
not agreeable unto al times and ages.

The Council called Neocaesariense, forbad, that Priests should not come too
banquettes at the second marriages, Concilium Neocesar. under Coustantinus.
Anno. 315. Present thereat Germanus, Leontius, Basilius, Longinus and aliis
least they should be supposed of others to allow them. Such like folish
constitutio^s very many have been entermingled with good ordinances:
wherefore, choice is to be made in such cases, and we must not rashely rejoice
or take encouragement a^euery saying of the ancient fathers, or Councels.

Anno Domini 324. The Council of Nicene was called together by Constantyne the
Emperor, Nicene Council under Constantyne, Anno. 324 Present there at 268.
bishops.
wherein Eustathius bishop of Antioche was chief. In this Council, therewere
very great and grievous controversies of opinions discussed and deryded, and
the errors of Samosatenus, and of Arrius were of good right condemned. Nicene
Count.
Also the errors of those called Cathari, which denied that such as had
swarued from the Church, were to be received again, and denied that such could
have forgiveness of their sins.

Afterward, Policies for the government of churches devised at the said
Council.
there were certain policyes ordained touching government of churches: That
the bishop of Alexandria should govern the Churches of the east* and the
bishop of Rome those Churches of the nations adjacent. Also that bishops
should be consecrated of the other bishops which dwelt nea^e unto them.
These policies, although they are profitable, yet they which constituted these,
would not have them too be taken for the articles of the faith.

Thirdly, Ceremonial institutions were causes of superstitions.
they also ordained certain ceremonial institutions: namely, Canons of
penance, as they termed them, which at the first, were not so difficulte, and
peradventure were less superstitious.

But afterward it grew to an intolerable yoke, and superstition thereby
increased, and the free remission of sins, was by means hereof obscured and
darkened. Wherefore; in this matter, the fathers of this Council were not
circumspect enough: And seeing that the event so manifested afterward, Fathers
faulty.
that superstitions did hereby increase, let us not in his behalf so marvel at
the doing of that Council, Canons of repentance.
that we will either allow, or restore these Canons as profitable for the
Church.

Neither, do we therefore differ in opinion from the ancient Church: we
retain in our Church the articles of the Council, touching doctrine, which
properly belong unto the church. As for the other ceremonies, which either
are beside, or against the word of God, they do nothing at al pertain unto
the church.

Anno Domini 383. The council of Constantinople was called together, The
council of Constantinople secundum Pantaleonem under Gratian. Anno 383. Present
thereat 180. Fathers. Controversies. Heretics.
of Theodosius the Emperor, wherein was chief the bishop of Constantinople:
there was a great controversy discussed upon and dreyded as concerning The
holy Ghost, That he is a person proceeding from the father, and the son and
that he is God: And for their contrary opinion therein, was Eunomius, and
other Heretics of right condemned.

And there were also certain policies here decreed, Policies.
as this one: namely, that no bishops should have any thing to deal in other
diocesses than in their own.

Anno 433. The 3. Council of Ephesus secund. Pantal. Romany ducibus inter se
de imp^rio disciptantibus 433. Present thereat 200. fathers. Heresies of
Nestorius.
The Council at Ephesus, was called of Theodosii^s, the younger, Emperor,
wherein was cheef, Cyrillus, bishop of Alexandria. This Synod by good right
condemned the heretic Nestorius, who denied in Christ the word united unto
humane nature, by a substantial union, but that the word is only present, and
(as it were a guest in (...)) does dwell in humane nature, that it might there
be effectual.

This controversy was of great efficacy. For in Christ, Two natures in
Christ truly and substantially united.
there are two natures united, truly and substantially. Neither is it only
true, that the humane nature alone is Christ, and the dwelling place of the
word assistent, or united. Thereupon have the godly urged these kinds of
speech, touching the unity of the person, That God was borne, that he
suffered, etc. And although Nestorius, denied that he held like opinion as
Samosatenus held, yet notwithstanding I suppose that in deed he held all
one opinion, but that he has after aforte propounded an old doting opinion,
darkly shadowed or cloked.

Anno 452. The Council of Calcedon, The 4. Council of Calcedon under Martian.
452.
was called together of the Emperor Martian, wherein Eutiches was rightly
condemned, which also denied the two natures in Christ; and contended that the
same nature of the word was sent from GOD, that it was brought forth by the
Virgin, neither that there were two natures united: and here he seems to
have renewed the doting madness of Samosatenus, but propounded by some other
sleyght or color. This judgment of the Council, is to be commended.

But now there had increased in the church man's traditions, Man's traditions
increased in the Church.
therefore this Synod brought forth corrupt constitutions, not touching
opinions, bnt touching ceremonies, and woorshipping of God, otherwise then the
scriptures allow, and notwithstanding these ordinances, were more within the
limits of modesty, then other which sprang up afterward. In this Synod,
was first an order decreed which forbad the marriage of Monks, and of Virgins
which had made vows: Monks forbidden to marry and virgins which had made vows.
and excommunicateth such as contrace matrimony, out of that society, although
it adds some mitigation, and that this may be granted by the judgment of
the Bishop.

But many pollitike ordinances were at this time profitably decreed: Politic
ordinances for the Church decreeed in the Council of Calcedon.
Namely, That the Bishops should not themselves, hold the administration of
ecclesiastical faculties, but that Churches should have their ouerseeers.
That no one person should have more functions then one. That no man should be
admitted without the order of Ministry. Also that Bishops in their several
Provinces should yeerelymeete together, and constitute Connenticles concerning
the present controversies in the Church. Adversaries charged with
dissimulation.
These profitable decrees, of the Synodes, the adversaries do dissemble with,
and in mean time do bring forth other lighter matters, in the end they
would seem to oppose unto us the authority of the ancient church.

There were also in the mean time other Synodes in other places, either
prouincials, or more often assembled: wherein the Bishops of the next provinces
abiacent, did also meet together, Th^^. Council of Antioch under Foelix the
Bishop of Rome there holden about the year 274, Touching the herisie of this
Paul Samosatenus. look in Pantaleon page 22.
Such a one was the Synod of Antioche (before that of Nicene aforesaid) called
against Samosatenus: which godly and rightly condemned the wickedness of
Samosatenus. Also the like Synod being ancient vncorrupt, called Gangrensis
in Galatia, ordained very good decrees against the superstitions of marriages,
of meats, and of Monkery. And it is manifest that this Council was gathered
too condemn those two Heretics. Montanus and Martion, with others such, which
woonderfully augmented those superstitions.

Since that, there ensued other Councelles more later, as that called
Auchiranum, which decreed this constitution worthy of memory: if Deacons in
their ordinance had not promised a single life, Vows of Dea^tons touching
marriage or single life fondly allowed of.
they were still too be retained in their ministeries, although afterward
they had married wives: but if they had promised vows of single life, and
afterward indeed married: they were then too be removed and displaced out
of the ministry. The same Synod has also other dangerous and superstitie us
Canons, of the years of penance. The Council of Laodicia under Valeut (...)
Anno 368.


The Council of Laodicea in Anno Domini 368. called together) did rightly
confound the Nouatian Heritikes. Lay men axacted upon, which had married 2
wives. Council. Laodicenum.
But it erred in exacting upon those Lay men, which already have had two
wives: it wills them first to be punished before they be admitted to the
Communion. It does also forbid baptizing 14 dates after the beginning of lent:
Error of Baptising forbidden for 14 days after beginning of lent.
the other politic ordinances there decreed, are good, as namely this one,
when it forbids matrimony and marrying with Heretics. Marriage forbid with
Heretics.
This Synod followed that of Nicene not long time between.

Under Honorius the Emperor was the first council of Toledo called, The
Council of Toledo under Arcadius and Honorius. Anno 395.
which contains many profitable arguments of doctrine. For it godly recites
the articles of the Divinity and natures of Christ, Articles of divinity and
humanity in Christ.
and certain other articles. Afterward it adjoined unto this certain
pollitike constitutions and ceremonies, touching the manner of their annoynting,
and touching vows.

This Synod forbids the preferring of Deacons unto the office of
Priesthood, if they do not abstain from lawful wives. Dea^ons.
Also it does excommunicate those Parents which love their daughters with
affection of parents if they do marry after they have once bound them selves with
bows. Excommunication of Parents.
Also, this counsel does not admit them once, A great and unmeet absurdity.
being married, to come to the communion, e^cept they depart away from their
husbands. Pantaleon writes that this was ratified in Anno Domini. 399.

The 5. Council of Carthage which was held Anno Domini 438. The 5. Council of
Carthage under Aurelius Bishop. Anno 438.
forbids Bishops, Priests, Present thereat 74. Bishops.
and Deacons to have the use of lawful wives. And so by a little and a little
the prohibition here of augmented. Before, that it was lawful for Deacons to
live with their wives, as the Synod called Anchirana Synodus both testify.
Afterward followed a prohibition hereof. Present therer^ 74. Bishops.
Marriage of ecclesiastical persons forbidden.
And these ordinances touching single life, were thereupon eftsoon repeated
in all Synodes and Councelles, and more sharper punishments were adjoined them,
as a certain Council holden at Toledo ordained, that the riches or substance
of women should be soulde away if they returned again unto their husbands.

For, A constitution concerning Chapels and Aulters of Saints.
this Council now holden at Carthage contains also another constitution
worthy of memory concerning Chapels, and Aulters of Saints, where as their
bodies were not buried. These Aulters and Chappelles, did the Bishop command
should be thrown down, or if they feared any insurrection of the people, he
biddes them exhort the people in their Sermons, that they come not to those
places. It appears that there were some at that time which would prohibit
and withstand the superstition of woorshipping Saints even when it was first
springing up. Superstitiouse woorshipping of Saints withstood and disanulled.


Pantaleon recites that this was ratified in the time of Clodoueus son of
Pharamund Duke of Franconiain Germany.

The Council of Carthage in Anno Domini 457. The 6. council of Carthage under
Aurelius Bishop there. Anno 457.
touching the appeal of Bishops therein the bishop of Rome required ye appeal
to the sea of Rome might be granted, Present thereat, 217, Bishops.
whe^cesoeuer any man had appealed unto the Bishop of Rome. Apeale to the Sea
of Rome. labored for by the Bishop there.
And because he would obtain this, he played a false part, he alleged a
counterfaite decree, which he affirmed was established in the Nicene council
too that purpose: afterward by originalles or copies fetched from
Constantinople, Augustine was present at this Council.
the vanity hereof was found out: and the demand of the Bishop of Rome was
utterly rejected. Note. The impudent forgery of the Bishop of Rome.
At this council was Saint. Augustine present. By such cunning sleights have
the Romish bishops made themselves a way and mean to obtain the supremacy.
This example admonishes us, that we should not be so far in love with
antiquity, that we altogether acquyte it of al faults there.

Pantaleon testifies that this Synod was ratified for the 6. by Aurelius the
Bishop of Carthage.

The 4. Synod there, contained a decree made, A Relation unto the 4. Councel^
holden there
Touching Prayer, and offering for the dead, in these words: Those that
repent the^ of their sins, which have diligently observed the canons of
repentance, A decree touching repentance.
if they happen too dye before they communicate, let the memory of them be
commended in prayers, and offeringes. That age had not as yet any private
Masses, but yet by a little and a little, superstition had increased. This
Canon does not allow of the dead, except they had observed diligently the
rites of penance. Also, it adds a kind or manner of offringes.

Pantaleon reports that this Synod was ratified in Anno 436. under the same
Bishop Aurelius.

The Council called Mileuitana Synodus in Africa handled a most weighty
cause, The Council called Mileuitana about the time that Hilarious entered
again into Rome. ^n. 420.
whereat Saint Augustine was present, and did rightly defend this godly
doctrine of original sin, of Grace, and of justification: the same Council
had also certain politic constitutions, amongst which, namely, these are
worthy of memory, it forbids suit of appeal unto the Bishops of beyond
the Seas. S. Augustine was present thereat with a great number of Bishops.
But indeed this decree, would not the Bishop of Rome now admit or
receive.

It also forbids Judges, Suit of appele to the Sea of Rome forbidden.
but not Bishops to be required of the Emperor. That was agreeable unto those
days. Now it were very hard too be observed: Diuorcements
Moreover touching Diuorcements it decreed that the innocent or faultlesse
person should not again contract matrimony with any other.

And it moreover adds that request is to be made, that the Emperor would
establish a law to that end and purpose. And that thing was also more
grievous. For Fabiola, as it appears by the testimony of Saint Hierom
contracted an other marriage after her first deuorce at Rome.

That Synod also confirms the superstition of vows, Superstition of vows
confirmed. Virgins to be covered before the age of 25. years.
it allows virgins to be covered before five and twenty years of age
contrary to the ancient Canons. Although therefore touching doctrine it
pronounced things which were very well to be borne withal, ye afterward,
notwithstanding, were added some stubble: and superstitious constitutions.

Wherefore, not all the decrees of the Councils without choice, are to be well
allowed of: And yet notwithstanding we must confess and acknowledge that godly
Councelles have well deserved to be borne with and allowed: because they have
retained and conserved some Articles of Christian doctrine. And concerning
these things, it is profitable to retain the Testimony of Councelles, and of
Antiquity.

Of ancient Ecclesiastical writers.
THese also have well deserved of, Ancient ecclesiastical writers so far
forth as they are witnesses of the ancient and first church of the Apostles
have well deserved to be allowed of.
especially so far forth as they are witnesses of the Ancient and first
Church of the Apostles. For, they confirm us with their testimony as touching
the Trinity, of the natures in Christ, of baptizing infantes, of the use of
the Lords Supper, of ordayning ministers, touching marriage of ministers,
touching the use of things indifferent, touching repentance of those which
have transgressed. As concerning all these articles, there are recited examples
worthy of memory, from the Apostles, which do mainteyne and defend our
doctrine.

But some of them have been more diligent in some matters, Other writers
oftentimes er^ing by admonishment have amended.
and as it is the nature of man they do often rashly and unadvisedly power out
absurd and false opinions, whereof if they had been admonished, they would
undoubtedly have corrected them. Oftentimes when they thought not amiss, yet
could they not so perspicuously or plainly declare their opinions, as they
would. Oftentimes by reason of the custom of times and ages they did more
obstinately defend their present traditions: And they have also now and then
false opinions. Without choice be made al writing or testimonies of the fathers
may not be allowed.
Wherefore without choice to be made all writings or testimonies of the
Fathers, may not be allowed, and oftentimes they the^ selves do contend
amongst themselves, neither is it a thing seldom seen, that a man disagreeth
from him self. Wherefore the judgment ought to be given according to the
writing and saying of the Apostles. But I now set down examples.

Of Origin.
Origin recytyng the examples and sentences of the Apostles, Origin was Bi^hop
of Alexan^ria. Anno 235 ^n some points ^e is a witness ^rofitable.
and of the ancient Churches, is a witness very profitable for the posterity
concerning some articles touching the Trinity, touching the two natures in
Christ touching Baptising of Infantes, Original sin, use of the Lords
supper, and certain other things.

But he has mixed many false and absurd opinions with his writings, With his
wri^ings he mixed ^any false and ^^surde opini^ns.
whereof some were disallowed even in his time. He feigned, or imagined that
before this world there were many more worlds. He imagigined; that the
torments ordained for Devils, and damned persons should have an end. These
things did that his age reprehend, and disalowe.

Upon the Romans 3. Where he handles this proposition: We are justified by
faith, not by works, He understands by a figure Synecdoche, we are just
by faith, that is too say, through a perfect faith containing all virtues, that
he declares: he says the same may be spoken of other virtues: as by mercy we
are just, namely being perfect comprehending all other virtues. This is to say
none other thing, Origin Error touching righteousness.
but that men may by reason of their works and virtues have remission of
sins, and are just. And when they do not diligently consider what Saint
Paul goes about, His error touching works and virtues.
what he calls Faith, what that exclusive particle (not of works) means,
he adds herein confused and troublesome interpretations, neither does he
agree with himself.

For, sometimes he utters some one tolerable saying, but the same does he
afterward corrupt: Like as that in the fourth to the Romans where he thus
argues that the beginning of justification from God, is faith, which believes
in him that justifies, (...) fault in Origin where he afterward corrupts
that which before he applied well.
and this faith when she is justified, a^ideth firm in the ground of the
soul, as the root of a tree being watered with a shewre, that when by the
law of God it begins too be tilled, straight way out of the same there
springes branches which bear the fruits of works. Not therefore out of
works, the root of righteousness, but from the root, the fruit of works
does grow, that is to say, from the root of righteousness whereby God accepts
righteousness without works.

In the 3. cap. He alle^geth ^^stification by ^aith.
Romans where he entreats upon this sentence, Where is then thy glorying? he
now seems to come nearer unto the mind of Saint Paul: he grants this
exclusive particle, that Men by faith only are justified: and he alleges the
thief upon the cross, and the women mentioned by S. Luk cap. 28. Thy faith
has saved thee. But after declaring these things, he seems thus too mean,
that a man at the beginning does obtain remission of sins by faith only.
Afterward that he is just through other virtues, like as he says
afterward: Faith is reputed for righteousness unto him which is converted,
but afterward righteousness is rekoned unto righteousness.

Furthermore there is a marvelous variety and doubtfulnesse of his
interpretation, although he grants in the beginning, Variety in his
interpretation.
that Man may obtain remission of sins only by Faith, yet notwithstanding
if afterward he imagine, that such as are converted, be without sin, by
reason of other virtues: he then disagreeth from Saint Paul and the rest of
divine Scriptures, according to that saying of David, No man living shall be
justified in thy sight. Psalm. 143. Again, If we say, we have no sin. etc. 1
John 1.

In ye 7. Chap. he says plainly, that the holy ones do resemble in
themselves the person of others, when they attribute sin unto themselves, as
it is manifest in Daniel. His corrupting of sentences grievously erronyous.
Not in our righteousness, but in thy mercy, thou will hear us. Such like
sentences does he corrupt, and teaches either trust in a man's own
righteousness, or else desperation.

Chap. 3. To. he says Without the law is the righteousness of God made
manifest. That is to say, without the natural law: there are new laws given
us in the Gospel, as that which is mentioned in Matthew. 6. Let not the right
hand know what the left hand does. This law, (says he) was before
unknown: Again: the law is spiritual. He understands only touching the
allegory, that is ceremonies have their allegory, Origin understands the
holy Ghost amiss.
and oftentimes he understands the holy Ghost amiss, not conceauing of the
motions of the holy Ghost, but only of the allegorical interpretation or
meaning.

In the eight chapter, that which was impossible unto the Law, because it was
weakened through the flesh, he applies the flesh unto the Law: the flesh of
the Law was weakened, that is, ceremonies were impossible, unprofitable. etc.
But S. Paul means the flesh, the nature of man, The law was weakened by
flesh, that is, it could not be fulfilled by humane nature. These places do
show that Origin ran clean beside the high way, and did not understand here
what Saint Paul meant.

I could collect many light or sie^der matters, as where he says, Note his
error in preferring Peter above all the rest of the Apostles. Mat. 16. Mat. 20.
That Peter excelled the rest, because it is said unto him in the plural
number: it shall be loosed in the heavens, and to all the whole company of the
Apostles it is said in the singular number, it shall be loosed in heaven. But
these trifles I let pass, yet it proficeth the learned and such as apply their
judgments to read the ancient writings: first by reason of historical
testimonies, and the^ because the conference of them, sharpneth the wits and
exercises the studious. So shall the reading of Origin profit them, which
before are rightly instructed, and do hold fast the sum and principles of
christian doctrine.

Of Dionysius
There is one book which Dionysius writ touching the ecclesiastical
hierarchy, This Dionysius is thought to have been the Disciple of Origin, and
also thief schoolemaister of the school in the City of Alexandria, Anno 250.
and it is for the history profitable, the rest conteyneth vain matters of
knowledge. For there the ceremonies of the Sacraments are set down, and the
ordinances of the Church, and it appears in those days, that there were
mean ceremonies as yet. And especially the ordinances of the Mass are there
too be considered, so that it appears the later popes that have been in the
church, have in their time digressed far from the ancient rule of the church.
They used to recite certain Psalms, Popes of the later times have digressed
from the ancient rule of the Church.
and certain lessons cut of the Gospel, they made also Prayers for the church,
and for the common weal. After this, the priest standing at the table, recited
the words of Christ concerning the Lords Supper. Furthermore he distributed
the sacrament unto the people, and lastly followed a giving of thanks. This was
the ordinary manner of their mass, whereby it plainly appears, that the Mass
was only a Communion, and that there were then no private Masses, Dionysius
testifies that there was no Mass but Communion in his time.
but that is also to be meruailed at, that there is no mention at all made of
oblation: no nor so much as the rite or manner of him that does offer. These
things specially it is profitable too observe in Dionysius, that we may oppose
antiquity against those, which defend the abuses of their Masses.

He makes mention of Baptism, Anointing, Communion, His testimonies touching
baptism annoynting Communion, ordering of priests and a godly order in burying
the dead.
and as I said, of the ordeining of Priests, and of them which made bows, and
of those which anointed the dead: where he declares, what manner ceremonies
they used at funerals: when the dead body was placed in the Church, in presence
of the people, there were recited certain lessons out of the word of God,
touching resurrection. The people also after this was bid to give thanks in
their prayers, that such a one had departed out of this world in the
knowledge of the Gospel. And herevntoo was added an exhortation, that every one
touching himself should pray for a Godly end out of this life. This was an
order very godly, and worthy of commendation.

For, what greater benefits may be devised, than in that great agony firmly
too retain in mind the knowledge of Christ, to be helped of Christ, and
saved by him. This better ceremony the latter age has utterly abolished,
retaining, and heaping up of others far worse.

Also Dionysius adds, that after this exhortation, the Priest went from his
former place, and powered oil upon the corpse, and prayed that God would pardon
his infirmity, which was remaining after the time of his conversion.
Afterward the coarse was laid straightway in the earth. These only were the
ceremonies of burialles, at that time: there was, as yet no mention in the
Mass, of them that were departed: much less was the body of the Lord offered
for those that were dead. This profanation or abuse of the Sacrament was added
in the latter age.

Thus much, Ceremonies were the beginnings of monkery.
concerning Dionysius, wherein, although ceremonies apeare somewhat less
faulty, yet notwithstanding were they the beginnings of Monkery, and this thing
was worthy of great reprehension that it makes no difference, between the
sacraments appointed by God and man's traditions. Touching thing anointing he
speaks al one, as of Baptism, and he makes by things equal with things
of substance. And it prefers the ordering of Monks, before the institution
of Ministers; which is greatly too be dispraysed when as the institution of
Ministers, pertains unto the preaching of the Gospel. And that ordering of
Monks is superstitious, and is only ordained for a kind of woorshipping God,
not allowed of according to that saying, They woorship me in vain teaching
traditions of men. Mat. 15. And yet Monkery is there called perfection.

Therefore let these testimonies of this Dionysius be of force so far as they
pertain to the history, that we may know what ceremonies were then used. But
let no doctrine or laws be instituted by his descriptions.

Of Tertullian.
Tertullian rightly confuted Martyon and other Heretics of that seet.
Tertullianus Apher was famous in Anno 230.
He contains profitable testimonies of the Trinity not recyting his opinion
therein, but the ancient opinion received from the Apostles. Against Praxea, he
has a large and lightsome testimony of the word, that is, of the son of
God, that he is the second person* yea, before he took upon him humane nature.
But yet the ancient fathers do also reprehende his errors: namely, that he
disalloweth the second marriages, His errors touching marriage.
and in that he very fondly alleges. That a man may not lawefully marry the
wife of a Christian brother that is dead: for (says he) who so marryeth the
widow of a Christian, marries the wife of a brother deceassed, therefore he
does not right.

He does also tryfle as touching the kingdom of the saints, His errors
touching Saints.
when they fained that it should endure a thousand years in this corporal
life; before the consummation of the world, and before the last judgment, too
others by a little, and a little rising sooner, and too others rising later.
His errors touching traditions.
This Judicial doting opinion is altogether to be excluded out of the Church.

In his little book De corona militis, he speaks many things concerning man's
traditions: And touching custom.
and very sharply he declameth, touching custom that it is too be reputed
for a law. By means of these sayings wrested a wrong way in the Church, as
it happens, might great errors be established in all ages, because man's
circumspecyou and vigilance can never be such and so great, but that some
perverse customs do creep into the church some time.

Moreover Tertullian rehearses very childish fashions: namely, Also touching
Baptism.
that for seven days after Baptism, there be no using of bathe or entering
into baine. Also that unto such as were baptized, milk and honey should be
given too taste. He says also there: We make once a year oblations for the
souls departed, and for the birth days of those that are living.

That thing now do our adversaries ungodly apply unto Masses for the souls
departed. Touching birthdayes and burial days.
But why do they leave out the birth days, if they give so much credit to the
authority of Tertullian? But he makes no mention of the Supper of the Lord.
But at the birth days and burial days, there was meat brought intoo the
Churches, and other gifts was bestowed upon the poor people. These they
called offeringes and feasts of charity. And this tradition was received of
the Ethnicks, but somewhat reformed, and in better order. For the Ethnicks also
gave their feas^es in the Churches, at their birth days and burial days: and
afterward the Nicene council and others, for bad this pomp, at the birth
days.

Therefore like as of the rest I have declared, so here the testimonies
historical in Tertullian, do profit what the former church did think. But as
for his interpretations and disputations, let them not be received for good
doctrine, except so far as they agree with the writing of the apostles.

Of Cyprian.
Cyprian lived about the year of our Lord 275. Cyprian Bishop of Carthig^ and
dyed a Martyr about the year 275.
He contains profitable testimonies, as touching the Trinity, as touching
baptising of infantes, of the use of the Lords Supper, and of the manner in
choosing of Bishops, which he writes are to be elected by them of authority
in the church, and that the same election is to be ratified by certain other
bishops dwelling near unto that place, which are to be adjoined.

But the ancient fathers did reprove Cyprian, Note his error touching
baptising by Heretics.
that he thinks such are too be again baptized of the Heretics, which
have been once already baptized. As he declameth herevppon, now and then, he
lays out absurd and corrupt opinions, when he does exagerate or amplify,
with immoderate and superfluous speeches: the cause he takes in hand, as he
writes very sharply of Canonical punishements, Touching re^^issio^ of sins.
he says, Absolution of sins is not auayleable, except those pains or
punishements be first performed. This saying how great inconvenience it
has, it is manifest.

Also he does very vehemently dispute of single life, although he does
mitigate that place, he bids those persons contract marriages which have
made their vows, yea if they keep not promise.

In his little book of Alms, His error, touching original sin.
he says, that those sins which were committed before baptism, are by
means of Christ's passion forgiven, but he says, that after baptism,
forgiveness of those sins then committed must be sought for, and obtained
by almose deeds.

The same man does affirm touching such as slide away from the Church, His
error touching such as slide away from the Church.
that the benefit of Christ which came by baptism, is utterly lost. But
afterward that remission of sins is to be sought for by almose deeds. These
things are full of absurdity, whereof he being admonished, no doubt would have
reformed himself. Therefore, not al his sayings are to hereputed and taken for
good doctrine.

As touching the Lords Supper, he is wont too use the words of Oblation and
Sacrifice like as the other writers before did, which say confusedly: Because
Cyprian used the word: [oblatio^] for the Lords supper, therefore the
adversaries ratify their mass.
We offer prayers, we offer bread, wine, we offer the body and blood of
Christ. For that is also found in Cyprian. Here upon, our adversaries take
their Testimonies too defend the profanation of the Lords Supper in their
private Mass, etc.

Great is the force of custom, and men imitating this, do oftentimes speak
improperly: As now we call it the Mass* where never any man knew the right
sense or meaning of that name. So the ancient fathers retained the speeches of
oblation and sacrifice, not very well regarding the Etymology or proper
signification thereof. And because Augustyne saw there was some discommodity
in those names, Augustines interpretation of the words, Sacrifice and oblation.
he somewhat mitigateth the same thee says, That it is called Sacrifice, for
the remembrance of the thing Sacrificed, and Oblation, for the memory of the
Oblation. These are Metonymiae, or figures of denomination, as we say the
passover for the memory or the sign of the passing over. But I will not here
subtly either interpret upon, or excuse the used phrase of speech in that
age. For indeed so did the people speak, which now and then received an
unapt phrase of speech.

Irenaeus plainly declares, The opinion of Irenaeus touching oblation.
That this oblation is a thanksgiving. The same did others think also, as the
name of the Eucharist, or thanksgiving, or, supper of the Lord, does testify,
wherefore they thought it was a ceremony whereby thanks are given. That has
no inconvenience in it at al. For we receive it to the end that we may thereby
be admonished of the benefit given us by Christ, that we may stir up and
increase our faith thereby, furthermore that we may give thanks for that
benefit. Neither does it therevppon follow, That that work is to be done
for others, or too be applied for others, etc. These monsters truly were not
once thought upon by the fathers.

Therefore, Sacrifice and oblation how to be understood.
when we read the name of Sacrifice and oblation, let us understand it,
either for a sign of the Sacrifice and oblation, or for a thanksgiving. Let us
not imagine that it may be applied for any others.

Now and then, in one word they call oblation all that buysinesse which is
there in hand: That is too say, Prayers, and the supper of the Lord. This
when it happens, than are Prayers too be understood for oblations.

Also, Certain word^ in Cyprian which the late writers do wrest contrary to
good meaning.
there are certain words read in Cyprian, concerning the dead, which the
later writers do wrest contrary to good meaning, We offer Sacrifices for
them. But these things he speaks, as touching Martyrs. For, of them there
was mention made in Prayers, when thanks were given unto God, that he had
assisted them. As the Greek canon says, We offer for the Patriarchs
Prophets, Apostles that is, we do give thee thanks, that thou have chosen
thy church unto thee eue^ from the beginning, that thou have redeemed,
sanctified: etc. This was the meaning of those words at the beginning: they did
not require of God, that he would ^ mitigat^ the pains of those which were
dead.

Afterward in time there happened evil opinions, and the former words were
partly changed, partly they of the latter age (retayning the form of those
words) understood yet an otherthing, than they of the former age did.

Ergo the testimonies of antiquity do not maintain or defend later abuses,
Testimonies of antiquity do not defend later abuses.
which are partly strange and contrary unto the state of the time present,
partly if in them they have any fault, they ought not too be objected unto
the firm testimonies of the scripture, because other ages had also their
discommodities. These things most simply without subtle cautilation do I
answer touching the words of Oblation and Sacrifice.

Of Basilius.
In Basilius there are profitable testimonies of the Trinity, Basilius was
Bishop of Caesarea in Capadocea abowte the year. 370.
and of Repentance against Nouatus. In his sermon of Humility he sets
down an excellent opinion touching righteousness of faith, which does
manifestly defend us. He plucketh away justification of good works, without
subtle cauillation therevppon, neither speaks he of things ceremoni^^ but of
al virtues, neither speaks he only of works before reuocatio^, but of the
virtues, in them which be renewed, and he biddes us believe, that only by
confidence in the mercy for Christ's sake promised we are just and not
otherwise His words are these.

And the Apostle says. Touching righteousness.
1. Cor. 1. He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord, saying, that Christ
is made for us wisdom from God, righteousness, sanctification and redemption,
that as it is written, he which rejoices might rejoice in the Lord. Eode^, for
indeed this is perfect and upright rejoicing in God, when as truly a man does
not exalte or glory in his own righteousness, but does acknowledge that true
righteousness takes in himself. And that by faith only in Christ he is
justified. And S. Paul rejoices saying, that he does despise his own
righteousness, but by faith in Christ seeks that righteousness which is of
God.

These words do sufficiently declare, that Basilius did so understand
righteousness of faith, that we ought too believe by that we are just
through faith for Christ by mercy, that is, we are acceptable unto him not
for any virtue which is in us.

But, Basilius first in^stituted the o^^res of Monkery.
whereas Basilius first instituted the order of Monkery: That example is
hurtful, and has in it some fault, yea although he himself had no gross
superstitions in him first, and those companies or orders of Monks were as
yet a certain show o^ schools. And there are certain books every where
ca^ried about under his name, which contain rules for Monks: whereof without
doubt some were counterfe^^ed by other writers, long time after Basilius dyed
(...) or they are full of false opinions touching Single life, and other rites
or ceremonies devised by man without the commandment of God, and they
contain foolish tryfling matters, as a great heap of penalties or
satisfactions, which he calls in Greek (...), that is too say, (...).
Punishments.
punishementes: as if during service time a maid should laugh in the queere,
she should be enjoined to sit two days together in the church porch, and such
like folish toys, which if a man would renew in admiration of antiquity, he
should surely be as one that is out of his wits.

Of Gregory Nazianzen.
Gregory entreats upon the article of the Trinity, This Gregory is supposed
to be (...) which was (...) in the Church. Anno. ^^85.
he touches other doctrine but slenderly. He writ the whole life of Cyprian,
wherein he mentions that there was a certain maid, whom before his
conversion Cyprian loved, who calling upon the virgin Mary overcame the
magical bewitchinges of Cyprian.

This example is recited touching invocation of Saints. And although this
seems to he rather a feigned fable, and afterward (...) abroad under the
title of Nazianzen, yet, admit the History were true, it is not therefore too
be cited too confirm or ratify the invocation of Saints: For the errors of
the godly are not too be opposed or set against the word of God, Errors of the
Godly are not to be opposed against the word of God.
for even the godly in every age which are of the Church, have their
infirmities also.

Our foresaid adversaries do further allege our of Basilius and Nazianzen,
What the Adversaries do allege out of Basilius.
that in the end of their sermons touching Saints, they were wont to call upon
them for help: as namely, O Athanasius, pray for us. But although these
Apostrophees, or turning of speech may be excused under rhetorical figures,
yet it may be, that (according too the manner of their time,) they did than
call upon Saints: for invocation of Saints at that time, by little and little
crept into the church, and errors of the times do seduce men, that they less
disallowe of things used in the Church, and well esteem the same. Like as the
violent force of raging floods carries with it such as sail there, and yet
notwithstanding is the invocation of Saints, never the more to be well allowed
of. And seeing this custom increased, and now the impiety is discovered, it
ought utterly to be abolished out of ye church.

Neither does Basil speak any thing touching Invocation, Basilius his
opi^nion touching Saints or the holy ones.
he only says, that the memory of saints or holyones is and ought to be
had in estimation, that we may follow their virtues, and he calls these
holyones, helpers of our prayers, not that they are to be called upon, but
because all the blessed in heaven pray for the Church, and commend the same
unto God.

Epiphanius writes that certain women calling upon the virgin Mary,
Epiphani^^^
were wont to bear about them the Image of her. Idolatry detected by him.
All this business does he disallowe, and calls it a work of Idolatry. For
Epiphanius contei^eth refutations of ancient heresies, specially touching the
Trinity, and a few other matters* which author as historical I judge him
specially worthy of reading.

Of Chrysostom.
Chrysostomes time had then received many corrupt traditions, ^oannes
Chrysostomus vixit cir^iter annum Do^ini. 404. ^piscopus Con^a^tinopolitanus.
which he himself rehearsing, does not find fault with them, as he
commends those which go unto the monumentes or tumbes of saints, and he
makes mention of prayer for the dead: He aduaunceth the Monks life or
solitary life with immoderate and false commendations. In his treatice of
Repentance where he collecteth together many means and ways of obtaining
remission of sins: ^is errors tou^hing remission ^f sins.
namely, Almose, Tears, and other works, yet notwithstanding, he speaks
nothing concerning faith, whereof ought too be spoken, and that writing of his
does contain many false things, and it is both confused, and also very
doubteful.

The Grecians specially commend his commentaries upon Paul, Chrysostomes
commentaryes touching justification and faith.
where in places touching justification and faith, the whole scope of Paul's
disputation carries him thither, that he oftentimes repeateth this sentence,
That by faith we attain remission of sins for Christ's sake, and not for
works or by works. And he says manifestly, That by faith not only is
God loved, but that again believers think, they are beloved of God, although
they are guilty by many means.

In this sentence he signifies sufficiently well that he takes faith, His
opinion touching faith.
not only for the knowledge of the history, but for the trust and co^fide^ce
through which we believe our sins are forgiven us: and truly this faith does
he separate from works, as from not stealing, not killing, etc. Ro^. 13. and
he says that this is the better means of honoring God. Although in deed the
declaration hereof be playner and less vncorrupt, as that formerly set down
by Origin: Yet, that notwithstanding is also obscure and does not in every
place agree with it self.

In the 7. Chap. he rometh further out of his bounds: he says, that
concupiscence and affections, except they bring forth external works, are no
sins. But yet, if a man diligently and with judgment read those
commentaries, he shall find many testimonies of many articles. And although at
that time, there was darkness in the Church, yet it appears that most men
have retained this common judgment, A true testimony of remission of sins
given in time of Darkness.
That through says (for Christ's sake) not for our works are our sins
forgiven us. Therefore though now and then, the ancient writers spoke not so
well their minds, yet in other places may be marked what they mean in deed.

Touching the supper of the Lord, Chrysostom does not mention of any private
mass in his time.
out of Chrysostom it is sufficient manifest, that there was then no private
Masses at all. For he describes the Priest standing at the table, and calling
the people too come unto the communion.

In his little book De dignitate Sacerdotii, he does learnedly discern
Cyuil, and Ecclesiastical authority: he denies that Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction has any right to repress with corporal power.

Of Ambrosius.
Many causes does Ambrose thoroughly touch, Ambr. vixit circiter annum 376.
Episcopus Mediolatiensis creatu^ 377.
viz. of the Trynity, against the Nouatians of justification. And although in
his commentaries, now and then sentences unlike are found, which seem not so
much too have been written of him as to have been set forth by others, yet it
is clear, that out of his longer disputations, be held opinion touching
Grace, and justification, the very same that wedoe teach.

That does his Epistle unto Irenaeus testify upon the 4. of Saint Paul too
the Romans, saying: The law works wrath. Epist. 71. where he says so: By
works of the law is no man justified, that is, by the law is sin
manifested, but the fault is not dispensed with. S. Ambrose his true testimony
touching remissiou of sinues.
Therefore our Lord Jesus Christ coming into the world forgave every one
their sins, which no man could avoid: and cancelled the handwriting of our
debt, by virtue of his blood shed for us. This is it where he says: Romans 5^
Sin did ouerabounde by reason of the law, Grace did ouerabounde through
Jesus Christ. As Saint John says also, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes
away the sins of the world. John Euan. cap. 1. Therefore (says he) let no
man rejoice or boast in his works because no man shall be justified by his
deeds: Note his worthy testimony touching Justification.
but he that is just, has this given him from above, because through Christ
he is justified. Therefore it is faith which delivers by the blood of Christ,
because blessed is he unto whom sins are forgeuen; Psalm. 32.
and pardon is granted.

And a few like sentences, are found in other places of this Writer, as
touching the calling of the nations. Also, where he says unto the virgin
Demetrias: Ambroslus ad Demetriadem Virginem.
Neither is a commandment given for any other end or purpose, but that the
help and aid of him that commands might be sought for. But under his title
or name, there are extant certain preparations unto the mass, and certain
other vain matters which seem after his time to be counterfeict.

Of Hieronymus.
Hierome by his labor did much profit the Church in his translations:
Sanctus Hie^onymus Stridonensis per totum ^errarum orbe^ notus in Bethleem
illustris habitat, Anno 387.
and though his interpretations upon the Prophets are but slender, yet the
exposition of the Histories derived from the ancient Fathers, is profitable.
Touching doctrines he wrote few things. Against Iouinian, he greatly
confirms false and superstitious opinions touching man's traditions. Writing
against Iouinianus he confirms superstitious doctrine, touching man^
traditions.
He disprayseth marriage, and inueigheth against it with reprochefull speech,
which is not (...) nor seming worthy for a Christian so to do. He gathers
sentences of Scripture very evil wrested as though they dispraised marriage, as
this one, namely, If you live according to the flesh, you shall die. Romans 8. and
such others. And he says expressly, that the woman which marries again
after she has been already twice married, His mistaking of matrimony:
nothing differs from a whore. Also he affirms, That we must regard, Not
so much what God grants us; but what he will have us do, as though God
would not have marriage.

Finally after the manner of Ethni^es, he collecteth common places of
reprac^^es against the feminine sex and against marriage, of whom a Christian
^^^ght ^arre otherwise too judge. Who knows, that the cause of infirnity in
both sexes, is the corruption of nature, And yet notwithstanding we must
attribute a kind of honor or dignity unto the sex, because God has so
commanded.

And seeing God has not in vain created both sex, we must acknowledge that
it is the work of God, and an ordinance to be highly esteemed of. Neither is
the infir^^ty of mind less in the men, in accomplishing such things, which
are enjoined them. But a Christian ought for Gods sake to bear withal and
tolerate the imbecility or weakness in the sociates or companions of this
life, with are adjoined by Gods ordinance, and as the Coheyres of eternal
glory, and he knows that it is Gods will we should care for them. as for part
of mankind: and that not through Diuelishe pride we should once despise, nor
deiect them.

These and such others touching this opinion, might rather have been spoken by
way of Christian disputation, the^ those vnreuerent reproaches of the sex or
kind and of Gods ordinance.

Touching difference of meats, he commends ordinances instituted without
the word of God, His errors touching difference of meats.
as if they were the commandments of God, yea he esteems them, for
perfection of matter, too serve his purpose withal. It is a foolish speech
which he alludeth hereunto, Romans 14.
If thou will be perfect, it is best for thee to drink no wine, and to eat
no flesh, where he has not well applied that saying of Paul, where he
says: It is best for thee too eat no flesh, (he adds) If the example
thereof offend thy Brother. But seeing it is needful that such superstitions
should be reprehended in the church, (for they bringfoorth many errors) we
must therefore wisely judge of those and such like sayings so unadvisedly
uttered.

In his Dialogue against Pelagius he does rightly dispute, His right opinion
touching man's regeneration.
That man's regeneration may not only be by force of free will: but that it has
need of the help of the holy Ghost. For he rightly denies that the holy
ones of God are without sin, and he alludeth one sentence worthy of
remembrance, which is this: Then are we just, when we confess our selves too
be sinners, and that our righteousness comes not by any merit in us, but by
the mercy of God. But afterward he speaks not sufficiently to this purpose,
His misunderstanding of sins.
he understands the sins of Saints so touching actual sins: as the
burning flambes of lusts or anger, and such other like, he understands them
not, touching the inward and perpetual doubting security and concupiscence. In
Hieromes wrytings are many and no small errors.
Therefore it is manifest that in the writings of Hierom there are many and no
small erroures.

Of Augustine.
Augustine handled well many necessary controversies: Aurelius Augustinus
Bishop of Hippona and Disciple of Hierom lived in Anno. 395.
he refuted the Arians, Manachies, Donatistes, and Pelagians. For now in his
time, there had crepte intoo the Church philoso phicall opinions which
Pelagius confirmed, transforming the Gospel intoo philos^phie: For he contended
that original sin was a matter of nothing, In Augustines time there had
crept in Philosophical opinions confirmed by Pelagius.
that men might by the law of God make satisfaction, and that by reason of
that external obedience they might deserve forgiveness of sins, that they
were just, and that they could merit or deserve by their works everlasting
life. But, he said nothing Touching faith in Christ, Nothing touching help
of The holy Ghost. This doctrine of Pelagius, His error by confirming of
Merits by works.
was not of the Gospel, but of Philosophy, as for the most part the opinion of
al learned school men, bended the self same way. But that these do annexe
here unto some monastical superstitions. And now again in our time many do
slide away into Pelagian opinions, because they are plausible to humane reason.
Therefore, Augustine in his time restored afreshe and again lightened the
doctrine of the gospel touching Grace, Augustine in his time restored a fresh
the Gospel touching grace and faith in Christ.
and faith in Christ, when as it was almost extinguished. For this benefit,
the Church is much bound unto him. Touching Original sin, he speaks with
much more perspicuity, than all others. Also he speaks more distinctly and
more rightely as touching Free will. That by force of free will, man may do
the external works of the law and other honest civil works: But he
says without the holy Ghost, His good Opinion touching the enjoying o^
spiritual moti^ons.
men can not have spiritual motions, true fear of God, true faith, and true
patience, (that is) newness of life which ought too appear in those that are
to be saved.

He gives us a profitable difference between the Letter and the Spirit.
Augustines pro^fitable difference betwee^ the letter and the spirit.
He teaches us of the free remission of sins. He admonishes how and after
what manner Paul is too be understood of us, where he says:

By the works of the law, is no man justified. Gal. 2. That he not only
plucketh away justification from ceremonies, but also from moral works. The
Church had great need of this admonition. Far O^gon, and many which followed
him, had spread abroad false interpretation in the Church only with
ceremonies was justification plucked away, (...) they imagined that men might
fulfill the law, and be just through their works.

Therefore Augustine handles this question learnedly in his book De spiritu
and litera, and affirms that Paul also speaks universally touching moral
things, when he denies us to be just by the law: and also denies man to be
able to satisfy and f^lfill the law. Romans cap. 8.

This admonition of Augustyne, and this place of his, to have in remembrance,
it shall very much avail us: For because seeing that reason cannot sufficiently
discern the hugeness of Original sin and of our natural corruption, it
easily slydeth away unto those opinions, namely, That it thinks a man may be
able to fulfill the law, and too be just for the works sake. So contrariwyse
The righteousness of faith is obscured, and true spiritual exercises are cast
of from us, namely, Trne invocation, which ought too stay or rest upon the
only mercy of God. Like as we are now derided of our adnersaries, which will
needs seem wyser then we, and cry out against us, that we do foolishly
exaggerate or increase our own infirmity, and fondly pluck away justification
from works, when notwithstanding, reason understands righteousness is
meant none other matter, Righteousness what it is.
but obedience, according to the law.

But the doctrine of the Gospel, The doctrine of the Gospel what it is.
touching sin, also, touching righteousness of faith is a secret and
peculiar wisdom of the true Church, which even a very few of the writers
have known, and the sounder part of the^ have acknowledged the fame, some
more obscurely, some more manifestly. The Scotists, and such others, Scotistae
subtle desputers, This Scotus lined about the year. 1298.
have altogether overwhelmed this doctrine. Therefore after that God has
again now revealed these things in our days, let us diligently defend and
maintain this doctrine now manifested.

Furthermore why do not our adversaries again consider, how absurd a thing
it is, too say, that Christ has delivered us only from the Ceremonies of the
law? Again, if our deliverance pertain only unto Ceremonial things, it
profited not the fathers, before Moses, any thing at all. And it is needeful,
that we believe, that our deliverance from the law pertains unto the
universal Church, from the beginning, unto the end of the world. These
things are more amply disputed upon in his little book De Spiritu and litera.

Finally they altogether know not what the deliverance from the law means,
which understand or think the same consists only of Ceremonies. Deliverance
from the Law.
As all men after Adams fall, are oppressed with sin, with the wrath of God,
with death, with great and grievous calamities of this life, with eternal
punishments.

So all men are burdened with the Law, which rebukes sin, accuses us, and
with eternal terrors slays us as Paul says. What it means.
Therefore to be delivered from the Law, is as much, as to be delivered from
that accusation, that we be not guilty of the wrath of God, and of eternal
death.

It is not only to be delivered from ceremonies or external shows: but much
more rather to be set free from the Law fearing us, cursing, condemning, and
killing us: when as in deed an other thing is set before us, for the which we
are pronounced just: that is to say, The Son of God, which was made a
sacrifice propiciatorie for us. Examples of the first age.


So Adam, Noe, Abraham, and all the other Eleete before Mofes* were delivered
from the Law, were accused of the Law, were exercised with horrible
terroures, with feeling of Gods wrath and of his Curse But amongst these
terrors they were raised up by the acknowledgement of the mercy promised unto
mankind, Note the Consolation i^ the promised Savior upon deliverance from
the Law.
by and through the Lord and Savior, that should come, and they believed that
they were pronounced just, by and for because of the Sacrifice that would
come, and not by or through the Law. They knew that sins were not only
external trespasses, but an inward uncleanness, horrible distrust in God,
murmuring and grudging against God in our adversities, and other wicked
motions. And they knew that even the same sin, and infirmity of man's nature
or the wrath of God was not taken away by any Law: But they knew that through
the acknowledgement and assured trust of the promised Savior, they should be
delivered out of so great miseries.

And so were they also delivered from the Law moral, Law moral and the
delivery therefrom.
that is, which judges and sleyeth them, and so were they delivered from the
eternal wrath of God, which the Law declares unto them. They knew that in
this their natural knowledge the free remission of their sins was not set
down.

Therefore they required the said remission of sins from an other place. For
if they had believed in themselves, that they should so have been made just,
when they were without fault, they had utterly fallen down in the agony or
vexation of their conscience, but they knew therefore was the Savior
promised, that they might believe they pleased God, yea although they were
unworthy and unclean persons. So did they believe, that they were just, not
by or through the law, but by and through the Savior that should come.

These so great matters does the deliverance from the law comprehend, which
men of secure minds understand not, who know not, what true repentance
means, nor what pertains unto true Invocation. Finally which are not
exercised in afflictions, and either have their minds occupied in carnal
pleasures, or are delighted with their own opinions, and despise the word of
God: either else, which do wrest it and abuse it, according too their own
imaginations.

Some of our adversaries more subtle then others, That some of ^he adversaries
^oe touching Augustines interpretation (...) the interpretation of late writers
upon Paul*
although they plainly see that Augustines interpretation, and ours also is
the true meaning agreeable unto the mind of Paul, and of Prophetical as
also Apostolical scripture: yet they exclaim against us, and cite for their
purpose the authority of Origin, Hierome, Chrysostom, and I know not of whom:
Not because they allow those from their heart: but only too bleare the eyes
of the ignorant people, least they should seem to be overcome.

For surely our adversaries bring not with them unto these conflictes, Private
hate of the adversaries toward the truth.
a good conscience and a zeal in searching forth the truth, but they bring
with them private hate toward us, contempt of the Gospel, and a care to
maintain their own force and autoritye. What the people should or ought to
believe touching Christ, or how and in what manner the churches should be
instructed, they judge nothing pertayneth unto them: and partly nowadaies
exercise better inuec^iues or sycophancies, such as Cochelus Wicelius and the
like: partly they are Tyran^es, and Champions of Tyrances, which for the
opinion of wisdom or virtue, do govern the Councels of Popes Kings, and
Princes, when indeed they are Homines (...) godless persons of no religion,
which altogether suppose that true religion is as fa^ling stories, and for this
cause do woonderfully please themselves, that they dare (...), far against
the thunder. Aristophanes That is they be have themselves most shamefully
beastly and contemtuously in contemning the mighty and meru^ilous works of
almighty God.
As the fellow in the comicall writer affirms. Yea and yet such will be ready
to speak their opinions in Synods or Councelles, touching the glory of
Christ, whose name they think to be Fabulus.

Therefore I exhort the godly Readers, first to consider the kinds of
doctrine, whether that simply and without cauelling these men do propone the
opinion of the scripture Prophetical and Apostolical. Next this, when the
Fathers are cited too have good regard: what sayings of those Fathers are
most consonant and agreeable unto the heavenly will and word of God. For
there is great difference and inequality of the Fathers.

Lastely (as Paul bids) too prove the Spirits, the opinion or mind of
both parts is to be regarded, and whole scope of their determination is also
too be marked. For after that manner do our Adversaries ha^^le their matters,
not to make any thing the better by their dealing, but by one precended color
or other too defend their Tyranny, confirm and mainteyne their dignities and
riches. An e^hortation ^o the Godly ^eaders,


Therefore at this day Kings and Bishops set themselves against the marriage
of Priests and spiritual persons, In (...) time Kings and Bishops set
themselves against the marriage of Priests.
because they see that single life is more expedient too the retayning of
authority and power, and too the conservation of worldely wealth. And by this
means, when there appear signs of a wicked will, in certain manifest
articles: it is sufficiently apparent, that they are not moved with the good
spirit, but rather that they are the enemies of Christ, The causes.
and that they do not in other articles search for the truth. Wherefore let
us constantly cast away from us and utterly reiecte their judgment and
opinions.

Augustine upon the two and fourtye Psalm, affirms, That the regenerate
Man is not just because of his works, but by faith. For so he says, In
deed fear thou if thou accomprest thy self just, if thou haste not the same
saying out of an other Psalm, Psalm 130. Enter not intoo judgment with thy
Servant, for if thou shalt execute Justice without Mercy, Augustines
affirmation touching the regenerate man not just by works but by faith.
Whither shall I go? if thou Lord shalt mark strayghtly our sins, Oh
Lord, who shall abide it? Psalm. 144.

Enter not into into judgment with thy servant because no living flesh
shall be justified in thy sight. Psalm. 144.
The^ here no living flesh shall be justified in thy sight: because, whosoever
lives here though he live never so just, yet woe be to him if God shall enter
into judgment with him.

For as it appears in an other Prophet God does thus chyde the arrogant and
proud people saying. Why do you contend in judgment with me. You have all
forsaken me, says the Lord. Do not therefore contend with me in judgment,
give thy endeavor too be just, Confession.
and how much just soever thou be, confess yet thy self to be a sinner:
Hope thou for mercy, Contrition.
and in this humble confession being secure, speak unto thy soul troubling
thee and turmoyling thee on this manner: Why art thou heavy, Trust in the Lord.
oh my soul, and why do thou thus trouble me? Perhaps thou would trust in
thy own self: but trust thou in the Lord, and not in thy self: for what art
thou in thy self? What art thou of thy self? Let him be health in thee, which
receued stripes for thee, and he says, Trust thou in the Lord.

David in his one and thyrtie Psalm says, Who are blessed? Not they in whom
the Lord shall find sin, for all have sinned, and have need of the glory
of God. Romans 5. If then in all men, sin be found, it rests, that none are
blessed, but they whose sins are forgiven. This therefore did the Apostle
thus commend, Abraham believed God, and it was reputed unto him for
righteousness. Romans 4. Here does he rightly apply this saying touching faith,
and he witnesses in this place that he understands faith is not only the
knowledge of the history, Faith touchin^ righteousness, how to be understood.
but that it is an assured confidence, whereby we trust without doubting that
our sins are forgiven us for Christ's sake. Neither indeed can any man
sufficiently understand the meaning of Paul in this point, except he
understand faith in this manner. This again (as we say) is ^e^ely to knock at a
wrong door, when men understand faith as the knowledge of the history, and not
as the assured confidence which we ought to have in the promised mercy of God,
for his son Christ's sake.

And it is no metuel, Monks erring all the way in expounding Paul's meaning
that Monks have erred all the way in expounding the meaning of Paul, because
even in this place they were foully deceived. And this misty cloud, is at this
day a special let unto our adversaries, that they ca^ not so well brook the
doctrine of faith, because they rightly understand not the name of faith. Why
do they not duly examine and way such sayings of Augustine, as this is, which
erewhyle I have recited? He witnesses Paul means this, that Abraham was
pronounced just, because he believed, not only touching the promise of God
concerning his posterity, but also touching the forgiveness of sins for
Christ's sake.

Such like sentences shall a man meet withal in Augustine every where,
Augustine believed touching grace and faith the very same which the later age
teaches.
which sufficiently show, that he believed touching Grace and faith, the very
same which we do teach. Like as in his book De Spiritu and Litera, he says
thus: By means of the law we fear God but by faith we flee unto the mercy
of God. Lo here does he manifestly discern between the Law and the Gospel.

And although now and then in his wrytinges there happen together as it were
certain figures of speech not sufficiently well expounded or inconvenient,
yet these are to lie attributed to the times, because the custom of the common
people, had received certain figures, as namely the name of Merit, and
certain others. And these could not the learned then put away. More over
neither were the writers themselves sufficiently accustomed unto disputations,
and what mysty cloud of ignorance was in the Church at that time, Pelagius
his hereste in estimation.
thereby might be esteemed, so that the wicked opinion and heresy of Pelagius
was entertapned with so great joy, that Augustine and certain few others,
could not abolish the same again out of their churches without great
conflictes and controversies.

But as touching Ceremonies, Ceremonies in Augustines time.
if any man object unto us the time wherein Augustine lived, let him know,
that in deed all the rytes or ceremonies of his time did not please Augustine*
for he complayneth that many ^^perstitious opinions then remained still in the
Church: Man's traditions better esteemed then the commaundemen^^s of God.
That man's traditions were esteemed better then the commandments of GOD, and
that ceremonies were so increased: that the (...) of the Jews in times past
was more tolerable, than of the Church in Augustines time.

His words are these unto Ianua^ius, in his 119. Epistle. Yet
notwithstanding the same Religion, which in a very few and most manifest
sacraments of honoring GOD, The mercy of God would have to be free, do they
suppress now with servile yokes, that the state of the Jews was more
tolerable to them in times past, which were yet subject unto Gods laws and
not unto man's.

And first touching man's traditions, he says, All this kind of matter has
his free observations. And afterward he wills that unprofitable traditions
of men should be cut off. Note, Augustines sound judgment touching the
overthrow of man's traditions.
Therefore by this it appears, Augustine does not so allow the ceremonies
of his time, that he would tie or bind the Church unto that rule: for
there were many things then received in the Church, which in deed himself
does not at all allow of: Nay rather he would those too be found fault
withal, and reformed: And certain other things there were, which after the
manner of his time he observed: So that we all do yield much unto present
manners or fashions of their time.

In this man's time speeches of Purgatory began every where too wax ryfe:
Sermons touching Purgatory frequented in Augustines time.
which he neither refuteth nor confirms. Only he declares, saying there
were certain persons which so thought that the souls of the godly were
purged, after that they departed out of their bodies: But in his 9. book of
Confessions he requires of God in his prayer for his mother departed, in
these words, Lord inspire thy servants, that they may remember my father and
my mother, at the Alter. Neither does he require any thing more. Now although
this be spoken modestly by him: S. Augustines words of prayer wrested by the
Papists for oblation of the sacrament of the dead.
yet now it to wickedly wrested too the oblation of the Sacrament for the dead,
such as was not in Augustynes time.

And there were vows accustomably used at that time, and the Question was
asked, whether marriages after vows contracted might be dissolved, yea or no.
Touching this matter, Augustines affirmation touching marriages contracted.
the opinion of Augustyne is extant, in decretis 27. q. 1. c. Nuptiarum. Here,
although Augustyne attributed more unto vows then was convenient, yet he
pronounces that marriages contracted after the vows, are not ^oo be
dissolved. And he affirms them too be marriages, indeed: Because the one
person ought not return unto the vow again with the injury of the other.
Neither is the bond made frustrate between both persons* yea although one of
them have brought with him the changing of his former purpose. These things
briefly does he speak in that text. But the error of vows was then of more
valor, then this mitigation of Augustyne. Therefore the constitutions which
afterward followed in the church did separate and divorce Marriages.

Augustine also then saw that this distractio^ was faulty: Vows reprehensible.
but he did not sufficiently consider what fault might be even in those vows
themselves which was a more obscure and dark thing to be discerned. For he
was overcome with vulgar opinions of his time: Now was the custom received of
making vows: A number living in that kind of life were greatly meruailed at,
and admiration of such hinders or hurts judgment. Many errors wrapped in
popish vows.
He therefore did not at al dispute whether vows were of force yea or no, when
as indeed there were many errors wrapped in them, they were accounted for
woorshipping of God, for a singular merit of righteousness, for perfection,
also to a great many they were impossible. These if he had first refuted, he
might the better been able to have prohibited the separation and divorce of
such marriages:

Therefore it is manifest, Augustines time had many abuses, whereof some he was
against.
that in those days there remained many abuses in the Church, whereof although
Augustine was against some of them, yet he took in good part others some, which
after they be discovered, ought not too be defended. Moreover, although the
examples of the ancient fathers were after a sort dissembled in their time, yet
now ought they not at al to be applied for the confirmation of greater abuses,
as for example this consequence is of no force. As admit Augustine bids that
prayer be made at the alter for his mother departed, Ergo, Masses are too be
allowed for those which are dead. Or else, certain persons in Augustines time
did think that there was a Purgatory. A weak argument wresting the
application of authorities by the adversaries for their masses, pardons, etc.
Ergo, Masses, pardons, and other foundations devised for the dead are to be
allowed. For as yet in Augustines time these monstrous impieties were not at
al heard of, although, by little and little the seeds of such impiety were
sprinkled.

Of Gregory Romanus.
Gregory entered into the Popedom, Anno 593. 157. years fully expyred after the
death of Augustine. Hic Gregorius contra animi sen^tentiam Pontifex electus
anno. 593 Long oberdi.
In the mean time many Barbarous nations flocked together intoo: Italy, as the
Goths Lumbardes and their confederates. And not only the studies of learning
were put too silence, and the Churches were neglected: but also, those same
Barharous nations which possessed Italy, either brought in with them, or easily
received amongst them many superstitious opinions. Therefore in short space
after increased many abuses and that greatly. Encreace of errors.


During that troublesome state of Italy it seemed a peculiar felicity too be
out of the country too dwell a far of in some solitary place, either without
their household, without children and not too behold the destructions of their
Cities, and spoiling of their natyue country. Virg. A^neidos. 2
For it is a miserable thing too say that which Aeneas says: Et quorum pars
magna fuit. Signifying that he himself was one of the chief beholders and
sufferers of the trouble. Therefore men of modest conversation, which kept
houses and families did think those which lived solitarily to be happy for
their tranquillity. Monks had in great estimation where and when.
So increased the admiration of men to wards Monks or solitary persons, and
many began to seek for and to love solitarily by places.

Moreover barbarous people marvel at, and are in love with new fashions,
which have a show of excellent godliness, and as it were of fellowship with
God. Barbarous people marvel at those strange ^rdinaunces.
It was therefore not too be merualled, if than the crewes of Monks increased,
and that plausible opinions touching that kind of works, did spread further
abroad, and that the light of the Gospel, touching true faith, and true
worshipping of God, was then extinguished.

Also the Barbarous people were well pleased with the worshipping of Saints.
Afterward when it was once received too reverence or honor them, Worshipping
of Saints.
namely, the saints with Images and peculiar temples after the Heathenishe
manner: the custom increased by the imitation of those in great authority. And
by little and little it came to so great ungodliness, that this woorshipping of
Saints in these later days differed nothing at all from the manifest
Idolatry of the Ethnickes in times past. Idolatry.
For, they now called upon S. Anne, S. George, and others, none otherwise
then the Ethnicks did upon Juno, Mars or Hercules. They ran to their Images,
and the Bishops with great authority confirmed that same (...) Idolomaniam mad
woorshipping of Idols, yea and their doctors and learned men commended them for
so doing. And in such kind of worshippinges consisted the whole su^me of
religion. Ignorance in them, touching inuocating vp^ Christ, etc.
But all this while, touching invocation upon Christ, and touching faith in
him, there was great silence amongst them.

The beginnings therefore of such and so great impiety were too be taken
heed of, which indeed Gregory himself greatly confirmed, Gregory confirmed
many ungodly exercises.
who first than instituted the public ordinance of calling upon saints:
who commanded that Temples should be dededicated too the bones, and dust of
those Saints. And also at that time crept in an opinion touching the oblation
of the body and blood of Christ, Profanation of the Sacrament.
too be made: for the dead. This opinion brought forth horrible profanation
or abuse of the Sacrament.

Therefore although after Gregory's time greater darkness ensewed, Errors in
Gregory's time.
yet notwithstanding these errors at that time remained in the Church. A
false persuasion brought in by Monkery: Of works devised without the
commandment of God: praying unto Saints, and the oblation of the body of
Christ for the dead. These errors afterward haled with them great ruin of
GODS Church. Therefore the state of Gregory's time may not be a sufficient
rule too reform the Church, which thing the more evident that it may appear,
I will first recite more manifest faults in Gregory, and afterward I will
dispute upon a few things pertaining to the Lords supper.

Gregory in Libro 3. Epistol. in that his Epistle unto the Bishop of Catanea
in Cilicia gives charge that Subdeacons or Deacons should not use the company
of their wives, He forbids Subdeacons and Deacons to have the company of
their wives.
which they had married before they were ordered. When as in deed the people
Siculi before their time had observed the manner of the Grecians, and did not
forbid the husbands to use the company of their wives. This fault is here
now sufficiently manifest. For no godly person can allow the separation or
divorce of lawefull matrimony. He tells that there was one called Speciosus
which had rather leave and forgo his function of being Subdeacon, His first
error forbidding of marriage.
then too want the company of his wife. This whosoever he was, no doubt was
indewed with sounder judgment in this point, then they which sought the
separation or diuorses of such marriages.

This increased the offense of Gregory, that he would have this tradition to
be received in the Churches of those people called Siculi. Which at that time
according to the decrees of ancient Synodes or Councelles, retained still
marriages in all their Ecclesiastical degrees, neither did they burden their
Deacons with vows, or any other persons. His artrogancy and tyranny.
Why does Gregory here take upon him the rule and government of other
Churches? When as indeed he declameth so tragically that he abhors from
the name of the universal Bishop. Further more, why does he there disanul
marriages, where the Deacons are not burdened with vows? Why does he not here
stand in awe of the authority of former Councels? This fault where it
contains manifest ungodliness and tyranny it is very evident, that this age
wherein Gregory lived, was not without great errors.

And how unjust is he again toward those, which at their fathers request
were from their infancy brought up in monasteries, His second error touching
young men brought up in monasteries.
and afterward being young men desired an other kind of life. Touching
these he answers again, that it is wickedly done of such too forsake that
monastical life. This straitness is not so much therefore to be found fault
with, because it was made an injury too that young age: but also because it
greatly stablished superstitious opinions, touching Monkish tradi^ions.

The third offense in him I will also add heerevntoo, The third error of
Gregory in being seduced by night visions.
which is manifest. He was seduced with night visions too allow or bring in
the oblation of the sacrament for the dead. He makes mention of two, which
after their death, had served in bathes. Whereof the one required that oblation
of the Sacrament might be made for him, that he might be delivered out of
those pains and punishementes. From these visions he groundeth doctrine in the
Church, contrary too the express word of GOD, as it is written. Deuteronomy. 18.
Thou shalt not ask counsel at the dead: That is, will they refuse too be
taught of the Prophet who in the mouth of God and seek help at the dead which
is the illusion of satan.
and as it is also written, Esaias 8. Should not a people in quyre at their GOD?
from the living too the dead. Ergo, what kind of state ^oever the souls of
those departed, are in after this life: Yet notwithstanding, from visions
orsights we ought not to take any dotrine of confirmation or otherwise. And
again who sees not that it is a fained fable, wherehee says, that after
death men became bath keepers. This fable is like the feigned tale of the
daughters of Danaus, which draw up water with a sieve.

We have not here determined to recite this Catalogue, The Autors purpose upon
the confutation of Gregory's errors.
because we would add herevntoo the confutations of his errors, which else
where are (...), I only meant here to rehearse his faults, to the end it might
appear that they are (...), which were so greatly in love with the fathers, as
though they had bin (...) alia^ Innoxii, Men blameless or without fault and
never do disagree from the express word of God. Allthough therefore the
better learned Fathers now and then do somewhat to the purpose admonish us, yet
we must even judge of them by the word of God.

Therefore, omitting other confutations, I will now further add certain
things briefly, Oblation for the dead confuted by (...) arguments.
touching oblation for the dead. We need not inquyre, whether there be any
Purgatory yea, or not this question pertains nothing too the oblation.
Although there were a Purgatory, yet it is wickedly done too offer the
Sacrament for the dead. There are many most strong arguments to prove the
same.

The first is ungodliness, too ordain a tradition in the Church without the
commandment of God. Again, the application of the Lords supper for others,
is made without any commandment of God, or testimony of Gods will. Ergo,
without all doubting this application is wicked.

Many sentences confirm the Mayor, Confirmation of the Mayor.
as namely this. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exo. 20. Lo here the
worshipping of strange Gods, is by express commanndeme^t forbidden. And
hithertoo pertains that saying, Esaias, They worship me, in vain, teaching
traditions of men. Again. S. Paul says, Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of faith,
is sin. Furthermore woorshippinges or service without the commandment of
God, can not be done by faith. But the world perceaueth not how great a
sin it is, too ordain woorshipping without the commandment of God, too
depart from the word of God. Of this mischief the Prophets do greatly cry
out and bewail the blindness of men, which with horrible boldness do appoint
traditions and opinions touching the will of God, neither retain they the word
and ordinance wherewith god has manifested his will toward us. Themselves
being blind too seek after God, by other means. Confutation of Sacrifice
for the dead.
For it is manifest, that Christ himself never delivered the Sacrament, to
have it applied for the dead. For what me^tio^ is there made of the dead? (...)
He bids us Celebrate his supper, (...)
that we may have in remembrance his death and benefits. Are the dead the^
present with us, too remember these with us? But I will briefly add unto these
other reasons also.

The second reason: this sentence to ^rue and assured which by no means may be
(...) or denied, The just man lives by his faith. Abac. 2. Forgiveness of
sins, what and how they are granted us.
Wherefore, it is needeful that in our life time we do receive forgiveness of
our sins at Gods hands. And it is impossible, that forgiveness of sins
should be granted too any person, by or for any kind of work done, or
sacrifice offered by any Priest. Causes obscure, and doubtful, require long
disputations. This error, touching oblation is refuced by so evident and firm
arguments, that they require not at all any long declaration. The doctrine
touching forgiveness of sins is certain and manifest. No man may have
remisiion of sins, except by his own faith he receive the same. This
opinion if any man go about too take away, he does then blaspheme and injury
Christ himself. Confutation of sacrifising of (...)
Ergo they blaspheme and injury Christ, which do feign that the same oblation
can deserve remission of sins for the dead.

The third reason: Use of the Sacrament rightly aplyed.
the use of the Sacrament only proffiteth them, which using the same, do
remember the death and benefits of Christ. Ergo it is impossible that this
work should profit them that are dead, which neither use the same
themselves, nor do make any remembrance of the death of Christ. The
antecedent is manifest, by the institution of Christ, because he bids us
celebrate this mystery in remembrance of him. And we ought not by Imagining
too add any thing unto the institution of Christ, if any man imagine more
things, if any man transfer the same unto the dead, he does wickedly defile
the institution of Christ.

The fourth reason: The scripture says manifestly, Blessed are the dead,
which dye in the Lord. Romans 8. The body dies because of sin, Justification
of the Spirit in this life.
but the spirit is life for righteousness sake^ (that is) they that are
justified in the spirit, so long as they carry about them this body where in
are as yet the remnauntes of sin, they are afflicted in diverse manners, too
the end that by calling upon God, faith, knowledge of GOD, and spiritual
newnes of life might more and more increase in them. But the body being once
dead, the remnauntes of sin are abolished. And Paul says manifestly. That
the spirit lives for righteousness sake. That life of the spirit justified,
is not fear, or feeling of Gods wrath, But is joy in the holy Ghost, as Paul
says. Romans 15. Therefore there are no pains of Purgatory.

Christ said unto the converted thief, This day, thou shall be with me in
Paradyse, that is, in a peaceable and blessed life, and not in pains or
horror. Therefore the Souls of the just do not go down too torments, but
ascend up unto spiritual joy and peace. In this life the godly are still
exercised with horrible afflictions, because GOD by a wonderful determination
will have his Church Subject unto the cross and too taste such afflictions
as Christ himself did. So Adam, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Esayas,
Hieremias, John Baptist, and others the lights of the Church were in
calamities and perplexities, The just and righteous are ever exercised with
afflictions in this life.
the greatenesse whereof no man can declare. Therefore Peter says: Humble
your selves under the mighty hand of God. 1. Pet. 5. For although such are
the afflictions which the Godly suffer in this life, while they are in the
flesh, yet notwithstanding this, after they be once dead, why is it said that
there are such punishments? For as much as these afflictions are by GOD
preordayned too acknowledge the remnaunte of sins in the flesh, and to work
repentance of sins even in this life.

But after death, there is then no place of repentance: Like as Paul
playnelie affirms. 2. Cor 5. Every one shall carry with him those things
which he has done in the body. And the Psalms do also teach us this
moreover: The dead shall not praise thee, Lord. Again, Because there is none
is death, which shall remember thee 112. Therefore it cannot be affirmed,
Confutation of Purgatory.
that any after death are yet tormented, to the end they might repent them of
their sins.

If our Adversaries do say, That those torments are not therefore laid upon
them, that thereby repentance might grow: but that they should be as
satisfactions for sins here committed, this opinion is a great deal more too
be refused. For the doctrine of Satisfactions, which the Sentenciaries have
devised, is both false and ungodly. Confutation of Satisfactions.
And truly very many lies and false imaginations have been heaped together
into those disputations, even as it were into a sinkehole and filthy puddle,
namely, of Purgatory, of vows, of oblatio^ for the dead, and many others.
Seeing therefore, that purgatory (as they call it,) cannot be affirmed, it is a
kind of ungodliness so to institute an oblatio^, to deliver ye dead out of
torments. Although yet if there were any purgatory, yet could not the supper
of the Lord be transferred for the dead.

But why do I here dispute? The first mention of Purgatory began of sightes
or visions, From whence Purgatory took his original.
and afterward for lucre sake was confirmed, and is now defended and
mayntayned of the Popes Cardinals, Bishops, and Chanons, which are manifest
Epicures, and with great security do contemn the judgment of God. And
whatsoever touching punishments after death such persons read, they accept
them as Poets fables of Ixion, Sisiphus, Tantalus, or such like, and do
deride the foolishnes of others which affirm that God has appointed
everlasting punishments for the wicked.

At this present, The Greeks oration exhibited touching Purgatory which is
referred unto repentance in this life.
therefore I let pass any further to dispute. The Grecians exhibited up an
oration, touching Purgatory, at the Council of Basil, wc oration at this day is
extant in the Library of Phortia, wherein they dispute tuching that place of S.
Paul 1. Cor. 3. Which place the latter age has wrested to confirm
purgatory. Whereas it is manifest, that the same place intreteth upon
repentance: namely, He shall be saved, so yet, as it were by fire. 1. Cor. 3.
Ergo, he would that the offender should be corrected or amended by
repentance. Wherefore, he speaks touching this present life, wherein is the
place of repentance. Surely it is true that is said, The Speech of truth is
simple and plain. When Paul speaks of repentance: Euripides.
this place cannot be wrested to the pains or torments after death.

Touching that place in the book of the Machabees, there is also a most
plain aunsweare: The truth is not the more corrupted by the errors of
things done, says the man of law. And Demosthenes disputing against
Aristocrates reprehending lewd examples, says, Suffer us not to say that
this has been done, but that it is meet and right to be done.

The sacrifices offered by the Levites did not take away sins from before the
face of God: Sacrifices of the Levites did not take away sins before God.
moreover there was none at all then instituted for the dead: Ergo this has
been an error in later times, too offer sacrifice for the sins of the dead,
as the Jews received oftentimes other corrupt and lewd traditions amongst
themselves. For the nature of men is prone unto superstitions, eue^ in all
ages. Tradition of the Jews.
Therefore in as much as that example is repugnant to the scriptures it is not
to be cited at all too confirm superstitions in the Church. These for the
most part are the chiefest things which are cited touching Purgatory. And
therefore I have here placed this disputation that it may the more appear
that Gregory's fault or error evidently (which has confirmed the oblation of
sacrifice for the dead) is manifestly repugnante unto the Apostolical
doctrine.

Which thing seeing it is so, the Canon also of the Mass (as they call it) is
to be reprehended, wherein is mentioned, That oblation of sacrifice, was made
too redeem the quick and the dead. What boldness was this to transfer
the Sacrament for the dead? when the institution thereof speaks so plainly of
them which be living, and of the remembrannce, of the death of Christ?

Gregory writes that one Scholasticus (as he names him) did make this Canon.
Note touching the Author of the Cannon of the Mass.
But whosoever was the author thereof, and which compyled this Rapsody, that
cannot be denied, that the Latin Canon differs from both the Greek Canons,
although neither yet do the Greek Canons agree with themselves, but they do
differ in notable places.

Thus much have I spoken touching Gregory. Neither will I add heerevntoo the
VVritres of later ages. For the doctrine of the Church afterward went
further out of course. And the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome increased also,
when as Gregory even yet himself refused and greatly dispraysed the name of
the universal Bishop, Name of the universal Bishop refused and dispraysed by
Gregory.
as certain his Epistles in his third book of Epistles do testify the same.

I could annexe herevntoo the complaints of ancient writers touching the
couetuousnesse of Bishops and the ignorance of them, Testimonies of abuses
in the Church of former time.
in times paste, which if there were no other thing, yet in this point they
admonish us. That the Church ought not too be governed according too the
Example and state of that time. But in the revelation of Saynct John, The
revelation of S. John a testimony for the Church in all ages.
there are horrible Figures expressed, which no doubt signify the ages of the
Church, and do show that wicked Teachers shall forthwith swarm in the Church,
and shall with Tyrannical rule oppress the truth.

And the Hystories of Councelles do show how great rage has possessed the
minds of very many Bishops, Testimonies of Councelles against ambitious
and subtle enemies of the Church.
which too defend their ungodliness, have by wonderful Subtilties kyndled
the hearts of Princes, and of the Common peopeople, as now the Bishops of
Rome, and other Bishops by all cunning sleightes endeavor themselves to
provoke the minds of Kings to raise up civil wars in their territories and
dominions.

Basilius in the end of his book De Spiritu Sancto, Complaint of Basilius
upon the Bishops and state of the Church in his time. Anno. 370.
with what tragical complaynt he does bewail the fury of those Bishops in
his time and their impiety: He declares, that they sought to defend their
wicked doctrine by seditions, and by slaughter of the people. And he writes
unto the Italian and French Bishops in this manner.

Euersa sunt veritatis dogmata, Confusae leges pietatis, Ambitio non timentium
Deum, rapit gubernationem Ecclesiarum. Nec additus est ad honores, nisiper
impietatem, vt quisque est ratiocissimus and audacissimus, in lacerandis p^js
and veris dogmatibus, ita maxim dignus Episcopi honor iudicatur. Perijt
grauitas sacerdotibus conueniens: desunt Pastores, qui eruditione gregem Domini
pascant. which may thus be englished. Basilius in libro de Spiritu Sancto
Touching abuses in his time.
The doctrines of truth and religion are turned vpside down, the laws of
Godliness are confounded, desire of promotion in those that fear not God,
greedily catches houlde upon the government of the Churches. Neither is there
any other way unto honor and dignity, but up ungodliness. And as every one
is most ravenous, and fierce in dismembring and rending in pieces the godly
and true doctrines of the church, so is he specially judged worthy too enjoy
the dignity of a Bishop. Gravity befitting the Ministry, is utterly gone: And
the Sheap-heardes that should feed the flock of the Lord with learning, are
wanting.

So and in such manner does he describe the Bishops in his time: unto whose
vices the latter ages have added Lordly rule and Tyrannies.

Seeing therefore it is manifest, The Church must ask counsel at the word of
God.
that that age was not without faults, we must grant unto the Church, that
touching doctrine she would ask Council at the word of God, as the
heavenly Father has commanded, That we should hear his Son. Mat. 17. And
David says in his 119. Psalm, Thy word is a Lantern unto my feet. etc.

These testimonies touching the faults of ancient writers, Protestation of
the Author touching the fore said Testimonies.
(although I have ouerpassed many absurdities) I have not gathered to that end
that somewhat of their true praises might be thereby diminished. For I believe
the most part of them in those points, were both godly and excellent men, and
cer^eyne of them no doubt have well deserved, to be well thought of. But yet
they themselves would not that their own words should be preferred before
the doctrine of Christ. Moreover even these our adversaries wc obiecte unto us
the authority of ye fathers, Adversaries obiecting the autorities of the Fathers
do very much abuse them.
do also abuse very much the testimonies of the^. Although in those days the
seeds of errors were first sown abroad, yet so pernicious abuses had not as
yet crept intoo the Church. There was at the beginning a certain manner of
calling upon Saints: But afterward how much wickedness followed? Therefore
the declamation of Nazianzen is not too be cited, for so much as that Age of
his was ignoraunte of this new devised Idolatry.

But why do the Adversaries lay for themselves the authority of the Church,
Adversaries allegations and contention.
when as they contend not with us, touching doctrine, nor touching Religion,
but concerning their sensualities, and promotions, they will not have their
peaceable estate too be troubled? This is one and the only cause why they
desire our subversion. For there are certain opinions more clearer then the
Noone day. And yet because they would oppress the same, they put in practice
open cruelty, Adversaries in seeking to oppress the truth, kill and slay
innocent person^ for marriage sake.
they kill and sley the Godly, learned and good men, yea and the Ministers of
the Church for marriage sake. Where shall a man read this in any place, as
touching any barbarous fury, that men should be killed and slain for honest
marriage sake? If they allow the ancient Church, why do they not follow
the first times? Do they think that either Ambrose or Augustine would have
allowed of this cruelty in punishing the Innocent Persons? No sure, they
utterly abhorred this beastly cruelty, and openly witnessed that these
chief Bishops the Autors of this cruelty were not the members of the
Church, but the Instruments of the Devil: and without all doubt the said
Fathers, Ambrose and Augustine took upon them, the defense of Godly
Ministers, women, children, and again of so many nations which are of
affinity or liable unto this cause.

But after that I have now declared, which is the true Church, and that it is
manifest that we faithfully retain still and maintain the Doctrine of the
Catholic church of Christ, The total su^m and scope of the Autor^ purpo^
in this woork^
set down in the Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures, and in the
Symbolles or Creedes: yt is plain that we believe and hold opinion, as the
Catholic Church of Christ does. Also I add here this also that the chief
writers, viz. Ambrose, Augustine, and a few others, do hold all one and the
selfsame opinion, if they be aptly understood, and if a few certain things
be borne withal in them, which in their time came not into controversy at all.

Touching the Lyturgy or public service it is nothing to be doubted,
^iturgiae.
that there neither was any private Masses more to be sold for monye, nor yet
Funeral Masses, before Gregory's time, ^o kind of Masses before ^regories
time.
neither began the manner of calling upon Saints too be had in estimation a
long time before Gregory's days.

And the Law of perpetual single life, is very lately ordained, Single life
^^tely ordained.
which is not defended, nor mayntayned for any other cause, but that single
life is more commodious to mainteyne worldly wealth. And they offer manifest
injury unto the word of God, which affirm that marriage of Priests is
repugnant unto Gods word.

Concerning Repentance, Forgiveness of sins, Repentance ^^rgiuenes of
^^nnes and Iu^^ification.
and justification, which we say men for Christ's sake do attain: and not by
means of their works: Also concerning satisfactions, touching the keys,
touching man's traditions, and politic affairs, our VVriters have disputed
many things more plain, then the ancient writers have done. Which
notwithstanding (as it appears) are agreeable unto the perpetual minds of
them, which were more learned and more skillful then others in spiritual
matters, who indeed if they had read this exposition and method, according
too their Godly zeal, would sincerely have allowed the same. As I hear say a
certain excellent Divine of Paris, confessed that he better understood
Augustines mind touching Justification, by the exposition of our writers.

I know there may many things differing and disagreeing from our opinions, Out
of the ancient writers some bees gather Honey, and some spiders suck out
poison.
be gathered out of the Ancient writers: And every man for his own purpose
borrows there as seems to him commodious, so as The Bees gather honey, and
the Spiders suck poison out of the self same flowers. But be it far from
Ecclesiastical Judgments to use Sycopha^sies, or better, inuectiues, I do not
appele unto all writers, but unto the best, as Ambrose Augustine, and so far
forth as others agree with these, which seeing themselves now and then too have
spoken things repugnaunt, they shall here pardon us if we reprehende
certain things in them. To the end we would follow the manifest and true
meaning of the word of GOD, and that we would not depart or starte from
the Symbolles or Creedes: But hold still firmly that which they both beheld
and desired too retain, but yet now and then could not expound the same.
For it is nothing at all too be doubted, that this kind of Doctrine, which
we profess, is the self same true consent and agreement of The Catholic
Church of Christ, as the Symbolles, the more sincere Councelles, and the
better learned Fathers do show the same effectually. These things do I
aunsweare unto the more discreeter sort of Readers, which obiecte unto us
the authority of the Church or of the Fathers. Newfangled sort of
Philosophical Divines and wise worldlinges.


But there is a certain newfangled sort of wise men starte up, who seeing
they be (...), Men of no religion, yet they will not have any controuersiee to
be handled touching Religion: they can commend well peace and concord, they
abhor all those which by any manner means sow discords, these they judge
worthily as a pestilent or filthy kind of people, and as the plagues amongst
men to be utterly removed. This is that one Philosophye of the Popes
Cardinals, Kings, Religious Monks and very many others, which will be
compted politic, who will not have their leisure too be once interrupted,
they will not have their dignity to be diminished or empaired, they hate the
doctrine which seems too hinder their profit, and again every one has his
sundry devise. Of all these, this is one voice in the counsels of Princes,
namely, That there should be no chaunges made: That the concord of the
church, and the authority of ordinary power is still too be retained Moreover
they have their Rhetoricians, Omphalius a flug and subtle supporter of the
Bhurche of Rome and common wealth in these later days
and eloquent Oratoures which set foor the most earnest speeches, and writings
to that purpose, which too be named here, is no need at all. For the writings
of many are extant: but amongst all them, Omphalius has lately provided him
his patched fragmentes. In his beginning he handles his matters likeas if he
were Solon, or some Areopagita, he declameth of the dignity of laws, he
dispraiseth seditions and the contempt of the laws, he rehearses how sweet
the hermonie of order and good government is in the common wealth, which the
laws do cause.

Furthermore although he names us certain things, yet notwithstanding he
shows sufficiently whom they are which he specially inueigheth against. He
declaimeth against us which have shaken of from us certain Tyrannical and
ungodly laws of the Popes. And although indeed I think that he spoke not
these things without reward: Yet notwithstanding seeing the same things are
spoken of many notable and eloquent men, I will not here dispute what this
fellow seeks or goes about.

All this kind of Orations or speches does belong only too confirm the
minds of mighty men that no modest and godly Councelles should be heard: The
Adversaries captions preaching instigate the minds of mighty personages
against the truth. Psalm. 8.
and moreover, that being inflamed by them, they may then exercise unjust
cruelty over the people. But as David required of the Lord, That the
Councelles of Achitophel should note prevail: So do we pray to God that the
eloquence of these Rhetoricians may never be able to oppress the truth and
glory of Christ. And seeing it is written, Out of the mouths of infantes and
sucking babes, have thou made perfect thy praise. etc. Luke. 23.
We will hope well, that God will vouchsafe not to be absent from us in refuting
these slanders, and in aduauncing of the glory of Christ.

I know it is plausibly spoken of some touching the dignity of laws, Dignity
of good laws in the Church and common wealth.
of peace and common tranquillity. I am not so void of learning, nor so
unskillful in the custom of civil life. But I think also that in the common
wealth, those burdens are to be borne withal touching common tranquillity which
may be tolerate without impiety. Touching that kind of burdens let these
sentences be of effect, (...), That an inconvenience which is well placed, let
it not be removed. And as Plato said, That as of the doting father, so, of the
fond foolish country, are the fashions to be borne withal. These things are
rightly spoken touching charges or functions in the civil society of men, which
being without ungodliness are borne withal: But this Philosophy is not
transposed or applied to subvert the glory of god. Errors of doctrine, and
Idolatry ought not to be dissembled: Gods comm^^demnent, how to be preserred.
Like as our savior Christ says, If any man shall deny me, I will confound
him.

The first precept says, Thou shall have none other Gods but me. Exodus 20. This
is too be preferred far beyond all humane matters, laws of men,
gouerneme^ts, ordinary power, peace, country and concord. There is nothing
more honorable then these tytles, but yet the name of God ought to be preferred
before al these.

The Prophets and the Apostles, The Prophets and the apostles loved their
country and the welfare thereof.
without doubt, (if ever any did) loved specially their country and
tranquillitey thereof. And yet notwithstanding they were even compelled to
reprehend ungodly traditions, and wicked opinions. And surely Christ confesses
of himself, That he does bring a kind of doctrine intoo the world, which
should be as a fire, which should kindle great discordes, etc. Needful it
is that there be conflicts in confirming the truth.
For it is needful that there should be conflictes touching the confirming of
the right ordethowe to worship and serve God, because the Devil burns with
horrible hatred against god, and so much as in him lies, endeavors himself to
extinguish the word of God, and stirs up ungodly men against God, and with
himself draws most flourishing kingdoms unto destruction. With these
enemies has Christ continual warrefare.

Wherefore, seeing it is needful that godlynnes must reprehende and abolishe
ungodly traditions, the Prophets and Apostles can not choose but be the autors
of mutations. Although in deed politic wisdom abhors the name of such
mutation. And the godly (which doubtless are not all fools or unwise) do
understand how much difficulties or dangers, these mutations do bring with
them, yet a Christian heart prefers the commandment of God, A Christian
har^ what it does in time of (...).
and with a heavenly courage receaueth thankfully al controversies, and
understands well that these are governed by Christ, unto whom, (as the
Prophet says) al things are in subjection.

These things briefly do I answer, not so much unto the Oration of
Omphalius, as unto the arguments of these wise men, Answer of the author unto
Omphalius and other newefangled wise men.
which in all their determinations, do preach as concerning eschewing of
mutations, and the retayning of concord. And although these godless men now
adays do make a test of this answer, yet is it profitable for the godly to
consider these arguments: least that feigned show of wisdom terrify men's
minds from Godliness, and the profession of truth.

And I write these too the end that youth should be hereby specially
admonished. Ungodly people whereas they do ensnare the minds of many
nowadaies, with their intysementes, with preferme^t to riches, and other
worldly commodities: So do they also again keep them fast entangled with
these persuasions, namely that mutations are to be esehewed, that me^ ought to
embrace and brook well ordinary power, and maintain the present state of their
common wealth. These (how far they are to be commended) Christian must be
premonished, that they do not forget this precept: Thou shall have none other
Gods but me. Exodus 20.

I am sorry too see that certain excellent wits, Wise worldelinges men
pleasers.
do together conspire with the ungodly of our age, and are as very firebrandes,
to inflame Chrstian Kings unto cruelty, and to the stablishment of
ungodliness. That is a virtue woorthely befitting mighty personnages and
excellent men, chiefly too bestow their industry and whole power, and authority
in setting forth the praise and glory of God. The true purposed scope wherein
all men ought to bestow their time and travel.
This ought to be the purposed scope wherein al men ought too bestow their
time and travel, that every one in his place or calling so much as in him
lies, bestow some diligence toward the preservation and conservation of the
Heavenly word of GOD. As for other abject Parasytes which set forth taunting
and reprochefull books, I will not as here speak of them, which are of that
sort of flatterers, such as Dionysius Siculus Fostered in his Court which
took up the Tyrants spicle from the ground, and licking it with their
tounges, declared abroad that it was more sweeter than that same Nectar. I
return now unto those wise men of our time, of whom some fayning too be of
the true religion, after that they see absurd superstitions of former times
can not be excused, they apply more smoother interpretations, unto their
alleged rytes and decrees, because they may covertly establishe ungodliness
by reserving still customs and corrupt decrees.

Such a book is there now set forth at Colen under the title of Reformation.
And I bear report, Cardinal Contarenus his words against the Lutherans.
that in Italy the Cardinal Contarenus was wont too say, these Lutheranes had
done injury unto the states of Rome, when they ascribe unto them the
offenses of the common writers, as of the legends, written, of that work
called Dormi secure, and of such other like writers and their works: That the
chief prelates of Rome were never of that judgment, or else allowed those
folish fables. So now, they turn quyte from them these faults. And I know
that there are very many every where, which by this new and strange kind of
coming, do seek to themselves commendation of singular, wisdom, which for
that cause are specially injurious toward us, that where many things are
borrowed by them out of our books with we have corrected, and they deck
themselves with our feathers, to the end they may bleare the eyes of the
ignorant, yet notwithstanding they allow us evil recompense for their
teaching. For they rease not to exercise cruelty toward us, and again, they
think not that this new sophistry may in time to come be the extreme and
utter destruction of the true religion.

If malapert wits may have liberty to devise gloses and false interpretations
after their own mind, ^loses invented by the Adversaries, and for what
purposes.
what shall then come to pass? Manifest is the Idolatry in worshipping of
saints, in using masses for the dead. And yet notwithstanding these gloses do
they allege for the retaining of customs and traditions, which of themselves
are corrupt and faulty. So within a while after, peradventure they will excuse
the very superstitions of Egypt. Be it far from the church therefore, to retain
this ungodly and pernicious sophistry, which is a protestation clean contrary
to their doing. And kind of worshipping god, not instituted by the express
word of god, of it self is vile and corrupt, yea although a man imagine what
gloss soever he will. As the praying unto Saints of it self is corrupt, and
vile, Praying vnto^ saints is corrupt and vile.
and vile, because it is not ordained by GOD: yea and again it is corrupt and
vile for this cause, for that this self some custom, yea though a man think
it other wise, does attribute honor unto Saints which is properly due unto
GOD, as every man may hear the same.

I could rehearse many examples, The autors exhortation for the detestation of
the adversaries sophistry. 2. Chronicoru^ ca* 29 and 31. Ezechias a notable
example of a good and godly Prince. True godlynes how it ought to be employed.
but I surcease and I exhort al those that are godly, to abhor this
mischievous sophistry of the adversaries. Ezechias king of Jerusalem, did not
only redress those superstitious errors and opinions, touching woorshipping
of the brazen Serpent, but he utterly destroyed the very Image it self. So it
is a point of true godliness to cast a way the traditions themselves together
with their ungodly opinions, which traditions are not in proper nature politic
customs. Like as the Scripture commands, Idolles to be destroyed, So those
same traditions of private Masses, praying unto Saints, observing of vows,
superstitious Apparel, religious orders of brotherhood, the bond of single
life, difference of meats, and such other like foolish traditions proceeding
of superstitions, ought utterly too be taken away and abolished.

But what do I dispute? They which describe their faulty and corrupt
traditions, The adversaries in descrybing their corrupt traditions do defend
their authority, etc.
with this sophistical doctrine, do not this unfeignedly, to take away errors
out of the Church, but that they might by all means defend their authority, and
by their coming establishe this ungodliness. For, lewd opinions do easily
afresh bude again, if the very customs do remain. Wherefore needful it is
that the godly should be watchful, for the devil stubbornly resists the
Gospel, not only provoking tyrants unto cruelty, but also craftily laying
snares, under a pretense of wisdom, and pouring forth pleasant persuasions,
of the which to beware, (...) show of wisdom in some of the adversaries of the
latter (...).
oftentimes the holy Ghost commands us. As the Apostle Paul writing unto
Timothy says, That there should come dissembling spirits, cap. 4. and he says
writing unto the Colos. cap. 2. That the traditions of me shall have in them a
show of wisdom. Whereby not only manifest dreams of men shall be spread
abroad, such as for the most part were both they of former and later age, like
as a little before the crafty dealings of pardons, were manifest, but also
subtle and crafty fellows shall cu^ningly depaint out false doctrine and ungodly
traditions, to the end they may be entertained with great joy, to the end they
may be beloved and retained in great estimation. For, has not the ungodliness
of Samosatenus a certain show of wisdom? Samosatenus (...) Heretyke had his
show of wisdom.
Is not the error of Pelagius plausible too profane wits? So have these
things a show of wisdom: it is profitable for peace and tranquillity (say the
adversaries) to retain the accustomed manners: Therefore let the more absurd or
inconvenient opinions be taken away, and let better interpretations or meanings
be given unto them: but the rytes or customs themselves let them be retained.
This kind of speech makes a fair show when in deed they practice far
otherwise.

These sycophancies or scoffing kind of speeches are much alyke signified in
the History of Christ, whom when the Jews had blindfilded, Examples of the
Jews scoffing speeches against Christ.
and his enemies which bound him, scoffingly buffetted him, they bid him then
prophecy who he was that strick him: so these excusers of ungodly traditions
have Christ and his church in derision, Mark. 14.
at this day. After that they have imagined some one unsavory strange phrase,
A relation the^ of unto the a^uersaries of t^ true Church the latter age^
they now think they have sufficiently blindfilded Christ, and after this
they fall to buffetting of him, that is, they establishe ungodliness, they
inflame the hearts of Kings unto cruelty, and they triu^phe over us, as though
they now had utterly extinguished the truth. Themselves in their own Theater
carry away the conquest, they are praised of the ungodly, they are beloved of
Kings, whose appetites and affections they serve. But God is in prayer to be
called upon, that he would vouchsafe to restrain and bridle this kind of
sycophanty.

Nicander says, The aduersa^ies perverse and ^orrupt dea^inges in the Church
com^ared too the ^oyson of the ^erpentes called ^emorrhoides.
there is a kind of Serpents which he calls Hemorrhoydes, and they are very
little beasts, of one foot length, but they have such force of Poison in them,
that sweat most blooddy bursteth out of him, which is stoonge with one of
them, yea from out his whole body, out of his mouth, nosethrilses, and out of
his bladder isseweth great streams of blood, so as his eyes send forth
sparkling tears of blood, and so that all his whole body burns with
incredible heat thereby. This kind of beast, when as one of them had in Egypt
destroyed a Mariner of Helens: The noble and hauty woman trod her under her
foot, whereupon also the posterity of Haemorrhoides, is said to halte and
be maimed by the loss of their sting.

For the event declares that this strange sophistical doctrine of
interpreting traditions, is a poison not unlike the poison of these
Hemorrhoides. The unlearned although they are our adversaries, yet
notwithstanding they fight against us with wilful boldness and hatred.

These Hemorrhoydes (hy the reason of the defense of their doctrine, by means
of these Sophistries and as Paul calls them by reason of a certain outward
show of wisdom, which they would have too be in them) are held in
admiration, and provoke the minds of mighty personages to oppress the truth.

Princes being enflamed with this poison, do conceive and kindle in their
hearts flames of hatred, are made bloodsuckers; and cruelly raging beyond
measure. Tyranny of (...) malignant Church.
But Christ will not suffer the light of his Gospel to be extinguished
accordingly as it is written, Whatsoever is of GOD, shall not be abolished.
Therefore shall the Church (wherein shyneth true doctrine) at length utterly
destroy the stinges from those Hemorrhoydes. Those sophistical interpretations
shall not oppress the truth, neither shall the crafty and cruel counselles of
the ungodly prevail them.

But whereas some men desirous of concord do daily look for, relation unto ^e
supposed and ^pected con^rde of the church in Me^^ctb^ns time.
that councels should be called by Bishops, and that they hope these shall
heal up the wounds of the Church, or redress enormities in the same, they
are far deceived. For the Bishops of Rome, and their champions, confederate
with them will never stinte from warrying against Christ, which that I may so
think, I am not only moved by man's conjectures, which are many and no flender
causes: I am, thoroughly moved with the sayings of Christ: Furthermore by the
examples of all ages. For Christ denies, that blasphemers shall be saved,
which contrary to their own conscience strive against the truth, defend open
Idolatry, and embrewe themselves in the blood of the godly ones. No doubt,
fury is allwaies accompanied with blasphemies, and murder: like as the
histories of Cain, Pharao, Saul, and the children of Israel do witness the
same. And God himself threatens blindness unto blasphemers, as the Psalm
says, Let their eyes be darkened. Therefore, daily do they increase their
torments, and they with ungodly leagues do bind Princes, unto themselves.
Neither do they only openly swarm abroad, but primly lay snares for the
lives of godly Princes. Is it not to be supposed, that these will admit
moderate or godly councels? And other whiles we have proved very many which
have fained a moderation, and yet in very deed have wrought nothing so, but
that they might catch their vauntage how too subvert us, if they had once
ensnared us: and so extinguishe al kind of good doctrine. Autors godl^
aduertizemen^ unto the godl^ in his time (...) pliable too the latter days.
I do know there are a few certain persons in the world more soundely
living in the societies of our enemies, which do lament the wilful boldness
of some Princes, and mighty personages: but the opinions and meaninges of these
men, are shut out as coming from scholars. These, when they are so, it is
the point of a godly mind, and of one which thinks of his souls health,
Luke 11.
and of the glory of Christ, too seek forth, which is the true Church, that
he may heerevntoo adioyne himself, that he may be a member of this society,
and of the flock of Christ, as Christ himself says, He that is not with
me, is against me. Again let him know that the Church consists not in
the power of Tyrants, and persecutors of Christ, and in them which do either
help forwards, or allow of their cruelty.

Touching these, let us hold fast the assured rule of S. Paul, where he
says, If any man teach any other doctrine, let him be holden as accursed.
The word is ^nat^ema.
1. Ga^^th. And when he says, * Let him be holden as accursed: let us not
think, that he used this as a slender or common curse, when he says
accursed, He signifies hereby, that GOD, has cast out of the Church, the
enemies of the true doctrine, and that they are too be eschewed as the
grievous plagues which GOD abhors.

Let good men well know, that by keeping felloweship and company with those
that are defiled, ^lesson for ^d men of Church.
they shall surely suffer great plagues, for their friendship and for their
society. The Psalm says of this kind of enemies, He has put on blasphemy,
as a garment upon him, and: it has pierced through him, as water through his
inward parts, and as oil in his bones: Psalm. 108. The infection of this
curse hurts others, which are of their affinity in nature, which do also
strive against the truth, and do exercise cruelty against the godly ones.

Let us not therefore, think, that this commandment is but of small effect,
too say ( If any man shall teach any other doctrine, let him be holden as
accursed. 1. Gal. They are not Bishops they are not the members of the Church,
Enemies of the Church aduo^^ched by the Au^^tor.
but the enemies of Christ, who since they be thoroughly moved with furyes,
do not think upon concord and pear of the Church but of establishing
tyranny, do not bend their indeuoures too heal up the wounds of the
Church, The chief inde^uour and practys^ of the Popish clergy.
but they busy themselves about civil broils, the desolation of Churches,
slaughter of those godly Ministers, and of those godly women members of the
same. Wherefore, we must not look for any reformation of the Church from
these enemies: What the god^ly ought too avoid.
But we must think, that in judgment, mind, and will, every man should
separate himself from them, should flee away from their Idolatry, should not
abide to hear their blasphemies against the true doctrine, neither should
help forwards nor allow their counsels, nor yet confirm their authority.

Saint Paul says, eschew Idolatry. These precepts are not to be slenderly
made account upon. An exhortation too all men to^ seek for the true church.
Let us therefore seek for the true Church, let us know, that in this our
Prayers are heard, let us know, that in this Church, we are the members of
Christ; and let us also know, that unto this Church, do the promises of
Christ appertain: namely, those which he speaks of in his Gospel. Those
promises pertayne not unto the enemies of the Gospel, like as they neither
appertain unto the Jews, nor unto the Mahometistes, as God himself
oftentimes witnesses, and as our chief Priest Christ speaks by his
Prophet in the 16. Psalm, saying thus, I will not offer up their sacrifices,
neither will I make mention of them in my lips. Whom may not this so heavy
commination or threatening persuade and move to eschew the company of those
which are enemies unto the true Church.

IN conclusion, The word of GOD is full of such Sermons or persuasions, for
both parts which commands us too flee from the enemies of the true
doctrine, and of the true Church: and too embrace the true doctrine, too love,
help, and adorn the true Church.

And let us not only think, that this Church is such a City as that whereof
Plato speaks. This society is the true church, wherein shyneth the sincere
and pure doctrine of the Gospel, and wherein the sacraments are rightly
administered, as they are delivered from GOD. Concluded affirmation which is the
true Church who they be and how they be members thereof.
In such a society, there must needs be some lively members of the Church
which perform unto God, true woorshipping of him, which truly repent them,
which with a true faith call upon God, bestow their study and diligence, too
the advancement of the Gospel, show their confession of sins, do
accomplish the charge of their vocation: and finally perform those godly
offices by God enjoined them, are exercised in all kinds of dangers, whereby
they may use prayer and invocation upon God, and other good works.

This do I affirm too be the true Church, with whom too be joined in
mind, will, and purpose, it behooves all good men every where. And such (do I
perceive by the benefit of GOD) are our Churches, which profess the true
doctrine of the Gospel, which without all doubt is the consent and agreement
of the doctrine of the Catholyke church of Christ.

Would to God that good minds would consider how much it stands them in
hand not too be conuersaunt in the Tents of the enemies of the Church, but
too be a Citizen of the true Church of Christ, for whose sake God would have
himself kuowen in the world, Commendation of the state of Gods Church.
for whose sake he created all things, whom he sanctified with the blood of
his son, wherein he manifested himself by his wonderful works, by the
fathers, Noah, Abraham, Joseph, Moses, David, Elias, Fliseus, his Apostles,
and other the lights of the Church, finally which shall inherit life and
glory everlasting, and shall enjoy the felloweship of God, and of his holy
Angels.

What a glory and blessedness is it, to be a fellow of this society, to be
seen in this flock, which Christ himself leads as guide where the godly
Angels enuyron them round about, wherein go the Princes Adam, Noah, Abraham,
Moses, Elias, and other notable men endewed with excellent gifts? And in this
flock, Who are meek ^sociates in the true Church of God.
thou have assured place, if thou helpest not, if thou allowest not the
ungodliness and cruelty of the enemies of the church, but do embrace the
true doctrine, confess ye same, and adorn the same with godlymaners.

David in his. 120. Psalm says, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Blessed are
all they which love the same. O sweet and pleasant sentence: He exhorts all
men, by all kind of duties to help the Church, to defend the purity and
agreement of the doctrine in the same, to do well unto those which teach in the
church with their prayers, An exhortation to pray for the prosperity of the
Church and deserve well toward the same.
and desires too commend the common welfare or safety thereof to God, to drive
away wicked teachers and Tyrants from the same.

And from my heart I wish, that Politic men which ought and are able too help
the Church, would consider the greatness of these duties. Let them have an eye
unto their posterity: For whom as they have a desire to leave a well ordained
common wealth, The godly care of the Author for the posterity.
so much more ought they deliver true knowledge of God, incorrupt religion,
sincere doctrine of the Gospel, and after this manner well governed Churches.
Like as Paul writing unto Timothy says thus, commanding him, Faithfuly to
keep that which is committed unto him, that the same may come whole and
vncorrupt unto the posterity. With this care nothing at al we see the Bishops
of Rome, either Bishops of their affinity, either any Monks or Chanons to be
any way moved, 1. Tim. 6.
but they contend touching worldly wealth and promotions which they would
have, The contrary care and carelessness of the adversaries.
not touching. Doctrine. Therefore let others in school, and government of
Cities take this care in hand. This sacrifice especially does God require of
all men, as Peter says, We are called to the end we should celebrate the
benefits of God toward us 2. Pet. 1.

This ought to be the end in all Councels and enterprises of wise men, God
requires every, man in his vocation to seek the advancement of Gods glory in
his Church.
to set forth and advance the glory of Christ. For the performance of this
duty, God himself promises great rewards in this little verse, Blessed
shall they be which shall love the Church. Psalm. 120.

He promises them sure defense, good prosperity, and everlasting felicity
which love the true church. With this voice, let the godly ones stir up their
minds to the care of aduauncing and adorning the church, and not only confirm
them selves against the threatening of Tyrants, Gods promised rewards too
those that so do.
but also let them fortify themselves, as armed against the sub till
Sophystrie of those which falsely allege their testimonies of Antiquity, and
of the church, for the defense of their wicked opynions, which to refute and
vanquishe, I have somewhat here thought good to instruct the minds of godly
disposed persons.

Soli Deo Gloria.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson.
1580.


