THE MEANING OF THE FRONTISPIECE.
LEARNING the ATLAS of the world, does bear
Earths burden up; sustaines this lower Sphere;
Which else had fallen, and her declining light
Had slept in shades of IGNORANCE and NIGHT.
RIOT and SLOTH, and dull OBLIVIONS head
Our ATLAS spurns, whose conquering feet does tread
Upon those slavish necks, which else would rise
(Like selfe-lewd Rebels) up and tirannize:
Grave HISTORY, and renowned GEOGRAPHY
Keep Centry here; their quickening flames do fly
And make a SUN whose more refulgent rays
Lightens the WORLD, and glorifies our DAYS:
By that fair EUROPE viewes the ASIAN shore,
And wild AMERICK courts the Sunburnt MOORE:
By this, th'extreme ANTIPODES do meet
And Earths vast bulk is lodged within one SHEET.
M. S.

HISTORIA MVNDI OR MERCATORS ATLAS. Containing his Cosmographicall Descriptions
of the Fabric and Figure of the World. Lately rectified in diverse places, as
also beautified and enlarged with new Mapps and Tables by the Studious
industry of IODOCVS HONDY ENGLISHED by W. S. Generosus and Regin. Oxoniae.

LONDON Printed for MICHAELL SPARK* and SAMVELL CARTWRIGHT 1635



HISTORIA MVNDI: OR MERCATOR'S ATLAS.

Containing his COSMOGRAPHICALL Description of the Fabric and Figure of the
WORLD.

Lately rectified in diverse places, as also beautified and enlarged with new
Mappes and Tables;

By the studious industry OF IVDOCVS HONDY.

ENGLISHED BY W. S. Generosus, and Coll. Regin. Oxoniae.

Pingitur his tabulis Orbis, simul Orbis and urbes;
Gemmae sunt urbes, annulus Orbis erit.
LONDON Printed by T. Cotes, for Michael Spark and Samuel Cartwright. 1635.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA (...)

GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR FRET HI^ REX F. D.



TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, and no less worthily honored Sir H. Marten Knight,
Judge of his Majesty's high Court of the Admiralty of England, and Judge of the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
SIR
MERCATORS Geographicall History, fitly Emblematiz'd by the Sun, has with
refulgent rays illuminated the Transmarine World. But now rising up in our
Critical Horizon, it fears the Eclipse of Envy, and therefore desires your
worthy and learned Patronage, that being freed from such interposing
shadows, it may shine forth as the Meridian Sun. Your great, and good Fame,
inviting and encouraging strangers to boldness, is my Apology for this
Dedication. For since the world is so much obliged to your Virtue, Learning,
and upright Integrity, it will appear a just gratitude to devote this
Cosmographicall World to so favorable a Moecenas. The Translator in the
performance, and Dedication, is enforced to aim at an inferior Object; and to
descend beneath his own descent and Birth, which improved in the University
of Oxford, flattered him with hope of a kinder Fortune. But modest ingenuitie
permits not a larger Character of himself, and the Brevitie of few words is
most intelligible to the judicious. The work in the Original was written by a
famous learned Cosmographer, and a great light of his time Mercator, whose
labors are here humbly presented, and his ashes sleeping in their Vrne (if
they could be sensible of joy) would rejoice in so worthy a Patron. Let the
Authors, and your own worthiness mitigate my presumption, that J whose life
has been all Tristia, have presumed to offer up the whole World at so high an
Altar. Pardon this double Ambition, and be pleased to accept this Sacrifice,
from the hand of the most humble Sacrificer,

The Servant of your Worthy Virtues; WYE SALTONSTALL.

Ad Mercatoris dignissimum and doctissimum Moecenatem.
LEarned Moecenas; I confess that I
Was borne to love and honor Poesy.
And though I do not write a gingling Line
To please the silken Tribe with a smooth Rhyme;
Nor strive against Minerva's sacred will
To extract Nonsense from a forced Quill.
I shunning these two mad Extremes of Wit,
To sing your Praise more humbly think it fit;
Since justice (the maine Pillar of a State)
Virtue, and Learning, which did transmigrate
Out of the ancient Sages, now do rest
In the fair Mansion of your worthy Breast.
Unto Pythagoras we may credit give,
Their Souls informed but once, their virtues live
In you by Transmigration, who have stood
The great Protector of the Common good.
And may you live to protect Mercators story,
Until you are exalted unto Glory.
W. S.

TO THE GENTRY OF GREAT BRITAIN.
IT is an Argument of worthiness, to love worth in others, and virtue you know
consists in action; so that Gentlemen should be always doing some worthy
deed, or patronizing that which is done. If you therefore consider the
worthiness of the Author or Work, you will join your helping hands to
support Atlas groaning under the burden of the world. Mercator drew these
Descriptions of the Integrall parts of the World in Latin, but now they are
drawn forth in English colors, which are but changeable accidents, for the
real substance of Mercators World remains the same in that manner as he
fashioned it. But of late with great care, cost, and fidelity, these
Descriptions have been converted into English with new additions and much
enlarged, that the benefit thereof might have a larger extent, for bonum quo
communius eo melius, Good becomes better when it is communicable to all. And
besides, seeing personal travells in these tempestuous times, cannot be
attempted with any safety, here you may in the quiet shade of your Studdies
travel at home. If therefore a work that is Bonum, utile and jucundum, good,
profitable, and pleasant, may deserve your favor, TO
Hic labor, hoc opus est, this is it. So that as Alexander grieved that there
was but one World for him to conquer, so you will be sorry that there was but
one World for Mercator to describe. Enjoy therefore that which is both good in
it self, and was undertaken for your good, and benefit. Valete.

W. S.

The Preface to the courteous Reader.
THat many sollid and urgent reasons did enduce them, who among the liberal
Disciplines which without controversy are very profitable to man's life, do
give the first place to the noble Art of Geographie, they shall best know and
discern, who shall consider both the excellency, and pleasure, as also the
incredible profit of this Art. For, as concerning the dignity and excellency
thereof, it does not entreat of mean matters of small moment, as brute
beasts, the fruits of the Earth, precious stones, mettalls, and other works of
nature, the handling whereof no reasonable man will contemn; but it presents
to our sight the whole Globe of the Earth as it were in a Mirror or
Looking-glass, and does show the beauty and ornaments of the whole Fabric
of the world, and contains all things in her ample and spacious bosom, and
like the vaste Sea, it does not only open and lay forth the hidden and remote
Islands, but also all other Countries. To omit the near affinity which this
noble Science has with Astronomy, which mounting above the earth does
contemplate the Heavens.

Moreover, if men as often as they hear some relation of this or that Country,
of any strange unknown people, or of any rare and unusual Creature, or of the
continual burning of the Mountain Aetna, also of diverse Islands lying here
and there in the great Ocean, and also of Salvage Nations, some whereof go
naked without clothes, others feed on man's flesh, and the like matters; or
do read the wonderful histories of the East and West Indies, (in which there
are many things which do rather seem fabulous than true) do apprehend them
with such great admiration, and give such earnest attention thereunto, out of
the desire which they have to hear such novelties; how much more may the
curious Readers delight in this work, which, as we said before, does contain
and represent the whole Globe of the Earth, with all the Countries, Kingdoms,
Dominions, Woods, Mountains, Valleys, Rivers, Lakes, People, Cities and
innumerable Towns thereof, with the Seas flowing about it: all which any one
may here view on dry land, without endangering his body or goods; and in this
travel his friends shall not be sollicitous or take care for him in his
absence, or earnestly desire his return. Besides, in this peregrination or
travel he shall want no delight that may drive away the tediousness of the
journey; for while he fixes his eyes on several Countries and places, he
shall straight way behold the special gifts and peculiar excellency of every
Country, and observe a wonderful variety therein, which are very delightful
to the mind, for as the Proverb says, A good merry companion is as a Coach
upon the way.

But they shall chiefly discern the great and manifold benefits of this Art
of Geography, who in their eye-travell, and viewing of several Countries,
shall consider the situation and disposition of Countries; the Customs,
observations, laws, and manners of the Inhabitants, and shall afterward
traffic, and send commodities to several places, or resolve to study the
liberal Arts; seeing no Poet, nor Historian can be well read with profit, nor
be conveniently expounded or declared by any Interpreter or Commentator,
without the help and knowledge of this most Noble Science. I omit here to
mention how absurd and unfit it is, that he who has no skill nor knowledge in
these matters, should give his opinion and judgment in the public assembly
or council of the Commonwealth, when consultation is held about the discovery
of some unknown Country, or in time of war concerning the bounds and
confines of any Province.

But Princes and Noble men ought chiefly to bestow great pains in studdying
this most excellent Art, in regard it may be very useful unto them in
undertaking journies and voyages when occasion requires, as also at home for
fortifying the Frontiers of their own Territories, or the directing and
conducting of any warlike expedition. For that irrecoverable dangers have
ensued when an army has been led through places unknown both to the
soldiers and Captain, both Livy and many other Historiographers have
abundantly testified by clear and manifest examples.

And moreover, as it is very necessary, profitable and pleasant to know all
Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions, and Provinces, with their situation,
disposition, and qualities; so in like manner the several Seas, Rivers, Lakes,
and memorable waters thereof, ought to be considered exactly in these times,
when voyages are so frequently made, unto known and unknown Countries, so
that not any one will continually reside at home, and abstain from making
discoveries both by Sea and Land. So that Polidore Virgils complaint is now
vain, who in the fifteenth chapter of the third Book concerning the Invention
of Matters, does condemn mankind of too much rashness, and madness, in
regard he cannot bridle his affections and desires with reason: and though God
has given him the Earth, being a firm and immovable element, abundantly
producing all things necessary and convenient for man's life, yet he being not
content therewith, has made a Scrutiny and search into the stars, the
heavens, and the vaste Seas. To the same purpose Horace sung formerly, in his
first Book, and third Ode: He had a heart of Oak or Brass,
Who did lanch forth a brittle ship, to pass
At first through the rough Seas,
And did not fear, when he set forth
The Afric wind striving with the North wind, etc.


And a little after in the same place: No sort of death he sure did fear
That saw the Monsters swimming there,
And could behold them with dry eyes
With the swelling Sea and rocks which in it lies.


And afterward he adds; In vain did God divide the land
from the unsociable Seas,
If impious ships can sail unto
forbidden Ports when they do please.
But mankind bold still to adventure
does on forbidden mischief enter etc.


And hereunto Propertius in his third Book does allude, in that Elegy wherein
he be wayleth Petus his Shipwreck, where he sings thus: Go crooked ships,
of death the fatal cause,
Which on himself man with his own hand draws*
Unto the earth, we added have the Seas,
That the miseries of misfortunes may increase.


And a little after: Nature to ensnare the covetous man,
Does let him sail upon the Ocean.


But these reasons are not able to discourage any one, but rather to quicken
their industry, greedily to take any occasion to know, view and discover diverse
Countries both neerehand and remote; partly by undertaking long voyages: and
those that cannot conveniently travel, may gather the knowledge of all
Countries out of Books and exact descriptions. And truly that studdy is
irreproveable, so that it ought rather to be accounted laudible, profitable,
pleasant and necessary. For Strabo in the first Book of his Geography says
rightly, that man ought to live on the Sea as well as on the land, and that God
made him equally an Inhabitant and Lord thereof Therefore they deserve great
praise, who have labored in this Art, as Abraham Or^elius, Daniel Cellarius,
Anthony Maginus, Paul Merula, Peter Bertius and others: but especially that
most learned Mathematician Gerard Mercator, although he were prevented by
death, so that he could not finish his Geographicall work, entitled Atlas.
But Iodocus Hondy did supply this defect, adding not only those Tables which
were wanting to make the work perfect, but also accurate descriptions thereof,
by the labor and studdy of Peter Montane. This work we do publish again in
this new Edition, being accurately reuised, and purged from many gross
errors; and the studious Reader shall find that the enlargement of this Book
is not to be contemned, being set forth with diverse additions, and some new
Tables added, as he may see in the descriptions of England, Ireland, Spain,
Friesland, Groonland, Vltrajectum, and other Countries, that shall compare this
Edition with the former. Therefore Courteous Reader, enjoy these our new
labors, favor them, and Farewell.

TO The virtuous and learned Gentlemen of Innes of Court, Mercator dedicateth
his Atlas or Cosmographicall Meditations.
TO you that are the Ornament of the Temples,
And by your actions give such fair Examples
Unto the Vulgar, that their Judgments can
Discern that Virtue makes a Gentleman:
To you Mercator offers by my hand
The Worlds Portraicture, wherein Sea and Land
Which make one Globe, are drawn forth in each Part
In Plano, with such Judgment, Truth, and Art,
That Pictures of all mortal beauties are
Weak shadows of frail dust, nor can compare
With these sweet Picces; for who would not be
A Lover? when he sees Geographie
Drawn forth in such fresh colors, that invite
The eye to gaze with wonder and delight?
And while it gazes does such pleasure find
That it convayes loves flame into the mind.
I know your Judgments, let none henceforth be
Your Mistresses but fair Geographie.
W. S.

Reverendae, and Eruditae Matris Academiae Oxoniae in Albo Mercatoris Famae
Inscriptio.
QVis ille Mundum cogit in leges suas,
Potentis artis machina!
Non illubenti quis jugum victor dedit
Vt serviat felicius!
Angustijsque clausit insuetum novis,
Vt major inde prodeat!
Et quae lacerent membra magni corporis,
Dedit videre singula.
Per quicquid usquam est sparsa, nec lacera tamen
Integriora reddidit.
Non hunc vetustis edidere saeculis
seu Roma, sive Graecia
Aevo priores, and labor praevios,
At post-futuris impares
Dicemus istos; orbis incunabulis
Quos admoveri fas erat.
Quos and minores expedire fascias
Debebat, ut mundo rudi.
Adultus at jam crevit, and cingi petit
(Quod repperit) solutius,
Quin and Britanno, (quod Britanni gaudeant)
Cinctu decorus visitur.
N. S. Oxonia

Aeque Eruditae and, Almae Matris Cantabrigiae, (...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
R. B. Cantabriglae

In Praise of Mercators Works:
INdustrious Camden; Englands brightest star,
By's Art gave light to us and after Times;
Mercators Sun shines more resplendent far
By's History, describing all the Climes
And uncouth Contnents, strange for us to view
The Rocks, the Isles, the Rivers and their falls,
Gods greatest Works, and Natures rarest show,
Which here lies open, with Mountains, Hills and dales;
And in these Mappes thou may at home descry
What some have sought with Travail far and near;
At easy rate they all here open lie
To feast thy Judgment with delicious cheer:
Then crown his Temples with deserving Bays
That such a Trophee, to thy use could raise.
W. D. Exoniae.

To the worthy Translator.
IF, what that famous Lyrick-Poet writ
In praise of Poetry, so full did fit;
That, Omne tulit punctum qui vnscuit utile dulci. Hor. de Art poetica.
He, of All, deserves the prize and praise,
Which mixeth Profit, with his Pleasant-Layes:
Then (sure) the same of History is true;
And of all Histories, to This, most due.
To this, I say; This Atlas of Earths frame,
This Geographick-Structure of much fame;
This Worlds bright Light, Delight, and Sun most fair,
Discovering all Earths specious Countries rare,
In such a Cosmographicall display,
In such a faithful and exact Survey.
That (Now) at least, Eleven fair Languages
Themselves with Its Translation sweetly please.
What thanks (Me thinks) then unto Thee remains,
Praiseworthy Saltonstall, for thy great pains*
In thus Translating on our English-Soyle
So choice a Piece, Wherein, without much toil;
Yet with much Pleasure and Utility,
The Mind all-bent on Foreign Noveltie
May here at home, even in his Chamber view
Each Country in his state and station true;
In figures fair lively delineated,
And in exact descriptions demonstrated.
For which, let Belgia give her Hondy praise,
And we, our Saltonstall deserved Bays.
I. V.

In due commendation of the Author, with an Allusion of Atlas his supportation
of the World.
1. An Acrosticke on Mercators Atlas.
Mercators Atlas Mirror of all story,
Express in Tropes of deep Cosmographie,
Reader admire in reading; for, It Is Glory
Claims a precedence past equality
All that Laborious Artists can compose
Triangles, Circles, Lines and Parallels;
Only (dear Hondius) these thy Maps disclose,
Raising to life a Work that all excels.
Atlas by fiction does the World uphold;
Thou, more, by Art, do all the Orb contain:
Let Poets pencill forth thy praise in Gold,
And all that reap the Harvest of thy pain;
So shall thy fame to every Age remain.
Here may thou read what ere thou would desire,
The manners of thine own and foraigne Nations,
And in thy Study only but retire
To view their customs, strengths and Scituations.
Then praise his Name, such gifts to Man that gave
Whereby thou may much cost and labor save.
M. R.

De Mercatoris Atlante in Anglorum sermon edito.
ATlas Latin, fortis in lauds tuas
Graeco politus carmine Heinsius fuit:
At Nostrum Atlantem, qui novus prodit modo,
Laudare non audere, laus, post Heinsium.
R. B. S. S. M.

Ad Anglum Lectorem.
SCire cupis mores hominum, lustrareque terras?
hic depicta tibi cuncta videre licet.
Ne Linguae ignotae exaniment, hunc consule nostrum
Atlantem: notus sic tibi mundus erit.
Orbem fuloit Atlas, opus hoc intellige: Atlantem
Lector, and Atlant is non leve fulcis onus.
R. B. S. Hosp.

On this Translation, an HEXASTICHON.
MErcator, sure thy Merchandise is good,
Having so current for so long time stood
In foreign Countries; but in British soil
Vnkenn'd, unkiss'd, till Saltonstall with toil
And study, rich, in thee, his natives made,
Teaching thee with our English (now) to-trade.
THOM. VICARS, olim Reginensis. Oxon.

NIli diluvium steriles faecundat agellos.
Floscula sparsa iuvant: stercora lucra ferunt;
Inde decus Solis, late quia lumina spargit.
Rivi fama patet, flumina longa trahens.
Sic linguis varijs, doctum lucrantur opellae
Laudem, diffusae: nos tamen omne bonum.
Hebrae^, Graeci exonerant: gens undique docta
Alueum in Brittanicum, qui scatet art nova,
Olim non notus, noto divisus ab orb
Huc tendi petijt navita nullus iter.
Olim tendebat cla^us mercator ad Indos,
Iam oras Angligenum, curva carina petit.
Ast hic Mercator non est omnino viator
Musaeo merces; littus and aequor eme.
Pet. Vowel.

To his learned (though unknown) friend the Author of this Translation.
SOmewhat amongst the rest of those that press,
To honor this thy Work, would I address
Unto thy praise, and therein strive to be
As breife and sweet as this Epitomee.
The World is here contracted, and in this
Thou show us what the lesser world (Man) is,
And therein work'st a wonder, that the less
Should comprehend the greaters spaciousness.
As thou have thus reduced both to a span,
So shall my lines thy worth, and in this one
Express thy world of that Celestial fire,
Whose beams we love not more than we admire.
I. G.

Verses in Commendation of this description of the terrestrial Globe, by G. W.
WIth cost and peril, some adventure far,
Yet, never the richer, nor the wiser are:
But giddily through many Climates rome,
And come less honored, and worse manner'd home,
Some others, Men and Cities, having seen,
Epitomize each place where they have been;
From every quarter, bringing like the Be,
The quintessence of all the flowers they see:
And best are pleased when they shall contrive
The honor, and the profit, of their Hive.
This is one end of Travail; and, the next
To that, which makes the world an ample Text,
Whereon to meditate, and Preach abroad
The many praisefull Attributes of GOD^
For, though two other Books are now unsealed,
He, by the World, was first of all revealed.
The Second volumne of that large Record,
(Which is Earth's Globe) this Treatise does afford,
Abstracted so (by this our Authors pain)
That, now, a Closet may the same contain:
And, they that have not heart, nor means, nor time,
To make their progres, through each foreign Clime,
Or view the World's remotest parts, at large,
May see them, now in breife, with little charge;
Without those pains or perils which are found,
In compassing, or traversing, this ROVND.
And (which does much endeare it) this will show
more profitable Truths, than many know
By hazzards, Pilgrimages, or expense:
Yea, and with more exact intelligence,
Than could be gotten (if these Charts were lost)
By ten men's pains, and fifty times the cost.
Then slight not Readers, that which here is tend'red
Nor let ill payments, for good-workes, be rendered:
But know (before miscensure this despises)
What profit from our Authors pains arises:
For by this Work, you have (though small it shows)
A World of Kingdoms at your own dispose.
Hereby, at leisure and with pleasure too
(When any sudden use requires so)
Within your own command you may survey
Earth's wide extended Empire every day;
Rise (in an instant) from your seat, and see
The farthest Kingdoms which discovered be;
Informed become, how small or large they are;
What profits, and what Rarities be there;
What Cities they afford, what Hills of Fame,
What Air, what Soil, what Rivers of great Name;
How governed, how confined, how defended,
What Foes they have, and how they stand befrended
With many other things, which much may steed
To serve your pleasures, or in time of need.
And when your Inquisitions there are done
You may (with swifter motion than the Sun)
Remove to any Province when you please,
From thence again to her Antipodes;
Yet neither be compelled to adventure
About the sphere, nor seek it through the Center:
For only by the turning of the hand,
The place desired, in your view shall stand,
And at one Prospect, show it with all those
Adjacent Countries, which the same enclose.
More might be said. But, I may think you prize not
An honest man's report, if this suffice not:
And therefore will no more thereon insist;
But leave you to accept it as you list.
Concerning the use of these Tables.
PTolomie and we in this book, do make the Longitude to be a segment of the
Equator, or Aequinoctiall Circle, comprehended with the Meridian of that
place, and the Meridian of the Fortunate Islands: for from these Islands the
beginning of Longitude is taken.

Some do not begin the Longitude from the Fortunate Islands (which are now
called the Canaries) but from the Flandrian Islands, which are now called the
Azores, because the needle of the compass does point there directly toward the
North. But the superficies of the Globe contains in Longitude 360 degrees.

The Latitude is the Arch or Segment of any place between the Aequinoctiall
and Parralell which is drawn through the vertical point of the same place,
and it is always to the elevation of the Pole.

Latitude is twofold, either Northern, or Southern, and there are reckoned
from the Aequinoctiall to either Pole 90 degrees of Latitude.

We have noted the degrees of Longitude and Latitude on the sides of all the
Tables, and for the most part, the degrees of Latitude on the top and
bottom, and of Longitude on the right and left hand, except when some Country
is to be described that is more extended between the South and North.

The several degrees both of Longitude and Latitude, according to the
capacity of the place, are sometimes divided into 60, sometimes into (...).
parts, which are called minutes, and we have noted the degrees with greater
Arithmeticall figures, and the minutes with lesser for difference sake.

If one would find out the Longitude and Latitude of any place, where the
Meridian Parralells are, by taking with a pair of compasses the distance
thereof from the side of the Table, and afterward by applying the compasses to
the other side. If thou take the distance from the East side, the compasses
being turned from that side to the North side, will show the degree and minute
of Longitude. If thou have the distance from the North-side, turn thy
compasses from thence to the East side, and it will show the Latitude. But if
the Meridians be not Parralells, the Latitude of a place is found in the same
manner, but in the Universal Tables where the Parralells are circular, the
distance of a place being taken from the next side, will show the same on the
East side. But the Longitude is to be taken with a thread or Ruler, laid upon
the place and turned until it do point out on the Northern and Southern
side, the same minute of the same degree, and wheresoever it be, that is the
Longitude of the place.

How to find out the distance of degrees or Miles between two Cities, or any
other Places.
WE have added scales of Miles to all the Tables, by which thou may easily
find out the distance of all places in this mannner.

Take a pair of Compasses, and open them until the 2 feet do touch the
extreme points of the places given, then appy them without any alteration to
the scale of miles, and the numerall figures noted thereon will give the
distance.

But if the Distance of places does exceed the length of the Scale, then with
thy compasses thou shall take the length of the Scale, and thou shall turn the
Compasses from one place to another, as far as the distance of places will
permit, and then reckon the miles together. But because the length of miles in
all Countries is unknown, thou shall more certainly take the distance of
places with thy Compasses, and apply the Compasses without variation to the
degrees of Latitude, which will give the true distance, by multiplying them by
the Miles of the known Country.

But the Miles do differ much in diverse Countries, and therefore I will here
insert their difference in the chief Countries.

Of common German Miles; which we Hollanders do also use 15 do answer to one
Degree. Of the middle sort of German Miles 12 do answer to one Degree. Of
great German Miles 10 do answer to one Degree. Of common French Miles 25 do
make one degree. Of great French Miles 20 do make one degree. Of Italian Miles
60 are contained in one Degree. Of English Miles as many, or as some will have
it 50 contained in every Degree. Of English Leagues 20 do make one degree. Of
Spanish Leagues 17 do make one degree. Houre-Leagues, and Itinerarie hours 20
do make one degree. Of Swedish and Danish Miles 10 do make one degree.
A Table of the Cosmographicall Descriptions, Mappes, and Tables contained in
Marcators Atlas.
The first figures directing to the Descriptions, The second to the Mappes.

1 THe World, Fol. 3. and 5. 2 Europe, Fol. 8. and 9. 3 Afric, Fol. 12. and
13. 4 Asia. 18, 19. 5 America. 22.23. 6 The North Pole. 28, 29. 7 Iseland,
33.35. 8 The ^^s of Britain. 38, 39. 9 Ireland, 43, 45. 10 Ireland 2 Tab. 48,
49. 11 Ireland 3 Tab. 53.55. 12 Ireland 4 Tab. 58.59. 13 Ireland 5 Tab. 63.65.
14 Scotland. 68.69. 15 Scotland 2 Tab. 73.75. 16 Scotland 3 Tab. 78.79. 17
England 83, 85. 18 England 2 Tab. 88.89. 19 England 3 Tab. 92.93. 20 A
Particular Description of Wales. 97. 21 England 4 Tab. 99.101. 22 England 5
Tab. 105.107. 23 England 6 Tab. 110.111. 24 England 7 Tab. 116.117. 25 Norwey
and Swethland 121.123 26 The State Politic of the Kingdom of Denmark, 126.
27 The Kingdom of Denmark, 132.133. 28 Denmark 137* 139. 29 Denmark 3 Tab.
142.143. 30 Denmark 4 Tab. 147, 149. 31 Borussia or Spruceland. 152.153 32
Liefland. 157, 159. 33 Russia or Moscovie. 162.163. 34 A more Particular
Description of some Provinces of Moscovia. 165. 35 Lithuania D. 168.169. 36
Transyluania or Siebenburgen. 173, 175. 37 Taurian Chersonesus 178, 179. 38
Spain 183, 185. 39 Portugal and Algarbia. 197. 199. 40 Gallicia, ^^on; and
Asturia de Oviedo, 202, 203. 41 Biscay and Guipuscoa 207.209. 42 Castile Old
and New. 212.213. 43 Andalusia 217, 219. 44 Valentia and Murcia. 222.223. 45
Aragon and Catalonia 227, 229 46 Catalonia more particularly described.
233.235. 47 France 245.247. 48 Brittanie, Normandy, and Belsia 259.261. 49
^emovicium, 264, 265. 50 Xaintogne 269, 274. 51 Aquitaine 274.275. 52 Provence,
269.271. 53 Picardie and Campania. 284. 285. 54 France. 289, 291. 55 Picardie.
294.295. 56 Campania 298, 299. 57 Bell^vacum 303.305. 58 Boulogne 307.309. 59
Aniou. 311.313. 60 Bitur^cum 316, 317. 61 Burbun ^. 321, 323. 62 Burdigala 326,
327 63 Per^^* C. 332.333. 64 Turene D. 335, 337. 65 Pulavia 338, 339. 66
Cadurcium 343, 345. 67 Bressia 348, 349. 68 Lions 351, 353. 69 Languedoc. 356,
357 70 Delphinate of France 359.361 71 Lotharingia D. 362.363. 72 Lotharingia
D. South part. 367 3^9. 73 Burgundy D. 372, 373. 74 Burgundy C. 377, 379. 75
Savoy D. 382, 383. 76 Helvetia, 387, 389. 77 Lur^chgow. 392, 393. 78
Wist^^spurgergow. 397.399. 79 Lake Leman 409, 411. 80 Argow 414, 415. 81
Rhetians 419, 421. 82 Low Countries 422, 423. 83 Flanders 439, 441. 84 Eastern
part of Flanders 444, 445. 85 Brabant D. 449 451. 86 Helland, C 454, 455. 87
Zeland C. 459, 461. 88 Gelderland, 464, 465. 89 Zutphania 469, 471. 90
Vitrajectum 472.473. 91 Machlin 478, 479. 92 Groeninga 481, 483. 93
Trans-Issalana 484, 485 94 Artois. 487, 489. 95 Hannalt 4^2, 493. 96 Namur^
497.499. 97 Lu^^^enburg D. 500, ^01. 98 Lamburg D. 505, 507. 99 Germany ^09,
511. 100 Germany 518. 101 West Friesland 5^2 5^3. 102 Embdanum and Oldenburg
536, 539. 103 Westphalia 1 Tab. 541, 543. 104 Bremes 545. 105 Westphalia 2 Tab.
547, 549. 106 Munster B. 552, 553. 107 Westphalia 3 Tab. 555, 557. 108 Colen
560, 561. 109 Westphalia 4 Tab. 563, 565. 110 Leiden 566, 567. 111 Muers 571,
573. 112 Waldeck 576, 577. 113 Palatinate of Rhene, 580, 581. 114 Wirtemberg
585, 587. 115 Alsatia the Lower 589, 591. 116 Alsatia the Higher, 594, 595. 117
Saxony the Lower 599, 521. Here the figures go ta^^^ but I follow them, as
the pages are misfigured.
118 Brunswicke D. 524, 525. 119 Hessen 529, 531. 120 Nassaw 534, 535. 121
Duringen 537, 539. 122 Frankenland D. 542, 543. 123 Bavaria D. 547, 549. 124
Bavaria Palate. 552, 553. 125 Saxony the higher D. 557, 559. 126 Brandenburg D.
562.563. 127 Pomerania D. 649, 651. 128 Rugia 652, 653, 129 Bohemia 656, 657.
130 Meriav^ 660, 661. 131 Austria 664, 665. 132 Saltzburg 669, 671. 133 Poland
K. 674, 675. 134 Poland 679.681. 135 Hungary 683, 685. 136 Italy 688, 689.
137 Lumbardie 704, 705. 138 Valesia 707. 139 Lumbardie 2 Tab. 709.711. 140
Lumbardie 3 Tab. 714, 715. 141 Genoa D. 720, 721 142 Lumbardie (...) ^23 72^
143 Bres^^^ and Midan, D 728. 729. 144 Millan D. 734, 735. 145 Verona 737, 739.
146 ^riul^ ^42, 743. 147 Istria 741. 148 Carniola 746. 149 Tuscany 747, 748.
150 Spo^^to D. 752, 753. 151 Campagna di Roma 757, 759. 152 Abruzco 762 763.
153 Puglia Piana 767, 769. 154 Corsica and Sardinia 772, 773. 155 Sardinia 775.
156 Sicilie 777, 779. 157 Stirmarck 782, 783. 158 Slavonia 786, 787. 159
Walachia, 790, 791. 160 Greece 794, 795. 161 Macedon 799, 801. 162 Morea 804,
805. 163 Candie 809, 811. 164 Barbary 814, 815. 165 Egypt 816, 818. 166
Morocco 819, 821. 167 Abissines D. 824, 825. 168 Guinea 829, 831. 169 Turkish
Empire 834, 835. 170 Holy Land 839, 841. 171 Asia the Lesser 844, 845. 172
Cyprus 849, 851. 173 Persia 855, 857. 174 Tartarie 860, 861. 175 China 865,
867. 176 East Indies 870, 871. 177 Islands of the East Indies 875, 877. 178
Iapan Isle. 880.881. 179 Zetlan I. 885, 887. 180 Islands of the West Indies,
890, 891. 181 Cuba, Hispaniola, etc. 893, 895. 182 Virginia 898, 899. 183 New
Virginia 905. 184 Description of New Spain M. 905. 185 New Spain 906, 907.
186 Firine Land 911, 913. 187 Peru 914, 915. 188 Summer Islands or Berm. 917,
919. 189 Southern America 920, 921. 190 Straites of Magellan. 925, 927. 191
New England after the book before the Table.
THE TYPE OF THE GLOBE OF THE EARTH.
WHereas by the Necessity of Nature, Order does always require, that
Universals should be set before Parriculars, and the Whole before the Part,
for the better understanding of the present Matter: I also, being bound by this
Law, ought to set before this first Volume of our Geographie, an universal
Type of the Globe of the Earth, and of the four Parts thereof, Europe, Africa,
Asia, and America, that so I may more happily follow my intended matter: and
also, that in the several following Tomes hereafter, he that shall desire to
have the Delineation of his own Country, may have a perfect Work before him,
being not deprived of this so profitable a speculation. For the contemplation
of Generals is pleasant, and very necessary to him, who desires to have the
least knowledge of the World and natural things. For if you please to consider
the manner of the rising and setting of the Sun, what is the cause of Summer
or Winter, whence is the inequality of the Days and Nights, or lastly, what
has been the originals, or propagations of things, what has been the
actions, the achievements, the mutations, and conversions happening in any
place, even from the first Creation, you shall learn all this no where better,
than out of these five adjoining Tables, without all danger, and with honest
recreation of mind. And even as it is not sufficient for any one, though he
have a large dewlling place, to know the several parts of his house, as the
Porch, the Wine-cellar, and Butterie, the Kitchen, the Parlour, the
Supping-roome, the Bed chamber, the Closet, the Study, etc. whereby he may
use them conveniently; but also it is fit and necessary, that he should know,
in what part and street of the City his house stands, and thence he may
straightway discern, if any fire or tumult happen in the City, how near or
how far he is from danger: So it is no less necessary to know in what part
of the world thou dwell, what people are near thee, and which are farther
off, that when war approaches, thou may know when to fear, and when to be
quiet in mind. Lastly, though Cosmographie be the light of all Ecclesiastical
and Political History, and that the beholder may learn more from thence,
than the Traveller by his long, tedious and chargeable labor, who often
changes his C^lum non animum mutant qui tran^ mare currunt. Horat.
Climate, only, but not his condition; yet you shall receive little benefit
thereby, if you do not join the General Tables to the Particular. Now these
General Tables are gathered out of the great description of the Globe of the
Earth (whose beginning of Longitude, or position of the first Meridian we have
followed in every one of them) and out of my great Europa, which I published at
Duysburg. In the mean time, Reader farewell, and enjoy this work, and
diligently consider with the Poet Buchanan, the glory of this thy habitation
granted unto thee only for a time, who does so compare it with the heavens,
that he may thereby lift up those minds which are drowned in these earthly and
transitory things, and show them the way to more high and Eternal matters.

How small a part that is, thou may perceive
Which we into proud Kingdoms here do cleave
With stately words; we part it with our sword,
And buy it with our blood that forth is powered;
We make great Triumphs when that we have got
Some part of this same little earthen clot:
For this same heap it self being viewed alone
Is large, and of a great extention:
But it will seem a Point, if that it be
Compared with Heavens starrie Canopie.
Or like unto a seed, upon which ground
Ancient Gargetius many worlds did found:
This is man's seat, and this a house affordes
Unto wild Beasts, and to all sorts of Birds.
And how much from this prison house of clay
Does the Seas flowing water take away.
And that which breaks through the Herculean bounds,
And parts Europe from the Lybian grounds,
With Seas, which limits to Arabia yields,
And those which straighten the Hyrcanian fields.
Then add to these the Lakes that are beside,
With Moors and Marshes being large and wide;
And Rivers which the Mountains down do throw
From their high tops, or those which stand below
In Lakes unmoved; and while with hasty course
These take part of the earth away by force;
And these with deep gulfes drown the world again,
The greatest part of land that does remain
In covered over with water, and does seem
Like a small Island in the Sea to swim.
In this again what barren sands there be,
And great vaste Mountains without fruit or tree?
How much of it is scorch't with too much flame?
Or how much is benumbed with cold again?
Or how much lies unfit for to be tilled?
Or how much is with mortal poisons filled?
O shame, O madness, of a fond desire!
How little cause has glory to aspire!
Anger does rage, fear troubles, grief does fret;
And want even by the sword does riches get,
By treachery, fire, nor poison does it spare:
Thus humane matters full of troubles are.
OF THE WORLD.
THis Universe, which rather presents it self to the contemplation of the
mind of man, then to the sight of the Eyes, for the perfect elegancie, and
absolute purity thereof, is called in Latin Mundus. This Pliny, in the 11.
Lib. The name by whom, and why given.
Cap. 1. of his Natural History, calls, That which covers all things with
his Circumference. And Apuleius painting forth an admirable picture of it
calls it, That which consists in the society of heaven and earth, and of
those things which belong unto their natures. The same Apuleius more
elaborately describes the world thus, or to this purpose. The world (says he)
is a garnished ordinance of things, the just charge and custody of the Gods,
whose pole, (for so I call the Center) being strong and immovable, passes
through the earth, the Mother and nourisher of all living creatures. All the
higher parts, as may be seen, being enclosed and hidden with the moistness of
the air in manner of a covering: Beyond is the house of the Gods, called
Heaven, which we see is full of divine bodies, as the fair and shining lights
of the Sun, Moon, and the other Stars, with which it is carried about by
the diurnall and nocturnall motion in such a perpetual course, as shall never
have an end. Now that the form thereof is gathered round together like a
Globe, the name thereof does declare, and the consent of men calling and
painting it in manner of a Globe, besides diverse arguments that prove the
same: As because such a figure is most capable, most simple, and does bend in
all parts toward it self, sustaines it self, includes and contains it
self, wanting no joining together, nor having any end or beginning in any of
its parts: as also because wheresoever you behold it, it has a circular form
in all its parts, which cannot happen in another figure. Therefore it was a
ridiculous imagination of them who supposed that it had not a Lactantius lib.
5. Institut. cap. 24. derideth those that say the Heaven is Sphericall.
Sphericall round figure, but either an angular, or ovall, or some other form.
There be two parts of the World, the Aetheriall or heavenly, and the Elementary
or sublunary. The Aetheriall is that clear part which contains all the
celestial Spheeres, and is free from (...). Aristot. de Caelo lib ^ cap. 3.
alteration. The Elementary is that which is placed beneath those Orbs, and it
admits generation and corruption, and contains not only simple Bodies, as
Fire, Air, Water, Earth: but also those which are compounded of them, whereof
wise men have delivered five kinds. For some are imperfectly mixed, which we
call Meteors, as Hayle, Rain, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, Wind; others
perfectly mixed, but without life, as Stones, Mettalls, etc. There are others
which have a vegetable soul, as Plants; and those which have a sensible soul,
as Brute Creatures: Lastly, there are some in the highest and last degree of
compound things, which beside all these have a reasonable soul, as Men. We,
leaving those things which belong to Astronomers and Philosophers, will chiefly
consider the Globe of the Earth. The whole Earth being diversely divided by
Seas, Rivers, and Marshes, does make altogether an absolute Globe. Homer for no
other cause calls it Orbicular. And Numa Pompilius for the same
consideration, did consecrate a round Temple to Vesta, the mother of Saturn,
whom Poets take for the earth. And that the figure thereof can be no other,
both Aristotle has demonstrated by the reason of heavy things making toward
one certain point, and also Mathematicians prove by the Eclipses, and shadows
of Dyalls. Besides it is found out by the long and certain observations of
Travelers, that the longitudes and latitudes of places do vary according to
their several distances, so that it is most certain without any farther
demonstration, that there are So called from the Greek (...). 1. ha^^to ^um.
Perioeci, that is to say, those that dwell under the same Parallel, and So
named (...) (...). (...) adverso ^abitare.
Antoeci, that is, those that dwell alike distance from the Equator, but the
one Northward, and the other Southward, and So styled from (...) and (...) q.
d. adversa vestigia figentes. The compass of the Earth.
Antipodes, that is, people dwelling on the other side of the earth, with their
feet directly against ours. Antiquity shows that the compass of this Globe,
where it is largest, is 360 degrees; and this latter age does affirm the same,
wherefore if to every degree you allow 15 Germane miles, or 60 Italian miles,
it will be easy to find out the The circumference acco^ding to this account
is 540^. Germane miles or 21600. Italian miles. The quality of the Earth.
circuit of the whole earth. All the parts whereof (as Pliny says in his 2d
book of Natural History, Cap. 68. and as others also have delivered) are but
a point in respect of the World, for the whole Earth is no better. This is the
matter and seat of our glory, here we bear honors, here we exercise
government, here we covet riches, here men do make tumults, and wage civil
wars, thereby to make themselves room upon the earth by slaughtering one
another. And (that I may pass over the public fury of nations) this is it
in which we drive forth our bordering neighbors, and by stealth encroach upon
their Country, so that he that has most enlarged his territories, and driven
the adjoining inhabitants from their bounds, in how small a part of earth does
he rejoice? or when he has enlarged it to the measure of his own
covetousness, what portion does he obtain for all his labor? Thus far
Pliny. And let this suffice concerning the earth as it does make one Globe
with the Sea. Now as it is distinguished from the waters, and called in the
Scriptures dry land, it is the proper habitation of men. And for the great
desert thereof, we give it the name of Mother. This receives us at our birth,
nourishes us being borne, and being once brought to light, it does always
sustain us: Lastly, when we are cast off and forsaken by nature, then chiefly
like a mother she hides us in her bosom. This also is to be added, that a The
outmost end whereof is called a Cape.
Promontorie is called a part of land lying out farther than the rest, and OF
THE WORLD.
TYPUS ORBIS TERRARUM


Domini est terra and plenitudo eius, orbis terrarum, and universi qui habitant
in eo. Psalmo 24. map of the world is contrary to a Bay. Such are the Lacinian
and Sephyrian in the farthest part of Italy, the Lilybaean in Sicilie, and the
Sigaean in Asia. That is called an Island which is washed on every side with the
Sea: such are Crete, Cyprus, Sicilie, etc. A So called, quasi Paene Insula.
Paeninsula is that which is joined to the Continent by a narrow ridge of Land,
which the Greeks call Isthmos, and the Paeninsula it self, Chersonesus is a
compound word of (...) and (...) q. d. Insula deserta aut inculta.
Chersonesus: such are the golden Chersonesus; the Cimbricke, the Dacike, the
Tauricke, and others.

In this place something also is to be added concerning the Sea: one Sea is
called the This Seasome Writers call Mare magnum, others Mare internum.
^ustathius calls it Mare Hesserium; and because of France Spain, Germany,
Britain, etc. it is toward the East, the Spaniards call it Mar de Levante. 1.
The East Sea, although in holy Scripture it be called Mare Occidental^, as
being West from Jerusalem.
Mediterranean, the other the The Ocean is so called from the Greek word (...).
1. (...) as Selinus affirms, and has been called Mare Atlanticum, or the
Atlanticke Se^ ^s it is evident in Tullies Semnium Scip. where it is said, that
every Country that is inhabited, is compassed about with the Atlanticke Sea*
which we call the Ocean.
Ocean. The Ocean, which the holy Scripture does call the gathering together of
the waters, does exceed all the other Seas in bigness and largeness, and is
spread abroad through the whole earth, and wandering with a winding course by
diverse coasts of the world, and by the Shoares, Isles and Promontories of
several Nations, it changes its name with those places. As in one place it is
called the Western Ocean, in other places the Eastern, Ethiopian, Spanish,
Atlanticke, Scythian, French, British, Germane, Northern, and Frozen, and
elsewhere by modern observation it is called Mare del Sur, or the peaceable
Sea, the Archipelagus of Lazarus, the Indian Sea, Lantchidol. There are many
Bays belonging to it, as the Arabian, the Persian, the Gangeticke, the Great,
the Sarmaticke, the Mexican, and the Vermilian. There are two famous Streights
of the Ocean, the one of This Straight is by diverse diversely called, sometime
Fretum Hereuleum: Pliny lib. 3. cap. 5. calls it Fretum Gaditanum: Avienus,
Herculis v^am; and Herma, Strabo, Pietum columnarum; Livie, Fretum Oceani:
Florus, Ostium Oceani; Ausonius, Fretum Iberum, etc.
Gibraltar, the other of This Straight deriveth its name from one Magellanus a
Spaniard, who first discovered it about the year of our Lord 1520.
Magellan, to which may be added Ania, which lies between the farthest
Western parts of America, and the Eastern parts of Tartaria. The
Mediterranean Sea divides Afric from Europe, and has diverse names
according to the situation of diverse Countries. As the Iberian, the Balearick,
the French, the Tuscane, the Sicilian, the Adriatic, the Ionian, Cretian,
Egyptian, Pamphilian, Syrian, Aegean, Myrtian, Icarian, and the Sea of
Propontis. Concerning the motion of the Sea, which they call the Tide, seeing
it is a matter most worthy of admiration, we are to speak something of it in
this place. The Tide is said to be a motion of the Sea, whereby it flows
upward, and having finished his course, ebbeth back again. As there is one
cause thereof so there are many events and effects concerning it. For in some
places there is little or no Tide at all. On the Northern Coast of the
Pacificke Sea, there is none. In the Tuscan, Tyrrhene, and Narbonian Sea, in
the Celtiberian Sea at Barchino, and in the Mexican at Cuba, with the
neighboring Islands there is none at all. But elsewhere it is great; as at
Bengala in the Indies near to Ganges, in the Gothicke, Germane, British, and
Portugal Ocean, and so great in the Erythrean, that the despisers of holy
Scriptures have fained, that Moses used to pass over on dry-land by the
opportunity of the Ebb, which could not be, because even to Sues, which lies
backward, the Sea covers that Shore; neither going backward does it leave it
so naked as that by its ebbing it should discover the lower parts, over which
the Hebrews passed. The Tides in the Ocean are always greates then those in
Bays, yet are they more discerned about the shoares, then in the deep. But
concerning them we will speak more in another place. The commodities of the
Sea.
The Sea is not altogether barren, but brings forth Fish, Plants, and
precious stones, and it is to be noted how Nature, with Dedalus cunning, has
represented in the Sea all the chiefest things which are seen either on the
Earth, or in the Air. I let pass the Sea-Elephants, the Sea-Hogges, the
Torteises, Dog-fishes, Sea-calves, Sea-horses: I omit the Falcons and
Sea-swallowes, seeing Nature has expressed even man himself, in the Mairman, in
the Siren, and Nereides: and also in the Monke-fish: as for the Corrall, the
Pearls, the Amber, Gum, Sponges, and infinite other things. Whom do they not
worthily draw into the admiration and adoration of Gods power? But of this we
have spoken sufficiently. Let us come now to the distribution of the Globe of
the Earth. The Ancients have divided the Globe of the Earth sometimes into two
parts, sometimes into three: the division into three parts, Europe, Asia,
Afric, or Libya, is most famous among the Ancients, to whom the new World was
not yet known. But America being found, our age has added that for the fourth
part. Our Mercator does distinguish this Globe of the Earth into three
Continents: he calls that the first, which the Ancients divided into three
parts, the second that which we now call America: the third, the Southern, or
Magellanicke land. But we will divide the whole Globe into five patts, Europe,
Afric, Asia, America, and the Southern Land.

EVROPE.
EUROPE, though it be least of all, yet with the chief Delineators of the
terrestrial Globe, we will describe it in the first place, either for the
excellency of the soil, or the company of the inhabitants, or in regard of
their famous acts, who have hitherto possessed it. Pliny calls it the Nurse
of a People conquering all Nations, and the most beautiful part of the Earth:
besides, though other parts be greater, and larger, yet they are less
inhabited; and therefore for these and other causes we may justly begin first
with Europe, which was the most noble inheritance of And therefore by some
called Iapetia. Europe, whence so called.
Iaphet (who being Noah's eldest son enlarged his Territories even to the Land
of his brethren, Sem and Cham) so much concerning the order: in the next place
we must show the Etymology of the name. Herodotus notes, that the original
of this name was not known: some say it was called so from one Europa a Whence
also called Tyria. vid. Herod. l. 4.
Tyrian, the daughter of Agenor King of the Phoenicians, of whom it is an
ancient Vid. O vid. l. 3. Metamorph.
fable, that Jupiter having, transformed himself into a Bull, and having set
her on his back, carried her from Sydon into Creete, or Cyprus. Others
rejecting fables, do think she was carried away in a ship built in the form
of a Bull: Others say it was a ship which had the protection of Jupiter, and
the image of a Bull upon it. Palephatus of Creete writes, that it was a ship
called the Bull, which brought away from the Tyrian Country, Europa the Kings
daughter as captive, with other maids: Some do suppose that it was a military
Legion, which among other Ensigns had one Standard with the figure of a Bull
in it. Some say it was so called in regard of the beauty of this Region which
may be compared to a Virgin, carried away for the love of her beauty. And
some (not unlikely) have said, that it was called so from Europus, who, as it
is left to memory, had heretofore a Kingdom in this part of the World.
Becanus, being unwilling to be persuaded that Europe has a Greek name,
seeing the Cimmerians did inhabit it before the Greeks, and the former had a
different Language from the latter, thinks that it was so called from the
excellency of the people. For the monasyllable H^ylin in his Geographie. page
29. derides this derivation with Oh the wit of man!
VER, being pronounced by the dipthong, signifies some great and excellent
thing; and HOP, does denote a multitude of men. The Asiaticans do generally at
this day call the Europeans Frankimen: the Turks call those of the Romish
Religion Franki, and those Romei who are addicted to the Greek Religion. The
Abyssines in Afric, which diverse Records do testify, do call us Alfrangues,
and the Christians Country Frankia. So much for the Name: the Situation and
Quantity follows: concerning which it is to be held, that Ptolomy, and other
Ancient Writers did place Europe between the 4. and 9. Climes, between the 11.
and 21. Parallels: between the Degrees of Latitude is the distance of a place,
North or South from the Ae^uator or middle of the World.
Latitude 36. and 54. and of Longitude is the distance of any place, East and
West, from the chief Meridian, and is measured by the Degrees of the Equator.
Modern Geographers place the first Meridian, not as the Ancients in the
Canaries, or ^^rtunate I^lands, but in the Island of S. Michael, one of the 9.
Azores in the Atlantic Sea.
Longitude 17. and 61. but in our age, seeing the Declination of the Sun, as
it is observed, is changed, and many places are added to this our Europe, for
they have now discovered to the 72. Degrees of Latitude EVROPE.
EUROPA
map of Europe toward the North; a further description of Climes and Parallels
has been devised, so that Europe is situated between the 4th and 18th A
Clime is a space of the Earth comprehended between th^e^ Parallels, lesser
innominne Circles which compass the Earth from ^^st to West. Climes serve to
distinguish the length of days in all places; in the first 24. from the
Equator, both North and South, every one lengthens the day half an hour,
afterward they increase by Weeks and Months, till it comes to the length of
half a year.
Climats; and between the Parallels 11. and 36. Lastly, between the degrees
of Latitude 36. and 72. but almost between the degrees of Longitude 17. and
71. If it be considered from the Promontorie of Spain, which is called at this
day Cabo S. Vincentij, even to a right line drawn from the head of the River
Tanais to the Northern Ocean: but the shortest Longitude is between the 17th
and 58. degrees, counting it from the same Promontorie of Spain, even to Malea
a Promontorie of Peloponesus, and excluding the Islands of the Aegean Sea,
which may be reckoned as part of Europe: so that the most Southern parts of
Europe are in the 36. degree of Latitude, as the Mountain Calpe in Spain, one
of Hercules Pillars, the Southern Promontory of Sicilie, heretofore called
Odyssia, and the head of Peloponnesus, or Morea, anciently Taenaria, and now
Cabo Maini: in which places the longest day is 14. hours, and 30. minutes. But
the most Northern limits of it are in the 71 degree and a half, as the
Promontory of Scandia, the farthest Land Northward, now called Wardhuys, where
the longest day is 2. months, 22. days, and 7. hours. Moreover, we make
account that a line drawn straight forward from the head of Tanais to the
Northern Ocean is the Eastern limite of Europe, following the common account.
For ancient Writers do not agree concerning the Eastern bounds of Europe.
Aristotle, Plato, Herodotus, and others who are of their opinion, do divide
Europe from Asia by the River or Isthmus of Phasis, which is between the
Euxine and Caspian Sea. Dionysius, Arrianus, Diodorus, Polybius, Iornandes, do
divide it by the River Tanais. Abraham See Ortelius in his Theatrum orbis
terrarum.
Ortelius makes the bounds of Europe toward the East to be the Aegean Sea, the
Euxine Sea, the Maeoticke Lake, the River Tanais, and the Isthmus which lies
straight forward from the head Springs thereof toward the North; and others
make other bounds. Ptolomaeus does part Europe from Asia, by the same River of
Tanais, and a line drawn from the head thereof toward the Northern Sea. Now
(we subscribing unto him with other most skillful Geographers, and descending
from the Line and River of Tanais toward the South) let us with others place
the Eastern bounds thereof in the Maeoticke Lake, the Cimmerian Bosphorus, the
Euxine Sea, the Thracian Bosphorus, the Propontis, and the Aegean Sea even to
the Mediterranean Sea, which parts it from Afric Southward: on the West, the
great and wide Ocean beats upon it. Lastly, on the North it is encompassed
with the Northern Sea. Strabo does attribute to it the form of a Dragon, of
which Spain does represent the head, France the neck, Germany the body,
Italy and the Cimbrian Chersonesus the right and left wings. The
temperatenesse of the Air.
For the most part it enjoyes a temperate Air, and mild Weather. Whence
Europe is every where inhabited, although very incommodiously and hardly in
those places which are beyond the 60th degree of Latitude, in regard of cold.
And it does not only far excel the other parts of the World in the
wonderful temperatenesse of the Climate, temper, pleasantness, and great
company of the inhabitants; The fertility of the Soil.
but also in the abundance of Fruits, Trees, Plants, all kind of living
Creatures, Metals; and in the plenty of all other things which are necessary
to sustain man's life. Yet it has not vines everywhere, but where wine is
wanting it supplies the defect thereof with drink made of fruits. This (for
here I cannot refrain from praising it) is the mother of the Conquerours of
the World. The government of the Ancients, and their successors.
Here Macedon did heretofore bring forth Alexander, Italy the Romans: who in
a certain succession (God in his Eternal Providence so decreeing) did conquer
the whole World, so far as it was known: and Germany does at this day bring
forth Princes of great Prowes. Have not here been borne many noble Heroes,
which have added to their Empire America unknown (as the most do suppose) to
the Ancients, and the better and stronger parts of Asia, and Afric? Is it not
the only mother of many Kings and Princes fighting in Christ's cause? This our
See Ortelius in his book before cited.
Europe, besides the Roman Empire, has above eight and twenty Kingdoms
instructed in Christian Religion, if we add the fourteen, which Damianus a
Goes reckons to be in Spain, whence we may estimate the dignity of this
Country: what shall I speak of the populousness, and renown of the cities
thereof. Heretofore Africa has been proud of her Carthage, Asia has been
puffed up with her three Cities, Babylon, Ninivie and Jerusalem. America does
glory at this day in Cusco, and new Spain in Mexico: but who sees not in
these times the like and greater, almost in every Country of Europe? Let any
one in his mind only walk over Italy (for this does afford an example of all
the rest) the sumptuous magnificence of Rome, the Royal wealth of Venice, the
honorable Nobility of Naples, the continual commerce and traffic of Genoa,
the happy and fertile pleasantness of Millaine, and the famous wonders, and
commodities of other places. So that the other parts of the World may be
silent, for none are equal to Europe. The Countries in it (as they are now
called) are Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Hungary, Transylvania, Dalmatia,
Greece, Poland, Lithuania, Moscovie, Russia, Denmark, Swethland, Norway:
besides the Isles in the Northern Ocean, which are, England, Scotland,
Ireland, Island, Frisland, and others in other places; and those in the
Mediterranean Sea, as the Baleares, which are two Isles in the Spanish Sea
called Majorica and Minorica, also Corsica, Sardinia, Sicilia, with the Isles
of Malta, Corfu, Creete, and many others. And as for the Lakes, The Lakes and
Rivers.
standing Pooles, Rivers, and Waters having diverse virtues in them, which
(beside their fish, whereof they yield an incredible company) are as it were a
wall unto Countries, who can number them? What should I mention the Seas? The
Seas.
it would be tedious in this place to reckon up their commodities, profits, and
delights, these things shall therefore be unfolded in their proper places.
Europe does not want Mountains, among which the Pirenean hills, and the Alps,
are always white with continual snow, and it has many woods and forests,
which afford pasturage for cattle, The public and private works. The Laws
and Institutions.
and have few harmefull beasts in them. What should I speak of the private or
public works, both sacred and profane that are in this part of the World?
Here are innumerable magnificent Temples, innumerable Abbeys, many famous
Palaces of Kings, innumerable fair and magnificent houses belonging to
Noblemen and Princes: and many rare buildings, both public and private. We
have here Justice and Laws: we have the dignity of It is observable that
there is no part of Europe, whether Continent or Island, that has not long
since been Christened.
Christian Religion, we have all the delights of mankind, The company of
Senators.
we have the strength of Arms, innumerable Senators, Men venerable both for
Wisdom and Learning: and if you please to compare famous men together, there
was never so great a company of Heroes, and Noble men in other parts of the
World, as in any one part of Europe. Besides, this part of the World is so
studious of Arts and Sciences, that for the invention and preservation of many
things, it may worthily be called, The Universities
the Mother and Nurse of Wisdom. In this are many excellent and flourishing
Who number it no less then ^8.
Universities, but in other Countries there is nothing but mere Barbarism. It
would be too much to reckon up the virtues of the Inhabitants; but as for the
vices (as who is without some?) they are noted in some short sayings, which I
will here add: The people of Franconia are foolish, rude, and vehement. The
Bavarians are prodigal, gluttons, and railers. The Grisons are light,
talkative, and braggers. The manners of the people.
The Turingi are distrustful and contentious. The Saxons dissemblers, crafty,
selfe-willed. The Low-country-men are horsemen, delicate, and tender. The
Italians proud, desirous of revenge, and witty. The Spaniards haughty, wise,
covetous. The French eloquent, intemperate, and rash. The People of Denmark
and Holsteine, are great of stature, seditious, and dreadful. The Sarmatians
great eaters, proud, and stealers. The Bohemians inhumane, newfangled and
robbers. The Illyrians unconstant, envious, seditious. The Pannonians cruel,
and superstitious. The Greeks miserable. And there is another saying no less
pleasant. A Bridge in Poland, a Monk of Bohemia, a Knight of the South, a
Nun of Suevia, the Devotion of Italy, the Religion of Prutenicks, the Fasts
of Germans, and the Constancy of Frenchmen are nothing worth.

AFRIC.
AFRIC follows: which was so called, if we believe Nisias, from Afer a
companion of Hercules, who accompanied him even as fair as Calis. But if we
trust Josephus, and Isidorus, The name by whom and why given.
from one of the posterity of Abraham, whose name was Afer: or (as Festus does
suppose) from the Greek word And a privativum.
(...), which signifies cold, for it is free from cold, because the most part
of it is situated between the The Tropicks are two nominate Circles that be
Parallel to the Equator, from which the Northern Tropicke, called the
Tropicke of Cancer, is distant 23. degrees ^/2 and the Southern, called the
Tropic of Capricorn, as much.
Tropicks. The Arabians do call it Fricchia, from the word Farruca, which with
them signifies to divide: for Afric is almost divided from the other parts of
the Earth. Or else it was so called from Ifricus a King of Arabia Foelix, who
(they report) did first inhabit this Country. The Greeks call it Libya either
from Libya the daughter of Epathus, or from the Greek word (...), which
signifies stony, or because Libs or the Southwest-wind blows from thence. In
the Scriptures it is called Chamesia; So called, from Cham the son of Noah,
who inhabited this Country, See Psalm 105.23.
the Arabians, and Aethiopians do call it Alkebula, and the Indians Besechath.
The So styled because when the Sun is under that Aequinoctiall Circle in the
Heaven, which answers to this on the Earth, the days and nights be of one
length
Aequinoctiall Circle does almost cut the middle part of Afric. The AFRIC.
AFRICAE DESCRIPTIO
map of Africa Tropicks pass not beyond it, (...)
either Northward or Southward, but it is stretched out beyond either of them
ten degrees and more. It is bounded toward the North, with the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Streights of Hercules; toward the East with the Arabian Bay, or
the Erythraean Sea, and with the Isthmus which is between the Mediterranean
Sea and the Arabian Bay; to the South it is washed with the Ethiopian Ocean:
and on the West with the Atlanticke. It has the form of a Peninsula, which is
joined to Asia by the Isthmus above mentioned. And though the length thereof
which lies from West to East, is shorter then the length of Europe; yet the
length thereof from the North, toward the (...) Habassia, (...) the higher
Aethiopia.
South is such, as Europe can hardly be compared with it: for it takes up
almost 70 degrees, but Europe scarce 35. Beside, Europe is full of windings,
but Afric is uniforme and continued. Europe (as I said before in the
description thereof) is every where inhabited; but this is full of Deserrs and
inhabitable places. That was formerly known, but not this: where it is
inhabited, Afric does excel in fruitfulness. But for the most part, The
(...).
it is not inhabited, but full of barren Sands, and Deserts, and troubled with
many kinds of living Creatures. It is reported that the fruitfulness of the
fields is very wonderful, and does give the tillers such a harvest, as does
requite the labor with a hundredfold increase for that which is sown. That
is wonderful which is spoken of the fertility of Mauritania: viz. that there
are Vines which two men cannot fadome about, and bunches of Grapes a cubit
long. There are very high trees near to the Mountain Atlas, plain and smooth
without knots, and leaved like the Cypress tree. Afric does bring forth
Elephants and Dragons, which lie in wait for beasts, and kill them with
winding about them: besides, it has a great number of Lions, Buffs, or wild
Oxen, Libbards, wild Goats, and Apes. Herodotus reports, that Asses with
horns bred here, besides Dragons, Hyenaes, rough Wolves, begotten of the Wolf
and Hiena, Panthers and Ostriches, roughtd besides many kinds of Serpents, as
Aspes, and Crocondiles, to which nature has made the O RI^e of India, who
steals into the Crocodiles mouth when he g^p the and a^^ng his bowels kills
him.
Ichneumon an enemy, etc. But, as the same Author witnesses, there is neither
Stagge nor Boar in it. Afric brings forth the Basiliske: and although many
things are thought to be fabulous which are reported of him; Yet it is certain
that Leo being Pope, there was a Basiliske which infected Rome with a great
plague by his noisome breath. There are also diverse kinds of Hence came the
old proverb, Africa semper aliquid apportat monst^i.
Monsters, whose diversity and multitude they ascribe to the want of water,
whereby the wild beasts are enforced to come together at a few Rivers and
Springs. The Romans divided Afric into six Provinces. The Proconsularie
Province, wherein was Carthage; Numidia, under the jurisdictin of a Consul;
Bizacchius, Tripolitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, and Mauritania Sitiphensis.
The Division.
Ptolomie in the beginning of his fourth Book does reckon twelve Provinces or
Countries, Mauritania Tingitana, Mauritania Caesariensis, Numidia, Africa
properly so called, Cyrenaica or Pentapolis, (for so Ptolomie calls it)
Marmarica, Lybia properly so called, the Higher and Lower Egypt, the Innermost
Lybia, Aethiopia under Egypt, and the Innermost Aethiopia. Leo Africanus does
divide all Afric into four parts, Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, and the Country
of Black-Mores. But in this Leo is deceived, because he has not made the Red
Sea the bound of Afric, but Nilus; whereby it comes to pass that he joins
Egypt and the Eastern part to Asia. Let us therefore, besides those four
parts reckoned up of Leo, place in Afric, Egypt, the Higher Aethiopia, the
Lower and outermost Aethiopia, and the Islands. Egypt is stretched forth in a
long tract of Land, from the South unto the North. The bounds thereof, on the
West side are the Deserts of Barca, Lybia and Numidia beyond Nilus, together
with the Kingdom of Nubia. On the South it is bounded with the Country of
Bugia and Nilus, where it runs a little from the West Eastward. On the
Eastside there are the Deserts of Arabia, which lie between Egypt and the Red
Sea; and on the North side it is enclosed with the Mediterranean Sea; Other
things concerning Egypt we will unfold in the particular Description thereof.
At this day they call all that part of Afric, which reaches from Egypt to
the Straits of Gibraltar, and is included with the Mediterranean Sea and the
Mountain Atlas, Barbaria: and it contains the Kingdoms of Morocco, Fesse,
Tremisen, Tunis, and Barca, of which we will speak more largely in the
Description of Barbary. At this time it shall be sufficient to show the Reader
the division and bounds thereof. The Kingdom therefore of Morocco is divided
into these Provinces, Hea, Susa, Guzala, the Land of Morocco, Ducala, Hoscora,
and Tedletes: it is bounded with the Atlantic Ocean, with the Mountain Atlas
it self, and the Kingdom of Fesse. The Kingdom of Fesse has on the West the
Atlanticke Sea, on the North the Straits of Hercules, on the East the River
Mulvia, on the South the Kingdom of Morocco. The Countries therein are
Temesna, the Territory of Fesse, Asgara, Elhabata, Errifa, Garetum and
Elchausum. The Kingdom of Tremisen, is bounded on the South with the Desert of
Numidia, on the East with the great River, on the North with the Mediterranean
Sea. The Kingdom of Tunis does contain the whole tract of Land from the great
River, to the River of the Country of Mestata. The Countries thereof are five,
Bugia, Constantina, the Territory of Tunis, Tripolis, and Ezzaba, Barcha now
called, but that it was an^ly called Barca is evident ^on of Virgil when he
says, Lateque (...).
Barca, or Barcha is stretched forth from the borders of Mestata to the
confines of Egypt. Numidia is called at this day Biledulgerid; the bounds
thereof are the Atlanticke Sea on the West side, the Mountain Atlas on the
North, the confines of Egypt on the East, the Deserts of Libya on the South.
The Regions thereof are Tesset, Tegelmessa, Seb, Biledulgerid, Dara and Fezzen.
Lybia was called by the Ancients Sarra, because it is a Desert. It begins
from the Kingdom of Gagoa near Nilus, and is extended toward the West, even
to the Kingdom of Gualata, which lies near to the Atlantic Sea, on the
North the Kingdom of Numidia does border on it, on the South the Kingdom of
the Nigritans or Blackmoores. The Nigritans are so called either from the
black color of the inhabitants, or from the black river which glideth through
their Country. They have on the East the Confines, or the Borders of Nilus, on
the West the Western Ocean, on the South partly the Ethiopian Sea, and partly
the Kingdom of Manicongus; but on the North the deserts of Libya. The
Kingdoms thereof are five and twenty, namely, Galata, Gumea, Melli, Tombutum,
Gago, Guber, Agadez, Cano, Caseva, Zegzeg, Zanfara, Gunangara, Boruum, Goago,
Nubia, Biro, Temiamo, Dauma, Medra, Gora, the Territory of Anterot, the
Territory of Giolosa, the Coast of Guinea, the Territory of Meligens, and the
Kingdom of Benin. The Abyssines do inhabit the higher or innermost Aethiopia,
whose Prince is called Abusively so called, but rightly Priest Johan or Gyam,
which in the Ethiopian tongue signifies Great or Mighty Prince.
Prester John. His Country is large, and does almost touch either Tropicke, and
it is extended between the Ethiopian and the So called from the redness of
the sands
Red Sea, on the North it has the people of Nubia and Bugia that borders on
Egypt; on the East the Red Sea; on the South the Mountains of the Moon; on
the West the Kingdom of Manicongus, the River Niger, the Kingdom of Nubia,
and the River Nilus. These Kingdoms are subject to him, Barnagnes, Tigremaum,
Tigraim, in which is the City Caxumo, Angote, Amara, Xoa, Goyami, Bagamedrum,
Gueguere, Fatiagar, Damar, Dancali, and Dobas. The lower or outermost Aethiopia
is the Southern part of Afric, unknown unto Ptolomie. The beginning thereof
on the East side is above the River Zaire not far from the Aequinoctiall, and
it does contain all the littorall part of Africa, and beyond the Aequinoctiall,
even to the Straits of Arabia. The Regions thereof are five, first the Country
of Ajana, in which are the Kingdoms Del, and Adea Magaduzzum. Secondly, the
Country of Zanguibara, the Kingdoms whereof are, Melinda, Mombazza, Quiloa,
Mozambique, Manoemuci, Cephala, Manomotapa, Torra, and Butua; the Kingdom of
Cafria, and Manicong, in which there are six Provinces, Sunde, Pango, Songo,
Bamba, Barra and Pemba, to which are added the Kingdoms of Angola, Loangi, and
Anzichi. There are some very great Lakes in Afric, which seem rather to be
Seas, the^ Lakes, of which the chiefest is Zembre, which is fifty miles in
compass, and out of it there flow the Rivers, Nilus, Zaire, and Cuama.
Besides, this part of the World has great Rivers, as Nilus, Niger, Senaga,
Cambra, Zaire, Cuama, and the River called the River of the Holy Ghost, all
which by their overflowing do wonderfully water it, and make it fruitful. It
has many great mountains, The Lakes. Rivers. Mountains.
amongst which the chief is So called from Atlas, in times past ^ K. of the
Moors, whom the Poets same to have been Metamorphosed into this Mountain
this hill is now called Anchisa: the inhabitants that dwell about it name it
Adiris; Solinus, Duris; others call it Astrixis, or Astre^xis. but Dioscorider
calls it Tmolus.
Atlas, who rising out of the vast sands lifts up his high head above the
clouds, so that the top thereof cannot be seen. The inhabitants call it the
Pillar of Heaven. It begins from the West, where it gives the name to the
Atlanticke Sea, and from thence by a continued winding ridge it extends it
self toward the East: toward the borders of Egypt it is round, rugged,
steep, and unpassable by reason of steep rocks; also woody, and watered
with the breaking forth of springs. The top of this Mountain is covered even
in the Summer with deep snow: yea sometime the back thereof (if the North
wind be sharp) is covered with a snow deeper then the highest tree, whereby
both men and cattle do perish. There is another very high mountain called
This Mountain is called by Ptolomie, Pliny, and others, Deorum cursus.
Sierra Liona, whose top is always hid with clouds, from whence a terrible
noise is heard at Sea, so that it is called the Mountain of Lions. The
Mountains also of the Moon, much renowned by the Ancients, are here placed
under the Tropicke of Capricorn: they are very rugged, of an incredible
height, and inhabited by wild people; and near them there are such low and
deep valleies, that it may seem that the Center of the Earth is there.
Lastly, there are the Mountains Cantaberes in the Kingdom of Angola, very
rich in silver mines, and other which we will mention in our particular
Descriptions. The chief Islands about Afric are these. In the Atlanticke
Ocean, there is the Isle called, Portus Sancti, or the Isle of the Holy Port:
Madera, the Canarie Islands, and Caput Viride, or the Green Cape. The Isle of
the Holy Port was so called from the discoverers, who having failed thither
with much danger and difficulty, would have this place so called in memory
thereof. The compass of it is about fifteen miles. Madera took his name from
the great plenty of trees that grew here. The circuit of it is about an hundred
and forty miles. The Canaries were so called from the multitude of dogs that
were found there: they were called by the Ancients, the So named either from
t^^n fruitfulness or goodness of A^e as Stephanus thinks.
Fortunate Islands* Pliny does mention six: Ombrio, Innonia the greater, and
lesser, Capraria, Navaria, and Canaria. Ptolomie calls them Aprosuum, Hera, or
Autolala, Pluitalia, Casperias, Canaria and Centuria, and does place them all
almost in a right Line toward the North. Cadamustus makes ten, seven tilled,
three desert: the names of those that are manured are the Islands of Fracta
Lancea, Magna Sors, Grand-Canarea, Teneriffa, Gomera, Palma, and Ferro. Cape
Verde, or the green Cape is planted with green Trees, and from hence it has
that name. The Isles thereof toward the West, do lie in the midst of the
Ocean: as the Islands of S. Anthony, S. Vincent, S. Lucia, S. Nicholas, the
Island of Salt, Bonavista, Maggio or May, Saint James, and the Island called
Insula del fuego. In the Ethiopian Ocean are the Islands, called Insula
Principis and Saint Thomas his Island. Behind the Promontory called Caput
Bonae spei, or the Cape of good Hope, there are other Islands, but none
inhabited except the Island of Saint Laurence.

ASIA.
The name by whom and why ^^^n.
ASIA succeeds Afric in my division. This name was allotted it from the Nymph
Daughter to ^^^anus and Teth^^.
Asia (as Varro witnesses) of whom and Iapetus Prometheus was borne: Others
say it was so called either of Asius the son of Atys, or from Asius the
Philosopher, who gave the Palladium of Troy to the custody of the City, for
which, that they might gratify him, his whole dominions (which before was
called Epirus) they called Asia. And from hence afterward, as from the more
noble part, all the whole tract of Land began to be called (...)
Asia. Moreover, as Lybia does both signify a third part of the World, and a
part of this part: So it is observed, that Asia does signify both the whole
Continent, and that part which is hemmed in with the Mountain Taurus, wherein
do dwell the Lydians, the Carians, the Lycaonians, Paphlagonians, Ionians,
Aeolians, and others; which part, for distinction sake, is commonly called Asia
the Less: the Turks call it From the Greek wo^d (...), wha^h signifies the
East, because it lies Eastward of Asia the Great.
Natolia. There is says Varro, Lib. 4. an Asia which is distinguished from
Europe, in which is Syria: and there is an Asia which is called the former part
of Asia, in which is Ionia, and our Province. But all Asia is called in the
Holy Scriptures From ^^m the ^^me of Noah.
Semia. It is almost wholly situated in the Northern part of the World from
the Aequinoctiall Circle, to the 80th degree of Northern Latitude, except some
Islands pertaining to Asia, some whereof are stretched out beyond the Equator
Southward. Hence arises a great difference through all Asia, The Situation.
in the length of the artificial days. For in the last Parallel, which is
drawn not far from the Aequinoctiall, the longest day is almost twelve
hours. About the middle of Asia, the longest day is fifteen hours, and in
the most Northern Parallel their light continually endures almost for four
whole Months in Summer. According to the Longitude, Asia is stretched forth
from the Meridian of 52. degrees, even to the Meridian of 196. according to
some: but if we follow the description of Mercator, the most Western Meridian
thereof passes through the 57th degree near to the furthest Western part of
Asia the Less; and the most Eastern Meridian through the 178th degree. On the
North it has the Scythian Sea, on the South the Indian, on the East the
Eastern Sea, on the West the Bay of Arabia, or the red Sea; the Mediterranean
and Euxine Seas. And as in the higher part it cleaves to Europe, so in the
Southern part it is joined to Afric by an Isthmus: yet Pliny and Strabo with
some others do stretch out Asia even to Nilus, The temperatenesse of the Air
and do reckon all Egypt to Asia. In Asia the face of the sky is both
pleasant and wholesome, the Air mild and temperate. Yet all Asia does not
feel this temperatenesse: for the right hand and left hand parts thereof are
exceeding hot and cold. The pleasantness of this Country is so great, that it
became a Proverb: All the Land is so renowned both for the fertility of the
fields, The fertility of the So^le.
the variety of fruits, and large pasturing of cattle, and for the abundant
plenty of those things ASIA
ASIA
map of Asia which are exported, that it does easily excel all other
Countries. Here is wonderful plenty of Fruits, Spices, and Mettalls. Hence we
receive Balsam, sweet Canes, Frankincense, Myrrh, Cassia, Cinnamon,
Gariophylus, Pepper, Saffron, sweet Woods, Rozine, Musk, and all kind of
precious stones. Here we may behold many different sorts of living Creatures.
The various kinds of li^ing Creatures.
For it brings forth a number of Elephants, Camells, and many other living
Creatures both tame and wild: we may here also admire the wits, riches, and
power of the Inhabitants. Here Man was first created by God; here was the first
Seat of the Church of God; here Arts were first invented; here were Laws
first made; here the Doctrine of the Gospel first granted to miserable mortal
men, with the hope of Salvation through Jesus Christ the Son of God. Here the
confusion of Languages was sent down amongst men, in the destruction of the
Tower of Babel. The government of the Ancients.
Here first Dominion over inferiors began. Here Nimrod began to reign, of
whom we read in Cap. 10. verse. 8.9.10.
Genesis. But the first Monarchs of the whole Country of Asia were the
Assyrians, the last whereof was Sardanapalus, a man given to wantonness, and
effeminate softness, who being found by Se^ Iust^n. lib. 1. and Diodo^us
Siculus, lib. 2. cap. 7.
Arbactus amongst a crew of whores, and not long after being overcome by him in
battle, he made a great fire, and cast himself and his riches thereinto.
Afterward the Empire came to the Persians: Among whom Whom Iunius says, the
Scripture calls Ahasuerus. Either 1.4.
Xerxes the son of This is meant of Darius the son of Histaspi^.
Darius did maintain a war, begun by his father, five years against Greece,
and he brought out of Asia into Europe an army of ten hundred thousand men, and
passed them over a bridge which he built over Hellespont: he came also
accompanied with Herodotus reckons all his forces by Sea and Land to be 2641610
men. besides Con^uoines, Eunuchs, women bakers and (...) an (...)
ten hundred thousand ships, but with a vain endeavor; for he that durst
threaten God, insult over the Sea, put fetters upon Neptune, darken the
Heavens, level Mountains, and shake the whole World, was feign, his army being
put to flight, to pass over the narrow Sea in a fisher-boate, the Bridge being
broken by the tempests of Winter. Darius was the last Persian Emperor, whose
being conquered and overcome by Alexander, made way to the Monarchy of the
Macedonians, for Alexander did first translate it out of Asia into Europe. All
Asia, according to the several government thereof, may thus be divided. The
first part is under the Turks command, the original whereof is from Mahomet,
and is a large Territory. The Duke of Moscovia does possess a second part,
enclosed with the frozen Sea, the River Oby, the Lake Kitaia, and a Line drawn
thence to the Caspian Sea, and to the Isthmus which is between this Sea and
Pontus. The Great Cham Emperor of Tartarie does possess the third part, whose
borders on the South are, the Caspian Sea, the River Iaxartes, and the
Mountain Imaus; on the East and North the Ocean: on the West the Kingdom of
Moscovia. The King of Persia, called the Sophie, has the fourth. This has on
the West side the Turk; on the North the Tartarian, on the South it is washed
with the Red Sea, but on the East with the River Indus. The fifth part does
contain India, both on this side and beyond Ganges; which is not governed by
one alone, but by many Rulers, for every Country thereof has almost a several
Prince, some whereof are tributarie to the great Cham. The sixth part contains
the large Kingdom of China. The seventh contains all the Islands scattered
up and down in the Indian and Eastern Sea. Among which are Tabrobana and
Zetlan, the two Iava found out not long since by the Portugalls, Borneo,
Celebes, Palohan, Mindanao, Gilolo, with the spice bearing Moluccoes, also
Iapan, with Nova Guinea lastly found out; concerning which it is not yet known
whether it be an Island, or joined to the Southern Continent. But the Ancients,
as Strabo and Arrianus, have made many divisions of it. Ptolomie does divide it
into 47. Countries and Provinces, the description whereof he delivers in his
fifth, sixth, and seventh Books of Geographic, and does set them forth in
twelve Tables. It has three Cities famous through the whole World, Babylon,
Ninivie, The Cities.
and Jerusalem. It has great Lakes full of fish, Lakes
and the Caspian Sea in manner of a Lake, which never comes to the Ocean.
Also many Rivers, Rivers.
among which the chiefest are Tigris, Euphrates, which Moses mentions in
Genesis, Iordane, Indus, Ganges, etc. Here are also great and wonderful
Mountains, Mountains.
among which is the Mountain Eustathius affirms that this Mountain was so
called by the reason of its magnitude, for, says he, among the Ancients all
great and strong things were called (...), and as it is called Taurus, and many
other names by humane Writers so the Scripture calls it Ararath, if we shall
believe A^^a^ Montanus and Becanus.
Taurus, which coming from the Eastern shore, divides all Asia; on the right
hand where it first rises from the Indian Sea, it bears Northwards: on the
left hand, it is Southern and bending toward the West, until the Seas meet
with it: as here the Phaenician, and the Ponticke. There the Caspian and
Hyrcanian Seas, together with the Meoticke Lake; as if Nature on purpose had
opposed it: But though this Mountain be shut as it were between these
bounds, yet with many windings it runs forth even as far as the neighboring
Cliffs of the Rhiphaean Mountains, being famous wheresoever it goes; and
known by many new names. At first it is called Imaus, and by and by Emodus,
Paropanisius, Circius, Chambades, Pharphariades, Croates, Oreges, Oroandes,
Niphates, and Taurus: where it does as it were exceed it self Caucasus, where
it spreads its arms as if it would embrace the Sea, Sarpedon, Coracesius,
and Cragus, and again Taurus. But where it opens it self, it takes its
name from the Havens, which are sometimes called the Armenian, elsewhere the
Caspian, and Cilician. The breadth of it in most places is three thousand
furlongs, which is 5625. Italian Heylin says, that reckoning its several
bendings in and out, it is 6250. miles long, and 375. miles broad p. 519. The
public works.
miles: that is, from the Coast of Rhodes, even to the farthest bounds of China
and Tartaria. But of these things enough. I pass now to the public works,
which have been heretofore very stately and magnificent, and worthy to be
numbered among the seven Miracles of the World. Amongst them the first were the
walls of Babylon, which See Justin Hist. lib. 1.
Semiramis built, or at least did repair being ruinate, with brickes joined
and laid in a pitchy kind of mortar, they were two hundred foot high and fifty
broad, so that Chariots might meet thereon; they had three hundred Towers, and
should have had more, but that in some parts the Marshes were instead of walls.
It is reported that for this so great a work three hundred thousand workmen
were employed. Herodotus reports, that the walls of Babylon were fifty
royal cubits thick, and two hundred high, and round about there were placed
in them a hundred brazen Gates. The second was the Temple of Diana of Ephesus,
which was built by all Asia in two hundred and twenty years, as Histories do
testify: And it was seated in a Moorish place, least it should be endangered
by Earthquakes; And least they should place the foundation of so great a
building upon unfirme ground, they strewed it over with coals trodden down,
and on it they laid fleeces of wool. The length of the Temple was 425. feet,
the breadth 220. The Pillars in it were an hundred and seven and twenty, all
made by several Kings, of which 36. were carved: Ctesiphon was the overseer of
the work. There was also a Monument which Artemesia Queen of Caria did erect
in memory of her deceased husband, which is to be counted among the wonders of
the World; it being 25. Cubits high, and compassed about with thirty Pillars:
it was six and thirty foot wide Northward and Southward. Lastly, there was
that magnificent Temple, which Solomon began to build in the fourth year of
his reign, not unfit to be reckoned with the seven wonders of the World.
First of all, Read 1. King. chap. 5. and 6.
thirty thousand men were set to cut trees, as Cedars and Cypress in Lebanon:
and there were fourscore thousand stone-cutters. The breadth of the Temple was
twenty Cubits, the length sixty, and the height an hundred and twenty. The
matter of the nethermost building was of white stone: the largeness of the
Porch was ten Cubits, there were twenty secret chambers, passing one into
another, and others placed under these. The beams were of Cedar, the roofes of
Cedar gilded over, and the walls in like manner: The Sanctuary of the Holy
place was distinguished from the body of the Temple with a wall, in which were
carved gates, with drawing Curtains interwoven with many flowers and winding
borders: besides two Cherubins of pure gold, the pavement under foot was beset
with studdes of gold: the gates were twenty Cubits in height, and twelve in
compass. There was a brazen vessel of so great a bigness, that it was fitly
called the Sea; round about which stood twelve Calves, three together, and
looking severally toward the four corners of the World. This vessel did hold
three thousand measures containing 72. Sextaries. There were also other
figures, which it would be too long to rehearse. There was a brazen Altar of
ten foot height, and double as much in length. Also one golden Table, and ten
thousand golden Pots and Dishes, etc. But let these things suffice which have
been spoken of this part of the Word: I come now to America the fourth part of
the World.

AMERICA.
America, whence so called.
WHen Christophorus Columbus had In the year 1492.
found out this fourth part of the World unknown to the Ancients; some call it
But improperly, for the true India is a part of Asia, and deriveth its name
from the River Indus, which this Country cannot.
India, others for the largeness of it Novus Orbis, or the new World: for it
is as great and big as all our World, that is, Europe, Afric, and Asia,
being joined together: as it may appear by viewing our general Table. It is
called also America from Americus Vesputius a Florentine, who next after
Columbus discovered the Eastern part of the Southern America: in which are
the Countries of Paria and Brasilia; but it is uncertain when America began
first to be inhabited: certain it is, that for many ages it lay unknown;
AMERICA.
AMERICAE DESCRIP.
map of the western hemisphere for that which some suppose concerning the
Romans, is more easily said then proved, and that fiction is accurately refuted
by Gasparus Varrerius. Some suppose that Venient an^^ s^^^la seris, quibus
occanus vin^ula rerum laxet, and ingens pateat tellus, nec sit terris ultima
^hule.
Seneca by Poetical inspiration did sing some raptures concerning it in his
Medea: but it is madness to suppose that these parts in that age were known
either to him or any other. Christophorus Columbus of Borne at Nervi in the
Country of Genoa.
Genoa, after it had been many ages unknown unto us, did first find it out
being employed by the King of Castile, after he had learnt it out, (as some
believe that would detract from the glory of so famous an enterprise) from a
certain Spanish Mariner, who had long endured foul weather on the Atlanticke
Sea; it was performed in the year 1492. After him Americus Vesputius did
attempt the same for the King of Portugal, and brought back the reward of his
enterprise, because (as we said) the whole Continent is called from his name
America. The Situation.
The whole Country from the North to the South, is stretched out in the form
of two great Peninsulaes, which are joined together by a slender Isthmus: the
one of them is called Northern America, the other, Southern America. The
Longitude thereof is extended between the Meridionall degree 190, and the
Meridionall degree 67. The term of its Latitude toward the South, is the
Straits of Magellane, that is, under the degree 52. and toward the North, it
is not known higher then 67. It has therefore on the East the Atlanticke Sea,
which they commonly call Del Nort; on the South, the Southern Land of
Magellane, disjoined from it by a narrow Sea flowing between: on the West,
Mare Pacificum, or the Peaceable Sea, called Mare Del Zur; and on the North it
is doubtful whether there be Land or Sea. The whole compass in sailing round
about it, is about 32000 miles, as the most approved think. For it has been
sailed round about, except that Country which lies Northward, whose coasts are
not yet discovered. The whole Country is changeable and full of variety; at
first it wanted both Corn and Wine: but instead thereof it brings forth Read
Heylin. page 770.
Maiz. a kind of pulse, for so they call it; as they call Wine Chichia, boats
Canoas, their Princes Cacicos. They do not plough the ground to reap, but
having dug trenches of a small depth, they put three or four granes in one
of them, and so cover them with earth. The several stalks do bear three or
four ears, and every one of the ears do bear three or four hundred
grains and more. The stalk of Mayz does exceed the height of a man, and in
some Countries it is gathered twice in a year. They have also another kind of
bread, beside that which they make of Maiz, which they call Or Cassader.
Cazabi. This is made of Iucca, which is a root of the bigness of a Turnep,
which sends forth no seed, but certain knottie, hard stalks, clothed with
green leaves like Hemp. Those stalks when they are ripe, they cut into
pieces of two hands length, which they bury in heaps under the earth; and as
often as they would make that kind of bread, they dig up of them as much as
they think good, because they will soon be corrupted and grow naught.
Moreover, there are two other kinds of roots, the one they call the Or
Potatoes.
Battata, the other the Haia, almost alike in shape, but that the Haiae are
less and more savory: they ea^e the fruit of them within six Months after
they are planted, which though they have a kind of sweet taste, yet such as
will soon cloy one; beside, they have but little juice, and do procure wind
in the stomach. Those Countries have also a great number of trees, which do
bring forth wild Grapes. Their Grapes are like Sloes which grow upon thorns
and bushes, and are covered with black leaves: but because they are more woody
then juycie, therefore the inhabitants do not make wine of them. There are in
this Country Trees bearing Olives, but such as are of an unpleasant smell, and
of a worse taste: and diverse other kinds of fruits in great abundance, as
those which they call Hovi, Platani, Pineae, Guiavae, Mamei, and Guanavanae; it
brings forth Sugar, Cotton-wooll, Hemp, and other things as with us, beside
diverse sorts of strange Trees and Herbs. It has sweet Spices, Pearls and
precious stones; it abounds with incredible plenty of Gold and Silver, and
with other Mettalls, and Mineralls. But it had not when it was discovered,
either Oxen, Horses, Mules, Asses, Sheep, Goats, or Dogs. Wherefore it is no
wonder if the inhabitants were stricken with amazement at the first sight of a
Horse. Mice were first brought thither by a Ship of Antwerpe, which sailed very
far through the Straight of Magellane. Since which time either by the
fruitfulness of the Country, or of the Creatures themselves, they are
multiplied and increased in so exceeding a manner, that they spoil the fruits
of their harvest by knawing the herbs and trees. It does bring to us diverse
living Creatures, partly known to us, and partly unknown. Among other things
there is found a prodigious Beast, which has on her belly another belly placed
in the likeness of a purse: and as often as she changes her den, she hides
and carries her young ones in that bag. This Creature has the body and
snowte of a Fox, the feet and hands of a Monkey, and the ears of a Batte.
There is also another kind of Creature (which the inhabitants do call
Cascuij) like a black Hog, hairy, hard skinned, having little eyes, broad
ears, cloven hoofes, armed with a short trunk or snowte like an Elephant; and
having so terrible a cry or braying, that he makes men deaf: but his flesh is
sweet to eat. Here is found a great company of wild Boares, and fierce
Tigers; and Lions also, but those very fearful, and such as will run away
at the sight of a man. Here are also Peacocks, Phesants, Partridges, and diverse
other kinds of Birds, but far differing from ours: But of these we will
speak more largely in our particular descriptions. All America is divided (as
we said before) into two great Peninsulaes, whereof the one, which lies on
this side of the Aequinoctiall, is called the Northern America; the other the
Southern, because the greatest part of it is stretched out beyond the
Aequinoctiall: although some Countries of it are near unto the Aequinoctiall.
The Northern America is divided into many Regions, as namely, Quivira, Nova
Hispania, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Apalchen, Norumbega, Nova Francia, Terra
Laboratoris, and Estotilandia. There are many parts of the Southern America,
but these are the chiefest which have already been gotten and taken from the
Savages: as Castella aurea, Plopaiana, Peruvia, Chile, and Brasilia: It does
glory especially in two Cities, Cusco and Mexico. Cusco is the Metropolis or
chief City of Southern America, which, both for bigness, strength and
magnificence, for the invincible fortification of the Castle, and the great
company of nobility; for the order and placing of the houses, and for
pleasantness of situation, may worthily compare with the fairest Cities of
France or Spain. No common people are admitted into it, but it is the seat of
Noble men and great Princes, who in that Country do live in great numbers,
partly within the walls of the City, and partly in Villages near the City.
Here are four especial Palaces of Noble men, who do govern the
Commonwealth, which are stately and with great cost built with square carved
Marble stone. And all the streets being straight, in many places make the form
of a Cross, and through every one a pleasant River runs in a channel
walled on each side with stone. The form of the City is four square, lying
sweetly on the side of a hill: on the steep ascent of a Mountain, a
wonderful fair Tower does adorn the City, whose beauty or largeness if you
consider, those which have viewed many Countries, have seen few in all Europe
like unto it. Mexico or Temistitan is a rich and famous City in Nova Hispania,
whereof we will treat hereafter in the description of Nova Hispania: now we
proceed to other things. This part of the World is watered with many famous
Rivers, The Lakes and Rivers.
the most whereof do bring down gold; and it is full of Lakes and Springs In
the Lakes and Rivers there are great plenty of fish: among which there is one
kind of them of chief note, which by the inhabitants of Hispaniola are called
Manati. This Fish is somewhat like a Trout; he is five and twenty foot long,
and twelve foot thick, in his head and tail he resembles an Ox; he has
small eyes, a hard and hairy skin, of a light blew color, and two feet like
an Elephant. The femalls of this kind of fish do bring forth their young
ones, as Cowes do, and do let them suck at their two dugges. The Mountains.
Here are also very many Mountains, among which, as Benso witnesses, is a
fire-vomiting Mountain, which out of its hollow mouth does send forth such
great flakes of fire, that the blazing of it in the night does cast forth a
light which may be seen above an hundred miles. Some have supposed that the
gold melting within, does afford continual matter to the fire. For a certain
Dominican Friar, when he would make trial thereof, caused a vessel of gold to
be made with an iron chain: and afterward going to the Mountain with four
other Spaniards, he let down the vessel with the chain into the hole of the
hill; and there by the heat of the fire the vessel with part of the chain
was melted: and having tried it again with a bigger chain, it happened to melt
again in the same manner. Here the Cities generally are stately built, the
ways paved, and the houses very fair and beautiful. It is reported that here
was a Kings garden, wherein herbs and trees, with their body, boughs, and
fruits did stand of solid gold, and as big as those which grow in Orchards.
And it is reported that here was a Kings Conclave, in which there were all
kinds of living Creatures, made of precious stones, partly painted, and partly
inlaid, and engraven. That which is reported concerning the two ways in this
Country is worthy of memory, the one whereof lies through the rough
Mountains, the other stretches through the plain fields, from Quito a City
of Peru, to the City Cusco, for the space of five hundred miles. The beauty of
this work is increased, by many wonderful heaps of stones, which were not
brought thither by the strength of Horses, or Oxen, (both which the inhabitants
wanted) but by the hands of men. The field way is defended on both sides with
walls, and it is five and twenty foot broad, within which little streams do
run, having their banks planted with shrubby trees, which they call Molli.
The other being hewed out of stones and rocks, passes through the middle of
the Mountains, having the same breadth: Moreover the way in the uneven and
lower part of the Valleys, is fortified with fences, as the nature of the
Country requires. These ways King Gninacava (who lived not long since) caused
to to be cleansed, and the ruinous walls to be repaired and adorned, otherwise
the work is more ancient, and there were placed all along by the way side
Innes both fair, and pleasant, (they call them Tambi) in which all the Kings
train were received. And let this suffice concerning the four parts of the
World in general: now our method does require that we should describe
particularly the parts of Europe, which was set before in the first place.

THE NORHTH-POLE: AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRIES SITVATE ROUND ABOUT IT.
HAving made (courteous Reader) a General Description of the whole Globe, and
the four parts thereof methodically, and according to the order of nature; I
purpose, in Imitation of Ptolomie the Prince of Cosmographers, to begin the
Geographie of particular Countries from the Pole it self and the Countries
lying round about it, that so descending from the higher to the lower parts,
and proceeding from the left hand to the right hand, I may by degrees join the
North with the South, and the West with the East, which I pray God may be
profitable to the Commonwealth. The Pole is the extremity, or end of the
Axis, which is a Line drawn through the Center of the Globe, the Latins call
it vertex. There are two Poles, the Northern, and the Southern. The Northern
is that which is always beheld toward the North, and therefore also it is
called the Northern and So called for its nearness to a constellation in the
North Hemisphere called (...) which signifies a Bear.
Articke Pole. The Southern, is that which appears to those only which
dwell toward the South, and therefore it is called the Meridionall, Southern,
and So called because it is opposite to the Articke Pole. Greenland, whence so
called.
Antarticke Pole. And thus much in this place shall suffice concerning the
Poles. I come to the Countries situate round about the Articke Pole: which are
Groenlandia or Greeneland, Frizlandia, or Freesland, Nova Zembla with some
others, of which we will entreat briefly as far as they are known. The
London Merchants call this Island K. James his new Land.

The quality of the Air and Soil.


Groenlandia, or Greeneland is so called from the greenness thereof, and is an
Island for the most part yet unknown, it is situate between the Northern
Circle and the Pole, the farthest paralels thereof toward the South are the
Degrees of 65, and toward the North the Degrees of 78. In this Island, if we
believe Nicolas Zenetus (who in the year 1480. endured much hard weather in
the bordering Sea) there is continual winter for nine Months, all which time
it does never rain there, neither does the snow, which falls at the
beginning thereof, melt until the end, yet is not this harmefull to the
grass, for here is a great increase both of grass and fodder. Therefore here
is great store of milke-beasts in regard of the great plenty thereof, so that
they make store of Butter and Cheese, which they sell to those they traffic
withal. There are only two inhabited places known unto us in Groenland, Alba
and the Monastery of Saint Thomas, of which we will speak by and by. The
Slow Sea, which is also called the frozen Icie Sea, does touch upon Greeneland.
There is in Greeneland a Monastery of the Preaching Order: and not far from
it a fire-vomiting Mountain like Aetna, at the foot whereof there is a
fountain of running waters, by whose great heat THE NORTH POLE.
POLUS ARCTICUS cum vicinis regionibus.
map of the arctic regions they do not only make hot all the rooms of the
Monastery like a hothouse, but also they bake their bread and dress their
meat, without the help of fire. The whole fabric of the Monastery does
consist of brittle sandy stones, which the Mountain does cast forth in the
midst of the flames. This fountain does warm the neighbor gardens so that
they continually flourish with diverse kinds of flowers and herbs. And the Sea
near unto it, by the virtue of these waters, is never frozen, but lies
continually open both for the fish and the use of man: which makes so great a
concurse of fish to resort hither from colder places, that not only these
Monks, Freezland.
but also the Inhabitants round about do live plentifully. Frislandia or
Freezland was an Island altogether unknown to the Ancients: being greater
than Heyling says almost as big as Ireland.
Ireland. The Climate is very intemperate. The Inhabitants have no fruits, but
live for the most part upon fish. The chief Town thereof has the same name
with the Island, and it belongs to the King of And therefore now subject to
the King of Denmark.
Norway. The Inhabitants for the most part live by fishing. For in the Haven
thereof so great a plenty of all kind of fish is taken that many ships are
loaded with them, and so carried to the Islands lying near it, as Zieglerus
writes. The same man writes that the Sea next to the Island on the West being
full of rocks and sands, is called the Icarean Sea, and the Island in it is
called by the Inhabitants Icaria. Nova Zembla.
This Island in our time begins to be known again, and that by the
Discovery of the English. Nova Zembla is an Island situated under the 76
Degree. Here the air is very sharp, and the cold most vehement and
intolerable. It is a wild, woodie, and rugged Country, where neither leaves nor
grass grow, nor any living creatures, but those which live by flesh as Foxes,
and Bears, whereof there is great store not only in this Island, but in most
of the Northern Countries. There are Sea Monsters here whose bodies does
exceed the bigness of an Ox, and are commonly called Walruschen: they are
headed like a Lion, their skin hairy, they having four feet, and two teeth
sticking forth of the upper part of their mouth being smooth, hard, and white,
and are worth as much as Elephants teeth. The Bays here are called Weggates
Bay, Forbishers Bay, and Davises Bay; Weigates Bay is streitched out toward
the East even to the place called Crucis Angulus, toward the Aerctapelietes to
the place called Dissidit Angulus, a a little enclining to the East. On the
Southern side of the Continent of Weggats Bay, William Barendson found some
wild men called Samiutae. The shape of their clothes which they use, is like
that which our Painters do bestow on woodmen, or Satyrs, but yet they are not
wild men, but endued with a good understanding. They are clothed from head to
foot with the skins of beasts called Rangiferi: for the most part are of
Pigmies are here supposed to inhabit.
low stature, broad faced, small eyed, short and splay-footed, and very nimble
both to run and leap. They have coaches unto which they put one or two of
these Rangiferi, which will draw it with one or two men in it with more speed
then any of our Horses can do. Forbishers Bay was so called from Martine
Forbisher an English man, who in the year 1577. seeking a passage to Cathaia
by the North, arrived at this Bay, in which he found both Islands and many
men, concerning which we will add some things. The men thereof being
strangers to all civilitie, do eat and feed upon the raw flesh of beasts and
fishes. They are clothed with the skins of wild beasts taken in hunting, and
they eat raw herbs like beasts. Their Tents are covered with Whales skins;
the cold being continually very sharp in these parts. They use Dogs which
are like unto our Wolves, and having yoked them together, they do make them
draw things over the ice. Their weapons are Bows and Arrows, and slings.
There is no wood there, but much Dear. The men do not plough the ground, as
being content with that it brings forth of its own accord: they live by
hunting: their drink is the warm blood of wild beasts, or else ice water:
there are no Rivers nor Springs, because the violence of the cold does so shut
up the Earth, that springs of water cannot break forth. The men are very
laborious, strong, hunters, and cunning fowlers: they use a certain kind of
boat made of leather, wherein one man can but sit, who makes use but of one
Oar, his right hand holding his bow wherewith he shoots at the birds. The
like has been seen in England. Davises Bay also was so called from John
Davis an Englishman, who in the year 1585. and the two following years did
search along the Coasts of America, or rather the Southern Coasts of Greenland
from the 53. Degree to the 75. to find out a passage that way unto China.
Concerning the four Euripideas in the table those things which you see are
taken out of the Register book of James Cnoxen Buscoducensis, who does report
that a certain English Minorite Friar of Oxford, being a Mathematician, did
describe the Countries lying near unto the Pole, and measured them with his
Astrolabe in this following shape, as Mercator has gathered them out of James
Cnoxeus Book. He says that these four Seas are carried with such violence
to the Innermost Gulf, that ships being once entered can never be driven back
again with any wind, and that there is never so great a wind, as that it can
drive about a windmill. But these things are as true as Lucians fables, seeing
they who have viewed these places in which those seas are said to be, do find
no such Euripi, or swift flowing Seas at all, namely the Hollanders who have
discovered the Sea even to the 81. Degree of Latitude. But concerning the
habitation of the Northern people, let us hear Julius Scaliger in his 37.
Exercitation, where he thus speaking concerning a voyage from the Northern Sea
toward China. There are (says he) diverse arguments brought by diverse men on
both sides, and it is diversely judged of, whether it be possible to sail by
that Sea. But these are ours. They would have us to sail from the mouth of the
River Duvina, all along that Country which encompasses all Scythia even to the
East corner: in which winding course we are to change the Northern wind for
the Western. But those which speak thus, it is certain they do not know the
nature of this Sea, nor of the Winds and Coast: For the West and East winds
are so rare in this Sea that they are almost scarce known. But so many North
winds are there here that it seems Nature has committed the government of
these parts unto them alone. There are many foards blind and muddle. In
winter, which continues ten months, the superficies or upper part of the Sea,
is as hard as any pavement. In Summer there are continual mists, which in the
afternoon as fast as one is expelled another rises. Besides, the Ice is very
dangerous, the great pieces whereof floting up and down, are like moving
Islands running one amongst another. It is certain that by the late
Navigations of the Hollanders in the year 1594. and in the two following
years, it was hoped, that we might sail out of the Northern Sea to the
Eastern parts of the World. But very difficultly, in regard of the Ice, and
long winter nights. William Barentson did deny that it was possible to sail
by the Bay of Nassovia to China, not only for the Ice, but also because he
found by diverse observations, that it was not a Sea but a Bay, and especially
because he found there was no Tide nor Ebb: and yet he was in great hope
that a way might be found out by the most Northern part of Nova Zembla. But
seeing there are every day new voyages made to discover the passage that way to
China, experience will teach them at last whether it can be done or not. It is
manifest that our ships have sailed even to the 81. Degree of Northern
Latitude, and yet found the Sea open: but yet afterward at the 76. Degree they
have been hindered with great pieces of ice, and the night coming on, so that
they could proceed no further. The Sun left them the 4. of November in the
year 1596, and was seen again the 24. of January in the following year, all
which time these valiant Argonantes, for so I may call them, hid themselves in
a little shed which they built up in Nova Zembla, until the 14. of June. For
though the voyage of the Jason and his Companions, who sailed to Colche^ to
fetch the golden fleece, of whom read Valerius Fla^cu^ Lib. 1*
Argonantes is made so famous by posterity, yet if it be compared with this it
will seem but a toy; for who has been, for the space of 13. Months
separated from the society of men, before the Hollanders, who wanting all
necessaries, and enduring extremity of cold, did even under the 76. Degree of
Latitude, build themselves houses to receive them, and defend them from the
violence of the weather, in which they lay buried and covered over with deep
snow almost ten whole months? I conceal that which they suffered in
returning, being compelled to leave their ships and betake themselves to their
boat. I omit to speak of the cruel, fierce, and great Bears, and
Sea Monsters, with which they oftentimes were enforced to fight. All which
troubles, labors, and difficulties they most valiantly by the protection and
favor of the Divine power did overcome.

ISELAND.
ISELAND is the greatest of all those Islands in the Western Ocean, which are
subject to the Kings of Norwey; it takes this name from the cold, The name by
whom, and why given.
wherewith it is partly frozen. It is also called Suelandia, from the Snow:
Also Gardartsholme, that is, the Island of Gardart. The most do suppose this to
be that Thule mentioned by the Ancients, which also Ptolemie does call Thule;
the middle whereof he places in the 30. Degree of Latitude, and 63. of
Longitude. Solinus places it five days and nights sail from the Orcades. An
Island the most famous of all other with Poets, when by this, as being the
farthest part of the World, they would intimate any thing far distant. Whence
Virgil says, Tibi serviat ultima Thule, may the farthest Thule serve thee. But
Sinesius doubts whether there were ever any Thule: and Giraldus writes, that
it was never seen, and the more Learned are doubtful in their opinions. See
Heylin. p 8
The most do affirm (as we said) that Iseland was heretofore called Thule:
yet Saxo the Grammarian, Crantzius, Milius, Ionius, and Peucerus are of a
contrary opinion unto them. But of this enough: I return again to Iseland.
The Situation.
It is situated not under the Which is a great circle rounding the Earth from
Pole to Pole, and passes through the Islands called Azores: See marg. page 10.
first Meridian, as one has noted, but in the eigth Degree from thence. The
length of it is an hundred German miles, as the common Writers have it, and
Jonas adds to these four and forty. The Latitude or breadth is six and
fifty German miles. It has an ungentle air, and for the most part it is
unhabited, especially toward the North, by reason of the vehement Western
winds, which will not suffer the shrubs (as Olaus writes) to rise up. The
Land is unfit for tillage, neither does it bear any grain; but all that have
written of this Isle do report, that it has such abundance of grass, that
unless the Cattle were sometime driven from the pasture, The quality of the
Soil and Air.
they would be in danger to die, and be choked with their own fatness. Jonas
himself confesses, that they have no laboring beasts, but Horses and Oxen:
and here all the Oxen and Kine have no horns, nor their Sheep likewise. They
have little white Dogs, which they very much esteem. They have abundance of
white Faulcones, and white Crows, The variety of living Cr^^tures.
which prey upon the young Lambs and Hogs. Also there are white Bears and
Hares. Also (as Islandus witnesses) there are Eagles with white trains: which
Pliny (as he says) called Pygargos. Velleius reports, that this Island
bears no tree but the Birch and Juniper trees: so that there is great
scarcity of wood through the whole Island, unless by chance (which sometimes
happens) some great trees being rooted up by the violence of the wind, are
brought out of the Northern parts, and like wracks cast upon these moors,
which the Inhabitants use in building houses and ships. It has been subject
to the King of Norwey, (as Jonas reports) from the year 1260. in which they
first did homage to him: In regard whereof, the King of Denmark and Norwey
does yearly send thither a Governor, who keeps his residence in the Castle
called Bestede, whom they now obey, as heretofore they did their Bishops, by
whom they were converted to the Christian Faith, under the reign of Edelbert.
In the time of Harald the Faire-haired, the first Monarch of Norwey, some
think it began to be inhabited: for when he had expelled a great company of
Noble men out of Norwey, they (forsaking their own Country) came with their
whole Families and dwelt here. It is likely, that these things happened a
thousand years after Christ; but as Islandus Jonas writes about the year
874, who declares the succession and names of these Bishops. Crantzius names
Islephus to be the first Bishop. But it seems, as we may collect out of the
E^logues of Nicolas Zenius, that it was under the command of the Norwegians two
hundred years before, where we read, that Zichmus King of Frisland did
attempt to get this Island by force of Arms, but was repulsed by the King of
Norwey's Garrison Soldiers, placed in this Island. The whole Island is divided
into four parts. The Eastern part they call Ausilendingasiordung, the
Western Westlendingasiordung, the Northern Nortendingasiordung, the Southern
Suydlendingasiordung. They have no Cities, but Mountains in stead thereof.
Here is a Fountain, The Fountains.
the exhalations whereof will change any thing into stone, and yet the shape
thereof shall still remain. And there is a Fountain of pestilent water, which
will poison any one that tastes of it. There is water that tastes like beer.
The Northern Ocean, in which this Island is situate, does afford such great
plenty of fish, and is so commodious to the Commonwealth of Iseland, The Sea.
that all the Inhabitants do live and maintain their Families by it. I should
want time to reckon up the several kinds of Fish that are in the Sea, yet it
will not be amiss, to remember some of the rarest. Among which there is a kind
of Fish called Nahual, whereof if any one eat, he dies presently; and he has
a tooth in the innermost part of his head, which stands forth 7 cubits in
length, which some have sold for an Unicorns horn, and it is believed to have
a great virtue against poison. This Monster is forty yards long. The Royder is
an hundred and thirty Else long, and has no teeth; his flesh is most sweet
and pleasant in eating, and his fat does heal many diseases. There is the
British Whale, which is thirty Else long, having no teeth, but a tongue seven
Else in length. And there is a kind of a great Whale, which is seldom seen,
being rather like an Island it self than a Fish. In regard of the hugeness of
his body, he cannot follow the lesser fishes, yet he takes them by cunning
and craftiness. There is also an other Fish called Stantus Valur, all grisly,
and something like a Thornback, but much greater; when he appears he seems
like an Island, and overturneth Ships with his Fins. There are also Sea-Oxen,
called Seenaut, of a grisly color, and diverse other fishes. I come now to the
Mountains. The Mountains.
In Iseland (says Georgius Agricola) there are three very high Mountains,
whose tops are always white with continual Snow, the bottomes do burn with
continual Fire. The first is called Hecla, or Hecklfort; the second, the
Mountain of the Cross; and the third Helga, that is, the holy Mountain. Not
far from Hecla there are Mines of Brimstone, which is the only commodity of
traffic, that belongs to the Inhabitants of Iseland. For Merchants do
freight and load their ships with it. The Mountain when it rages, does send
forth a ISELAND.
ISLAND.
map of Iceland noise like thunder, casts forth great stones, vomiteth out
Brimstone, and sils all the ground with ashes round about it, so that the
Country cannot be inhabited for two entire miles round about it. They which
draw near to this Mountain to consider and view more curiously the causes why
it burns, are sometime swallowed up alive by some hidden breach in the
Mountain, for there are many, and those covered so with ashes, that no man can
beware of them: therefore they call this place The Papists think that here is
th^^^ feined Purgatory
Carcer sordidarum animarum, the prisonhouse of unclean souls. Besides it
happens, that the ye being loosed, does in great pieces for 8 months
together beat against the shore, and makes such an horrible sound, that the
Inhabitants say, it is the crying and howling of those souls. There is an
other Mountain of the same nature called Helga: this Mountain in the year
1581, (as Jonas witnesses) did cast forth fire and stones with such a
thundering noise, that four score miles from thence, they thought some great
pieces of Ordnance had been shot off. In one part hereof, strange Spirits are
seen in the liknesse of men, so that those who do not know them to be dead
before, would think they were alive: nor do they find their error before
the ghosts do vanish away. But these things Jonas thinks are fabulous, or
else the delusions of the Devil. Crantzius and Olaus do write, that the
Islanders, for the most part, do dwell in Caves, which they dig in the sides
of the Mountains, especially in the Winter time. But Jonas, on the contrary,
says, that there are many Temples and houses built of wood very fair and
costly. The Island has two Cathedral Bishoprics, as Holar, or Hallen, under
which are the Monasteries Pingora, Remested, Modur, Munkeniere; and Scalholt,
under which are those Monasteries Videy, Pyrnebar, Kirckebar, and Shieda. Yet
we understand by the writings of Velletus the Author of this Table, that
there are nine Monasteries in it, and three hundred and nine and twenty
Churches. The Bishops are sent thither out of the Universitie of Hassnia, the
only University in Denmark; one of them governs the Northern part of the
Island, the other the Southern. And each of them has a free School joined to
his house, in which he is bound to be at the cost of the bringing up and
teaching of four and twenty Children. The manner^ of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants live, eat, and lodge in the same houses with their Cattle.
They live in a holy simplicity, seeking nothing more than what Nature grants
them, for the Mountains are their Towns, and the Fountains their delight. A
happy Nation, not envied by reason of their poverty, and so much the happier
because it has received the Christian Religion. Yet the English and Danish
Merchants do trouble their quiet, not suffering them to be content with their
own; for they frequenting this Island, to bring away fish from thence, have
brought among them their vices together with their wares. The memorable acts of
their Ancestors, they do celebrate in Verse, and do keep them from oblivion
by engraving them on Rocks. They live, for the most part, by Fish, which being
dried and beaten, Their food.
and so made into a kind of meat, they use at their Table instead of bread.
But the wealthier do eat bread twice baked. Heretofore they drank water, and
the richer milk, but now they have learned to mingle corn with it, which is
brought hither from other places, and they scorn to drink water, since
strangers have begun to traffic with them. For those of Lubeck, Hamburrough,
and Rostoch coming every year with their ships to this Island, do bring
thither corn, bread, Th^^ Tr^^fick o^ (...)
beer, wine, honey, English clothes, linen cloth, iron, steel, gold,
silver, women's coyfs, and wood for building houses and ships: and they do
expect for these, Iselandish cloth (commonly called Watman) great store of
Brimstone, dried fish, butter, tallow, hides, skins of wild beasts, foxes,
white faulcons, horses, and the like. Here is so great plenty of fish, that
they lay them in great heaps out of doors, and so sell them, the heaps being
higher than the tops of their houses. There is also so great store of salt
butter, that they put it up in sweet chests of forty foot long, and five foot
deep, besides that which they barrel up. And here we will add Erasmus
Michael's Verses concerning Iseland, as he has them in his third Book Of Sea
matters.

Vltima Parrhasias Islandia spectat in Arctos, etc.
The farthest part of Iseland looks North,
And Westward some Degrees it is straight forth,
Which has not only a rich pleasant soil
While as it does the yellow Brimstone boil
Within its cavernes blind, which at the last
All mingled with sand, it forth does cast:
Or when the Meddowes bring forth fodder store,
And all the vales with grass are clothed over;
But when upon the shore it fish does heap,
Whose number cannot be told, it is so great:
Or he distinguished every several sort,
Which it by shipping does abroad transport.
For though here plenty of all things is found,
Yet most of all in fish it does abound.
It Is rich, the Inhabitants are stout of mind,
And where it lies against the Southern wind
Hecla still burns with continual flame,
Which it at open holes sends forth again.
It casts forth ashes with a fearful sound,
While pitchie flames do to the Stars rebound.
THE ISLES OF BRITAIN. ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND: WITH THE ISLANDS LYING
ROVND ABOUT THEM.
BRITAIN contains all those Islands which lying between Spain and Germany,
are stretched forth in a great quantity of Land toward France. Lhuyddus says
that not long ago it was called Prydanium; The name by whom and why given.
Sr Thomas Eliott would have it called Prytania, being incited thereunto
through the love of contention rather then truth, against the authority of
Aristotle, Lucretius, Julius Caesar, and other ancient Writers. But because
heretofore all the Britains did paint themselves with woade, which gave them
a bluish color, that so their faces might be more terrible against their
enemies in war; and in regard that in their ancient Language they did call any
thing that was painted and colored, Brit: some do rightly suppose that the
Graecians, understanding that the inhabitants were called Brith and Briton, did
add to Brith Tania, which signifies a Country, and therefore If this be true,
then did it not receive its denomination from Brutus. See Heylin page 455.

The temper of the Air.

The fertility of the Soil. The variety of living Creatures.


Britain was called the Country of Britains, that is, the Country of
painted and colored men, like as Mauritania is called so of the Moors,
Lusitania from Lusus, and Aquitania the Region of Waters. Britain is endowed
by Nature with all gifts both of Air and Soil, in which neither the cold of
winter is too violent, (as the Orator has it, speaking to Constantine) nor
the heat of Summer, and it is so fruitful in bearing corn, that it is
sufficiently stored with Bread and Drink: Here the woods are without wild
beasts, and the earth without harmefull Serpents. On the contrary, innumerable
flocks and herds of tame cattle, full of milk, and laden with their
fleece; yea, whatsoever is necessary to life is here: the days are very long,
so that the nights are not without some light, and the Sun which seems in
other Countries to go down and set, does seem here only to pass by. Among
all the Isles of Britain, two do exceed the rest in greatness: Albion, The
I Will of Albion.
(under which are contained England, and Scotland,) and Ireland. The greatest
of these is Albion, now alone called Britain, which was a name formerly
common to them all: and this name is rather deduced out of Books, than used in
common speech, only the Scots do yet call themselves Albinich, and their
Country Albin. Concerning the name of Albion, the Grecians first gave it to
this I Will for distinction sake, seeing all the neighbor Islands were called the
Isles of Britain: so that it did first arise from the vain and fabulous
lightness of the Grecians in faigning names. For seeing they called Italy,
from Hesperus the son of Atlas, Hesperia; France, from the son of
Poliphemus, Gallatia, etc. It is not unlikely that they fabulously named this
Island Albion, from Albion the son of Neptune, which Perottus and Lilius
Giraldus THE ISLES OF BRITAIN.
ANGLIA SCOTIA et HIBERNIA
map of the British Isles do confirm. Others would derive it from Verstegan
affirms it was so called ab albis rupibus: the white rocks toward France.
The figure.
(...), which, as Festus witnesses, in Greek signifies white; whence also the
Alps are so called. The figure of it is Triangular, or three cornerd, and it
runs forth into three several Angles. The first Promontorie, toward the
West, the Englishmen do call the Cape of Cornwall. The second in Kent, which
looks toward the East, the English call it North-forland. The third is
Orcas, or Tarvisium, which lies far North, the Scots call it D^ngisbehead:
Livius, and Fabius Rusticus, have likened it to a Cheesell. On the West side,
whereon Ireland lies, the Which the English and French call the channel of S.
George.
Vergivian Sea breaks in, on the North it is beaten with the wide and great
Northern Ocean; on the East, where it lies against Germany, with the Germane
Sea; on the South, where it butteth upon France, it is beaten with the British
Sea. Diodorus in his sixth book, writes that the compass of it is two and
forty thousand furlongs. Martian says, that Britain is eight hundred miles
long, and three hundred broad, and in compass 6000. miles. The learned and
accurate Writer Camden, does thus account it; from the Promontorie Tarvisium to
Belerium, following the winding of the shore, is eight hundred and twelve
miles: from thence to Kent, 320. miles. Lastly, from Kent to Tarvisium seven
hundred and four miles: the whole sum is 1836. miles This Island formerly was
divided into two parts, as Ptolomie witnesses in his second Book: where he
parts the whole Island into Great Britain and Little Britain. The Great he
calls the This division was made by Severus the Emperor, says Camden. p. 98.
Hither part toward the South; the Lesser the Farther toward the North. But
the Romans neglecting the farther part, because, as Appian says, it could not
be commodious to them, the hither part being reduced into a Province, they at
first divided into the The Romans, says Camden, called those Provinces of any
Country they conquered which were next unto the^, Primas and superiore, and the
more remote, secundas and ^^se^ o^es. p 99.
Lower and Higher, as it is gathered out of Dion. For the hither part of
England with Wales, he calls the Higher, the farther and Northern he calls
the Lower. Afterward they divided it into three parts, as appears by Sextus
Rufus, into Maxima Caesariensis, Brittania Prima, and Brittania Secunda.
Afterward, when the form of the Commonwealth was daily changed, they divided
Britain in What Countries these five parts contained, and why they were so
denominated. See in Camden page 98. and 99.
five parts, the First, Second, Maxima Caesariensis, Valentia, and Flavia
Caesariensis: And these were divisions of Britain when it was under the
Romans. Some have written that the whole Island was heretofore divided into
three parts, Leogria, Cambria, and Albania; but Camden believes that this was
a later division, which seems to arise from those three People, the
Englishmen, Welsh, and Scots, who last of all divided this Island among
themselves. Afterward, the Island was divided into two Kingdoms, namely
England, and Scotland: but at last, under the happy reign of James the sixth
King of Scotland, these two Kingdoms were They were first united in in the
year of grace 1603. The Sea.
united, and the whole Island called Great Britain. Britain, as we said
before, is every where environed with the great and wide Ocean, which S. Basil.
says is a great Sea, and very terrible for those that sail on it. Now it
flows far into the Land, and then it returns back again and leaves the
Sands naked: it feels the efficacy of the increasing Moon very powerfully,
and does flow in with so great a force, that it does not only drive back
Rivers, but it sometimes sweepes off cattle from the Land, casts forth the
fishes on the shore, and at the ebb leaves them there. In a word, so great a
matter it was held to sail upon this Sea, that Julius Firmicus in his Book
concerning the errors of profane Religions, cries out thus to Constantine
the Emperor. In Winter (which was never heretofore done, nor shall be done)
you have passed over the swelling raging waters of the British Ocean, the
waves of a Sea almost unknown to us have trembled under our Oars: and the
Britains have been afraid at the unlookt-for presence of the Emperor What
would you more? The Elements themselves were conquered by your valor. It does
not belong unto us to speak here of the commodities which this Sea yields,
of the time when it cherishes the Earth, of the vapors with which it nourishes
the Air, and bedewes the fields, of the diverse kinds of Fish, as Salmons,
Playces, Crabfishes, The commodities.
Codfishes, Herrings, etc. of which it brings forth infinite numbers. Yet the Sea Camden page 640 and 595.
Pearls are not to be passed over in silence, which in a round shape do
swim in great shoales as it were following one Leader like Bees; so that
Iubas calls it the Sea of Bees: and also Marcellus makes mention of it.
Suetonius does report that Caesar did first attempt Britain in hope of
getting these Pearls: and so much concerning Albion or England, now let us
pass over to the roast. Among all of them, Ireland does far excel, of which
we will speak nothing here, intending to speak of it in particular Tables.
The Orcades do follow, The Orcades.
now called the Isles of Orkney, which are about H^yler says they are 3^. page
51^
thirty in number, and do lie a little way distant one from another, which a
certain ancient record does so call, as if it were Argath; which is there
expounded as much as supra Getas, above the Getes: Camden would rather have it
above Cath, for it lies over against Cath a Country of Scotland, which in
regard of the Promontorie, they now call Cathnesse: whose Inhabitants Ptolomy,
though wrongfully, does call Carini instead of Cathini. In the time of Solinus
they were not inhabited, being overgrowne with Reeds and Bullrushes, but now
they are tilled and bring forth Barley enough, The fertility of the Soil.
though they want both wheat and trees: there is no Serpent or poisonous
Creature in them. They have great numbers of living Creatures in them; as
Hares, Cunnies, Cranes, and many Swans. There is good fishing in them, of which
the inhabitants make great profit. Julius Agricola first sailing in a Ship
round about Britain, did find out and conquer the Orcades at that time
unknown; and therefore it is unlikely that Claudius did first overcome them,
as Hierom affirms in his Chronicle. Afterward, when the Romans were
Commanders over Britain, they were the seats of the Picts; and after that
they came under the power of the Norwegians and Danes: whence the Inhabitants
do speak the Gothicke tongue. Last of all, Christiernus King of Denmark in
consideration of a sum of money, in the year 1474. did pass over all his
right unto the King of Scotland. The chief of these is Pomonia, famous in
regard it is the seat of a Bishop, which was called by Solinus for the
continual length of the day Pomona diutina: now it is called by the
Inhabitants Mainland, as if it were a Continent. It has abundance of Tin and
Lead, and is adorned with a Bishops See in the Town Kirkwale, and with two
Castles. Among these Ptolomie also reckons Ocetis, which Camden supposes
should now be called Hethy. And says the same Camden, I am not yet resolved
whether I should call Hey, which is among these Plinies Dumna. If it be not
so, I had rather think Fair I Will, which has only one Town called Dume, to
be that Dumna, than with Becanus to think that it is Wardhuys in Lappland.
John Major does also call one of these Zeland, being fifty miles in length.
Moreover, the Inhabitants of these Isles do make a very strong drink by
putting store of Barley in it, and are the greatest drinkers of all others; yet
Boethius witnesses that he never saw any of them drunk, or deprived of sense.
The next to these are the Islands called the Hebrides, The names of the Hebrides.
in number four and forty, which Beda calls Maevaniae; Ethicus, Betoricae
Insulae, Giraldus calls them the Incades and Leucades, the Scots the Western
Isles: Ptolomie with Pliny and Solinus calls them Stephanus calls them the
Hebrides, others Ebonia ^nsulae.
Ebudae, Pliny writes that there are thirty of them, but Ptolomie reckons
only five. The first is Ricina, which Pliny calls Rinea, and Antoninus
Ridunas, but now it is called Racline, which is a little Island just against
Ireland. The next is Epedium, now called Ila, an I Will, (as Camden witnesses)
very This Island is 24. miles long, and 16. miles broad.
large, and having very fruitful plains: between this and Scotland lies
Iona, which Beda calls Hy and Hu, being plain ground, in which there is an
Episcopal See in the Town Sodore, whence all the Islands were called
Sodorenses: it is famous, because here lie buried many Kings of Scotland. Then
there is another which Ptolomie calls Maleos, now Mula, which Pliny
mentions when he says that Mella of all the rest is more then 25 miles over.
The Eastern Hebuda, now called Sky, is stretched along by the Scotch shore,
and the Western Hebuda lying more toward the West, is now called Jews, of
which Maccloyd is Governor, and in the ancient book of Mannia, it is called
Lodhuys, being mountainous, stony, little manured, but yet the greatest; from
which Eust is parted by a little Euripus or flowing Sea between them. The
test, except Hyrrha, are of no note, as being rockie, unpassable, and having no
green things growing in them. The Islands of Man and Wight do follow, of which
see those things that are spoken in the seventh Table of England.

THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.
THE Island of Ireland follows, which Orpheus, Aristotle, The new and ancient
names, by whom, and why given.
and Claudi^n do call Isacius calls this Kingdom Britannia Occidentalis, or
Western Britain, and Isidorus and others call it Scotia, because the Scots
coming from Spain dwelt here; the Irish Ba^di call it Ba^^, whence Festus
Av^enus calls it Insula sacra: See Camden page 643.
Ierna, Iuvenal and Mela Iuvernia, Diodorus Siculus Iris, Eustatius Vernia and
Bernia, the Inhabitants Erin, the Britains Yverdhon, and the English call it
Ireland. Diverse opinions (as in obscure matters) do arise concerning the
original of these names. Some would have it called Hibernia from Hiberus, a
Spanish Captain, who first possessed it, and peopled it: some say from the
River Iberus, because the Inhabitants thereof did first inhabit this Island:
some ab hiberno tempore, from the winter season, because it enclines toward
the West: the Author of the Eulogue, from Irnalphus, a Captain. It was called
without doubt Hibernia and Iuverna, from Ierna, which Orpheus and Aristotle
mention; but that Ierna, together with Iris, Yverdhon, and Ireland, did
proceed from the word Erin, used by the Inhabitants; therefore the Etymology
is to be drawn from the word Erin. Here page 642.
Camden affirms, that he knows not what to conjecture, unless, says he,
it be derived from Hiere an Irish word, which with them signifies the West,
whence Erin seems to be drawn, being as much to say as the Western
Country. This Island is stretched forth from the South Northward in an ovall
form, not twenty days sail, as Philemon in Ptolemie delivers, but only 400.
The Situation.
miles; and is scarce 200. miles broad. On the East it has Britain, from
which it is parted by the Irish Sea, which is one days sail: On the North,
where the Deucaledon Ocean, which Ptolemie calls the Northern, breaks in, it
has Iseland: On the South it looks toward Spain. The Air of this Island
is very wholesome, the Climate very gentle, The temper of the Air
warm and temperate; for the Inhabitants neither by the heat of Summer are
enforced to seek shadie places, nor yet by cold to sit by the fire: yet the
seeds in regard of the moistness of Autumn do seldom come to maturitie and
ripeness. Hence Mela writes, that it has no good Air for ripening of
seeds: yet in the wholsomnesse and cleernesse of the Air it does far
exceed Britain. Here are never any Earthquakes, and you shall scarce hear
thunder once in a year. The Country is a fat soil, and has great plenty of
fruits, yet it has greater plenty of pasturage than fruits, and of grass than
grain. For here their wheat is very small, so that it can hardly be winnowed
or cleansed with a fan. What the Spring produces, the Summer cherishes, but
it can hardly be gathered, in regard they have too much rain in Harvest time;
for this Island has winds and rain very often. But (as Mela says) it is so
full of pleasant sweet grass, that when the Cattle have fed some part of the
day, if they be not restrained and kept from grazing, they will endanger the
bursting of themselves. Which also Solinus witnesses concerning this Island.
Hence it proceeds, that there are infinite numbers of Cattle, which are the
Inhabitants chief riches, and many flocks of Sheep, which they sheare twice a
year. They have excellent Horses (called Hobbies) which are not paced like
others, but do amble very gently. No creeping thing nor Serpent lives here,
nor also in Crete: and Serpents being often brought hither out of Britain, as
soon as they came near the Land, and smelled the Air, they died. Beda
witnesses, that he has seen some, who have been stung with Serpents, that
have drunk the leaves of Books (brought out of Ireland) in a Potion, and
straightway the force of the poison was allayde, and the swelling of the body
went down again. Ireland has greater store of Faulcons and Hawks, than
other Countries. And here Eagles are as common as Kites in some places.
Besides, here is so great a number of Cranes, that you shall often see a
hundred in a company together. In the North part also there are abundance of
Swannes, but there are few Storkes through the whole Island, and those black.
There are few Partriges and Pheasants, but no Pies, nor Nightingales. Here is
such great store of Bees, that they do not only breed in hives, but also in
hollow trees, and in the cavernes of the earth. Giraldus also writes a strange
thing concerning a kind of Bird, commonly called a Barnacle, that out of
certain pieces of wood, floating up and down in the Sea, there comes out first
a kind of Gum, which afterward grows into a hard substance, within which
little Creatures are generated, which first have life, and afterward have bills,
feathers and wings, with which they do fly in the Air, or swim in the water,
and in this manner and no other this Creature is generated. This Giraldus does
testify, that he has seen some of them half formed, which as soon as they
came to perfection did fly as well as the rest. There are also many birds of a
twofold shape, (as he witnesses) which they call Aurifrisij, lesser than an
Eagle, and bigger than a Hawke; whom Nature, to delight her self, has framed
with one foot armed with tallents sharp and open, the other smoothe with a
plain web. There are other Birds which they call Marinetae, less than a
Blackbird, being short like a Starling, yet differing from him by the
whiteness of the belly, and the blackness of the back. It is a wonderful
thing which was reported concerning these Birds, for if when they are dead
they be kept in a dry place, they will not putrify or corrupt: and being
placed among garments and other things, it will preserve them from moathes.
That which is more worthy of admiration is that, if being dead, they be hanged
up in some dry place, they will every year renew and change their feathers,
as if they were alive. Ireland contains all kinds of wild beasts. It has
Hearts that are so fat, that they can hardly run, and by how much they are
lesser in body, by so much the larger are their horns. There are great store
of Bores, many Hares, etc. but the bodies of all the wild beasts and birds are
lesser here than in other places. It has many Badgers, and Weesils. It has
few or no Goats, fallow Dear, Hedghogs, Moles; but infinite store of Mice. It
has also Wolves and Foxes. But enough of these things, I return to other
matters. Heretofore Ireland was ruled by many Earls, now it is subject to
England, and is governed by the Kings Substitute, The Government.
who is called the Lord Deputy. It came to be under the dominion IRELAND.
IRLANDIA
map of Ireland of the Kings of England about the year Camden says it was in
the year 1172. p: 649.
1175, at which time Roderick King of Connaught styled himself King of all
Ireland; and striving to subject the whole Kingdom to himself, waged
continual war with the other Earls; by whose sedition it came to pass,
that the other Earls of their own accord, and without any effusion of blood,
did put themselves under the obedience of Henry the second, King of England,
from whom all the Kings of England were called Lords of Ireland, until the
time of Henry the eigth, who by the Nobles of Ireland was declared King of
Ireland, because the name of Lord grew hateful to some seditious people. The
Cities.
There are four special Cities in this Island: First This Town was built by
Harald Harfager, the first King of Norway.
Dublin, the Metropolis or Mother-Citie of Ireland, being the royal
Archiepiscopall Seat, giving name to a County. The next in dignity is
Waterford, the third Limbrick, the fourth Cork. There are many other very
great Towns, of which we will speak more largely in the particular
Descriptions of Ireland. This Country has many Lakes and standing waters, Lakes
among which there is a Lake in Vlster, twenty miles distant from the Lake
Erne, of which we will speak more largely hereafter. There is a little Lake
beyond the City Armack, in which if you stick a Spear up some months, that
part which stuck in the mudde will be iron, that which is in the water stony,
and that which is out of the water will remain wood. There is also the Lake
Erne, which is thirty miles long, and fifteen miles broad, being compassed
about with thick woods, and so full of Fish, that the Fishermen often break
their nets, by taking too many at one time. The Rivers.
This Island is divided and watered with many fair Rivers, whose names are
these: or the River Liffie.
Avenliffe, running through Dublin; Boandus through Methe, Banna through
Vltonia, Linu^ through Connack, and Moadus through Kenel. cunillia, Slicheia,
and Samaira: Besides Modarnus and Furnus through Keneleonia, and many other.
But of all the Rivers of Ireland, the River or Shennin, is some interpret it,
tho ancient River.
Synnenus is the chief both for the breadth and It runs (says Heylin) a
course of 200 miles, to the Vergician Sea, and is navigable 60 miles.
length of its course, and for the plenty of Fish which is in it. But in
general, the Rivers and Lakes are full of fish bred in them. This Country is
unequal and mountainous, soft and waterish: you shall find Lakes and standing
waters on the top of the Mountains. The Mountains abound with Cattle, and
the woods with wild beasts. Solinus writes thus concerning the Sea, which
flows between Ireland and England: The Sea between Ireland and England is
rough and unquiet all the year, and is scarce navigable but in some part of
the Summer. But he erres, for it is quiet enough, unless it be stirred up
with winds. And not only in Summer, but also in Winter passengers do sail
to and fro. All the Sea shores do abound sufficiently with Fish. Ireland has
in all three and thirty Counties, and four Archbishops. The Bishop of Armach,
Primate of all Ireland: the Bishop of Dublin: the Bishops of Cassil and Toam:
and these four have nine and twenty Suffragans or Vicegorents. Ireland (from
the manners of the Inhabitants) is divided into two parts. For those who refuse
to obey the Laws, and live more uncivilly, are called Irishrie, and commonly
Wild Irish. But those who are willing to obey the Laws, and appear before the
Judges, are called the English-Irish, and their Country the English Pale. they
speak English naturally and uncorruptly, yet they understand Irish, in regard
of their daily commerce with the Irish-men. The Irish-men have some certain
Lords, under whose command the most of them are: but they live under the
jurisdiction of the English, but counterfeitly, and as long as the English
Soldiers do waste their Territories: yet they appoint Sessions to be kept at
certain times and places, to restrain and punish robberies and theft,
committed by night. There those that are accused, if they be convicted, have
certain Arbitratours to judge of the cause, whom they call Brehoni: these are
all of one family, and although they have no knowledge in the Law, yet for
their wisdom and honesty of life they are accounted divine. Their war is
partly on horsback, and partly on foot. The Gentry have horses well managed,
so that without any advantage they will mount them in their armor, and taking
a Javelin or dart of great weight by the middle, they will throw or brandish it
against their enemy with much ease. Among the footmen, some are Soldiers in
Cassocks very strong, whom they call Galeglacii, having Cuttle-axes as sharp
as razors, and they are the chief strength of the Irish wars. The next are
Footmen wearing a light armor, with swords in their hands, and these are
called Karnes, and they think a man is not dead, until they have cut off his
head. In the third place are footmen, whom they call Daltines, who going
unarmed, attend upon the horsemen. The footmen as well as horsemen, as often as
they come to fight with their enemies, do cry with a great voice The reason
of this, See in Camden, p. 678.
Pharro, Pharro: and they use a Bagpipe in stead of a Trumpet. The Irish do
fare sumptuously and magnificently: for though they have no delicate dishes,
Their Diet.
nor great service in their banquets, yet their Tables according to the season
of the year are well furnished with Beef and Porke, and other meat. In their
Feasts they lie upon Beds: the first place at the Table belongs to the Mother
of the Family, who wears a long Gown or Mantell reaching to her ancles, often
dyed, and also sleeved.

THE SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE VLTONIA, CONNACIA, MEDIA, AND PART
OF LAGENIA. VLTONIA.
IRELAND being described in general, I think it worth my labor, before I
come to a particular description of the several parts: first to make a
division thereof, Ireland is divided into five Parts or Provinces. Into
Lagenia, which being Eastward is next to England: Connacia, or Connachtia,
which lies toward the West: Vltonia on the North side: and Momonia which is
situate in the Southern part. The fifth part is called Media, which being
placed in the midst, is enclosed with the rest. In these five Provinces there
are many notable Territories. As Lagenia does include Fingal, Offal, Leis,
Ossir, and Ormund. Media contains Slani, Four, and Delvin. In Connacia is
contained Clar: in Vltonia is contained Vril, Antrimen, Lecal, and Treconch. In
Momonia are included Trippitate, Kerie, Cosmay, Desmond, Tomond, and some
others. There is another division of Ireland, which we have touched in our
general Table, which is diligently to be considered if any one desire to know
the state of this Country, wherefore he must observe that Ireland is divided
into two parts: the English part, and the Irish part. The latter the native
Irish do inhabit, the former the Englishmen, and that part in common speech is
called the English Province, because it is as it were empaled and environed
with the Territories of the English. For after that the English having suppressed
the Irish Rebels, had restored Dermicius to his Country and Kingdom, they
seated themselves and built themselves seats in the chiefest places of Ireland.
Afterward seeing that as it were certain Islands did part them from the
subdued Irish, they called that part in which they placed a Colonie, the
English Province. In this is contained the greater part of Lagenia, and Media,
and that part of Vltonia which is called Vril: but the chiefest part of
Lagenia, which is called Fingal, near to Dublin on the North, has the chief
place, and Media is next to that. But Mercator uses the same division which
we made of it in the former Tables, describing it in four Tables, beginning
with Vltonia, Connacia, Media, and part of Lagenia. I will make a brief
description of all these parts, in the same order as our Author places them.
Vltonia offers it self in the first place. This part of Ireland was first
called by the Welsh Vltun, by the Irish Cui-Guilli, by the Latins Vltonia, and
by the English Vlster: The names of Vltonia.
toward the North it is parted with the Narrow Sea: The bound^.
toward the South it stretches it self to Connaught and Lagenia; the THE
SECOND TABLE OF IRELAND.
UDRONE
map of Ireland (partial) East part is bounded with the Irish Sea, and the West
part is beaten with the great Western Ocean. This Country being near to
Scotland, is reckoned one of the Scotch Islands, which are called the Hebrides,
and lie scatterd in the Sea between both Kingdoms: which Islands the
Irish-Scots, the successors of the Ancient Scythians, do inhabit. It is round
in form, and in length from the Haven Coldagh in the North, to Kilmore in the
South, it is about an hundred miles; and it is in breadth from Black-Abbey in
the East to Calebegh, a Western Promontorie, an hundred and thirty miles and
more. The whole circumference or compass of it is about four hundred and
twenty miles. The Form.
This Country has seldom any intemperate weather, for the sudden and fresh
gales of wind do refrigerate and cool the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle
raines do mitigate the cold of Winter. Briefly, it is neither in the Cold nor
Torrid Zone. The clouds are fair and clear, and when they are most impure,
yet the wind continually driving them about does make the air wholesome, The
Air.
and at length quite dispelleth them. The equal temper of the Clime is the
cause that the soil does plentifully bring forth diverse kinds of trees, some
bearing fruit, and others for building. The Country is full of grass and fit
for pasturing: very rich in horse, and sheep, and Oxen. The Rivers are, The
Rivers.
as I may say, doubly commodious, being navigable to bring up Vessels, and
Barques, and also being full of fish and very convenient for the inhabitants in
other uses. Among these the first is Vinderius, which is now called the Bay of
Knocfergus, from the Town seated on it, and from the safety of the Haven, which
the English call Knocfergus, the Irish Caregfergus, that is Fergus his rock,
which name it received from A famous Scot, as Camden affirms. page 669.
Fergusius who was drowned there: There is also Banna which (as Giraldus says)
is a very fair River as the Banna in Irish signifies fair. Camden. p. 669 The
plenty of Salmons.
name witnesses, it runs out of the Lake Eaugh, and discharges it self
into the Ocean with a double Channel; it is fuller of Salmons than any River
in Europe, because (as some think) the water is so clear, in which Salmons do
chiefly delight. And there is the River Logia, which Ptolemie mentions, and
now is called Lough Foil, which falls into the Sea with a great stream.
There are many great Lakes in it, in which is the Lake Eaugh which spreads it
self abroad from Armaugh: and on the East side are the woods Kilulto, The
Lakes.
Kilwarney, and Dyffrim, into which the Lake does so insinuate and wind in it
self, that it makes two Peninsula's, Lecale toward the South, and Ard toward
the North: Lecale runs out farthest toward the East of any part of Ireland,
and the farthest Promontorie thereof Mariners do now call Saint John's Foreland,
Ptolomie calls it Isanius, perhaps from the British word Isa, which signifies
Lowermost. In the Isthmus thereof stands Dunam, Here was buried S. Patricke, who
as they say, being sent by Celestinus the Bishop of Rome, An. 433. converted
this Island to the Christian faith.
which Ptolemie mentions, now called Down, being an ancient Town, and the Seat
of a Bishop. Ard lies over against it being divided from it by a little slip
of land. There are also Lakes, of which we have made mention in our general
Table. The Country is shadowed with great woods. To speak in a word, although
it be barren in some places by reason of Lakes, Bogs, and thick Woods, yet it
is every where full of Cattle, and Grass, and at all times it abundantly
requiteth the labor of the husbandman. Nature is so little beholding here to
Art or Industry, that the flourishing banks of Rivers embrodered with
flowers, the shadie Woods, green Meadows, bending Hills, and Fields fit to
bear corn if they were tilled, do seem to be angry with the Inhabitants,
because by their carelessness and negligence they suffer them to be rude and
wild. The Voluntii, Darni, Robogdii, The Ancient Inhabitants.
and Erdini in Ptolemies time held all this Country, who also dispersed
themselves into other parts of Ireland. The special place in this Country is
Armach, near the River Kalis, which although it be not very fair, yet it is
the seat of an Archbishop, and the Metropolis of the whole Island. The
Irish-men do fabulously report that it was called so from Queen Armacha, but
See Camden. page 66^.
Camden thinks it to be the same which Beda calls Dearmach, which signifies
in the Scotch and Irish language, the field of Redmen. There is one Archbishop
in Vltonia, who has his Seat at Armach, and has these Suffraganes and
substitutes under him, with the Bishop of Maeth and Deren, Ardach or Apde,
Kilmore, Clogher, Down, Coner, Klancknos, Raboo, or Ropo, and Dromoore. For
the keeping of the Inhabitants of this Country and Province in order, it was
fortified with six and fifty Castles, there are also nine Market Towns in it.
And it is divided into the Hithermost and Furthermost. The Hithermost has
three Counties, Louth, Down, The names of Conn^gh
and Antrimme. The Farthermost has seven, Monahon, Tiroen, Armack, Colrane,
Donergall, Fermanagh, and Cavon. Connacia is the second part of Ireland, some
call it Connachtia, the English call it Connagh, The bounds*
and the Irish Connaghti: it is bounded on the East with part of Lagenia, on
the North with part of Vltonia, on the West it is beaten with the Western
Ocean, and on the South it is environed with part of Momonia or Munster, which
is enclosed with the River Sineo or Shennin, and lies over against the
Kingdom of Spain. The Figure of it is long, The Form.
and at either end both Northward and Southward it is very narrow, but toward
the middle it grows longer on either side. It is an hundred and six and
twenty miles long, from the River Shennin in the South, to Engi Kelling in the
North, the greatest breadth is about foure-score miles, from Tromer the
Eastern bound, to Barrag-Bay the Western limit. The whole circuit and
compass of it is about four hundred miles. The Air in this Region is not so
pure and clear as in the other Provinces of Ireland, The Air
by reason of some wet places bearing grass, which are called in regard of
their softness Bogges, being dangerous, and sending out many thick vapors.
The chief City of this Province, being the third City of note in Ireland, is
Galway, in Irish Gallive. Built in the form of a Tower, The City
having a Bishops See in it, and being famous for the frequent resort of
merchants thither, and also profitable to the Inhabitants by the conveniencie
of the Haven which is beneath it, and by the easy exportation of Merchandise:
not far from hence on the Western sidely the Islands which are called Arran,
of which many things are fabled, as if they were the Isles of the living, in
which no man could either die or be subject to death. The Province of Connaught
at this time is fortified with foureteen Castles, it has nine Market Towns,
and it is divided into six Counties or Shires in this manner: the County of
Clare, of Galway, of Mago, of Slego, of Letrimme, and of Roscomen. Media is the
third part of Ireland, The names whence derived.
which in their Country speech they call Mijh, the English Methe, Giraldus
Midia and Media, perhaps because it is in the very middle of the Island. For
the Castle Killaire in these parts, which Ptolemie seems to call Laberus, The
Situation.
is in the middle of Ireland, as the name Killair does denote. The Country
reaches from the Irish Sea, even to the River Shennin, which river parts it
from Connacia. It has a wholesome and delightful air. It is fruitful in
corn, pasturage, and flocks, abounding with Fleshmeate, The fertility of the
Soil.
Butter, Cheese, Milk, and the like: and in regard of the multitude of people,
the strength of fair Castles and Towns, and the peace arising from thence, it
is commonly called the Chamber of Ireland. Here is the Town Pontana, which is
commonly called Drogheda, a fair Town, and having a convenient Haven for Ships
to ride in. But there are some who think that the middle part of this Town,
on the other side the River, The Towns names.
is in Vltonia. There are also these Towns in Media, Molingar, Four, Delvyn,
Trim, Kelle^, Navan, Aboy, Dulek, and Scrin.

THE THIRD TABLE OF IRELAND. IN WHICH ARE MOMONJA, AND THE REMAINDER OF LAGENIA
AND CONNACH.
CONNACIA is the second part of Ireland, some call it Connachtia, the English
Connach, and the Irish Connachty. The names
It lies toward the West, and is bounded with the River Sen, the River Banna,
and the Ocean. This, the Auteri and Nagnatae in the time of Ptolomie did
inhabit. But there is so near an affinity between these two words,
Nagnatae and Connaghty, that they seem one to be derived from the other:
unless we suppose that the word Connaghty did arise from the Haven Nagnatae,
which Ptolomy mentions, and from thence the Country got this name. For a Haven
is called in their native speech Cuon, to which if you add Nagnata, it will
not be much different in sound from Connaghty. The fertility of the Soil.
The Country as it is in some places fruitful and pleasant, so in some wet
places covered over with grass, and by reason of their softness, called Bogs,
it is very dangerous, as other parts of the Island are, and full of dark and
thick woods. But the Coasts having many Bays, and navigable in-lets, does as
it were invite and stir up the inhabitants to employ themselves in
navigation, yet sloth is so sweet unto them, that they had rather beg from
door to door, then seek to keep themselves from Poverty by honest labor.
It is reported in the Irish Histories that Turlogus O-mor O-conor, was sole
Governor of this Country, The ancient government
and that he divided it between his two sons, Cabelus and Brienus. But when
the English came into Ireland, Rodericke did govern it, and called himself
King of Ireland, but he being afraid of the English wars, not trying the
chance or fortune of the field, put himself under obedience to Henry the
Second King of England. Who after revolting from his faith given, Miles Cogane
was the first Englishman who did attempt, but in vain, to get Connachtia.
Afterward, William the son of Adelme, whose posterity were called in Irish
Bourki, Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, and William de Bermingham chief
men in England, did subject this Country, and brought it to civilitie. But
Bourke, or de Burgo, and his Posterity were a long time styled and called Lords
of Connach, governing this Province together with Vltonia in great peace and
tranquillity, and did receive great revenewes out of it, until the only
daughter of Richard de Burgo being sole inheretrix of Connachtia and Vltonia,
was married to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the son of King Edward the third.
But he living for the most part in England, and his successors the Mortimers
did neglect their Patrimony, the Bourks being their kinsemen, to whom they had
committed the overseeing of those Lands, making use of the absence of the
Lords, and the troublesome times in England, contemned the authority of the
Laws, entering into league with the Irish, and making marriages with them, and
got all Connachtia to themselves, and by degrees degenerating, having left off
the English habit, they followed the Irish manners It is at this day divided
into six Counties: Clare, Letrimme, Galwey, Resecomin, Maio, and Sligo. There
are in it the Baron of Atterith, the Baron of Clare, and others. Here is also
Galloway, a Town much frequented by foreign Merchants. It is reported that an
Outlandish Merchant who did traffic with the Townsmen, did once ask an
Irishman, in what part of Galloway Ireland stood? valuing this Town as the
whole Country, and the whole Country as this Town. There are reckoned to
Galloway, Anner, Clare, Sligo, Arctlo, and Alon, Towns of note.

The Auteri, whom I mentioned before, did heretofore possess the more
Southern part of this Connacia, where is now Twomondia, or Claria, the Country
of Clan-Richard, and the Baronie of Atterith, which plainly intimates whence
came the name of the Auteri. Twomond, called by Giraldus Theutmonia (which
though it lie beyond the River Senus or Shinnin, may be added to Momonia) is
stretched forth into the Sea with a great Promontorie, famous for the Seat of
an Archbishop which they call Toam, and for the Earls thereof, namely the
O-Brennis, who descending from the ancient Earls of Connack, were honored by
Henry the Seventh, with the Title of Earls of Twomond. This Country or the
most part of it the English call Clare-shire, from Thomas Clare the youngest
son of Gilbert, the first Earl of Gloucester, to whom King Edward the first
gave this Country. Clan-Richard, that is, the Land of the sons of Richard, is
next unto this; it took its name, according to the Irish custom, from one
Richard an Englishman, called de Burgo, or Burgensis, who afterward in this
Country became a man of great note and power; and out of this Family Henry the
eighth created Richard de Burgo Earl of Clan-Richard, Atterith, commonly
Athenri, does glory in that warlike Baron, John de Bermingham an Englishman,
out of which Family the Earls of Louth are descended: but these Berminghams of
Atterith, degenerating into the Irish Wildenesse and incivilitie, will scarce
acknowledge that they were once English. In this Atterith Geographers do place
the mouth of the River Ausoba, which is now called the Bay of Galway: for
Galway, in Irish called Gallive, is seated on it, being a fair Town, which
through the benefit of the River, is filled with many commodities brought
thither, both by Sea and Land. Geographers do also place the River anciently
called Ravius, but now Trowis, in Connack; it is also known by the name of
Bannus, for the inhabitants do call it Banny: This River coming out of the
Lake Ernus is the bounds of Connack, and Vlster.

I return to the Inhabitants. The rest of Connack toward the North was
heretofore possessed by the Nagnatae, even to the River Bannus, which does part
Vltonia and Connack; where O-Conor, O-Rorck, and Mac-Diarmod, being wild
Irish, do govern and rule. The shore is THE THIRD TABLE OF IRELAND.
ULTONIA CONATIA et MEDIA
map of Ireland (partial) backed from Ausoban with the Isles of Arran,
Inisceath, known heretofore by reason of Colmans Monastery here seated, and
Inis Bovind, which Beda translating out of Scotch, calls Vitulae albae
Insulam, or the Island of the White Calfe. Then the shore runs back to the
mouth of the River Libinus, which Camden brings unto Dublin, but the place
which Ptolomie assigns, is now called the Bay of Slegah. Here Ptolomie
places the City of Nagnata, but Camden says, he cannot tell what that City
should be. There is one Archbishop here who keeps his residence at Toam; under
whom are these Suffragan Bishops, the Bishop of Kilmako, Olfine, Bishop
Helphen, Avaughdoune, Clonfert, and Moroo.

MEDIA.
MEDIA is the third part of Ireland, which in the Country speech is called
Mijh, the English call it Methe, Giraldus Midia, and Media, Whence the names
are derived.
because perhaps it lies in the very middle of the Island. For the Castle of
Killaire in those parts, which Ptolomie calls Laberus, is held to be in the
middle of Ireland, and so much the Sea Camden page 663.
name it self does express: for Lair in the Irish speech signifies the
middle. Richard Stanthurst writes thus concerning the Etymon or signification
of the word Media. In the year of the World 2535. five brethren possessing the
Islands, they resolved to divide it equally into four Provinces, that so they
might govern in them severally. But least their younger brother whose name was
Slanius, might be without some honor, they consented together to bestow on
him a share taken out of all four parts: Which was received by him
chearefully, and hence some suppose that it was called Media. It stretches and
extends it self from the Irish Sea, even to the River Shennin, which River
does part it from Connack. The Situation.
It has a wholesome pleasant Air and deligthfull Prospect. It abounds with
corn, pasturage and cattle, having store of Flesh, The fertility and
fruitfulnes.
Butter, Cheese, Milk, and the like, and in regard of the strength of the
Towns and Castles, and the peace arising thence it is called the Chamber of
Ireland. The Irishmen do write that this Country heretofore had Kings, and
that Slanius afterward became sole Monarch of all Ireland. The ancient
go^e^nment.
But when the English had set foot in Ireland, Hugh Lacey did conquer the most
part of it, and King Henry the Second King of England granted it unto him to
hold in fee, and styled him Lord of Media. He having his head on a sudden cut
off by an Irishman while he was building the Castle of Derworth, left behind
him Hugh Earl of Vltonia, and Walter Lord of Trim, the Father of Gilbert, who
dyed before him. But by the daughters of Gilbert, Margaret, and Matilda, the
one part fell by the Ienvills of the House of Lorraine, and the Mortimers, unto
the King: for Peter of Ienvill being borne of that Matilda had issue Ioane, who
was married to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March: the other came by the Verdons to
many Families in England. In our forefathers time by an Act of Parliament it
was divided into two parts, namely, into East and West Media. The River Boand
or Boyne, which Ptolomie calls Buvinda, runs through the East side, and
afterward when it has washed Droghda, a fair and populous Town, called so
from the bridge, it divides that part from Vltonia. The Western Media has
nothing worthy of memory or note beside Laberus (which Camden seems to call
Kaillair) and the Town of Delvin which heretofore did honor Peter Meset, and
now the renowned English Family of the Nogents, with the title of Barons. For
Gilbert Nogent (as Richard Stanihurst has it, who writ eloquently of Irish
matters) having a gentleman's estate, was rewarded by Hugh Lacy, for his service
performed in the Irish wars, with the Colonies of Delvin and Four; from him
are the Barons of Delvin descended. Those Irish Countries of O-Malaghlem,
Mac-Coglan, O-Madden, and Mogoghian, whose names have a barbarous sound, we
leave unto others. Among the Towns of Media, Pontana is reckoned which is
commonly called Droghda, being a fair Town and having an Haven fit for the
receipt of Ships. But there are some who place the middle part of this Town
in Vltonia, beyond the River. There are also in Media these Towns, Molingar,
Four, Delvin, Trim, Kelles, Navain, Aboy, Dulek, and Scrin. There are also in
this Province near Fonera three Lakes, not far one from another, whereof
every one contains his several sorts of fish, which never come one to
another, although the way be passable by the River flowing between them: and
beside if the fish be carried from one Lake to another, they either die, or
return to it again. Here is the River Boand aforesaid, called so from the
swiftness of it: for See Camden^ Brit. page 663.
Boan both in Irish and Welsh, does signify swift, and Nechamus has sung of
it.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF IRELAND. WHICH CONTAINS THE EASTERN PART, AND DOES
present these following Territories to view. Glandeboy, Tirone, Arde, Lecale,
Enaugh, Arthule, Newry, Morn, Fuse, Vriel, and many others, also the Cities
Armack and Down. LAGENIA.
IN our Authors division Lagenia follows Media, being the fourth part of
Ireland, The names.
which the Inhabitants call Leighnigh, the Britains Leyn, the English
Leynster, the Latin Writers Lagenia, and the book called the holy lives of
the Saints Lagen. It lies all toward the Sea on the East side of Ireland, even
from Momonia to the River Neorus, which it goes beyond in many places: it is
divided from Conack by the River Senus or Shennin, and from Media by the bounds
thereof. In Ptolemies time it was the seat of the Brigantes, the Coriondi, the
Menapij, the Cauci, and the Blani, and perhaps from these Blani, their names
Lein, Leinigh and Leinster were derived. It is a fertile and fruitful Country,
it has a gentle Air, and the Inhabitants are of a courteous disposition. It is
now divided into these Counties, Weishford, Caterlogh, Kilkenny, Dublin,
Kildare, Kings-shire, Queenes-shire, Longford, with which Fernes and Wicklo are
now reckoned. These Counties we will now view in order, with Camden, according
to the people which the Geographer writes did inhabit this part of Ireland.
The Brigantes were seated between the mouth of the River Suirus, and the two
Rivers Neorus and Barrow, which Ptolemie calls Birgus, which flow together
under the City of Waterford. Because there was an ancient City of the
Brigantes in Spain, called Brigantia, therefore Florianus del Campo, striveth
to fetch the original of these Brigantes out of Spain; though if there were
any ground for such a conjecture, they might as probably be derived from the
Brigantes in Britain, which is a neighbor Nation and very populous. But if
it be true, as some copies have it, that they were anciently called Brigantes,
then the very name does persuade us that they were so called from the River
Birgus, which they inhabited round about. The Coriondi did inhabit between the
Rivers Neorus and Birgus, where is now the County of Carleo or Caterlogh, a
great part of Kilkenny, and farther even to THE FOVRTH TABLE OF IRELAND.
ULTONIA ORIENTAL
map of Ireland (partial) Ossiria the Higher, beside Ormondia, which the Irish
call Vrrown, the English Ormond, and vulgarly Wormwood. In both of these there
is nothing memorable, but the Earls thereof. For Ossiria the Higher has been
renowned by the Earl Barnabie Fitzpatrick, who was dignified by Edward the
sixth with that honor. And Ormond has had, accounting from James the first,
thirteen Earls of the famous Family of the Butlers, whom Edward the third
advanced to that honor, and whose honorable Ancestors were heretofore the
Butlers of Ireland, whence this name Butler was given them. That which some of
the Irish, and those that would be thought men of good credit, do affirm
concerning certain men in this Country that are every year turned into
Wolves, I think it to be fabulous: Although it may be indeed the abundance of
melancholy, wherewith they are possessed, (called by the Physicians
Lycanthropia) does stir up such fantasies, that they imagine themselves to
be transformed into Wolves. Neither dare I imagine any other thing of these
Lycaons transformed in Livonia. At the mouth of Surius the Menapij held a
Promontorie toward the Southwest, which is now the County Weishford, in Irish
County Reogh. The name it self does seem to intimate that these Menapij came
from the Menapij a Maritime people among the Belgians. But whether that
Carausius, who being made King defended Britain against the Emperor
Dioclesian, was descended from the one or the other, let others determine. For
Aurelius Victor calls him a Citizen of Menapia, and the City Menapia is
placed by Geographers not in Holland, but in Camden thinks this Menapia to be
that which now is called Weishford, see him page 659.
Ireland. Ptolemie calls this Promontorie Hieron, that is, holy, and I doubt
not but it was called so by the Inhabitants for the same respect. For they
called in their Country speech, the farthest Town hereof, at which the English
first landed in this Isle, Banna, which signifies Holy. From this Holy
Promontorie the shore runs forth in a large tract toward the East and
North, near to which there are shallow sands very dangerous for shipping,
which Sailors call The Ground. The Cauci, who were a Maritime people of
Germany, did inhabit next to the Menapij. These had that Maritime Country,
which the Irish Families of the O-Mores, and O-Brins do inhabit, together
with the County of Kildare. The County of Kildare is very pleasant; concerning
the pastures whereof Giraldus uses these verses of Virgill.

Et quantum longis carpunt armenta diebus,
Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponit.
How much the flocks do eat in the long day,
The cold dew in the short night does repay.
But for the company of Giants which Giraldus places in this Country, I leave
it to those who admire fabulous antiquities, for I would not willingly doat
too much on fables. Beyond the Cauci lived the Eblani, where is now the
Country of Dublin and Meth, being one of the five parts of Ireland. The County
of Dublin toward the Sea is of a fertile soil, having pleasant Meddowes, but
so bare of Wood, that for the most part they use Turfe and Coal dug in
England. It is full of Towns and People; where the River Liffe hides it self
in the Sea, Houth is almost environed therewith, from whence the Family of the
Laurences are called Barons of Houth. On the North side of Dublin lies Fingall,
a fair Country well tilled, and is as it were the storehouse or Barn of the
Kingdom, in regard it yields yearly so great a quantity of corn, that in
a manner the earth does strive with the labor of the husbandmen, which lying
in other parts of the Island, neglected and untilled, does seem to complain
of their ignorant sloth. These things being unfolded, let us now pass to the
Cities and Towns. Here Kilkenny meets us in the first place, being near to
the River Neorus, The names of the Towns.
Kilkenny signifies the Cell, or Chapel of Canicus, who formerly in this
Country was famous for his Religious solitary life. It is a neat fine Town,
abounding with all things, and the chief of the innermost Towns of this
Island. The Town is divided into the English and Irish part, the Irish part is
as it were the Suburbs, wherein is the Temple of Canicus, who gave the name to
it, and it is the Seat of a Bishop. The English Town is newer, being built by
Ralph the third Earl of Chester, it was fortified as some do suppose, with
walls on the West side by Robert Talbot a Noble man, and strengthened with a
Castle by the Butlers. Below this, upon the same River of Neorus, a walled
Town is seated, called in English Thomas Town, in Irish Bala mac-Andan, that
is, the Town of Antonius his son, both names were given unto it by the
builder Thomas Fitz*Antonius an Englishman, whose heirs are still acknowledged
the Lords thereof. There stood in this Country that ancient City Rheba,
mentioned by Ptolemy, which was also called Rheban, but instead of a City it
is even (...) a City and no City, as he himself says, being a few Cottages
with a Forte. It honors the Saint-michaells with the title of Baronet. There
is Lechlinia, in Irish Leiglyn, a royal Town, fortified with a Castle by that
Noble Deputy Bellingham. The great City of Rosse, has likewise here
flourished in times past, as having been full of Inhabitants, and Merchandise,
and fortified with a wall of great circuit, by Isabell the daugher of Richard
Strongbow Earl, which walls do now only remain. For discord arising among
the Citizens concerning Religion, the Town is ruinated and fallen to nothing:
but enough of these things, The Mountains and Rivers.
I pass to the Mountains and Rivers. Beneath Ormund the hills Bliew Blemi
(which Giraldus calls the Mountains of Bladina) do lift up their heads with
their unequal tops, out of whose bowels as it were, the Rivers Suirus, Neorus
and Birgus, do arise, and running in several channels before they come to the
Ocean they join all in one stream, whence the Ancients did call them Tres
Sorores the three Sisters. Neorus hemmeth in many Castles and Towns; Birgus,
now called Barrow, flowing out of the Mountain Bladina, and running along by
it self with many windings, at last passes Rheba and other Towns. Afterward
Neorus and Birgus do mingle their Waters, and having for some miles run in
one channel, they resign their name and waters to their elder sister Suirus,
which by a rocky mouth discharges her self into the Ocean, where on the left
hand there runs forth a little Promontorie with a straight neck, which
bears a little Tower as a defense or mark for Ships, built by the Rosses
when they flourished that they might safely enter into the Haven. In this part
Ptolemie placed the River Or M^d^na, which Camden thinks to be Slane. See him
page 569.
Modanus aforesaid, and Ovoca near the Sea, on the back whereof the Castle
Arcklo is seated, which River as Giraldus says, both in the flowing and ebbing
of the Sea water, does still retain its native sweetness, and does preserve
its waters unstained or unmingled with saltness a great way in the Sea. Here
is the River Liffie, which slideth by Dublin, Called Lifnius* or Labnius
Fluvius.
it is not carried with any violence except after a great storm of rain, but
flows very gently. This River without doubt is mentioned by Ptolemie: but by
the carelessness of Bookemen, it is banished out of its place. For the River
Liffie, is placed in Ptolemies Tables in the same Latitude toward the other
part of the Island, where there is no such River. But let us call it back
again to Or Dublin, which is called by the West Britains Dinas Dublin, and by
the Irish Balacleigh. 1. the Town upon Hurdles, for it is reported that the
foundation thereof was laid upon Hurdles.
Eblana its proper place, and give these verses of Necham concerning it.

Visere Castle-cnock non dedignatur Aven-liff,
Istum Dublini suscipit unda Maris.
Aven-liff to see Castle-cnock does not disdain,
Which the Sea near Dublin does receive again.
I will also add that which Giraldus has concerning Wiclo a Port or Haven
near to Ovoca: which he calls Winchiligello. There is a Haven at
Winchiligello, on that side of Ireland which looks toward Wales, whose waters
do flow in when the Sea does ebb, and when the Sea flows, it ebbeth. There
is also another very notable one, which when the Sea ebbeth, yet still
continues salt and brackish in every part and creek thereof. There is one
Archbishop in Lagenia, which has his seat at Dublin, and Clandelachy, he is
called, Glandeloylong, and Primate of Ireland, having these following Suffragan
Bishops under him, the Bishop of Elphine, or Bishop Helphen; of Kildare, of
Fernes Ossorie, and of Leighlyn called by some Laghlyn.

THE FIFTH TABLE. OF IRELAND. CONTAINING THE BARONIE OF Vdrone, part of the
Queens Country, and the Lord Fortonesy, in the middle of Vdrone lies the
City Laglyn, otherwise Leighlin, adorned with a Bishops Seat. MOMONIA.
MOMONIA follows in our propounded method, in Irish called Mown, in English
Munster: the fifth and last part of Ireland, it lies on the South upon the
Vergivian Sea, being divided in some places from Connacia by the River Shennin,
and from Lagenia by the River Neorus; it was formerly divided into two parts,
the Western, and the Southern. The Western part the Gangani, Luceni,
Velabri, and Vterim did anciently inhabit, the Vdiae or Vodiae the Southern
part. Now it is divided into seven Counties namely Kerry, Limrick, Corck,
Tripperary the County of the Holy Cross, the County of Waterford, and
Desmond. We purpose to run briefly over these Counties with Cambden,
according to the several people which the Cosmographer attributes to them.
The Gangani whom we formerly mentioned in the first place, do seem by the
affinity of their name to be the same with the Concani of Spain, whose
original was from the Scythians, and Silius witnesses that they drank horses
blood, which heretofore the Wild Irish did often use to do, Kerri (as it is
now called) at the mouth of the River Shennin, was Anciently their Seat. A
country full of inaccessible and woody mountains between which there are
many hollow valleys, having thick woods in them. The Earls of Desmond were
heretofore honored with the dignity of Counts Palatine hereof, but by the
wickedness of men, which would have liberty and yet knew not how to use it,
it was long since converted into a sink of impiety, and a refuge for
seditious persons. A ridiculous opinion has invaded and persuaded the minds
of the Wild Irish, that he that does not answer the great shouting or warlike
Which is Pharich.
cry which the rest make, when they join battle, should be suddenly taken up
from the earth, and as it were flying be carried into these desert valleys,
from any part of Ireland, and there feed on grass, drink water, and yet know
not what he is, having reason, but not speech, and at last should be taken by
hunters, and brought home again. The middle of this Country is cut into two
parts by a River which has now no name, but flows by a small Town called
Trailes, now almost ruinated, where the Earls of Desmond had their mansion
houses. This River, by the situation of it in Ptolemies tables, does seem to
be Dur, and says Camden, I would avouch no less, if Duris, which at this day
is reckoned among the Havens of this Western Coast, be at the mouth of it, as
I have understood by some. Not far from hence is the Haven Smerwick (the word
being contracted in stead of S. Mary Wick,) of which, not many years ago,
when Girald Earl of Desmond, a man profound in treachery toward his Prince
and Country, did daily by several inrodes waste the Country of Momonia, a
mixed band or company of Italians and Spaniards arrived, being sent unto his
aid from Pope Gregory, and the Spaniards, who having engarrison'd themselves
in a place, called Fort del Ore, seemed not to fear Heaven it self. But when
that famous and warlike Deputy the Lord Arthur Gray came with his forces, he
did soon decide the matter. For forthwith they yielded themselves, and most
part of them were put to death, because it seemed most safe and fit so to do,
the affairs of the Kingdom requiring it, and the rebels being on every hand.
The Earl of Desmond himself fled to the woods, and having hid himself in a
Cottage was wounded by a Soldier or two who rushed in upon him, and afterward
being known, he was beheaded for his treachery and wasting of his Country.
All Desmonia toward the South is subject to the Gangans, which the Irish call
Dassown, the English, Desmond; heretofore three sorts of people dwelt in it,
namely the Luceni, the Velabri, the Iherni, which are conceived in some Maps to
be the Vterini. The Luceni seem to have drawn both their name and original
from the Lucensii of Spain, which held the opposite Coast. The Velabri were so
called from Aber, which is as much to say as Aestuarii, because they were
seated near the arms of the Sea: hence also the Artabri and Cantabri were so
called. Orosius places these at the Promontorie Notium, which Mariners at this
day do call Some call it Cabo del Mar. others Ca^a and Cabo de Cler.
Biar-head: under this Promontorie the River Iernus is received into the Ocean,
near to which stands Dunck-eran a Bishops Seat, this Dunck-eran, which in the
Scottish-Irish, is as much as to say, the Town Eran, does not only expressly
show it self to be that City Ivernis which Ptolemie mentions, but the river
to be that Iernus whereof he speaks, which has its appellation together
with the whole Island from Hier an Irish word signifying the West. For it is
the farthest River of this Country toward the West, as Ireland is the farthest
Island Westward of all Europe. The Iberni, who are also called Vterni, (that is
according to Camdens interpretation, the High Irish) did inhabit by this River
on one side of the Promontorie, where are the Havens Berebavim and Baltimore,
well known for the plenty of Herring taken therein: near to which dwelt
Mac-Carti More, an Irish Nobleman who in the year 1566. did deliver and render
his Lands and possessions into the hands of Elizabeth Queen of England, and
received the^ again from Her, to hold the^ by fealty after the manner of
England. And at the same time he was created Earl at Glencar, and baron of
Valentia. A man in this Country of great name and power, and an enemy
heretofore to the Giralds, who deprived his Ancesters, being heretofore, as he
contended, the lawful Kings of Desmond, of their ancient right. For these
Giralds, or Fitz-Giralds, being descended from the house of Kildare: and having
conquered the Irish, did here get themselves large possessions, and of these
Giralds Maurice Fitz-Thomas was created by Edward the third THE FIFTH TABLE OF
IRELAND.
Hiberniae v. Tabula.
map of Ireland (south) the first Earl of Desmond in the year of Grace 1355,
and left so firm and so established an inheritance, that the aforesaid honor
in a continued succession did descend to this wretched rebel, of which I have
spoken before, who was the tenth Earl after him. Next to the Iberni dwelt the
Vdiae who are also called Vodiae, of which names there remains some tokens in
the Country of Kilkenni; for the greatest part is called Idou and Idouth. These
did inhabit the Counties of Cork, Triperarie, Linrick, Kilkenni, and
Waterford. In the County of Triperarie, there is nothing worthy of memory,
but that there is a Palatinate in it, and the little Town called Holy Cross,
that has great immunities and freedoms granted (as the Monks have persuaded
them) in honor of a piece of our Saviors Cross which was kept there. The
Rivers, Cities and Towns.
The famous River Suirus, which the inhabitants call Shower, is carried out of
this Country of Triperarie into Kilkenni. This River running out of the
Mountain Blada through Ossiria the Lower of which the Butlers are styled
Earls, and afterward Thurles, of which they are styled Vicounts, first passes
by the City Cassilia or Cassel, adorned by Pope Eugenius with an Archbishop,
under whom are nine Suffragan Bishops. And from thence growing bigger by the
receipt of two other Rivers into it, near Waterford it discharges it self
into the Ocean. Hitherto I have run over this part of Ireland with Camden,
now it remains to unfold some things concerning the Cities and Towns in the
same. Among them the first that offers it self is This City the Irish and
Britains call Porthlargy.
Waterford, which is the second City in Ireland, and always faithful and
obedient to the English government. For after Richard Earl of Pembroke
conquered and took it, it always continued in peacable quietness and
obedience to the English, endeavoring to bring Ireland into subjection; whence
the Kings of England did grant them many and diverse immunities and freedoms,
which Henry the seventh did increase and confirm, because the Citizens did
behave themselves valiantly and wisely against Perkin VVarbeck, who with the
wings of impudence thought to aspire to the royal Throne. This City was built
by Pirates of Norway, which although it have a thick air, a soil not very
pleasant, and very narrow streets, yet such is the conveniencie of the Haven,
that it is the second Ctity in Ireland for wealth and populousnes, and is
filled with many wise and well behaved Citizens. It has a safe and quiet
Haven, and which is often full of outlandish and foreign ships. For there are
many Merchants in Waterford, who in trading do so wisely use their stock, and
so warily cast up their accou^ts, that in a short time they get great store of
wealth; they are not for the most part indebted, but have ready money. There
are very few usurers, which by fraudulent and intolerable interest live upon
the goods and spoil of the Citizens by taking them to pawn. The Citizens are
courteous, bountiful, thriftie, hospitable to strangers, and serviceable both
in private and public affairs. This City was anciently called Menapia, as
Dublin Eblana: or rather Amellana from Amellanus, who built it, as it is
reported that Sitaracus built Waterford, and Ivorus Limrick; They being
Cosen-Germans, and heretofore of great authority in Ireland. There is also in
this Country Limrick, which is the third City, that excells the rest, for
commodious situation, and for the fairness of the River, being watered with
Shennin the chief of all the Irish Rivers; though this City be distant from
the Sea sixty miles, yet the ship-masters do bring ships of great burden
even to the walls of the City, neither need they fear any rocks all the way
they come up. It is wonderful to see what store and plenty of fish you shall
find there. John King of England being enamoured with the pleasantness of
this City, built there a fair Castle, and a Bridge. There is also Corcagia
in the County of Cork, which the English call Cork, and the natives Korkeach,
environed with a wall, not very wide in compass. It is stretched out so as to
make but one street, yet there is a pretty and very fair market place; it
has an excellent safe harbor, but has heretofore been so encompassed with
seditious neighbors, that they keep continual watch and ward, as if they
were always besieged, and they scarce marry their daughters into the
country, by reason whereof, marrying among themselves, all the Citizens are
somewhat allied one to another. The Citizens are strong in Soldiers, they
addict themselves to merchandise, and govern their affairs both at home and
abroad very frugally. Coenalis writes, that the holy man Briacus came from
hence, from whom the Diocese of Sanbrioch in Britain, commonly called S.
Brieu, took its name. But in this he wandereth from the truth, because he
places the Coriondi of Ireland in this City. For Ptolemie does not mention it
at all. Yet the River which flows by it seems to be the same, which
Ptolemie calls Daurona, and Giraldus calls Sauranus, and Saverenus by changing
one letter. Learned page 655.
Camden says, that the affinity which is between these names did intimate so
much unto him, and that with greater probalitie, then if he should call the
next River Daurona, which running through the County Cork and Triperarie
falls into the Ocean by Lysmor, and is called by Historians Avenmor, that is,
the Great River, of which Nechamus thus writes: Vrbem Lissimor pertransit
flumen Avenmor,
Ardmor cernit ubi concitus oequor adit.
Avenmor runs by Lissimors wall
And at Ardmor into the Sea does fall.


THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
The names
THE Northern part of the Island of Britain is called Scotland, heretofore
Albania. The Inhabitants who keep their ancient speech, do call it Albain,
and the Irish Albany, as if it were an other Ireland, which the Bardes call
Banno. For Historians do call Ireland Greater Scotland; and the Kingdom of
Scots in Britain the Lesser Scotland: Ptolemie does call it Little Britain,
Rufus the Second Britain; Tacitus calls it Caledonia, from a certain
Forest so called. But the Scots were so called from their Neighbors the or
Scitti, a people of Germany that seized on a part of Spain.
Scyths: For as the Dutchmen call the Scyths and Scots by one name Scutten,
that is, Archers: so also the Britains did call both of them Y-scot, as
appears by the British Writers. And it is manifest, that they descending from
the Scyths, came out of Spain into Anno 424.
Ireland, and from thence into that part of Albain which they now possess, and
grew with the Picts into one Nation. Thus much of the Name, the Situation
follows. The Southern bounds toward England are the Rivers Tweede and
Solwey, on the North is the Deucaledon Ocean, The Situation.
on the West the Irish, on the East the German, other parts the Ocean and the
German Sea do compass. It is 480 miles long, but no where above 112 miles
broad. The temperature of the Air.
The Country is more temperate than France, the heat and cold being more
remiss, in like manner as it is in England, but yet it cannot be compared unto
it in fruitfulness. The Earth, for the most part, The fertility of the Soil.
is full of Sulphur or moorish, which affords them coal and turfe for
firing, especially in those places where there is want of wood. Yet here
grows as much corn as the Inhabitants can spend. The Earth also brings
forth diverse metals, as Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Iron, Lead, and Copper. It
has in Drisdale a Gold Mine, in which the Azure stone is found. It has also
precious stones, especially the Gagate, which burns in the water, and is
quenched with oil. Also excellent pastures, which do feed and bring up all
kinds of Herds: whence they abound with plenty of flesh, milk, butter,
cheese, and wool. When the Scots came to the Picts into Britain, although
they still provoked the English by wars and robberies, yet the Scottish
affairs grew not upon a sudden, but a long time they lay hid in that corner
in which they first arrived; neither (as Beda notes) for more than an hundred
and seven and twenty years, durst they bear Arms against the Earls of
Northumberland, until at one and the same in the year of grace 740.
time they had almost slain all the Picts, and the Kingdom of Northumberland
by domestic troubles, and by the incursions of the Dane, was almost ruined.
For then all the North part of Britain came to be called Scotland, together
with the Country beyond Cluide, and Edenburgh-Frith. The Scots are valiant in
war, and stout soldiers to endure hunger, watching, or cold. The chief
City of Scotland is This City the Scotch-Irish call Dun Faden. ^. the Town
Eaden.
Edinburgh, commonly called Edenburrow, THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
SCOTIA
map of Scotland this royal Seat Ptolemie calls the Which the word Edenburrow
much resembles, for (says Camden) Adam in the British tongue signifies a
wing See page 6^7.
Winged Castle, and not only the Metropolis of Lauden, but also of all
Scotland; it has its situation on the Mountains, much like to Prague in
Bohemia; the length stretched from East to West is a thousand paces, or a mile,
the breadth is half as much. The whole City hangs, as it were, on the side
of a Mountain, and is highest toward the West; toward the North it fortifies
the City with its steepness, the other parts toward the East and South are
environed with a wall. On the East side of the City is the Kings palace,
which they call King Arthurs Chair: on the West there is a steep Rock, and on
the Rock a great Tower, which the Scots do commonly call the maiden Tower,
which is the same which Ptolemie calls the Winged Castle. There are also other
Cities and famous Towns in this Kingdom, which we will describe particularly
in their places. In the Valeys there are many Lakes, Marshes, Fountains and
Rivers full of Fish, the greatest part whereof arise out of the Mountain
Grampius, of which we will make mention in our next Description. The Sea.
The Scottish Sea is full of Oysters, The Ports.
Herrings, Coral, and shellfish of diverse kinds. Scotland has many Havens
and Bays, amongst which Letha is a most convenient Haven. Mountains*
The Country it self is very rugged and mountainous, and on the very
Mountains has plain level ground, which does afford pasturage for Cattle.
Grampius is the greatest Mountain, and does run through the middle of
Scotland: it is commonly called Grasebaim, or Grantzbaine, Woods.
that is to say, the crooked mountain, for it bending it self from the shore
of the German Sea to the mouth of the River Dee, and passing through the middle
of this Country toward the Irish Sea, ends at the Lake Lomund: it was
heretofore the bounds of the Kingdom of the Picts and Scots. At Aberdon there
are woody mountains. It is thought, that here was the Forest of Caledonia,
which Lucius Florus calls saltus Caledonius, very spacious, and by reason of
great trees impassable; and it is divided by the Mountain Grampius. Moreover
not only ancient writings and manuscripts, but also Temples, Friaries,
Monasteries, Public w^^ks.
Hospitals, and other places devoted to Religion do testify, that the Scots
were not the last The Gospel was fast p^^ac^^d (...) P^llad^^^ (...) 4^1
among the Europaeans, who embraced the Christian Religion, and did observe and
reverence it above others. The royal Palace of Edinburgh, of which I spoke
before, is very stately and magnificent, and in the midst of the City is their
Capitol or Parliament House. The Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Nobles of the
Kingdom have their Palaces in the City, when they are summoned to
Parliament. The City it self is not built of brick, but of free squared
stone, so that the several houses may be compared to great Palaces. But
enough of this, let us pass to other things. The people of Scotland are
divided into three Ranks or Orders, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Laiety.
The Ecclesiastical Order has two Archbishops, one of S. Andrews, The manner
of Government.
Primate of all Scotland, the other of Glasco. There are eight Bishoprics
under the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, of Dunkeld, of Aberdon, of Murray, of
Dunblan, of Brecchin, of Rosse, of Cathanes, and of Orkney: Under the Bishop of
which is also called the Bishop of Gallowa^.
Glasgo there are three, to wit, the Bishop of Candida casa, the Bishop of or
Argile
Argadia, and the Bishop of the Isles, namely Sura, Mura, Yla, etc. This is the
manner and order of the Nobility, the Kings and the Kings Sons lawfully
begotten have the first place, of which if there be many, the eldest Son is
called Prince of Scotland, the rest are only called Princes; but when the King
is publicly crowned, he promises to all the people, that he will keep and
observe the Laws, Rites, and Customs of his Ancestors, and use them in the
same manner as they did. The Dukes have the second place, the Earls the third,
and those Nobles the fourth place, who are not known by that Title in foreign
Countries, but the Scots do call them My Lords. This name is so much esteemed
amongst them, that for honors sake they attribute it to their Bishops, Earls,
and chiefest Magistrates. In the fifth place are the Knights and Barons, who
are usually called Lords. They are in the sixth and last place, who having
attained to no title of honor, but yet descended from a noble Family, are
therefore commonly called Gentlemen; as the Brothers, and Sons of Earls and
Lords, the youngest Sons of Knights, who have no part in the Inheritance,
because (by the Laws of Scotland) that comes unto the eldest Son, for the
preservation of the Family, but the common people call all those Gentlemen,
who are either rich or well spoken of for their hospitality. The whole weight
of war does depend on the Nobility of the lowest degree. The Plebeians or
Citizens are partly chief men, who bear office in their Cities, partly
Merchants, and partly Tradesmen, or Handy-craftes-men, all which because they
are free from Tribute and other burdens, do easily grow rich. And least any
thing should be too heavily enacted against any City, the King permits that in
public assemblies or Parliaments three or four Citizens, being called out of
every City, should freely interpose their opinion concerning matters
propounded. Heretofore the Clergy was governed by the authority of Decrees
and Councels, but now (as the rest) they are ruled by the Laws, which the
Kings have devised, or confirmed by their royal assent. The Book which
contains the municipall Laws, written in Latin, is entitled Regia
Majestas, the Kings Majesty, because the Book begins with those words: In the
other Books of the Laws, the Acts of their Councels (which are called
Parliaments) are written in Scotch. There are many and diverse Magistrates in
Scotland, as in other Nations. Among these, the chief and next to the King is
the Protector of the Kingdom (whom they call the Governor.) He has the
charge of governing the Kingdom, if the Commonwealth at any time be deprived
of her King; or the King by reason of his tender age cannot manage the affairs
of the Kingdom. There is also a continual Senate at Edenburrough, so framed
of the Clergy and Nobility, that the Clergy does in number equal the
Laiety. The Clergy have a President over them, who has the first place in
delivering his opinion, unless the Chancellor of the Kingdom be present,
for he has the chief place in all affairs of the Kingdom. He that sits on
matters of life and death, they call The great Justice; he that looks to
Sea-matters, the Admiral: he that looks to the Camp, the Marshall: and he
that punishes offenses, committed in the Court, is called the Constable. There
are also in several Provinces, which they call Viecounties, those which are
Governors of them, whom by an ancient name they call Vicounts. Their authority
in deciding those matters which belong to civil causes, does depend on a
certain hereditary right, by which they claim also unto themselves those
Vicountships. So that these Vicounts may be said not to be created by the King,
but borne unto it by right from their Parents. The Cities also and Towns have
their Governors, their Bailiffes, and other Magistrates of that kind, who
keep the Citizens in obedience, and do maintain and defend the Privileges
of the Cities, whereby it comes to pass that the Commonwealth of Scotland, by
the apt disposition and ranking of Degrees, by the holy Majesty of Laws and
the authority of Magistrates, does flourish, and deserves great praise. These
are the names of the Dukedomes, Earledomes, and Vicountships of Scotland: the
Dukedom of Rotsay and Albania, and the Dukedom of Lennox, the County of
Carnes, Sutherlant, Rosse, Murray, Buchquhan, Garmach, Garmoran, Mar, Mernis,
Angus, Gowry, Frisse, March, Athole, Stratherne, Menteith, Wagion, Douglasse,
Carrike, Crawford, Annandale, Ourmonth, and Huntley. The Vicountships are,
Berwich, alias North-Berwyk, Roxburgh, Selkirk, Twedale, Dunfrise, Niddisdale,
Wigton, Are, Lanarke, Dunbretton, Sterueling, Louthean, Lauden, Clacmanan,
Kiuros, Fisse, Perth, Angus, Mernis, Aberdone, Bamph, Fores, and Inuernes.
There are the Universities of Saint Andrew and Aberdone, the later was adorned
with many privileges by King Alexander, and his Sister Isabel, about the year
1240. The former was begun to be established under King James, in the year
1411. To which is added the University of Glasgo, founded by Bishop Turnbul,
anno 1554, and Edinburgh. The disposition of the Scots is lively, stirring,
fiery, hot, and very capable of wisdom.

THE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
I Have ended that which I purposed to speak of Scotland in general, our
method requires that we should run through the parts of it in special.
Scotland is divided (by the Mountain Grampius, cutting it in the midst) into
the Southern or Higher part, and into the Northern or Lower part. It is
divided from England by the River Tweede, by the high Mountain Cheviota, and,
where the Mountain fails, by a trench made not long ago, and lastly by the
Rivers Eske and Solway. Beyond these bounds the Countries even from the
Scottish Sea to the Irish, do lie in this manner. The first is Marcia, Merchia
or March so called, because it is the limits, and lies on the Marches of
Scotland, this reaches to the left side of Tweede: on the East it is bounded
with the Forth Which is an arm of the Sea, where the water ebbes and flows.

The names of Cities.


Aestuarium, and on the South with England. In March is the Town of Berwyke,
Borwick, or Borcovicum; which the English hold. Here is also the Castle of
Hume, the ancient possession of the Lords of Hume, who being descended from the
Earls of March, became at last a great and renowned Family. Near to this
Castle lies Kelso, famous by a certain Monastery, and the ancient habitation
of the Hepburni, who a long time by Hereditary right, were Earls of Bothwell,
and Admiralls of Scotland, which honors by the Sister of James Earl of
Bothwell, married to John the lawful Son of King James the fifth, did descend
to Francis his Son. From thence we may see Coldingham, or Childingham, which
Beda calls the City Coldana, and Vrbs Coludi, and Ptolemie perchance calls
Colania. On the West side of March on either side of Tweede is Tifedale, being
so called from the River Tyfie. It is divided from England by the Mountain
Cheviota. After this are three small Countries, Lidesdale, Eusedale, and
Eskedale, so named from three Rivers of like name, Lide, Eve, and Eske. The
last is Annandale, which is so called from the River of Annan, dividing it in
the midst, which runs along by Solway into the Irish Sea. Now that we may
return again to the Called by Ptolemie Bode^ia by Tacitus Bodotria and by
Boethius Fluvius Levinus.

Lothiana.


Forth or Scottish Fyrth it does bound Lothiana or Lauden on the East side: the
Cochurmian Woods, and the Lamirian Mountains do separate it from Marcia. And
then a little toward the West it touches upon Lauderia and Twedia: the one so
called from the Town Laudera, the other from the River Tweede, cutting through
the middle of that Country. On the South and West Lidesdale Nithesdale and
Clidesdall do touch upon Tweede, the name of Nithesdale was given unto it from
the River Nyth, called by Ptolemie Nobios, which glideth through it into the
Irish Sea. The Country is now called Lauden, and anciently Pictland.

The fertility of the Soil.

The Rivers.


Lothiaria was so called from Lothius King of the Scots. On the East side it is
bounded with the Forth or Scottish Sea, and on the West it looks toward the
Vale of Clide. This Country both for courtesy and plenty of all things
necessary for man's life, does far excel the rest. It is watered with five
Rivers, Ti^^, The names of Cities
both the Eskes (who before they fall into the Sea do join together in one
channel) Letha, and Almone. These rising partly out of the Lamirian
Mountains, partly out of the Pictland Mountains do run into the Forth. It
has these Towns, Dunbarr, Hadinia, commonly called Hadington, Dalneth,
Edenburrough, Leth and Lemnuch. Somewhat more toward the West lies Or
Cl^^ddesdale.

The Rivers.


Clydesdale, on either side of the River Clide or Glotta, which in regard of
the length is divided into two Provinces. In the former Province is a hill not
very high, from whence three Rivers do discharge themselves into three diverse
Seas. Called Vedra by Ptolemie.
Tweede into the Scotch Sea, Annand into the Irish, and Clide into the
Deucalidon Sea. The chiefest Cities in it are Lanarick and Glasco. The names of
Cities
The latter the River Coila or Coyil runs by on the West: beyond Coila is
Gallovidia or Galloway. It is separated from Nithesdale with the River
Claudanus, almost enclining toward the South, whose banks do hemme in the
other side of Scotland. The whole Country is more fruitful in Cattle then in
Corn. Galloway.
It has many Rivers which run into the Irish Sea, as Vrus, Dee, Kennus, Cray
and Lowys. It is no where raised into Mountains, but yet it swells with little
Hills. Among which the water settling does make innumerable Lakes, The Situation.
which by the first rain which falls before the Autumnall Aequinox do make
the Rivers rise, whence there comes down an incredible multitude of Eeles,
which the Inhabitants having took up with wickar-weeles, do salt up, and make
a great commodity of. In this Country is the Lake of Myrton, part of whose
Waters do congeale in Winter, the other is never frozen. The farthest part on
this side is the Promontorie Novantum, under which in the mouth of the River
Lowys is the Bay which Ptolemy calls An^ Camde^* G^rigon^u^, because there is a
Town situate called ^^^geny.
Regrionius. On the other side there flows into it the Bay of Glotta, commonly
called the Lake Rian, which Ptolemy calls Vidogara. That Land which runs
between these two Bays the Inhabitants call Rine, that is the Eye of
Galloway: they call it also the Mule of Galloway, or the Mules nocke. The whole
Country is called Galloway, or Gallovid, which in the language of the Ancient
Scots signifies a Frenchman. Beneath Vidogara on the backside of Galloway,
Caricta gently bends toward the estuarie of Glotta. Rivers
Two Rivers do cut through it: Lakes.
one called Stinsianus, and the other Grevanus, on both of which many pleasant
Towns are seated. Between the Rivers, in those places where it swells into
little hills, it is fruitful in pasturage, and has some Corn. The whole
Country has not only a sufficiency of all things, for the maintenance of men
both by Sea and Land, but also does furnish the neighbor Countries with many
commodities. The River Dun does separate it from Coila, arising out of a Lake
of the same name, which has an Island in it with a small Castle. There are in
the Country of Caricta, very exceeding great Oxen, whose flesh is tender and
sweet in taste, and whose fat being once melted never hardneth again, but
always runs abroad like oil. Coila follows, which Galloway does bound on
the South, on the East it touches Clidesdale, on the West it is divided from
Cunningam by the River Vrwyn, the River Air THE SECOND TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
Scotiae tabula.II.
map of Scotland (western isles) runs through the middle hereof, on which is
seated Air a fair Market Town. For the general, this Country has greater
plenty of valiant men, then of fruit or cattle, for it is altogether of a light
sandy soil: which does sharpen the industry of the Inhabitants, and their
sparing life does confirm the strength of their minds and bodies. In this
Country about ten miles from the Town Air, there is a stone almost twelve foot
high, and thirty Cubits thick, which is called the deaf stone, for if you
hollow or shoot off a Musket on the one side, he that stands on the other
side next to the stone cannot hear it, he that stands farther off shall hear
it better, and he that stands farthest off shall hear it best. After this
Cunningam runs to the North, and straightneth Glotta, until it become a
small River. It is manifest that the name of this Country came from the Danes,
and in their language signifies a Kings house, which is a sign that the Danes
sometimes possessed it. Next on the East side is situated Renfroan, so called
from a Town, in which the Inhabitants kept their public meetings, it is
commonly called Baronia. Two Rivers do cut through the middle of it, which are
both called Carth. After this Country is Clidesdale aforenamed, stretched forth
to either bank of Glotta, and pours forth many Noble Rivers: on the left
hand Aven, and Duglasse, which do run into Glotta: on the right hand another
Aven, which seperates Sterling on the South from Lothiana, and on the East from
the Fyrth, until at last growing lesser, it has a Bridge over it near
Sterling. There is one River that cutteth through this Country, which is worthy
of memory, called Carron, near to which are some ancient Monuments. On the
left side of Carron there are two little hills built by the industry of men,
which are commonly called Duni pacis. On the right side of Carron, there is a
plain field that at last rises into a little hill, being in the middle
between Duni pacis, and a little Chapel. On the side of this hill there
appears yet the ruins or remainder of a small City. But the foundation of
the Walls, and the description of the streets, partly by tillage, and partly
by digging forth squared stones for the building of rich men's houses, cannot be
distinctly known. This place Beda does call Guidi, and does place it in a
corner of the trench made by Severus the Emperor. Many famous Roman Writers
have made mention of this Trench and Bulwark. Here many tokens do remain,
and many stones are dug up with inscriptions, which are either testimonies
of aid formerly received by the Tribunes and Centurions, or of their
Sepulchers in those places. Beyond Sterling is Levinis or Lennox, divided from
Renfroan by Glotta, from Glasco by the River Keluin: It is parted from Sterling
or Striveling with the Mountains, from Taichia, by the Forth: at length it
ends at the Mountain Grampius, at the foot thereof the Lake Lomund through a
hollow Vale extends it self 24. miles in length, and 8. in breadth, which
contains above 24. Islands. Besides a multitude of other fishes, it has some
particular unto it self, which are pleasant in taste, called Pollacks. There
are three things reported of this Lake very memorable: First the Fish have no
Finnes, but otherwise are of an excellent taste. Secondly, the water when there
is no wind is sometime so rough, that it would affright the boldest Mariner,
from weighing Anchor. Lastly, there is a certain Island fit to feed flocks of
cattle, which moves up and down, and is driven to and fro with every tempest.
But I return to the Lake, which at last breaking forth toward the South, does
send forth the River Levin, which gives its own name to the Country. This
River near to the Castle Brittanodun, or Dun brittan, and a Town of the same
name, enters into Glotta. The farthest Hills of the Mountain Grampius do
somewhat raise the farthest part of Levinia, being cut through with a little
Bay of the Sea, which for the shortness of it they call Gerloch. Beyond this
is a far larger Bay, which they call Longus, from the River Long that falls
into it. This is the bound between Levinia and Covalia. Covalia it self,
Called also Argile, and Argadia.
Argathel or rather Ergathel and Cnapdale, are divided into many parts by many
straight Bays made by the estuarie of Glotta, or Dun-Brittan Fryth. There is
one famous Lake amongst the rest; they call it Finis from the River Fin, which
it receives, it is 60 miles long. There is in Knapdale the Lake Avus, in which
there is a small Island with a fortified Castle. From hence the River Avus
runs forth, which alone in these Countries emptieth it self into the
Deucalidon Sea. Beyond Knapdale toward the West Cantiera or Cantyre runs
out, that is, the head of the Country, over against Ireland, from which it is
parted by a small narrow Sea, being longer than broad, and joined so
straightly, and in such a narrow manner to Cnapdale, that it is scarce a mile
over, and even that is nothing else but sand. On Cantyre Lauria touches, lying
near to Argathel, and reaching near to Abry: it is a plain Country, and not
unfruitful. In that place where the Mountain Grampius is somewhat lower, and
more passable, the Country is called Braid Albin, that is to say, the highest
part of Scotland, and where it is highest it is called Drum Albin, that is the
back of Scotland; and not without reason. For out of the back Rivers do
run into either Sea, some into the North, some into the South: out of the
Lake Iernus, it sends forth the River Ierna into the East, which having run
three miles falls into Taus beneath Perth. From this River Strathierna or
Stathierna, extended to either bank thereof, took its name. For the Scots are
wont to call a Country which lies on a River, Stat.

THE THIRD TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
THe Mountains of Ocellum do border upon Tachia, which for the most part,
together with the Country at the foot thereof, are thought to be in the
Country of Iernia: but the rest of the Country even to the Forth ambition has
divided into many parts, as Clacman, Colrosse, and Kinrosse. From these and the
Mountains of Ocellum, all the Country which is bounded by the Forth and Tay,
grows straight in the form of a wedge Eastward, toward the Sea. And by one
name is called Fife, having sufficiency of all things necessary to life: it
is broadest where the Lake Levinus cutteth it, and thence gathers it self
into a narrow form, even to the Town Caralia. It sends forth one notable
River, to wit Levinus, whose banks are beautified with many Towns, of which
the most renowned for the study of good Arts, (...)
is Fanum Andraeae, or Andrews Chapel, which the ancient Scots did call Fanum
Reguli, and the Picts Rigmud. In the middle of the Country is Cuprum or Cuper,
whither those of Fife do come to have their causes tried: on that side where it
touches Iernia, there stands Abreneth the ancient Palace of the Picts. Here
Ierna runs into Taus. But Taus runs four and twenty miles, having
broken out of the Lake Taus which is in Braid Albin, and is the greatest River
in Scotland. This River bending toward the mountain Grampius, does touch
Atholia a fertile Region placed in the wooddie Country of Grampius. Beneath
Atholia Caledon is seated on the right hand bank of the River Taus an old Town
which only retains a name, common-called Duncaldene, that is, Hasell-trees.
For the Hasell trees spreading themselves all over, and covering the fields
thereabout with their shadie boughs, gave occasion of that name both to the
Town and people. These Caledones or people of Caledon, being once reckoned
among the chief Britains, did make up one part of the Kingdom of the Picts.
For Ammianus Marcellinus divides them into the Caledones and Vecturiones, but
of their names there is scarce any memory left at this day. Twelve miles
beneath Caledon lies the Country of Perth on the same right hand bank. On the
left hand bank beneath Atholia is Gour, looking toward the East, renowned for
corne-fields: and beneath this again is Angusia stretched out between Taus
and Eske: this the ancient Scots did call Aeneia. Some suppose it to be called
Horestia, or according to the English speech Forest. In it is the City Cuprum
which Boethius, to gratify his Country, ambitiously calls This is also
called Allectum
Dei Donum, the gift of God: but I suppose the ancient name was Taodunum, from
Dunus, that is, an Hill situate by Taus, at the foot whereof there is a Town.
Beyond Taus the next fourteen miles off, on the same bank is Abreneth,
otherwise called Obrinca. After this Country is the Red Promontorie, very
conspicuous. The River Eske called the Southern, cutting through the midst
thereof, the other Northern Eske divides it from Mernia. It is for the most
part a THE THIRD TABLE. OF SCOTLAND.
SCOTIAE tabula.III.
map of Scotland (north) plain field country, until Grampius meeting with it
beneath Fordune, and Dunotrum the Earl Marshalls castle, it somewhat remitteth
its height, and so bends down into the Sea. Beyond it toward the North is
the mouth of the River Deva commonly called Dea or Dee, and about a mile
distant from it the River Don; by the one is Aberdon, famous for the
Salmon-fishing, by the other another (...) mouth of the River Don. this Town is
called by (...) De^^^^, for De^^^^, because a (...) River Don (...)
Aberdon, which has a Bishops Seat, and Public Schools flourishing by the
studies of all Liberal Arts. I find in ancient monuments that the Hithermost
was called Aberdea, but now these Towns are called the old and new Aberdon.
From this strait Foreland between these two Rivers begins Marria, which by
little and little enlarging it self runs 60. miles in length even to
Badenacke or Badgenoth. This Country extends it self in one continued ^^dge*
and does send forth diverse great Rivers into either Sea. ^^^bria does border on
Badenacke, being somewhat inclined toward the Deucalidon Sea, and is as
plentiful as any Country in Scotland with all Sea and Land-commoditie. For it
has good corn and pasturage, and is pleasant as well in regard of the shadie
woods as cool streams, and fountains. It has so great plenty of fish, that
it is not inferior to any part of the whole Kingdom. For beside the plenty
of river fish, the Sea storeth it, for breaking in upon the plain ground, and
there being kept in with high banks it spreads it self abroad, in manner of a
great Lake: whence it is called in their country speech Abria, (...)
that is a standing water. They give also the same name to the neighbor
Country. Northward next to Marria is Buchania or Buguhan divided from it by
the river Don. This of all the Countries of Scotland does stretch it self
farthest into the Germane Sea. It is happy in pasturage and the increase of
sheep, and is sufficiently furnished with all things necessary for man's life.
(...)
The rivers thereof do abound with Salmons. Yet that kind of fish is not found
in the river Raira. There is on the banks of this river a Cave, the nature
whereof is not to be omitted, which is, that water distilling drop by drop out
of the hollow arch thereof these drops are straightway turned into little
Pyramides of stone, and if it should not be cleansed by the industry of men, it
would quickly fill up the cave even to the top. Beyond Buchania toward the
North, are two small Countries, Boina and Ainia, which lie by the river Spaea
or Spey that separateth them from Moravia. Spaea rises on the backside of
Badenach aforesaid, and a good way distant from its fountain is that Lake
whence Iutea breaks forth, and ^owleth it self into the Western Sea. They
report that at the mouth thereof there was a famous Town, named from the river
Emmorluteum: the truth is, whether you consider the nature of the Country
round about it, or the conveniencie of Navigation and transportation, it is a
place very fit to be a Town of traffic. And the ancient Kings induced
thereunto by the opportunity of the seat, for many ages dwelt in the Castle
(...) called ^^unstphage
Evon, which now many are falsely persuaded was Stephanodunum. For the ruins of
that Castle are yet seen in Lorna. Moravia follows from beyond Spaea even to
Nessus, heretofore it is thought it was called Varar. Between those two rivers
the German Ocean, as it were driving back the Land into the West, flows in
by a great Bay, and straightneth the largeness of it. The whole Country round
about does abound with Corn and Hay, and is one of the chief of the whole
Kingdom both for pleasantness and increase of fruits. It has two memorable
Towns* F^gina near the River L^x, which yet retains its ancient name, and
Nessus near the River Ne^^us. This River flows four and twenty miles in
length from the Lake Nessus. The water is almost always warm, it is never so
cold that it ^^ee^eth. And in the extremity of winter, pieces of ice carried
into it are quickly dissolved by the warmth of the water. Beyond the Lake
Nessus toward the West, the Continent is stretched forth but eight miles in
length, ^o that the Seas are ready to meet, and to make an Island of the
remainder of Scotland. That part of Scotland which lies beyond Nessus, and
this strait of Land North and West is wont to be divided into four Provinces.
First beyond the mouth of Nessus, where it drowneth it self in the German
Ocean, is the Country Rossia, (...)
running out with high Promontories into the Sea: which the name it self
shows. For Ro^ signifies in the Scottish speech a Promontorie. It is longer
then broad. For it is extended from the German Sea to the Pe^^alidon, where it
becomes mountanous and rugged, but the fields of it, are not inferior to any
part of Scotland in fertility and fruitfulness. It has pleasant valleys
watered with Rivers full of fish, and many Lakes that have fish in abundance,
but the greatest of them all is ^abrus. From the Deucalidon Sea, the Shore by
degrees bends in, and inclines toward the East. From the other Shore the
German Sea, making a way for it self between the rocks, and flowing into a
great Bay, makes a safe and sure Haven against all tempest. Secondly, next to
the farthest part of Rosse toward the North, Navernia
is Navernia, so called from the River Navernus: and this Country commonly
(following their Country speech) they call Strathnaverne. Rosse bounds it on
the South, on the West and North the Deucaledon Sea washes it, on the East it
touches Cathanesia. (...)
In the third place Sutherland is near unto all these, and touches them on
one side or another: for on the West it has Strathnaverme, on the South and
East Rosse, and on the North Cathanesia. The Inhabitants of this Country by
reason of the condition of the soil are rather given to pasturage than
tillage. There is nothing that I know singular in it, Mountains*
but that it has Mountains of white marble, (a^ a^e miracle in cold
Countries) which is not gotten for any use, because wantonness has not yet
invaded those parts. Lastly, Cathanesia or Cathanes is the farthest Country of
Scotland toward the North, where Navernia meets it, and these two Countries of
Scotland do contract the breadth of it into a strait and narrow front. In this
front of Land three Promontories do raise themselves. The highest was Navernia,
which Ptolemie calls Orcas, Tavedrum and Tarvisium: the two other being
nothing so high are in Cathanesia, namely Vervedrum, now Hoya, and Betubium,
called (though not rightly) by Hector Boethius Dame: Cathanesia.
now it is commonly called Dunis Bey, others call it Duncans Bey. Out of this
name by taking away some letters the word Dunis Bey seems to be derived. In
this Country Ptolemie places the Cornavis, of whose name there do still
remain some tokens. As they commonly call the Castles of the Earls of
Cathanesia, Gernico or Kernico: and those who seem to Ptolemie and others to
be the Cornavii, the Britains think to be the Kernes. For since not only in
this Country, but in a diverse part of this Island they place the Cornavii,
namely in Cornwall, they call those who do still retain the ancient British
speech, Kernes. Now it remains that we should speak somewhat of the Islands.
The later Writers have made three sorts of all the Islands, which do as it were
crown Scotland, the Western, the Orcades, and the Zealand Islands. Those are
called the Western Islands which are stretched from Ireland almost to the
Orcades in the Deucalidon Sea on the Western side. These some call the
Hebrides, others the So called from Eb. rid. which signifies in the Bruttish
tongue (...), without (...), as Camden thin^^th page 6^^.
Aebudae, others the Mevaniae, others the Beteoricae. The Orcades, now called
Orkney, are partly in the Deucalidon Sea, and partly in the German, and are
scattered toward the Notherne part of Scotland. Concerning their names Ancient
and Modern Writers do agree, but it does not appear who first possessed them.
Some say they had their original from the Germans: But out of what Country
these Germans came it is not delivered. If we may conjecture by their speech,
they used formerly, as at this day, the ancient Gothicke tongue. Some suppose
them to have been the Picts, enduced thereunto chiefly, because the narrow Sea
dividing them from Cathanesia, is called from the Picts Fretum Picticum. And
they think that the Picts themselves were of the Saxon race, which they
conjecture by a verse of Claudians: -- Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule:
Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
The Orcades with blood of men grew wet,
When as the Saxon did the worser get:
Thule even with the blood of Picts grew hot,
Ierne wail'd the death of many a Scot.
But seeing we have entreated of these things formerly in the Description of
the British Isles, thus much shall suffice concerning Scotland.

ENGLANG.
THE Southern and greatest part of the Isle of Albion, is called in Latin
Anglia: from Angria, a Country of Westphalia, commonly called Engern, as some
would have it. Some suppose it was so called from angulus a corner, The name by
who^^ it was given
because it is a corner of the World. Others from Angloen a Town of Pomerania.
Goropius deriveth the word Angli, or Englishmen, from the word Angle, that is
from a fishing-hooke, because, as he says, they hooked all things to
themselves, and were, as we say in England, good Anglers: but this conjecture
rather deserves laughter than belief. Some suppose, it was so called from
Anglia, a little Country of the Cimbrick Chersonesus, which was named Engelond,
that is, the Land of Englishmen, by Egbert King of the West Saxons: or else as
it were Engistland, that is, the Land of Engist, who was Captain over the
Saxons. But he that shall note the Etymology of the words, Engelbert,
Engelhard, and the like German names, may easily see, that thereby is denoted
the Englishmen. These are people of Germany that possessed Britain; and, as
Camden shows, were one Nation, which now by a common name are called English
Saxons. This part of the Isle of Albion is diversely called by the Inhabitants;
for they divide it into two Countries. That part which looks to the East, and
the German Sea, the natives of England, being people of Saxony, call in their
Language Because it (...) of an ^ngular form, for Eng in the Saxon tongue,
signifies a corner, or nooke.
England. And the Western part, which is divided from the other by the Rivers
Sabrine or Severne, and Dee, Wales. The Northern bounds of it toward Scotland,
are the Rivers Tweede and Solway: on the South lies France, and the British
Ocean; on the West Ireland, and the Irish Ocean; on the East the German Ocean.
It is 302 English miles long, and 300 broad, that is, from the Cape of Cornwall
to the Promontorie of Kent. The Air here at any time of the year is temperate
and mild, for the sky is thick, in which clouds, showers, and winds are
easily generated, by reason wereof it has less cold and heat. It has a
fertile and fruitful Soil, and so furnished with all kind of fruits, that
Orpheus says, it was the seat of Ceres. With whom agrees Mamertinus, who
speaking a Panegyric Oration to Constantine, said, that in this Country was
such great plenty, as that it was sufficiently furnished with the gifts both of
Ceres and Bacchus. It has fields not only abounding with rank and
flourishing Corn, but it produces all kind of commodities. Here grows the
Maple and the Beech-tree in abundance: and as for Laurels or Bay trees it
surpasses Thessalie it self. Here is such plenty of Rosemary, that in some
places they make hedges with it. Here is Gold, Silver, Copresse, though but
little store of it, yet here is great store of Iron. Here is dug abundance
of the best black Lead, and white Lead or Tin, and so transported to other
Nations. Here are many Hills, on which flocks of sheep do graze, which are
esteemed, not only for their flesh, which is very sweet and pleasant, but
also for the finenesse of their wool; and these flocks of sheep do prosper
and increase through the wholsomnesse of the Air, and goodness of the Soil,
as also by reason of the scarcity of trees on the Hills, and the freeness of
the whole Country from Wolves. This Country abounds with all kind of
Cattle and living Creatures, except Asses, Mules, Camels, Elephants, and a few
other. There are no where better or fiercer Mastiffes, no where greater store
of Crows, or greater plenty of Kites, that prey upon young Chickens than here.
The Romans did command the better part of Britain, almost five hundred
years, namely from the time of Fifty years before the birth of Christ.
Caius Julius Caesar to the time of Which was An. Dom. 446. according to Bid.
Theodosius the younger: when the Legions and Garrisons of Rome, being called
to defend France, they left the Isle of Britain, whereby it came to pass,
that the Southern parts thereof were invaded by the Picts and Scots, whose
violence, when the Britains could no longer sustain, they called the Saxones
out of Germany, men accustomed to war, for their Aid. These Saxons assisted
them in the beginning, but afterward being allured with the temperature of the
Air, or persuaded by the friendship and familiarity of the Picts, or stirred
up by their own treacherous minds, they made a league with the Picts against
the Britains, and having driven out their Hosts, they themselves possessed
their places. England contains many Cities, The City
and fair Towns, among which the chief are London, York, Canterbury,
Bristoll, Gloucester, Shrewsbury, Winchester, Bathe, Cambridge, Oxford, Norwich,
Sandwich, with many other which we will delineate in our particular
Descriptions. The chief Rivers are Thames, Humber, The Rivers
Trent, Ouse, and Severne, of which in their places. The Ocean which washes
this Isle, The Sea.
does abound with plenty of all kinds of Fish, among which is the Pike, which
with the Inhabitants is in great esteem, so that some times they take him out
of moorish Lakes, into fish ponds, where after he has scoured himself, being
fed with Eeles and little fishes, he grows wonderful fat. Moreover there are
no where more delicate Oysters, or greater plenty of them than here. The
especial Havens of England are these: Ports,
first Davernas commonly called Dover, which is the farthest part of the
County of Kent, it is fortified with a Castle seated on a Hill, and well
furnished with all kind of Armor: secondly Muntsbay of a great breadth in
Cornwall, where there is a safe harbor for ships. There is also Volemouth, or
Falemouth, Torbay, Southhampton, and many others. The King of England has
supreme power, and acknowledges no superior but God: his Subjects are either
the Laiety or the Clergy: The manner of Government.
the Laiety are either Nobles or Commons. The Nobles are either of the greater
rank, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, and Bannerets, who have
these Titles by inheritance, or else are conferred upon them by the King for
their virtues. The lesser Nobles are Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and those
which commonly are called Gentlemen: the Gentlemen are those who are honored
by their birth, or those whose virtue or fortune do lift them up, and
distinguish them from the meaner sort of men. The Citizens or Burgesses are
those, who in their several Cities do bear public Offices, and have their
places in the Parliaments of England. The Yeomen are those, whom the Law
calls legal men, and do receive out of the Lands which they hold, at the
least forty shillings yearly. The Tradesmen ENGLAND.
ANGLIA
map of England are those, who work for wages or hire. All England is divided
into nine and thirty Shires were first made by King Alfred, for the better
administration of Justice.
Shires; and these Shires are divided into Hundreds and Tithings: In each of
these Counties is one man placed, called the Kings Prefect or Lieutenant,
whose office is to take care for the security of the Commonwealth in times of
danger: and every year there is one chosen, whom they call the Sheriff, that
is, the Provost of the Shire, who may be rightly called the Questor of the
County or Province. For it is his office to collect public money, to
distraine for trespasses, and to bring the money into the Exchequer, to assist
the Judges, and to execute their commands: to empannell the Jurie, who are to
enquire concerning matters of fact, and bring in their verdict to the Judges
(for the Judges in England are Judges of the Right, not of the Fact) to bring
the condemned to execution, and to decide of themselves small controversies.
But in great matters those Judges do administer right, whom they call
Itinerarie Judges, and Judges of Assise, who twice every year do visit most of
these Shires, to determine and end matters of difference, and also to give
judgment upon Prisoners. For as much as concerns Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
England has now two Provinces, and also two Archbishops: the Archb. of
Canterbury Primate of all England, and the Archb. of York: Under these are
seven and twenty Bishops, two and twenty under Canterbury, and the other five
under York. The Tribunals or Courts of Justice in England are of three sorts,
for some are Spiritual some Temporal, and one mixed, which they call the
Parliament, consisting of the three Orders of England, and it represents the
body of the whole Kingdom. This Parliament the King calls and appoints
according to his pleasure: He has the chief authority in making, confirming,
abrogating, and interpreting of Laws, and in all things that belong to the
good of the Commonwealth. The temporal Courts are twofold, namely of Law,
and of equity. The Courts of Law are the Kings Bench, the Star Chamber, the
Common Pleas, the Exchequer, the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Court of the
Admiraltie, and Assizes; we omit others which are obscure. The Kings Bench is
so called, because the King is wont to sit in it, and it handles Pleas of the
Crown. The Star Chamber, or rather the Court of the Kings Counsel is that,
in which criminal matters are handled, as perjuries, impostures, deceits, and
the like. The Common Pleas is so called, because common pleas are tried there
between the Subjects, by the Law of England, which they call the Common Law.
The Exchequer deriveth its name from a four square Table, covered with a
Chequer-Cloth, at which the Barons sit; in it all causes are heard, which
belong to the Exchequer. The Court of Wards has his name from Wards, whose
causes it handles. The Admirals Court handles Sea-matters. Those which we
call the Assizes, are held twice in a year in most Shires; in which two Judges
of Assise appointed for it, with the Justices of peace do enquire and
determine of civil and criminal matters. The Courts of Equity are the
Chancerie, the Court of Requests, and the Council in the Marshes of Wales. The
Chancerie draws its name from the Chancellor, who sits there. This Court
gives judgment according to equity, and the extreme rigor of the Law is
thereby tempered. The Court of Requests hears the causes of the poor, and of
the Kings Servants. The chief spiritual Courts are the Corporatition of the
Clergy, the Courts which belong to the Archbishop himself, and the
Chancellours Courts, kept in every Diocese. There are two famous Universities
in this Kingdom Oxford and Cambridge. England does produce happy and good
wits, and has many learned men, skillful in all Faculties and Sciences. The
people are of a large stature, fair complexion'd, and for the most part,
gray-eyed, and as their Language sounds like the Italians, so they differ not
from them in the habit and disposition of their body. Their food consists,
for the most part, of Flesh. They make Drink of Barley, being a very savorie
and pleasant drink. It is transported often into foreign countries. They use
a habit not much different from the French. And thus much shall suffice
concerning England in general, we will declare the rest in the particular
Tables following.

THE SECOND TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINING, The Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham.
WE have finished that which we intended to speak concerning England in
general: Our Method does require that we should go through the parts thereof
in particular. The Romans diversely divided the hither part of Britain, being
reduced into a Province. But the Saxons instead of the Pentarchie of the
Romans, made an Heptarchie of it, in which are Kent, Sussex, Eastanglia,
Westsex, Northumberland, Essex, and Mercia. At this day it is divided into
Counties, which the English by a proper word call Shires. And first, in the
year of Christ 1016, in the Reign of Ethelred there were only two and
thirty. Afterward under William the Conqueror there were 36. And lastly, these
being augmented by three more, came to be 39 Counties. To which are added 13
Shires in Wales; six whereof were in the time of Edward the first, the other
Henry the eigth ordained by Parliamentarie Authority. These Counties or parts
of England, with some Islands, our Mercator does lively express in six Tables.
Of all which Tables, we will make a brief Description or Delineation, in that
order as our Author propounds them. In the first place Northumberland
offers it self, Northumberland.
commonly called Northumberlant, The Situation.
lying, in a manner, in the form of a triangle, but not equilaterall. The
Southern side thereof Derwent flowing into Tine, and Tine it self do enclose
where it looks toward the Bishopric of Durham. The East side is beaten with
the German Sea. But the Western side is drawn out in length from the North to
the South, first by a continued ridge of Mountains, and afterward by the River
Tweede; and being opposite to Scotland, The quality of the Soil.
it is the bound of that Country. The Soil it self, for the most part, is
barren and unfit for tillage. Toward the Sea and the Tine, if tillage be used,
the Husbandman receives sufficient increase, but in other places it is more
unfruitful, and rugged. In many places great store of Sea-cole (as the English
call them) are dug forth. There is in Northumberland the City of New
Castle, The Cities.
famous for the Haven, which the River Tine makes, having so deep a channel,
that it receives ships of great burden, and desends them both from tempests
and sands. The last Town in England, and the strongest in all Britain is
Berwick, which some do derive from a certain Captain, called Berengarius,
Leland from Aber, which in the British Language signifies the mouth of a
River, as if it were, Aberwick, a Town at the mouth of a River. But whence
soever it has its name, it stands far in the Sea, so that it is THE SECOND
TABLE OF ENGLAND.
Northumbr. Cumberla^dia Dunelm. Episcop.
map of England (north) compassed round about therewith, and the River Tweede.
The Rivers here are the Southern and Northern Tines (which are so called, The
Rivers.
because they are bound in with straight and narrow banks, for so much Tine
does signify in the British speech, as some do affirm:) the Southern
rises out of Cumberland, near Alstenmore, where there is an ancient Mine of
Brass; and having run a good while toward the North, it turns toward the
East, and runs straight forward with the Picts Wall. The Northern Tine
arising out of the bordering Mountains, does join it self with the River
Read, which being powered out at the Mountain Redsquier, waters Readsdale,
that is, the Vale of Read, which nourishes the best Foul. Both the Tines do
flow beneath Collerford, and growing bigger and bigger, do hasten their
journey to the Ocean in one channel. Tweede for a great way parts England
from Scotland, and is called the Eastern bound. This River breaking forth of
the Mountains of Scotland, runs a great while in a winding course: but
where it comes near unto the Town Carram, growing strong in waters, it
begins to distinguish the Limits of the two Kingdoms, and at last having
received the River Till, it disburthens it self into the German Sea. There are
also other Rivers, as Coquet, Alaunus, or Alne, Blithe, Wanspethel, which I
omit, and so pass to the second part: and that is, Cumberland.
Cumbria, commonly called Cumberland: this lies before Westmoreland on the
West side; It is the farthest Shire in this part of England, The Situation.
insomuch, that it touches Scotland it self on the North side, being beaten
on the South and North with the Irish Ocean, but on the East side above
Westmoreland it joyneth to Northumberland. It takes its name from the
Inhabitants, The quality of the Soil.
who were the true and native Britains, calling themselves in their Language
Kumbri, and Kambri. Although the Country seems, in regard of the Northern
situation, to be cold and very mountainous, yet it delights the beholder with
much variety. For behind the Cliffes and cluster of Mountains, between which
the Lakes do lie, there are grassie Hills full of Flocks, under which again
there lie plain and fruitful Valleys. The Cities.
There is in this Country an ancient wel-seated City, called Carlisle, being
defended on the North with the deep Channel of Ituna, or Eeden; on the East
with Peterill, on the West with Cauda; and besides these fortifications of
Nature, it is strengthened with strong Walls of square stone, with a Castle, and
a Cittadell. There are other Towns, as Keswick, Wirkinton, Bulnesse, called
anciently Blatum-Bulgium, Penrith or Perith: that I may pass over Villages and
Castles: This Shire has 58 Parish-Churches. It has also Lakes abounding with
all kind of flying Fowls: Lakes.
and many Rivers, among which is the little River Irton, Rivers.
in which while the gaping shellfish receive the dew, they become presently,
as it were, great with child, and bring forth pearls, which the Inhabitants
when the water setleth do seek for. There are also the Derwent, Cokar, Olen
or Elen, Eden and others, all abounding with Fish. Besides, this Ocean which
beats on the shore, does bring forth great shoales of excellent fish, and
does seem to reproach the Inhabitants with negligence, because they use
fishing so lazily. Here are many Mountains close together, being full of
metal, among which there are the Mountains called Derwentfels, in which
near to Newland are found rich veins of Brass not without Gold and Silver.
Here also is found that minerall-earth, The Mountains.
or hard and shining stone, called by the English Black-lead, which the
Painters use to draw their lines and proportions withal. That famous Wall,
which was the limit or bound of the Roman Empire, The Wall of the Picts.
being 122 miles in length, does divide and cut through the higher part of this
Country, it was built by Severus, who (as Orosius says) took care that this
part of the Island should be separated by a trench from the other wild and
untamed people. Beda writes, that it was eight foot broad and twelve foot
high, standing in a right line from East to West, some ruins and pieces
whereof standing for a good way together, but without Battlements, may be seen
at this day, as Camden witnesses. The Bishopric of Durham
The Bishopric of The City of Durham was called by the Saxons Dunholme* Dun
signifies a hill, and Holme a piece of land compassed with a River like an
Island in the Saxon tongue, and this name agrees with the situation of the
place.
Durham, or Duresme bordereth upon Yorkshire Northward, and lies in a
triangular or three cornered form, the top whereof is made by the meeting of
the Northern bound, and the Fountains of Teisis. On the Southern part,
almost where the River retreateth back again, the Cathedral Church is seen,
being beautified with an high Steeple and many Pinnacles: on the top of a great
Hill the Castle is seated, in the middle of two Bridges, made of stone, by
which the two streams of the River Vedra, the one on the East side, the other
on the West side are joined together. On the North side from the Castle lies
the Market place, and S. Nicholas Church. Here are also these Market Towns
Standrove or Stanthorpe, Derlington, Hartlepole or Heorteu, Binchester or
Binovium, and Chester upon the street, which the Saxons called Concester, with
many Villages and Castles. In this Shire and Northumberland there are an
hundred and eighteen Parishes, besides many Chapels. The Cities or Towns.
Here are many Rivers, of which the chief is Tees, called in Latin Tesis and
Teisa; Polidorus calls it Athesis, and Camden thinks it was called by Ptolemie
Tuesis, though this name be not found in him, by reason of the carelessness of
the Transcribers of his Book. This River breaking out of the Quarri-pit of
Stanemore, and having gathered into it self many torrents, running by the
Marble Rocks near Egleston, and afterward washing many places, at last by a
great inlet, it casts it self into the Ocean, whence the basis of the Triangle
begins. There is also the Rivers Vedra or Wear, Gaunlesse, Derwent, etc.

THE THIRD TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAING THESE FOLLOWING Shires, Westmorland,
Lancashire, Cheshire, Caernarvanshire, Denbigh-shire, Flint-shire,
Merionedh-shire, Montgomerie-shire, and Shropshire, with the Islands of Mann,
and Anglesey.
Westmoreland The situation.
I Come unto the third Table, wherein Westmorland first offers it self, being
bounded on the West, and North with Cumberland, The quality of the Soil.
and on the East with Yorke-shire and Durham. It is so called, because for the
most part it is unfit for tillage: for such places as cannot be tilled, the
English call Moors, so that Westmoreland signifies in English nothing but a
Morish, and, for the most part, untillable Country toward the West. The
Southern part being narrowly enclosed between the River Lone and Winander
Mere, is fruitful enough in the Valleys, (although it has many ruff and
bare cliffes) and is called the Baronie of So called, because the River Kan
runs through it.
Kendale or Kandale. Afterward, above the spring heads of Lone, the Country
grows larger, and the Mountains run out with many crooked windings: In
some places there are deep Vales between them, which by reason of the
steepnes of the Hills on both sides seem like Caves. The chief Town here is
Aballaba, The Towns
now called Apelby. The antiquity and situation whereof is only worth regard:
for it is so far from elegant and neat building or structure, that if the
antiquity thereof did not give it the prioritie to be the chief Town of the
Country, and the Assizes held in the Castle, it would not differ much from a
Village. There is also a Town of great resort called Kendale, famous for
Cloath-making: and in this Shire there are six and twenty Parishes. The Rivers
are Lone, The Rivers.
Ituna or Eden, and Eimot. Lancastria is commonly called Lancashire, Lancashire.

The Situation.


and the County Palatine of Lancaster, because it is a County adorned with the
title of a Palatine. It lies Westward, under the Mountains which do run
through the middle of England, and is so enclosed between York shire on the
East, and the Irish Sea on the West, that on the Southern side where it
looks toward Cheshire (from which it is divided by the River Mersey) it is
broader, and so by degrees as it goes Northward, there where it boundeth on
Westmoreland it grows straighter and narrower; and there it is broken off
with a Bay of the Sea, yet so, as a great part of it is beyond the Bay, and
joyneth to Cumberland. Where it has a level of field ground, it has
sufficient store of Barley and Wheat, The fertility of the Soil.
but at the foot of the Mountains it bears most Oats: The Soil is
tolerable, unless it be in some moorish and unwholesome THE THIRD TABLE OF
ENGLAND.
WEST:MORLAND, CASTRIA, CESTRIA etc.
map of England (west midlands) places, which yet do requite these
inconveniences with greater commodities. For the upper grass being pared off,
they afford Turfes for fuel, in digging of which trees are often found, which
have laid a long time buried in the earth: and digging a little lower, they
furnish themselves with Marle, or Marmure to dung their fields. In this Country
the Oxen excel all other, both for the largeness of their horns, and
fairness of their bodies. The ancient government.
I pass now to the Cities, among which we meet first with the ancient Town
of Manchester, which Antoninus calls Mancunium, and Mannucia, this does
exceed the neighbor Towns for beauty, populousnes, the trade of Clothing,
and for the Marketplace, Church, and College. There is also Ormeskirke, a
Town of traffic, famous by being the burying place of the Stanleyes Earls
of Derby. There is also Lancaster the chief Town of the Country, which the
Inhabitants do more truly call Loncaster, and the Scots Loncastle, because it
took that name from the River Lone, vulgarly called Lune. Camden supposes this
City to be that which the Romans did call Alona instead of Arlone, which
signifies in the British language, at or upon Lone. In this Shire are but 36.
Parishes, The Lakes.
but those very populous. Here are many Lakes and Moors, among which is the
Moore Merton, and the greatest Lake of all England called Winander Mere, which
has abundance of one sort of Fish peculiar unto it self and Huls, Rivers.
which the Inhabitants call Charre. The Rivers are Mersey, Idwell, Duglesse,
Ribell, Wyre, Lack, and Lone, which flowing out of the Mountains of
Westmoreland, toward the South with narrow banks, and an unequal channel
enricheth the Inhabitants in the Summer season with Salmon-fish. The Mountains.
Here are many Mountains, and those very high, among which is that which is
called Ingleborrow Hill, which (as Camden says) we have admired rising by
degrees with a great ridge toward the West, and the farthest part of it being
hightned with another Hill, as it were set upon it. The next is Penigent, so
called perhaps from the white and snowie head, which is raised to a great
height. Lastly Pendle Hill, which is raised with a high top, in manner of a
race mark, famous for the damage which it does to the neighbor grounds under
it by sending down great streams of water, and by the certain foreshewing of
rain, as often as the top of it is hidden with clouds. Cestria follows
commonly called Cheshire, Cheshire.
and the County Palatine of Chester, because the Earls of it have the rights
and privileges of a Palatine. It is bounded on the South with Shropshire, The
Situation.
on the East with Staffordshire, and Derbyshire, on the North with Lancashire,
and on the West with Denbighshire, and Flint-shire; near Chester it runs
far out into the Sea with a Chersonesus, which being included between two
Bays, does admit the Ocean to break in on either side, and into these Bays
all the Rivers of this Country do run. The Country is barren of Corn, and
especially Wheat, The quality of the Soil.
but abounding with cattle, and fish. Here is a fair City which Ptolemie
calls Deunana, Antoninus calls it Deva, from the River Dee, The Cities.
on which it stands, the English call it Chester, and Westchester. This City
stands four square, having walls two miles in compass; toward the Northwest
is seated a Castle built near the River by the Earls of Cheshire, where the
Courts for the Palatinate are held twice every year. The houses are very
fair, and there are as it were cloisters to go in on both sides of the chief
streets. There are also the Towns of Finborrow, and Condate, now the
Congleton: and this Shire has about 68. Parishes. The Rivers which water this
City, The Rivers.
are Deuca, in English Dee; having great store of Salmons, and rises out of
two Fountains in Wales: Whence it is denominated in the British tongue,
Dyffyr Dwy, i. the Water of Dwy, which word Dwy signifies two: Besides, there
are the Rivers Wever, Mersey, and Dane. Caernarvanshire.

The S^^

The (...) of the Soil


Caernarvanshire called, before Wales was divided into Shires, Snodon Forest,
in Latin Histories, Snaudonia and Arvonia, has the Sea on the North and West
side; Merioneth-shire boundeth the South side, and Denbigh-shire the East side,
the River Conovius gliding between. Toward the Sea the Soil is fertile
enough, and full of little Towns: The Towns.
among which is the Town of Bangor, the Seat of a Bishop, which has 90.
Parishes under it, and is situated near the jaws of the narrow Sea. There is
also the River Conovius, commonly called Conway, which bounds this Country on
the East, and brings forth shell-fishes, which filling themselves with the
dew of Heaven, do bring forth Pearls. The Inland Parts of this Country are
Mountainous, rugged, and cliffie. The Mountains.
Camden says that you may worthily call these Mountains the British Alps.
Denbigh-shire is more inward from the Sea, Denbigh-shire.

The Si^uation.

The quality of the Soil


and runs out toward the East, even to the River Deva. On the North side,
the Sea for a while does encompasse it, and afterward Flint-shire: on the West
Merioneth and Montgomery-shire, on the East Cheshire and Shropshire, are the
bounds of it. The Western part is barren, the middle part, where it lies in a
Vale, is the most fruitful, a little beyond the Vale Eastward Nature is more
sparing in her benefits, but near Deva much more liberal. In this Country is
the Vale of Cluide, very happy in pleasantness, fertility of Soil, and
wholesomnesse of Air, The Towns.
of which Ruthun or Ruthin, is the greatest Market Town. After this is the
Territory, called in Welsh Mailor Gimraig, in English Bromfield, very
fruitful and full of Lead. The chief Town in this Country is Denbigia,
commonly called Denbigh, and anciently by the Britains, Clad Frynyn. Beyond
Denbigh-shire more Northward is Flint-shire: Flint-shire.

The Situation.

The quality of the Soil


It is beaten with the Irish Sea, and the Bay of Deva, on the North; on the
East it is bounded with Cheshire, and in other parts with Denbigh-shire. This
shire is not Mountanous, but somewhat rising with swelling Hills, which are
gently levelled into pleasant fields, especially those toward the Sea, which
every first year in some places do bear Barley, in other places Wheat,
which being reaped; does yield a twenty fold increase: and afterward they bear
Oats four or five years together. There is a Town here which the English
call S. Asaph, and the Britains Llanelwy, (because it stands upon the River
Elwy,) where there is a Bishops Seat, under which are many Parishes: and
Ruthlan, a Town beautified with an excellent Castle. Here is also the River
Alen, near which in a hill at a place called Kilken is a Fountain, which in
emulation of the Sea at set times does ebb and slow. Merioneth-shire, in
Latin called Mervinia, Merionethshire.
and in the British language Sir Verioneth, does reach from the Town
Montgomery, even to the Irish Ocean, with which it is so beaten on the West,
The Situation.
that some part thereof is supposed to have been washed away with the violence
of the waves. Toward the South it is bounded with the River Dee, toward the
North it joyneth to Caernarvan and Denbigh-shire. By reason of the frequencie
of the Mountains, it is the ruggedst and hardest Country of all the Shires in
Wales. The Towns
Towns of any note here are very scarce, yet here is the Town of Harlech well
fortified with a Castle, being the chief in the whole Country. And here are
two famous Bays, Traith-Maur, and Traith-Bochum: that is, the greater and the
lesser Bay. It has very high Mountains, The Mountains.
narrow and sharp pointed like Towers, and so many of them joined together by
equality of distance, that (as Giraldus reports) sheepheards either
conferring or brawling one with another on the tops thereof, if they both
intended to fight, yet could they hardly meet together, though they should
endeavor so to do by going from morning till evening. Great flocks of sheep
do wander on these Mountains, which feed not in danger of Wolves.
Montgomery-shire is circumscribed on the South with Cardigan-shire and
Radnor-shire, Mongomery-shire.

The Site.

The fruitfulnes of the Soil.


on the East with Shropshire, on the North with Denbigh-shire, and on the West
with Merioneth-shire: and although it be raised with many Mountains, yet it is
happy in the fruitfulness of the Valleys, Fields, and Pastures, and in times
past famous for breeding of an excellent sort of Horses, which (as Giraldus
says) were as it were Pictures of Natures workmanship, and were commended
both for their excellent shape, and incomparable speed. The chief Town in
this Country is Mongomery, situate upon an easy ascent of a Hill, and built by
one Baldwine President of the Marshes of Wales, The Towns.
in the time of William the Conqueror, whence the Britains call it
Trefaldwin at this day: and secondly Lanuethlin, a market Town. Salopia,
commonly called Shropshire, as it is a County, no less pleasant and fruitful
then the rest, so it is much bigger. It is enclosed on the East with
Staffordshire, on the West with Montgomery-shire, on the South with
Yorke-shire, and on the North with Cheshire. It is a Country fortified with
many Castles and Towns, as bordering upon the Welsh, who a long time rebelled
against the English, and therefore the Saxons called it the Marches. It is
divided into two parts by the River Severne: The chief Towns thereof are
Shrewsbury (anciently called Sloppesbury, and by the Britains Pengwerne)
Ludlow, (called by the British Dinan) Bridgmorse, or Bridgnorth, Vriconium, or
Viriconium, called by Nennius Caer Vrvach, but commonly by the English
Wreckceter or Wroxceter, Draiton, and Bewdley. The chief Rivers that water
this shire, are Sabrine or Severne, Temdus, called by the Welsh Tefidianc,
Colunwy or Clun, Corve, and Terne: and there are in it 170 Parish Churches for
Gods sacred and divine service. The Isle of Man.
The Isle of Man Caesar calls Mona, Ptolemie Monaeda, as it were Moneitha i.
the farther Mona to difference it from another Mona, Pliny calls it Monabia,
The names.
Orosius and Beda Menavia, Gilda calls it Eubonia, the Britains Menaw, the
Inhabitants Maning, and the English the Isle of Man. It lies in the middle
between the Northern parts of Ireland and Britain, and is from the North
toward the South about thirty Italian miles long, The Situation.
but the breadth thereof where it is broadest is scarce 15. miles, and where it
is narrowest it is but 8. This Island brings forth Flax and Hemp in great
abundance, it has very fair meddowes and plowed PARTICVLAR DESCRIPTION OF
VVALES^
CAMBRIA seu WALLIA
map of Wales fields, it is fruitful in bringing forth Barley and Wheat, but
especially Oats, whence the Inhabitants do for the most part live upon Oaten
Bread. Here are great store of cattle, and great flocks of sheep, but both
sheep and cattle are of a lesser stature then those that are in England. The
Inhabitants here wanting wood, use a pitchie kind of Turfe for fireing; which,
while they dig up, they do sometimes find trees hid in the earth, and these
they convert to the same use. It is evident that the Britains did possess
this Island as they did Britain, but when the Northern People like a furious
storm fell upon the Southern parts, it came into the hands of the Scots. The
Towns.
The chief Town of this Island is thought to be Russin, situated on the
Southern side thereof, which from the Castle and Garrison kept therein, is
commonly called Castletowne: but the most populous is Duglasse, because it has
an excellent Haven, and easy to come into, by reason of which the Frenchmen
and other Forrainers come with Salt and other commodities to traffic with the
Islanders for hides, raw wool, barrell'd beef, etc. On the West side of the
Island stands Balacuri, where the Bishop lives, who is subject to the
Archbishop of York; and the Pyle, being a forte placed on a small Island, in
which there are many Garrison Soldiers. Over against the Southern Promontorie
of the Isle, there lies a small Island called the Calfe of Man, which is full
of those Sea-foule which they call Puffins, and of those Geese that are
generated of putrified wood, which the English call Barnacles, and the Scots
do call Clakes and Soland Geese. Toward the middle Mannia swells into
Mountains, The Mountains.
the highest whereof is Sceafell, from whence on a clear day both Scotland,
England, and Ireland, may be discerned. The manner of government.
The Judges, being called Deemsters, which the Inhabitants of this Isle have
amongst them, do decide all controversies without writings or other charges.
For any complaint being made, the Magistrate takes a stone, and having marked
it, delivers it to the plaintiff, by which he summons his adversary, and
witnesses: And if the matter in controversy be doubtful, and of great
consequence; it is referred to twelve men whom they call the Keys of the
Island. Here also Coroners supply the office of Undersheriffes. The
Ecclesiastical Judge, when he cites a man to make appearance at a definite
time, if he obey not the summons within eight days, The manners of the people.
he is cast into prison; but neither Plaintiff nor Defendant pay a penny
either to him or his officers. The Inhabitants do hate both lying and
stealing, they are wondrous Religious, and all conformable to the English
Church. They hate the Civil and Ecclesiastical disorder of their neighbors,
and whereas the Island is divided into the Southern and Northern part: the
former speaks like the Scots, the latter like the Irish. Now remains the
Isle of Anglesey, of which we will entreat in the fourth Table of England.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE SHIRES, Cornwall,
Devon-shire, Sommerset-shire, Dorcet-shire, VVilt-shire Gloucestershire,
Monmouth-shire, Glamorgan-shire, Caermarden-shire, Penbrock-shire,
Brecnock-shire, and Hereford-shire.
CORNWALL, Cornwall.
which is also called Cornubia and in the British language Kernaw, is enclosed
on the South with the British Ocean, on the North with the Irish, The
Situation.
on the West with Penwith, called by Ptolemie Bolerium, and the French Ocean,
and on the East it is parted from Devonshire with the River Tamar. It is a
Country having a fruitful soil, The quality of the Soil.
and abounding with mettall-Mines. It has also store of fruits, which yet will
not grow without the industry of the husbandman. This Country is full of
Towns, and especially the Sea Coasts, as namely Heuston, The Towns.
called by the natives Hellas, a town famous for the privilege of sealing of
Tin, as also Peryn a fair market Town, together with Arwenak, Truro, which
the Cornish call Truscu, Granpound, Fowy by the, Britains called Foath,
Lestuthiell, called by Ptolemie Vzella, Leskerd, Bodman, S. Iies, S. Colombs,
Padstow, anciently called Loderick and Laffenac, Stow, Stratton, Tamerton, or
Tamerworth, Lanstuphadon, vulgarly called Leuston and anciently Dunevet, and
Saltash anciently called Esse. And there are in this Country 161 Parishes. The
Rivers are Vale, Fawey, Loo, Liver, Hail, Alan, or Camel, and Tamar. Havens.
One of the famousest Havens in the Country is Volemouth or Falemouth, which
Ptolemie calls the Bay of Cenio, being equal to Brundusium in Italy, as being
capable of as many ships, and as safe an harbor. Devonia, commonly called
Denshire, and by the natives Deunan, Devonshire.
follows. The bounds hereof are on the West the River Tamar, on the South the
Ocean, on the East Dorcet-shire, and Somersetshire, The Situation.
and on the North the Bay of Severne. This Country as it is stretched out
broader on both sides than Cornwall, so it is encompassed with more commodious
Havens, and is no less rich in Mines of Tin, besides it is diapred with more
pleasant meadows, and clothed with more frequent woods yet the soil in some
places is very barren. The chief City here the English at this day do call
Excester, The Latins Exonia, Ptolemie calls it Isca, Antoninus Isa of the
Damnonians, and the Britains call it Caeruth and Pencaer, that is, the chief
city. There are also many other Towns as Plimmouth, anciently called Sutton,
which of late days from a little fisher-towne is become a fair Town, The
Cities and Towns.
and for populousness it may compare with some Cities. Here was borne Sr
Francis Drake Knight, who for matters of Navigation was the most excellent of
late times. The Rivers
Here are also the Towns of Lidston or Lidford, Plimpton, Modbery or
Champernouns, Dartmoth, Exminster and many other. This County contains 394.
Parishes. The Rivers here are Lid, Teave, Plim, Dert, Totnes, Teigne, Isca,
Creden, Columb, Otterey, Ax, Towridge, Somersetshire.
The Situation.

The temper of the A^^e.

The f^rtilitie of the Soil.


Taw, O^k, and North Ewe. Somersetshire follows, the bounds whereof on the
East are Wiltshire, on the South Dorcetshire, on the West Devonshire, on the
North the Bay of Severne, and Gloucestershire. This is a very rich soil,
being in every place exceedingly fertile in fruits and Pasturage and in some
places affording many Diamonds, which do exceed those of India for beauty
though they are not so hard. The chief City of this shire is Bristoll, The
Cities and Towns.
(called anciently by the Britains Caer Brito, and by the Saxons Britstow) a
pleasant place, which is beautified with many fair houses, a double River and
wall, a fair Haven, much traffic, and the populousness of Citizens. It has
also the town of Theodorudunum now called Wells, from the many wells or
springs that there break forth; and Bathonia, styled anciently by the
Britains Caer Badon, by Stephanus Badiza, but commonly called Bathe. And in
this country are 385. Parishes. The Rivers are Ivell, Erome, Pedred, Thon,
Avon, Somer, The Rivers.
Brui and Welwe. In the next place Dorcetshire, which is bounded on the East
with Hampshire, on the West with Devonshire, on the South with the British
Ocean, and on the North with Wilsthire and Somersetshire. Dorcetshire.
It is of a fertile soil, and the North part full of many woods and forests,
from whence even to the Sea coast it descends with many grassie hills, on
which feed innumerable flocks of sheep. Durnovaria, which Ptolemie according
to diverse copies calls Durnium and Duneum, and now is called Dorchester, is the
chief town of this Shire, yet it is neither very great nor fair, her walls
being ruined long since by the fury of the Danes. There are also other towns,
as Birt-port, or Burt-port. Lime, Weymouth, The Towns.
Poole, Warham, so called because it stands by the River Varia, Shirburne,
Sturminster, and Winburne, called by Antoninus Vindogladia from the British
word Windugledy because it stands between two Rivers. Here are in this Shire
248. Parishes. The Rivers are Lim, Trent, now called Piddle, The Rivers.
Carr, Ivell, Wey, Sturn, Alen, Varia, so called by the Latins, but Fraw or
From in the Saxon tongue. Wiltonia so called by the Latins from Wilton once
its chief Town, Wilsthire.
but commonly called VVilshire, is an inland Country, having Oxfordshire, and
South-hamptonshire to bound it on the East, The Situation.
on the West Somersetshire, on the North Glocestershire, and on the South
Dorcetshire, The quality of the Soil.
and South-hamptonshire. The Country is every where full of pasturage and
fruits. The Towns are first Wilton, anciently called Ellandunum, Towns.
which was heretofore the head Town of the Shire. Secondly, Sarisbury or new
Sarum, now the chief city, and famous for its Cathedral Church, and for that
a stream of water runs through every street thereof. Here are also the
Towns of Malmesburie, Chippenham, Trubridge, Calne, Marleburrow, etc. And this
Shire contains 304. Parishes. The rivers are Isis, Avon, VVilleybourne,
Adderburne, Ellan and Kennet. Glocestria commonly called Glocestershire, has
on the West Wales, Gloucester.
on the North Worcestershire, on the East Oxfordshire, on THE FOVRTH TABLE OF
ENGLAND.
Cornub. Devonia. Somerset etc.
map of England (southwest) the South Wilsthire, it is a pleasant and fertile
Country, lying East and West; The Towns.
and has in it many other mines. The chief City of this County is
Gloucester, which Antoninus calls Cleve, and Gleve, the Latins Glovernia, and
some Claudiocestria: it is an ancient City built by the Romans, and is seated
by the River Severne, having a strong wall in those places where the River does
not wash it. There are also other Towns, as Teukesburie, Rivers
anciently called Theocsburie, Deohirst, Campden or Camden, VVincelscombe,
Cirencester or Circester, Tetburie, Barkley, etc. and 280. Parishes contained
in this County. The Rivers which water it are Severne, Avon and Isis, commonly
called Ouse, which afterward by the marriage of Them unto it is called by a
compounded name Thamisis or Thames. Monmouthshire.
The County of Monmouth, called anciently VVentset and VVentsland, The
Situation.
and by the Britains Guent, is enclosed on the North with the River Munow,
which does part it from Herefordshire, on the East with the river Vaga or Wye,
which divides it from Glocestershire, on the West with Remney which disjoynes
it from Glamorganshire, and on the South it is bounded with the Severne Bay,
into which those former Rivers together with the River Isc, which runs
through the middle of the Country, do roll themselves. It has not only
sufficient provision of things necessary for life for it, The quality of the
Soil.
but also furnishes other Countries. The chief Town thereof is Monmouth,
called by the Inhabitants Mongwy: toward the North where the River does not
fence it, it was encompassed with a wall and a ditch; In the middle near the
Marketplace is a Castle. The Towns.
There are also the Towns of Chepstow, called Castlewent, Abergevenny, or
contractly Abergenny, which Antoninus calls Gobanneum, New-port or Brunepegie,
and the City which Antoninus called Ifa, where the second Legion named Augusta
lay, now styled by the Britains Caerleon, and Caer Leonar Vsk. Here the Saxon
Heptarchie, obeyed the Welsh Mountainers, who notwitstanding, as we may
discern by the ancient Laws, The Government.
were under the government of the West Saxons. But at the coming in of the
Normans, the Captains of the Marches did grievously afflict them, especially
Hamelin Balun, Hugh Lacy, Gualter and Gilbert de Clare called Earls of
Strigulia, and Brian of Wallingford, to whom when the King had granted
whatsoever they could get in that Country by conquering the Welchmen, some of
them reduced the Higher part of the Country into their power: and others the
Lower part which they called Netherwent. Glamorganshire lies wholly by the Sea
side, Glamorganshire.
it is longer than broad, and is beaten on the South side with the Bay of
Severne. But on the East side it has Monmouthshire, on the Norrh
Brecnock-shire, The Situation.
and on the West Caermardenshire. The Northern part swells with mountains
which descending toward the South, The quality of the Soil.
remit somewhat of their height, and at the foot of them the Country lies
plain toward the South. The Cities and Towns.
In this country is the little City of Landaffe, that is the Chapel at Taff;
under which there are 156. Parishes. Also Caerdiffe, or as the Britons call it
Caerdid, Cowbridge, called by the Britains Poratuan from the stonebridge
which is there, Neath, Sweinsey, and Loghor, which Antoninus calls Leucarum.
The Rivers that wash it are Ramney, The Rivers.
Taff, Nide, and Loghor. The Earls of this Province from the first vanquishing
were the Earls of Gloucester descending in a right line from the Fitz-hamons,
the Clares, the Spencers, and after them the Beauchamps, and the two Nevils,
and by a daughter of a Nevill, Richard the third King of England, who being
killed, Henry the seventh enlarged the inheritance of this Country, and gave
it to Gaspar his Uncle and Earl of Bedford, but he dying without issue, the
King took it again into his own hands. Caermardenshire is bounded on the
East with Glamorganshire, and Brecknock-shire, Caermardenshire
on the West with Penbrockshire, on the North with the River Tay separating it
from Cardiganshire, on the South with the Ocean. It is sufficiently fruitful,
abounding with flocks of cattle and in some places with pit-coales. The Towns.
The chief town of the Shire is Caermarden, which Ptolemie calls Maridunum,
Antoninus Muridunum, having pleasant Meadows and woods about it, it is very
ancient, and as Giraldus says, it was encompassed with a stone wall, part
whereof yet stands. There is also the ancient town of Kidwilly, which now
is almost ruinated, for the Inhabitants passing over the River Vendraeth Vehan
did build a new Kidwilly, being drawn thither with the conveniencie of the
Haven, which yet is of no note. The Rivers are Vendraeth Vehan, Towy or Tobius,
and Taff. Penbrokshire is on every side encompassed with the Sea, Pembrokeshire.
except on the East, where part of Caermardenshire, The Situation.
and on the North where part of Flintshire lies against it. The country
being near Ireland has a temperate, and wholesome air, and is plentiful in
all kind of grain. The temperature of the Air.
The chief town hereof is Penbro now called Penbroke, The Towns.
and seated on a craggie long rock. The other Towns of note in this Country
are Tenby, Hulphord now called HarfordWest, and Menevia or Tuy Dewi, which the
English at this day do call S. David's. I find but two Rivers in this Shire:
but here is a Port called Milford-Haven, The Government.
which is the fairest and safest in all Europe. Gilbert Strongbow was the first
Earl of this County, on whom King Stephen did first confer the title of
Earl of Penbroke, and he left it to his son Richard Strongbow, who subdued
Ireland, from whom with his daughter Isabel, William Lord of Hempsted and
Marshall of England, a man flourishing both in times of peace and war,
received it as her dowry. Concerning the other Earls read Camden.
Brecnockshire is called so from the Prince Brechanius, Brecnock-shire.
as the Welchmen suppose. This is bounded on the East with Hereford, The
Situation.
on the South with Monmouthshire and Glamorganshire, on the West with
Caermardenshire, on the North with Radnorshire. The country is very full of
Mountains, yet it has every where fruitful valleys. The fruitfulness of the
Soil.

The Towns.

The Rivers.


The chief town in it is Brecnock, styled in the British tongue Aber-hodney,
and placed in the midst thereof. There are also the towns of Blueth or Bealt,
and Hay or Trekethle. The River Vaga called by the Britains Gowy, and by the
English Wye, waters the Northern part of the country: and Vsk runs
through the middle thereof. Herefordshire, Hereford-shire.
called in the British tongue Ereinuc, is as it were of a circular form, it
is environed on the East with Gloucestershire, on the South with Monmouthshire,
The Situation.
on the West with Radnor and Brecnock shire, and on the North with Shropshire.
It is a pleasant country, full of fruit and cattle. Hereford or Hareford is
the chief city of this country, having round about it fair meadows, and
fruitful fields; it is encompassed with Rivers almost round about, on the
North and West with a namelesse river: on the South with Vaga, which hasteneth
its course hither out of Wales. There are also the towns of Lemster (called
anciently Leonis monasterium, and by the Britains Lhanlieni) Webley,
Ledburie, and Rosse: and there are in it 157 Parishes. The chief Rivers here
are Vaga, The Rivers.
Lug, Munow, and Dor.

THE FIFTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. Containing these Shires, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire,
Darbyshire, Staffordshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire, and
Northfolke.
THE fifth Table of England comes to be unfolded, in the which, the first that
we meet withal is Yorkshire, Yorkshire.
the greatest Shire in all England, and called by the Saxons Ebona-y^yne. The
Situation
On the East it is bounded with the German Ocean, on the West with Lancashire,
and Westmoreland, on the North with the Bishopric of Durham, and on the South
with Cheshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and Lincolneshire. It is held to be
temperate and fruitful. If in one place it be sandy, stony, and barren, The
quality of the Soil.
in an other place it has fruitful fields, if here it be void of woods,
there it is shadowed with thick trees, Nature being so provident, that the
Country is more pleasant by this variety. Here is Eboracum called by Nennius
Caer Ebrauc, and by the Britains Caer Effroc, The Towns.
but commonly styled York. It is the second City of all England, and the
fairest in all this Country, which is a great strength and ornament to all the
North parts. It is pleasant, large, strong, beautified both with private and
public Buildings, and full of wealthy Citizens. The River Ouse does, as it
were, part it and divide it into two Cities, which are joined together by a
great stone Bridge. There are also the Towns of Kingston upon Hull, Dancaster,
called by the Scots Doncastle, and by Antoninus Danum, Halifax, anciently
Horton, Pontfreit, Shirborne, Wetherby, Kingston, Patrington, called anciently
Praetorium, and many others; for there are in this Shire 39 great Towns, and
459 Parishes, besides many private Chapels of ease, which great Parishes are
feign to provide in regard of the multitude of the Inhabitants. The chiefest
Rivers are Don or Dune, The Rivers.
Calder, Arc, Wherfe, Nid, and Ouse, which arising out of the Mountains, do
run through the fruitfullest parts of the Country. There are also other
Rivers, as Cokar, Fosse, Derwent, Foulness, Hull, Teyse, Dow, Rhie, Recall, and
Wisck. Lincolneshire is a great Country, Lincolnshire.
being almost three score miles long, and in some places more than thirty miles
broad. On the East it is beaten with the German Ocean, on the North it touches
the Aestuarie of Abus or Humber, in the West it looks toward Nottinghamshire,
and on the South it is parted from Northamptonshire with the River Welland. It
is a Country that produces much fruit, The quality of the Soil.
and breadeth up abundance of cattle. The chief City of this Shire is
Lincoln, which Ptolemie and Antoninus call Lindum. The Towns.
The City it self is large and fair, being seated on the side of a Hill,
where the River Witham bends toward the East. There are also the Towns of
Stanford, Grantham, Ancaster, anciently called Crococalana, Crowland, Spalding,
Boston, rightly called Botolps town, and others. And there are in this Shire
about 630 Parishes. T^^ Rivers.
This Country is watered with many Rivers, as Witham, which is full of Pikes,
Lud, Trent, Welland, Idle, Pan, etc. The next Country that follows is
Darbyshire, Darbyshire
which on the South is enclosed with Leicestershire, on the West with
Staffordshire, on the North with Yorkshire, on the East with Nottinghamshire.
It is of a triangular form, but not equilaterall, The Situation.
or having equal sides. It is divided into two parts by the River Derwent. The
Eastern and Southern parts are tillable, and fruitful, the Western part is
all rockie, and full of craggie barren Mountains, The Towns
though they be rich in Mines of Lead, and are commodious for to feed sheep.
The head Town of the Shire is Darbie, famous for the best Ale in England which
is brewed there. There are also the Towns of Saint Diacre, Workesworth, so
called from the Lead-workes there, and Bakewel. And this Shire does contain an
hundred and six Parishes. The Riv^rs.
The Rivers that water it are Trent, Dove, and Derwent. The Western part of
this Shire, which is mountainous, is called the Peake, and is very full of
Lead: for in these Mountains Lead-stones (as the Mettallists call them) are
daily dug forth, which when the wind is Westward, they dissolve with a wood
fire, and (having made trenches for the metal to run in) melt into pieces,
which they call Sowes. Moreover, not only Lead, but also veins of Antimonie,
which the Grecian women were wont to use in dying, are found in these Hills.
Here also Millstones are cut forth, as also whet-stones, and sometimes a white
substance is found in the Mines, like to Crystal. But of this enough:
Stafford shire
I pass to Staffordshire, which is encompassed on the East side with
Warwickshire and Darby-shire, on the South with Gloucestershire, on the West
with Shropshire, The Site.
and on the North with Cheshire. It bears the shape of a Rhombus, running
from South to North, and being broadest in the middle, and narrowest toward the
two ends. The Northern part is mountainous and less pleasant, The ^^^^il^ty of
the Soy^e.
the middle part is more delightful, as being watered with the River Trent,
clothed with green woods, and diversified with variety of fields and meddowes.
The Southern part is rich in Pit-coales, and veins of Iron. The head Town
hereof is Stafford or Stratford, The Towns.
anciently called Betheney, and is much graced by the Castle called Stafford
adjoining to it, which the Barons of Stafford built for their own dwelling.
Here are also the Towns of Lichfield or Licidfield, Burton, Vtcester,
anciently called Etocetum, Stone, Drayton Basset, Tameworth, Wolverhampton, or
Vulfrunshampton, Theotenhall or Tetnall, and Weadesbrig or Wedsborow. And in
this Shire are reckoned 130 Parishes. The chief Rivers which glide through
this Country are Dove, Hanse, The Rivers.
Churnet, Tayn, Blithe, and Trent, which arising from two springheads, is the
third chief River of Britain. There are also Sous, Tam, and Penke. The
Northern part is somewhat mountainous, and full of hills, The Mountains.
which beginning here, do run, like the Apennine Hills of Italy, with a
continued ridge through the middle of England, even to Scotland, yet often
changing their name. In the midst of this Shire is Needwood a spacious wood,
The Woods.
in which the Nobility and Gentry of the Country do THE FIFTH TABLE OF
ENGLAND.
EBORACUM Lincolnia Derbia. Stafford, etc
map of England (northeast) daily recreate themselves with hunting.
Nottinghamshire*
Nottinghamshire is bounded on the East with Lincolnshire, on the North with
Yorkshire, on the West with Darbyshire, The Situation
and on the South with Leicestershire. The Southern and Eastern part of the
County is fructified by the famous River of Trent, and other Rivulets that
flow into it. The quality of the Soil.
The Forest of Shirwood takes up the whole Western side: this (because it is
sandy) the Inhabitants call the Sand: the other (by reason the soil
consists of Clay) they call the Clay; and they divide their Country into
these two parts. The chief Town which gives a denomination to the Shire, is
Nottingham, being pleasantly seated; The Towns
for on one side fair Meddowes lie along the River side, and on an other
little Hills do raise themselves, to add a grace thereunto: It is a Town
abounding with all things necessary to life. For besides other conveniences, it
has Shirewood, which does furnish it with store of fuel, and the River Trent
does yield it plenty of Fish. The Streets are large, having fair buildings,
and two great Churches, with a spacious Marketplace, and a strong Castle.
Besides, here are other great Towns, namely Suthwel, Newarke, Mansfield,
Blithe, Scroby, and Workensop. The R^^^^s.
And in this Shire there are 168 Parishes. The Rivers are Trent,
Leicester^shire.
Lin, Snite, and Idle. Leichestershire, anciently called Ledecester-shire, The
Situation.
bordereth upon the South with Northamptonshire, on the East with Rutland
shire and Lincolnshire, on the North with Nottingham shire and Darby-shire,
The ^^^^^fulnesse of the So^^
and on the West with Warwickshire. It is all field-ground, and very
fruitful, but for the most part it wants wood. The chief City is
Leicester, called heretofore Legecestria, Leogara, and Legeocester, more
ancient than beautiful. The Towns
There are also the Towns of Longburrow, Lutterworth, Hinckly and Bosworth,
near which Richard the third was slain; and in this Shire there are 200
Parish Churches. The River Soar, running toward Trent, waters the middle of it,
and the little River Wrek, which at last mingleth his waters with Soar, does
gently wind about through the Eastern part. Rutland-shire.
Rutland-shire, which was anciently called Rudland and Roteland, that is, red
land, is, as it were, emcompassed with Leicestershire, The Situation.
except on the South side, where it lies by the River Welland, and on the East
where it joyneth to Lincolne-shire: It is the least Shire in England; for it
lies in a round circular form, so that a man may ride quite round about it in
one day. The (...) of the S^^l^.
This Country is no less pleasant and fruitful than others, although it be
not so spacious. The chief Town in it is Vppingham, so called, because it
stands on the ascent of an hill; The Towne^
it has a fair free School in it, which was built for the nurture and
bringing up of children to learning, by R. Johnson, Minister of Gods word, who
also built an other at the town of Okeham, so called, because it is situated
in a vale, which once was very woody and full of Oaks. This Shire can reckon
47 Parish Churches. The little River Wash or Gwash, gliding through the middle
of it from East to West, does divide it into two parts. Northfolke.
Northfolke remains yet to be described, that is to say, the Northern people.
The bounds thereof on the South are Suffolk, The Situation
on the East and North the German Ocean, and on the West the River Ouse. The
quality of the Soil.
The Country is large, and for the most part field-ground, unless it be
where there are some smaller hills; it is very rich, full of flocks of sheep,
and especially of Cunnies: it is watered with pleasant Rivers, and is
sufficiently stored with wood. The soil differs according to the diversity of
places, for in some parts it is fat and rich, in other parts light and sandy,
and in other clayie and chalkie. Amongst the chief towns in this Shire, old
Thetford is the first, The Towns.
which Antoninus calls Sitomagus, that is, a town situate by the river Sit.
It has now but few dwelling-houses, though heretofore it were fair and very
populous. There is also in this Shire the famous City of Norwich, called by
the Saxons North, that is, the North Castle, and This Town the Saxons called
Garmouth, because it is situated ad Gar^^^^ os^^um^s, the mouth of Gerne.
Yarmouth or Garmouth, a fair Haven Town, fortified by its situation, and
man's industry; for it is almost entrenched with water; on the West with the
River, over which there is a draw Bridge; on other sides with the Ocean, except
it be on the North side, toward the Land, and there it is encompassed with
strong walls, which with the River do lie in a long square-sided-figure. There
are also these Towns, Ashelwel-thorp, Dis or Disce, Shelton, Skulton or
Burdos, Attleburgh, Wauburne, Lynne, Swaff ham, North Elmeham, Dereham,
Windham, Icborow, and others. For this Country has 27 Market Towns, and 525
Villages, and about 660 Parish Churches. The rivers that do water it are Ouse,
Thet, The Rivers.
anciently called Sit, Wauency, Gerne or Year, and Wents anciently Wentfare.
There is not in the world any town which gets so much by taking and
catching of Herrings, as the town of Yarmouth in this Shire. The commodities
of the Sea.
For it is incredible to think, what great Faires and Markets they have here
at Michaeltide, and what a number of Herrings and other fish are carried from
hence into other parts. Besides, from hence (as Varro advises) thou may
collect the goodness of the shire, the Inhabitants being well colored,
crafty witted, and sharply insighted into the Laws of England. The manners
of the Inhabitants.
But of these Counties we have entreated largely enough, I pass now to the
sixth Table.

THE SIXTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. IN WHICH ARE THESE Shires, Warwickshire,
Northamptonshire, Huntingdon, Cambridge, Suffolk, Oxfordshire, Buckingam,
Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Bark-shire, Middlesex, Hampshire, Surrey, Kent and
Sussex.
Warwick shire
IN the Sixth Table of England is first Warwick shire, being bounded on the East
with Leicester^shire, and Watling-street way, on the South with Oxford shire
and Gloucestershire, The Situation.
on the West with Wiltshire, and on the North with Staffordshire. This Country
is divided into two parts, Feldon and Woodland, The quality of the So^^^

The Towns.


heretofore called Arden, that is, into the Field and Wood-Country. The chief
Town hereof is Warwick, called by the Britains ^aer-Leon; besides the
Towns of Leamington, called so from the River Leame by which it stands,
V^hindon, now called Long Ichingdon, Harbury, Mancester, called anciently
Manduessedum; Coventry, called heretofore Conventria, Stratford upon Avon, and
others; and there are in this County 158 Parish Churches. The Rivers are Avon,
Leam, Arrow and Allen, commonly called Aln^. The next that follows is
Northamptonshire, Northamptonshire
which from the East, where it is broadest, lesseneth by degrees, and is
extended Eastward. The County is bounded on the East with Redford-shire and
Huntingdon-shire, The Situation
on the South with Bucking^am shire, The (...) of the S^^l^.
and Oxford shire, on the West with Warwickshire, and on the North with
Leichestershire, Rutland-shire, and La^colne-shire, which are parted from it by
the River Welland. It is a field Country, of a very rich soil, The C^ties
(...) Towne^
both in upland grounds and meddowes. The shire Town hereof is Northampton,
the other Towns are Frakley, Torcester, anciently called Tripontium, Grafton,
Daventr^, W^d^n, Higham, Oundale, rightly Avondale, Peterborow, called
anciently Pe^^^^urg^^, Welledone, etc. A^ to this Shire there appertains 326
Parishes: The Rivers

Huntingdon shire*


the Rivers are Ouse, Avon, and Welland. In the third place is
Huntingdon-shire, being so situated, that on the South it looks toward
Bedford shire, on the West toward Northamptonshire, on the North where it is
parted with the River Avon, The Situation.

The fertility o^ the Soil.


and on the East, toward Cambridge-shire. It is a Country fit for tillage, and
feeding of cattle, and toward the East where it is low ground it is very
fruitful, having every where pleasant hills and shadie woods. The chief Town
of this Country is Huntingdon, called heretofore Huntesdune, to which it gives
the name of Huntingdon-shire. Here are THE SIXTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.
Warwicum. Northampton. Huntingdon Cantabr etc.
map of England (southeast) also the Towns of S. Ives, which the Saxons
anciently called Sleep, Saint Needs, or Saint Neotifanum, and Cunnington; here
are 78. Parishes. The two Rivers Ouse, The Rivers.
and Avon do water the Country. In the fourth place is Cambridge-shire,
Cambridg-shire.

The Situation.

The quality of the Soil.


which lying toward the East, does butte upon North-folke and Suffolk, on the
South on Essex and Harford-shire, on the West on Huntingdon-shire, and on the
North on Lincolne-shire, and the River Ouse, which running through it from East
to West, does divide it into two parts. The Towns.
The Lower and Southern part is more tilled and planted then the rest, and
therefore more pleasant; it lies in the manner of a bending plain, being a
Champion Country, and yielding excellent Barley, except where it bears
Saffron: the farther and Northern part flourishes more with green Meddowes.
The chief Town in this Shire is Cambridge, anciently called Camboritum, and
by the Saxons Grantcester, The Universitie.
this is one of the Universities of England, yea the Sun and Eye thereof, and
a famous Nurserie of good learning and piety, it is seated upon the River Came.
Besides, here are these Towns, Roiston, Rech, Burwell, Ely, and here are 163
Parishes in this County, and the Rivers are Came and Stour. Suffolk follows
in the next place, having on the West Cambridge-shire, Suffolk.
and on the South the River Stour, which divides it from Essex, The Situation.
on the East the Germane Ocean, and on the North the two little Rivulets, The
fertility of the Soil.
Ouse the less, and Waveney, which arising as it were from one spring head,
and running a diverse course, do part it from North-folke. The Country is
large, and of a fat soil, except it be toward the East, for it is compounded
of clay and marle, so that the fields do flourish every where; here is
fruitful pasturage for fatting of cattle, The Towns.
and great store of cheese made. The Towns in this County are Sudbury, that is
the South-Towne. Ixning, Saint Edmunds-bury, called anciently Villa Faustini,
Bretenham, Hadley, Ipswich, called anciently Gippwic, Debenham, Oreford, and
many others. The Rivers are Stour, Breton, Gipping, Rivers.

Oxfordshire.


Deben, Ore, Ouse, Waveney, and Gerne or Year. Oxfordshire, which comes next
to be spoken of, on the West is joined to Gloucestershire, and on the South it
is parted from Barke-shire by the River Isis or Ouse, on the East it is bounded
with Buckingham-shire, and on the North with Northamptonshire and
Warwickshire. The Situation.

The fertility of the Soil.


It is a fertile and rich Country, the plains thereof being adorned with fair
fields and meddowes, and the hills crowned with many woods, filled with fruits,
and all sorts of cattle which graze thereon. In this Shire the City of Oxford,
anciently called Ousford from the River Ouse, lifts up her head, being the
other Universitie of England, The University.
the other Sun, Eye, and Soul thereof, and a most famous Nurserie of
Learning and Wisdom, from whence Religion, Humanity, and Learning are
plentifully diffused and dispersed into other parts of the Kingdom. The Towns.
Here are also the Towns of Bablac, Burford, which the Saxons called Beorford,
Minster Lovell, Whitney, Woodstocke, Banbury, Burcester, or Burencester, Tame,
Dorchester, called by Bid Civitas Dorcinia, and by Lelandus Hydropolis,
Watlington, and 280. Parishes in it: the rivers here are Isis, Cherwell,
Windrush, and Evenlode. Buckingham-shire.
Buckingham-shire so called, because it is full of Beech-trees, comes to be
viewed in the seventh place, which being but narrow, does run length-wayes
from Thamisis Northward. On the South it looks toward Berk-shire, being
parted from it by Thamisis, The Situation*
on the West toward Oxfordshire, on the North toward Northamptonshire, The
fertility of the Soil.
and on the East it looks first toward Bedford-shire, afterward toward
Hartford-shire; and last of all toward Middlesex. It has a plentiful soil,
and the fruitful meddowes thereof do feed innumerable flocks of sheep. The
head Town is Buckingham, The Towns.
besides which it has also the Towns of Marlow, Colbroke, Amersham, Crendon
or Credendon, so called from the Chalk or Marle, by which the Inhabitants
thereof manure their Land, High-Wickam, Stony-Stratford, Oulney,
Newport-Pannell, etc. and in this Shire are reckoned 185 Parishes: the Rivers
are Them, Colne and Ouse. Bedford-shire follows, Bedford shire

The Situation

The quality of the Soil.


being joined on the East to Cambridg-shire, on the South to Hartford-shire, on
the West to Buckingham-shire, and on the North to Northamptonshire, and
Huntingdon-shire; it is divided into two parts by the River Ouse. That part
which is Northward is more fruitful and woody, the other part toward the South
which is larger, is of a meaner soil, but yet not barren: for it has great
store of very excellent Barley. In the middle of it there are thick Woods, but
Eastward it is more bare and naked of trees The chief Town is Lactodorum, now
called Bedford, which communicates its name to the Shire. It has also other
Towns, as Odill, Bletnesho or Bletso, Eaton, Dunstable, The Towns
built by Henry the first for suppressing of the robberies of the rebel Dun
and his companions: it contains 116 Parishes, and is watered with the River
Ouse. Hertford-shire
Next to Bedford-shire on the South side lies Hartford-shire, the West side
thereof is enclosed with Buckingham-shire, the Northern side with Middlesex,
and the East side with Essex, The Situation.
and partly with Cambridge-shire. It is very rich in corne-fields, pastures,
meddowes, and woods. The chief Town in the Country is Herudford, The
fertility of the Soil.
now called Hertford, which does impart its name to the whole Shire. There are
also the Towns of Watling-street, Fane, S. Albane, or Verulamium, Roiston,
called anciently Crux Roisiae, Ashwell, Bishops-Stortford, and many others: and
this Shire has an 120. Parishes. The Rivers are Lea or Ley, Stort, Mimer and
Benefice. Now come we to Essex, The Towns Essex.
which the River Stour on the North divides from South-folke, on the East the
Ocean beats it, The Situation
on the South the River Thames now grown very wide, does part it from Kent, on
the West the River Lea divides it from Middlesex, and the little River Stour
or Stort, from Hertford-shire. The fertility of the Soil.
It is a large Country, fruitful, abounding with Saffron, being full of woods,
and very rich: here is Camalodunum, now called Maldon. The Towns
Also Colchester, which the Britains call Caer Colin, Leyton, Bemflot, Leegh.
Rochford, Anger, Ralegh, anciently called Raganeia, Dunmow, Plaissy or Plessy,
called anciently Estre, Chelmesford, now called Chensford, Ithancester, Earls
Colne, Barlow, Walden, called likewise Saffron* Walden, etc. the Parishes are
415. the Rivers are Ley, Thames, Chelmer, Froshwell, anciently called Pante and
Colne. In the next place follows Berroc-shire, Berk-shire.
now called Berk-shire, the Northern part whereof Isis, which is afterward
called Tamisis, does compass with a winding pleasant stream, The Situation.
and does divide it from Oxfordshire and Buckingham-shire: the Southern part
the River Kennet does separate from Hampshire, the Western part is held in by
Wiltshire and Gloucestershire, and the Eastern part is confined with Surrey.
This County on the West side where it is broadest, and in the middle thereof is
very rich, and full of corn, especially in the Vale of White Horse, and on the
Eastern side which is less fruitful, The Towns.
there are many long and spacious woods. The Towns are Farendon, Abington,
called anciently Abandune, and by the Saxons Sheoverham, Wantage, Wallingford,
Hungerford, Widehay, anciently called Gallena, Newbery, Reading, Bistleham, or
Bisham, Southealington, now called Maidenhead, and Windsore, called by the
Saxons Windlesora. This Country has 140 Parishes: the Rivers which water it
are Isis, Thames, Ocke, Cunetio or Kenet, Middlesex.
and Lambo^. Middlesex is divided on the West side from Buckingham-shire with
the River Colne, on the North side from Hertford-shire, with the known bounds,
The Situation.
on the East side from Essex with the River Lea, and on the South side from
Surrey and Kent with the River Thames. It is every where very pleasant by
reason of the temperatenesse of the Air, The temperature of the Air.

The Towns.


and goodness of the Soil, besides the fair Towns and buildings. The Towns
here are Vxbridge, Draiton, Stanes, Radclisse, and others: but above all
London, called also Londinium, Longidinium, Augusta, and by Stephanus
Lindonion, which is an Epitomy of all Britain. It is seated by the River of
Thames, having a fertile Soil and temperate Air: it is distant from the Sea
threescore miles, it has a stone Bridge over the River, being three hundred
and thirty paces long, adorned on both sides with magnificent and fair
buildings. It has also a strong Tower, which is the chief Armory of England,
and in this the Mint is kept. Near to London is Westminster, anciently called
Thorney, famous for the Abbey, the Courts of Justice, and the Kings Palace. The
Abbey is most renowned by reason of the Coronation, and burial of the Kings of
England, The Rivers.
and in this County are 73 Parishes, besides those in the City. The Rivers
that water it are Lea, Ham^shire.

The Situation.


Colne, and Thames. Hampshire or Hantshire touches on the West Dorsetshire and
Wiltshire, on the South the Ocean, on the East Sussex and Surrey, and on the
North Berk-shire. It is fruitful, having pleasant thick woods and flourishing
pastures: it has two Cities, the one Southampton, so called, because it stands
on the River Test, The Towns
anciently called Ant or Hant: the other Winchester, called heretofore Venta
Belgarum. There are also these Towns, Regnwood or Ringwood, Christ-church,
Whorwell, Andover, Rumsey, Portsmouth, Kings-cleare, Odiam, Silcester, called
anciently by the Britains Caer Segente, and others, Surrey.
and it has 253 Parishes: the Rivers are Avon, Stour, Test and Hamble. Surrey,
called by Bid Suthriona, joyneth on the West partly to Berk-shire, The
quality of the Soil.
and partly to Southampton-shire, on the South to Sussex, on the East to Kent,
and on the North it is watered by the River Thames, and divided by it from
Middlesex. It is a Country not very large, yet very rich: The Towns.
The Towns are Godelminge, Aclea, or Ockley, Effingham, Kingstone, Merton,
Cradiden, or Croydon, Beddington, Wimbandune, or Wimbledon, Wandlesworth, The
Rivers.
and the Borrough of Southworke, called by the Saxons South work, and this
Country has 140 Parishes: The rivers are VVey, Mole, (so called, because for a
certain space it runs under ground like a Mole) Wandale, and Thames
aforesaid. Now follows Cantium or Kent, a Country so called from the
situation, Kent.
for it looks toward France with a great corner, The Situation.
which the word Canton in the French signifies, environed round about with the
mouth of Thames and the Sea, unless on the West side where it joyneth to
Surrey, The quality of the Soil.
and on the South side to part of Sussex. It is unlevell, yet plainest toward
the West, and shaded with woods, on the East it is raised with high hills. The
chief City is Durovernum, which Ptolemie calls Darvernum, and in English is
called Canterbury. There are also the Towns of Dover, The Towns.
anciently called Durbis, and by the Saxons Dufra, Hith or Hide, Rumney,
anciently called Rumenal, Sandwich or Sondwic, Gravesend, etc. The Rivers are
Thames, Rivers.
Darent, Medway, anciently called Medwege, Stoure, called by Bid Wantsome,
etc. Sussex toward the South bordereth upon the British Ocean, Sussex
The Situation.
and that part of the Country which is toward the Sea is full of high white
hills, which because they consist of a fat kind of Chalk are very fruitful:
the middle of it has goodly meddowes, pastures, fields, and many pleasant
groves. The hither part has many woods, and it has many veins of Iron. The
Towns here are Chichester, or rightly Cissanceaster, The Towns.
so called from one Cissa a Saxon that built it: Arundal, so called, because it
stands upon the River Arun, and other. It has many Rivers, and 312 Parishes.

THE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND. CONTAINS THESE FOUR ISLANDS which belong to
England, Anglesey, Wight, Gersey, and Garnsey.
THe seventh and last Table of England contains these four Islands which
belong to England: the former two whereof namely Anglesey and Wight, The Isle
of Anglesey.
do lie near the English shore, the latter Garsey near the French shore.
The first is Anglesey, The names.
which the Britains call Mon, Tirmon, and Ynis Dowyl, (that is) the dark
Island, the Saxons call it Moneza, being divided by a slender Bay from the
British Continent. It is a brave Island, and the ancient seat of the Druides,
the length whereof 22 English miles, The Situation
the breadth 17, and the whole compass of it 60 miles. This Island, although
Giraldus says, it was in his time, dry, stony, unpleasant, and deformed, yet
now it is delectable, and being tilled yields so much wheat, The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
that it is commonly called the Mother of Wales. It has milstones, and in some
places aluminous earth, out of which they have lately begun to make Alum. It is
also rich in cattle. It was first subjected to the Roman Empire by Paulinus
Suetonius, and Julius Agricola as Camden out of Tacitus a learned Writer. Many
years after being conquered by the English, it came to be called Anglesey, as
it were, the English Island, Camden adds, that when the Roman Empire in
Britain began to decrease, the Scots crept out of Ireland into this Island.
For besides the hills which are entrenched round, and called the Irish
cottages: The Government.
there is a place which the Irish call Y^ Hericy Guidil, where being lead by
their Captain Sirigi, they gave the Britains a great overthrow, as it is
mentioned in the book of Triads. Neither has this Island been invaded by the
English, but likewise by the Norwegians. For in the year 1000. The navy of
Aethelred sailing about it did wast it in hostile manner. Afterward two Norman
Hughs, one Earl of Cheshire, the other of Shropshire did most grievously
afflict it and built the Castle Aber-Lienioc to restrain the Inhabitants, but
Magnus a Norwegian arriving at this Island killed Hugh Earl of Cheshire with an
arrow, and having took booty on the Island departed. Afterward also the
English often attempted it, until Edward the first reduced it into his power.
Heretofore it had 363 Villages, and at this day it is full of Inhabitants, but
the chief Town is Bellus Mariscus, The Towns.
commonly called Beaumarish, which Edward the first built in the East part of
that Island in a moorish place; and in regard of the Situation, he gave it this
name, and fortified it with a Castle. The second Town to this is Newburge, in
Welsh Ressur, because it was THE SEVENTH TABLE OF ENGLAND.
ANGLESEY. INS.
map of Anglesey WIGHT ol. Vectis
map of the Isle of Wight INS. GARNESEY
map of Guernsey (Channel islands) INS. IARSEY
map of Jersey (Channel islands) much troubled with the sands which were
continually cast upon it. Here is also Aberfraw heretofore the chief City of
Wales. Also the holy Promontorie which the English call Holyhead: the
Inhabitants call it Caer Guby from Kibius a holy man who was Scholar to
Hilarious Pictavensis. The Inhabitants are very rich and strong, and they use
the British language having no skill in English, albeit they, together with
the rest of Wales, have been subject to the Kings of England these three
hundred years. The Isle of Wight.
Now follows Vecta or Vectis, the Isle of Wight, which the Britains call
Guith. The names.
It is broken off from the Continent of Britain by so small an Euripus
running between, called heretofore Solent, that it seems to cleave unto it,
and hence that British name Guith, which signifies a separation, seems to be
derived: even as Sicilie being divided from Italy, took his name, (as learned
Julius Scaliger pleases to derive it,) a secando, that is, from cutting. From
this vicinitie of situation, and affinity of the name, we may conjecture that
this Vecta was that Icta, which when the Sea Flowed did seem an Island, but
when it Ebd again, the shore being almost dry, the ancient Britains were
wont to carry Tin thither in Carts to be transported thence into France. I
suppose it cannot be that Mictis of Pliny, which joyneth close to Vecta,
because out of that there came white lead, and in this (says Camden) there is
no metal vein so far as I know. The Situation.
This Island between East and West lies twenty miles in length in an ovall
figure, the breadth thereof in the middle where it is broadest is twelve miles
over, the one side lies toward the North, the other toward the South. It has
a fruitful soil, and very profitable to the husbandman, The fruitfulness of
the Soil.
so that it exporteth and sends forth diverse commodities, it is every where
full of Cunnies, Hares, Partridges and Pheasants, it has also a Forest and
two Parkes full of Dear for hunting. The variety of the living Creatures.
Through the middle of this Island there runs a long ridge of hills, on which
flocks of sheep securely graze, whose fleeces are held to be the best wool,
except that of Lemster and Cotteswold, and therefore being chiefly bought up by
Clothiers, the Inhabitants do make a great gain and commodity thereby. The
Northern part has green meadows, fields, and woods: the Southern part is
all corne-fields, enclosed every where with ditches and hedges. The Sea
At either end the Sea on the North side does so penetrate and wind into it,
that it makes almost two Islands, and the Inhabitants do call them Islands,
namely that which looks toward the West the Fresh Water Isle, that which
lies toward the East Binbrydge Isle. Vespasian serving under the Emperor
Claudius did first reduce this Island to the obedience of the Romans, as ^n
Vespasian^ ^ap. 4.
Suetonius writes in the life of Vespasian. The first Saxon that made it his
own was Cerdicius which gave it to Stuffa, and Whitgarus, who carried away the
British Inhabitants to Caresbrok, and put them to death; afterward Wolpherus
being of the Mercians, brought Vecta or Wight under his power, The ancient
government.
and gave it to Edelwalch King of the South Saxons. After that Caedwalla King
of the West- Saxons, (the aforesaid Edwalch being slain, and Arnaldus
Governor of the Island being made away) adjoined it to his territories. But
see more concerning these things in Camden. The Inhabitants by nature are
warlike, The nature of the Inhabitants.
bold, and forward, and the Soldiers very stout. In Bedes time there were
thought to be in this Island a thousand and two hundred families, but now it
has six and thirty Towns besides Villages and Castles. The chiefest Towns
are New-port, the chief Market-towne of the Island, heretofore called Medena,
and Novus Burgus de Meden, from whence the whole Country is divided into
East-Meden, and West-Meden, according as it lies East or West. Also Brading,
The Towns.
Newton, and Yarmouth which have their Majors, and do send up their Burgesses
to the Parliaments of England. This Yarmouth and another also called Sharpnore
have Castles, which together with the Fort Worsteys do defend the coast on the
West side. Over against which scarce two miles off stands the Fort Hurst on a
little tongue of ground in Hampshire. Here is also the Town Quarre where a
little Monastery was built in the year 1132 for veiled Virgins or close
Nuns, and Gods Hill where I. Worseley founded a School for the nurture of
children. Here is situate Westcow and Eastcow, now ruinated, which Henry the
eight built in the very jaws and entrance of New-port. And on the East is
Sandham a Castle fortified with great Ordinance, as the rest are, beside the
fortifications of nature, for it is encompassed about with ragged cliffes,
underneath which are hidden rocks. As these two Islands lie near to the
English shore, somewhat more toward the West, some Islands do appear in the
Sea near to France, and yet belong to England, among which are Gerzey and
Garnzey, and first Gerzey, called Caesarea by Antoninus, lies near to
Normandy, or the shore of Lexobii, whom our Britains do call Lettaw, that
is, dwellers on the shore, or coasters: this word Caesarea the Frenchmen have
contracted into Gersey, Gersey.
even as Caesaris Burgus, a town in Normandy is by them contractly called
Cherburgh and Caesar Augusta a Town in Spain is by the Spaniards called
Saraggosa. The names.
Into this Island condemned men were heretofore banished, The Situation.
for the Bishop of Lions was banished hither. Papirius Massonius calls it the
Isle of Constantine shore, because it lies over against the ancient city of
Constantia, which Ammianus thinks was heretofore called Castra Constantia,
and in former times Muritonium. This Island is about 20 miles in compass,
being defended by rocks and such sands as are dangerous to seamen. The earth
is sufficiently fertile, abounding with diverse fruits and with flocks of
cattle; it has many sheep, and most of them such as have four horns, is
beautified with so many green Orchards and Gardens, and those so fruitful
that the Inhabitants make a kind of drink of apples, which they call Sisera
and the English Side^, therewith; but in regard they have little fuel, instead
of wood they use Sea weeds (by them called Vraic) which seems to be that
sea-grasse which Pliny mentions, and they grow so plentifully on these rocks,
The fertility of the Soil.
that they seem a far of to be thick woods. These being dried in the Sun
and after burnt for fuel, they make use of the ashes for manuring their
fields, and making them fruitful. This Island is likewise full of Villages,
having twelve Parishes. It is fortified with a strong Castle seated on the hill
Montorguel, and he that governes it for the English is also governor of the
whole Island. Twenty miles hence toward the West is another Island, which
Antoninus named Sarnia, the English at this day call it Garnsey, lying from
East to West in the form of a harp, Garnsey.
it is not to be compared either for largeness or populusnesse with the
aforesaid Gersey, for it has only ten Parishes. Yet in this it is to be
preferred before it, because it has no venomous thing in it: beside it is more
fortified by nature, as being encompassed on every side with broken cliffes
among which the Smyris an hard and rough stone is found, which the English call
an Emrall, with which Jewellers do cut their stones, The quality of the Soil.
and Glaziers do cut their glass. This Island also, as the former, has green
Gardens and Orchards planted with diverse trees, whence for the most part, the
Inhabitants use the drink made of apples called Cider, as the Gersey people
do, in regard of the convenience of an Haven, The Haven.
and the traffic of Merchants it is more famous than Gersey. For on the
farthest part toward the East, on the Southern side, it has a Haven like an
half Moon, near which is seated the Town of Saint Peter, being one long
narrow street, S. Peter's Town.
full of warlike provision, and frequented much with Merchants when wars
begin in other places. The entrance into the Haven is fortified on either side
with Castles, on the left hand is an ancient Castle, and on the right hand
another which they call Cornet, seated on a high rock, and environed with the
Sea. The Inhabitants of either Isle are originally either Normans or
Britains, and do speak French.* In both Islands they use that which they
call Vraic instead of fuel, or pitcoales dug in England, and both of them
have great store of fish. These Islands with other adjacent and lying near
unto them did heretofore belong to Normandy, but when Henry the first had
overthrown his brother Robert in the year of Christ 1108, he adjoined
Normandy and these Islands to the Kingdom of England, The ancient Government.
since which time they have continued in faithful obedience to England,
although the French (banishing King John) possessed Normandy and Henry the
third sold his right in Normandy, and yielded up the possession of Aquitaine
in consideration of a certain sum of money. It Is true that the French in the
reign of Henry the fourth, did hold Garnsey, but by the industry of Richard
Harleston, Valectus de Carona (as they then called him) they were driven out,
in reward whereof the King did confer and bestow upon him the government of
the Island and Castle. And let so much suffice to have been spoken concerning
these four Islands, and also concerning England, both in general and
particular.

NORWEY, AND SVVETH-LAND. The first and second Kingdom of the North part of
the World.
BRITAIN being described as faithfully as we could, that Northern part of
the world now follows in our method, which the Ancients did call Scandia and
Scandinavia, Pliny calls it the Nurser of Nations, and the receptacle of
people of a great stature. That part which is nearest to the farthest Northern
shore of Germany, is distinguished at this time into the three Kingdoms of
Norwey, Swethland, and Denmark. Norwey
Norwey or Norwegia comes in the first place to be viewed. Whence so called.
The Etymology whereof is easy to be known; for it is so called from Nord
which signifies the North, and Weg which signifies a way, as if we should
say, the Northway, or Northern Country. It has on the South Denmark, on the
West the Sea, on the East Sweth-land, and it is bounded on the North with
Lapland, from which it is parted with high and rugged Mountains, covered over
with continual snow. All the Country toward the West is unpassable by reason
of rocks and sharp cliffes, and it is also stony toward the South, especially
in that part which lies against the Cimbrick Chersonesus, from whence it is
250 miles distant. But all the Country both toward the West and South has a
gentle Air, for the Sea is not frozen, neither do the Snowes lie long. The
quality of the Soil.
And though the Country it self be not so fertile, that it is able to
furnish the Inhabitants with food: yet it abounds with cattle and wild
beasts, as white Bears of an unusual bigness, Beavers and innumerable other.
The variety of Creatures.
Norwey was sometime a very flourishing, Kingdom, under the jurisdiction
whereof were Denmark and the Isles of the Sea, until it came to be governed
by hereditarie succession. Afterward in the Interregnum it was agreed upon by
the consent of the Nobles, that the Kings should be chosen by election. From
Suthdager the second to Christierne the last, there were 45 Kings. Now it is
under the command of Denmark. There are at this time in it five royal
Castles, and so many special Provinces, whereof the first and farthest toward
the South is Bahusia, or Bay. The Towns subject unto it are Marstand, The
Cities and Towns.
seated on a rocky Peninsula, and famous for herring-fishing; and the Towns of
lesser note, are Koengeef or Congel, near Bahus and Oddewold, otherwise called
Odwad. The second Castle is Aggerhusia, out of the Province whereof high Masts
of ships, oaken and maple plankes and wood fit for building houses, is yearly
carried into Spain and other Countries. The Towns subject unto it are Astoia,
the Seat of a Bishop, to which strangers do chiefly resort, because there is
held the Court whither causes are brought for trial out of all parts of
Norwey. Also Tonsberg or Konningsberg, Fridrichstad, Saltzburgh, and Schin or
Schon, where there are Mines of Coppresse and Iron, also Hammaria the Greater
and the Lesser, heretofore being Bishoprics, but now committed to the care of
the Asloian Bishop, and divided by the Bay of Mosian, gliding between them.
The third is the Castle Bergerhusia, under which are the Cities of Bergen, or
Berga, and Staffanger. But Berga is the most famous City of all Norwey for
traffic, and as it were the Barn thereof: here resideth the Kings
Lieutenant, and a Bishop; and here that delicate fish is sold, which being
taken near the shore of Norwey, is called the fish of Bergen, being
transported from hence by Merchants into diverse Countries. Here lie the
Factors of the Vandals and the Sea Towns, who continuing here all the year,
for traffic sake, do take up one part of the City, which the Inhabitants
call the Bridge. Here is also an excellent and safe Haven. The City
Staffanger, although it have the same Governor with Bergen, yet it has a
Bishop peculiar to it self, and living therein. The fourth Castle is Nidrosia,
called so from the River Nideros and Rosa, which is the name of a Temple,
commonly called Trundtheim, and heretofore Trondon; it is the Metropolis of all
Norwey, and now reduced into the form of a Town. It was the chief seat
heretofore of the Archbishop, and of the whole Kingdom. It has a large
Jurisdiction, in which much fish and precious skins are gotten, and afterward
carried to Bergen to be sold. And here is at this day a Cathedral Church, and
such a one as there is scarce an other like it in the Christian world, both for
the largeness of the stones, and for the carved work. The Border and
groundwork about the Altar in this Church was burnt with fire, in the year
1530, and the loss redounding thereby was valued at seven thousand Crowns.
The fifth and last Tower toward the North of Norwey is Wardbuise, standing on
the little Island Ward; it is now very small, and almost decayed, having
neither castle nor munition, yet has it a little Town adjoining unto it,
which consists all of fisher-mens houses. In this Tower or rather Cottage, the
Kings Prefect lives in Summer, and governs this cold Northern part of
Norwey, even to the borders of Russia. Moreover the Western shore of Norwey
(because it is of an unsearchable depth) in the Spring time is much troubled
with Whales, The Sea
to prevent whose violence, the ship-men use a kind of Oil made of Beavers
stone, which is a present remedy, for as soon as it is cast into the Sea, and
mingled with the water, straightway that great Sea Monster makes away and
hides himself in the deep. Here is good fishing in the neighboring seas,
The Commodities.
and especially of Stock Fish, which being dried and hardened in the cold and
hung up upon poles, they send into other Kingdoms of Europe. The Merchandise.
The best taking of them is in the Month of January: for as then in regard of
the cold, they are more easily dried, so the sea does yield more plenty of them
and fatter. The commodities of this country in general, are precious Skins,
Tallow, Butter, Hides, the fat of Whales, Tar, Oak timber, Masts, and Planks
and Boards of all sort, to the great commodity of those who sell them. The
Inhabitants are honest, The manners of the people.
loving and hospitable to strangers, neither NORWEY AND SWETHLAND.
SVECIA, ET Norwegia etc
map of Norway and Sweden have they robbers, thieves or Pirates among them.

(...)
The Kingdom of Swethland is an ancient Kingdom, as Pliny witnesses. (...)
It has on the West Norwey, on the North Lapland and Botnia, on the East
^^^land, separated from it by the Botnian Bay, or Finnish Sea, and L^^onia
(...) L^sland, (...)
disjoined from it by the Baltic Sea, called by Ta^^^us Mar^ p^grum, (...)
by the Suc^ians Mare Su^vicum, and on the South Gothia It is a com^^^ the most
fruitful of all the North parts: it has a plentiful soil* and seas, lakes,
and rivers abounding with fish of diverse ^^ndes it has also Metals, as Lead,
Iron, Brass, and Silver, which is dug up in very p^^e oa^e near Sl^burg:
and likewise woods full of wild beasts and honey. It is thought that it does
doubly exceed Norwey, both in largeness, fruitfulness, and goodness of
soil, yet in some places it is ^ugged and moorish. This Country being for
some ages valiantly and happily defended and enlarged by the native Kings
thereof, afterward came to the Kings of Denmark: and having been subject to
them more than an hundred years, at last did shake them off, under color,
that the Laws wh\ich they were sworn unto at their Coronation, were not
observed, and hence it stood a while in a very uncertain condition. But now it
is returned again to the natives, out of which it chooses it self a King.
There are diverse Provinces of this ^ingdome, some belonging to the Goths, as
Ostgothia, whereof Lincop is the Metropolis: (...)
Westgothia separated with an ancient Lake from Ostgothia, whereof Scara is the
Bishops seat: Also Southern Gothia or S^^alandia, ^u^s^ia, Verendia, in which
Vexio or Wexo is the chief Town. Also Meringia, and the Isle of O^land,
fortified with the Castle Borgholm. Other Provinces there are that belong to
Swethland, specially so called, as Oplandia, in which is Vpsal in the very
center of Swethland; here are an Archbishops seat, public Schools, and many
sepulchers of the Kings of Swethland, magnificently and fairly built. Also
Stocholm, a fai^e Mart Town, and one of the Kings places of residence, being
fortified both by Nature and Art. It is seated in a marshie fenny place like
Venice, and is named, as aforesaid, because it is built upon stakes. There is a
passage to it out of the Eastern Sea, by a deep channel through the jaws of
M^lerus; and it does let the sea flow so far into it, that ships of great but
then may easily come with full sails into the Haven. But the tower Waxholme on
the one side, and Digna on the other side do so straighten the entrance, that
no ships can come in or go forth against the Governors will, who keep watch
there. On the Southern bank of M^le^^^ lies Sudermannia, whose towns are
Tolgo, Strengenes the seat of a Bishop, and the Castle Gripsholme. In the
third place is N^^^ct^ in which is the castle Orebo, and toward the West the
country of Westmannia, and the cities Arosia, near to which there is such
excellent silver, that Artificers can extract out of fifteen pounds of silver
one pound of gold and Arboga do lie near unto a Lake. From thence toward the
West do lie Western Dalia, the Eastern and Sol^es Dalia, so called from the
Lake Sol^on; which three Provinces together with the greater part of the
mountainous Provinces, are under the Bishop of Sa^^^s^. Here are mineral
veins, which stretch themselves Eastward to the Baltic Sea, and to the Bay of
Helsing^a, and toward the West they run almost without interruption through
Wermeland to the Western Ocean, so that in every part there is dug up some
kind of metal, as Silver, Coppresse, Lead, Iron, Steel, or Sulphur. Toward
the North near unto Opland are these Countries, first Gestricia, then Helsing,
after that Midelpadia, and beyond that the Northern and Southern Angermannia.
Then is there North-Botnia, divided into West-Botnia and East-Botnia, both of
them being large Provinces: and after these toward the North lie So called
from the sliding and leaping gate of the F^nn^ which are the Inhabitants
thereof.
Scricfinnia, So called from the blockishnesse of the Inhabitants, ^o^ L^^p^n
signifies F^olish.
Lapland, and Biarmia. These or most of these ancient Provinces of the Kingdom
of Swethland, the Botnick Bay stretched forth from the Balthick straight
Northward to Toronia, and beyond the Artick Circle, does divide from Finland a
large Peninsula: at the Southward point whereof are the Islands of Alandia or
Alant, and Abo a Bishops Seat, and on the North point Withurgeum. Finland is
divided into the Northern and Southern Finland, to which the higher and lower
Natagundia, Savolosia, Tavastia, all very large countries are adjoined. From
thence beyond the Finnick Bay is Which with Biarmia aforesaid, belongs to the
Duke of Rus^^a.
Corelia, the Metropolis whereof is Hexholme or Kexholme: and toward the West
Wotichonia, in which is the mouth of the River Lovat, that glideth by
Novogardia, which the Inhabitants call Ny: above Copora is Ingria, in which
stands the Forts Iamagrod and Solonseia, wherein stands Ivanogrod, over
against Nerva or Narva; confining upon these toward the South are the provinces
of Lieflandia or Civonia, extended even from Nerva to Revalia or Revel, and
Prenovia or Parniew, as first Allantacia wherein Nerva is a Bishops See; then
Wiria, whereof Wesemberg is a Bishops See: besides Wichia, wherein Habsay is a
Bishops seat, and the Isle Dagen or Dachlen, most of which Countries beyond
the Finnick Bay were added to the Kingdom of Swethland, in the year 1581; by
the valor and good success of King John the third, after that Revalia had
willingly yielded it self to Ericus the fourteenth King of Swedes, Anno 1561.
Swethland has many fishing-waters, The Rivers.
and many rivers gliding through it. The Country it self is rugged, being
full of mountains and woods. Mountains.
Woods.
The subjects are partly Churchmen, partly Laymen; The Senators.
the Laymen are either Nobles or Commons. The chief title of Nobility is
Knighthood, which is solemnly conferred by the King as a reward of virtue. The
Manners.
The provinces are governed by the natives. If the Inhabitants be compared with
the Germans, they have less civilitie, but are more industrious and witty, so
that every countrey-fellow with them has skill almost in all trades, and all
mechanic Arts.

THE STATE POLITIC OF THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK.
DENMARK is a large and populous Kingdom, commonly called Danemarch, as it
were the Country of the Danes. But whence the original of the Danes came,
they themselves do not know: Some do fetch it from Danus, their first King,
and some from the Dahi, a people of Asia. Dudo de S. Quintino, an ancient
Writer (as Camden reports) does affirm, that they came out of Scandia into
the ancient seats of the Cimbrians. But they seem to be so called from the
waters, because AHA with them signifies a River, and they do call themselves
Daneman (that is) as it were, River-men, or Watermen. All Denmark is a
Peninsula, as the Description shows, and is divided into 184 Prefectships or
Provinces, which they call Horret, and they are governed by so many Prefects
skillful in the Danish Laws. It has a King rather by election of the Nobles,
than by succession of birth: the ancient manner of choosing him was, that when
they gave their voice, they stood in the open field upon stones, devoting by
the firm stabilitie of the stones under them, the constancy of their election.
The Kings are crowned at Hafnia in the Church of the blessed Virgin Mary
before the Altar, and are led into the aforesaid Church by the Senators of the
Kingdom, the ensigns of regality being carried before them, as the Sword,
Globe, and Crown. Neither are these things attributed to special Families, as
it is in most Countries, but as every one excels in virtue and dignity, so
is he chosen to that place. First the King is compelled to swear that he will
observe certain written Articles, and that he will strictly defend the
Christian Religion, and the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom. Afterward he
is anointed by the Bishop of Roeschild, and first the Crown is set upon his
head by all the Senators, who then take their oath to his Majesty, if they
have not done it before the Coronation, and then the King makes out of the
Gentry some Knights by the light stroke of a sword, for some service done
either in peace or war. Thus the ancient Danes did establish an excellent
Political State and Monarchy, neither has any Nation ever brought them into
subjection, or took away their Country Rites and Privileges. But on the
contrary the Northern people, as the Danes, Swedens, Norwegians, have wasted
almost Europe, and in some places have established Kingdoms. For the
expedition of the Cimbrians against Italy is known unto all Historiographers,
as also the Goths subjecting of Spain, the Longobards establishing of a
Kingdom in Italy, the Normans seating themselves in France, the erecting of
the Kingdom of Naples and Sicilie, and the attempt of Godfride upon Freseland
against Charles the Great. To these may be added the late King of Swedens
prosperous victories in Germany.
Canutus the Great, his holding five Kingdoms a long time. For he was King of
Denmark, Swethland, Norwey, England, and Normandy, and son in law to Henry
the third Emperor, of whom these verses are yet extant. Desine mirari quos
garrula laudibus effert
Graecia, quos jactat Roma superba duces. etc.
Cease thou to wonder at those Captains bold,
Of which both Greece and Rome did boast of old.
For now the Danish Land has brought forth one.
That is in virtue second unto none.
By my achievements I much fame attained,
Five Kingdoms subject were to my command*
And me he chose his son in Law to be,
Who was third Emperor of Germany.
My Justice famous was, I showed the way,
How powerful Kings should their own Laws obey.
By which it appears, as also by the following wars, which diverse Kings of
the Family of the Oldenburgs happily waged, that it is a warlike Nation, and
fortunate in vanquishing their enemies both by Land and Sea. The Noble men and
Senators of the Kingdom have a free power to elect the Kings, but for the
most part they choose the Kings eldest son, unless there be some sufficient
cause for the contrary. However, they always choose one of the Royal blood,
and they do not suffer the Kingdom to be divided, unless they be compelled
thereunto by civil wars. They send the younger sons or brothers into other
Countries, seeing they cannot participate in the government of the Kingdom:
and hence it is that so many expeditions are undertaken by them. Moreover,
seeing all the Nobles and Common People cannot live conveniently in their own
Country, therefore they seek out to get themselves a more fit seat. For the
Northern people have abundance of children, in regard of their abundance of
blood and heat; they are quarrellers and fighters, they drink and eat much,
(for the cold Air excites their appetite) and yet digest it well, whence it is
that they live long; they are fair complexioned, of great stature, crafty and
faithful. And an argument, that they are long lived, is that their Kings have
reigned very long, many of them thirty years, some forty, and some longer.

The Political government.
THere are five States or Orders in the Commonwealth of Denmark* The first is
of the Kings Family, the second of the Nobles, The Situation.
among which there are neither Earls nor Barons, yet all of them can show how
their Nobility descended to them by a long pedigree of Ancestors. They carry
Bucklers, which they will not change nor alter, because they anciently used
them. There are some Families yet living, whose Ancestors were present at the
Parley between Charles the Great, and Hemmingus King of Denmark, upon the
River Egidora or Eider, as the Family of Vren and others. These hold their
goods and lands in Capite, and they have free liberty to hawke and hunt in
their own lands, as the Counts have in Germany. Their goods are not feudatory,
but hereditary. All the Castles, lands, and goods, as well moveable as
immovable, left them by their parents, are equally divided among the brethren:
and the sisters by a special privilege have a share also, yet so, that the
brother has two parts with the Castles and places of strength, and the sister
but one. By this means the eldest sons have not much lands, yet some of them
coming of a good Family, and being endued with virtue, through the Kings
favor, do advance themselves to great possessions by marriage. Out of this
order the Senators of the Kingdom are chosen, who are seldom more then 28.
These Senators have a certain allowance from the King and Kingdom, for they
have Castles so long as they be Senators, for which they pay no rent to the
King, but are charged to keep certain horses both in peace and war, and
whenever the King calls them, they are to be ready at the proper charge of
the Kingdom. If they be sent on any Embassage out of the Kingdom, they have
allowance out of the Exchequer, that they may perform their journey in a
Princely manner, as becomes a Kings Ambassadors. The other Nobles also have
sufficient maintenance from the King, whether they live at Court or not. For
the King has lands which in the Danish speech are called Verleghninge or
Benefices, and out of these he gives maintenance, either for term of life,
or for years, to those who have done him or the Kingdom any service. And
those who hold these Benefices of the King, are charged to keep certain
horses, and to pay yearly a certain sum of money into the Exchequer, yet so
as they may gain something in reward of their labor and service. There is
also a good Law and Institution in the Kingdom of Denmark, whereby the King
is prohibited and restrained from buying any immovable goods of the Nobles,
least any dissension should arise between the King and them. For otherwise the
King might by violence take into his hands those lands which the Nobles would
not sell: yet the King may change any immovable goods with the Nobles, though
on the contrary the Nobles cannot buy any of them of the Kings Farmers, many of
which have hereditarie, and (as it were) free lands.

Here follows the names of the special Families of the Nobility, in the
Kingdom of DENMARK.
THe Lords of Kaas, the L. Guldensteen, the Lords of Munc, of Rosencrantz, of
Grubbe, of VValkendorp, of Brahe, of Schram, of Pasberg, of Hardenberg, of
Vlstant, of Bing, of Below, of VVepfert, of Goce, of Schefeldt, of Ranzow, of
Schelen, of Frese, of Iul, of Bilde, of Dresselberg, of Green, of Brockenhusen,
of Holke, of Trolle, of Knutzen, of Biorn, Schested, of Iensen, of Steuge, of
Mattiesse, of Lunge, of Banner, of Luc, of Rastorp, of Krusen, of Fassi, of
Lindeman, of Suvon, of Stantbeke, of Quitrowe, of Lange, of Gelschut, of
Glambeke, of Krabbe, of Marizer, of Kragge, of Achsel, of Be^, of Ruthede, of
Negel, of VVirfelt, of Split, of Ofren, of Appelgard, of Iuenam, of Poldessen,
of Reuter, of Podebussen, who were all in times past Barons in the Dukedom of
Pomerania, and some of whose Family are still remaining there. Also the Lords
of Vren, who lived in the time of Charles the great: Also the Lords of Bli^, of
Galle, of VVogersen, of Bassi, of Solle, of Daac, of Bax, of Basclich, of
VVensterman, of Hoken, of Lindow, of Bille, of Reutem, of Hundertmar^, of
Heiderstorper, of Would, of Papenhaimb, of Spar, of Falster, of Narbu, of
Worm, of Bilde, of Bocholt, of Budde, of Swaben, of Santbarch, of Gram, of
Lutken, of Vhrup, of Spegel, of Bammelberg, of Rosenspart, of Duve, of Hube, of
Schaungard, of Must, of Gris, of Falcke, of Brune, of Laxman, of Duram, of
Baggen, of Norman, of Goss, of Matre, of Rosengard, of Tollen, of Ronnoun, of
Krimpen. Out of this Nobility is chosen the Prefect or Master of the Court,
which is such an office, as the Governor of the Kings House in France: He
dwells, for the most part, at Haffnia, being, as it were, the Kings
Substitute, and does dispatch matters as he is directed by the King. Next to
him is the Marshall, which in the time of war and peace does provide those
things which appertain to expedition. In the third place is the Admiral,
which does build new ships, repair the old, and every year order the
sea^matters, for the securing of the coasts. He has under him an other
Admiral appointed, and in every ship a Captain, who must be borne a
Gentleman. There is also the Chancellor of the Kingdom, to whom out of all
the Provinces and Isles they appeal and make suite unto, and from whom appeal
is also made to the King and the Senate of the Kingdom. All the Provinces are
divided into Haeret, as they call them, or into Dioceses, under which are many
Parishes, here, if there be any controversies, matters are first tried. And
from hence they appeal to the Judge of the Haeret. Afterward to the
Chancellor, and last of all to the King and Senators, where it has a
determinate and final Judgment. They have a written Law, composed by
Woldemare the first, together with the Bishops and Senators, which is very
agreeable to the law of Nature, and not much differing from the Roman Laws;
and that causes and suites may sooner have an end, and judgment be given and
put in execution, It is provided that Judges, if they do any wrong or give
false judgment, are condemned to lose half their goods; whereof the King has
the one part, and the injured party the other. Woldemare the first (except I
be deceived) added the Bishops to the Senators, whom Christianus the third, for
rebellion and certain other causes did put out again. The Kings Chancellor,
who for the most part follows the King in the Court, has seven or eight
Noble men adjoined unto him as Assistants, besides Secretaries and Clerks; and
all businesses are dispatched by the King himself. But if it be some matter of
consequence, as concerning peace or war, entering into league with foreign
Nations, or into consultation concerning the defending of their own
Territories, then the King calls a Council of Senators. Neither can the King
impose any tax upon the Kingdom or Country, without their consent, and the
consent of the Nobles. There is also in this Kingdom a Master of the
Exchequer, who collecteth and gathers all the Revenues of the whole Kingdom,
both of Castles, Farms, and Customs, as well by Sea as by Land. He takes
account of them, enquireth into them, and gives acquittances for the receipt of
them. He has two Assistants of the Nobility, and many Clerks under him; and
for his office has a yearly stipend or pension.

The third State is of the Clergy, in which there are seven Bishops, as the
Bishop of Lunden, the Bishop of Ro^schild, the Bishop of Otthon, of Rip, of
Wiburg, of Arhuse, and the Bishop of Sleswich, to whom the other Canonical
persons have relation. These have the Tenths of the Kingdom; which in diverse
Countries are divided in a diverse manner: for the Bishops have an half part of
the Tenths, and the King an half part, the Canonists and Preachers have a
part, and a part is contributed toward the building and repairing of Churches.
And as concerning the Popes authority in this Kingdom, as also in France, the
ordination of Prelates and Bishops have been always in the Kings power, as
may appear by the answer of Woldemare the first, King of Denmark, which here
I have annexed. When the Pope required these and the like privileges from the
King, it is reported, that the King writ back unto him, We have our Kingdom
from our Subjects, our life from our Parents, our Reliligion from the Romish
Church, which if you will take from us, I send it you by these presents. And as
the wise Decree of Charles the fifth is praised, prohibiting Ecclesiastical
persons from buying any immovable thing without the consent of the King, so
Christian the third as wisely did ordain, that the Clergy should not sell any
thing without the Kings express commandment. In other matters the Clergymen
through the whole kingdom are well provided for by Christian the third, of
famous memory, and many Schools erected in many places, as also two in
Iseland, where they have likewise a Printing House. There is but one
Universitie in the whole kingdom, called the Universitie of This City is
called by the Germans Cope^hagen, that is, the Merchants Haven.
Haffen or Hafnia, founded by Christerne the first, by permission of Pope
Sixtus, in the year of Christ 1470: which Frederick the second, although he
were seven years encumbered with the Swethish wars, did so enrich, that the
yearly revenues thereof are very much.

The fourth State is of the Citizens and Merchants, dwelling in Cities and
Towns. These have proper and peculiar privileges which they enjoy, besides
certain fields and woods that belong to them; and these do traffic both by
Sea and Land in all parts of Europe. Out of these, as also out of the
Countrey-people, the Bishops, the Canonists, the Preachers, and Senators of
Cities, the Clerks of Bands, the Lievtenants of Towers, and the Masters of
Ships are chosen, and some of them are Masters of the Customs or Tributes;
lastly, of these all lesser Councels of Justice do consist, one of the
Nobility, for the most part, sitting as President.

The fifth State is of the Rustic, or Countrey-people, and there are two sorts
of them, the first they call Freibunden, that is, Freeholders. These do hold
Lands of Inheritance, yet paying for the same some little free-rent every
year. These do also use merchandise and fishing. They are not oppressed with
doing services, neither do they pay any taxes, unless the Senators of the
kingdom do grant it as a subsidy. The other sort is of those, who do not
possess goods of inheritance, but do farm them of the King, the Nobles or
Ecclesiastical persons, and are constrained to do many services for their
Lords, in such manner, as they shall covenant with their Landlord. These are
the chief things which I thought good to declare concerning the State politic
of Denmark; whereby it appears, that the Danish Monarchy was, for the most
part, well framed: for the free election of the Kings being in the hands of the
Nobility, and yet notwithstanding out of the royal Progeny, as we said
before: it follows, that the Danes have no civil wars or dissentions,
unless those which are between such as be of the Blood Royal, which are
quickly composed by the mediation and help of the Nobles; but especially
seeing the Kings younger Sons can have no part of the kingdom. Moreover, as
they are all styled but Nobles, and know not the titles and names of Barons,
Earls, and Dukes, so there are none that have so much wealth and power, as
that reposing trust therein, they dare oppose themselves against the Royal
Family; because the Fathers Inheritance is always divided between the Sons
and Daughters. Thus the Kings of Denmark have a flourishing Commonwealth,
which may easily be defended from foreign enemies, whom their Subjects,
living in unanimity and concord with them as their natural Lords, are able to
resist both by sea and land.

THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK. BEING THE THIRD KINGDOM OF THE NORTH.
DENMARK is joined only in two places to the Continent, The Situation.
on the West the Ocean beats on it, on the East the Balticke Sea, on the
North lies Norwey and Swethland, and on the South Holsatia, Megalopolis, and
Pomerama. It has many several Islands lying by it. The temper of the Climate,
The temperature of the Air.
together with the wholsomnesse of the Air (that I may use Ioh. Coldingensis
his words) does make the Danes fresh complexioned. The fruitfulness of the
Earth does nourish them, the sweet harmony of Birds does recreate them; their
Woods and Groves, in which great numbers of Hogs do feed, The fruitfulnes of
the Soil.
and fat themselves with Akornes and Beech-maste, do refresh them; and the
diverse sorts of Cattle and flourishing Meadows do yield them much delight. The
Sea does afford them such plenty of provision, that the Danes thereby not
only furnish themselves, The variety of living creatures.
but also many other parts of Europe. In a word, they want nothing that is
necessary to life, so loving has Nature showed her self to this Country.
Concerning the ancient Government thereof Munster writes, that one Danus many
ages before Christ, was the first King of Denmark, The Ancient Government.
from whom the other Kings of Denmark did descend in a fair and orderly
succession; therefore concerning the names of his successors, and the other
Kings of Denmark, read Munster, largely discoursing. All the Country of
Denmark having many arms of the Sea reaching far into the Land, does
consist of many parts, the chief whereof are these Iutia, Fionia, Zelandia and
Scania, besides the Islands lying near to several parts thereof.

Iutia, which some would have called Got^a, being heretofore the Seat of the
Cimbri, is called by Historians and Geographers the Cimbrian Chersonesus, and
is divided into the Southern and Northern Iutia. The Description of this
Northern Iutia you may behold in the second Table of Denmark. Southern
Iutia, heretofore called Nordalbingia, does contain the famous Dukedom of
Sleswick to which the Dukedom of Holsatia may now be added, whereof you shall
find a more ample declaration in the third Table of Denmark.

Also there follows a more particular Description of Fionia, in the fourth
Table of Denmark.

Zeland, otherwise called Staland, and by some Authors Selandunia, is the
greatest of all the Isles of Denmark, which Olivarius and Ortelius think to
be that Codanonia which Mela mentions. Others call it Zeland as if it were
Sealand, because it is on every side encompassed with the Sea. Some would have
it so called as if one should say Seed-land, because THE KINGDOM OF DENMARK.
DANIAE REGNU^.
map of Denmark of its own accord without any yearly manuring it is very
fruitful in bearing of corn. This Island is For it is 64 English miles in
length, and 52. in breedth.
two days journey long, and almost as much in breadth. It has 15 Cities in it,
and twelve royal Castles. But among the Cities the chief is Hafnia, which is
the Metropolis or mother City of all Denmark, and famous, not only for the
largeness and wealth thereof, but for a convenient Haven, which the incredible
depth thereof, and the lying of the Island Amaggor over against it does make a
safe Harbor to Sea-faring-men. This City, being an Universitie, affords a
continual supply of Doctors, learned Pastors, and Preachers for all the
Churches of the Kingdom of Denmark and Norwey. Above Hafnia is Helsingor
called also Elseneur, and near unto it the royal Castle of Croneburg of which
we will speak hereafter: over against this Castle on the other side of the
Sea, there stands another like unto it called Helsinborch or Hilsemburg with
a Town of the same name. Here Zeland and Scania do lie so near together with
their Promontories, as it were meeting one the other, that the Sea between them
is scarce four miles over, and is called De Sund, or the Sound. At this place
all the ships that are bound toward the East, are compelled to come as to one
common Center, and pay Custom to the King. And there being a Castle on either
Shore, the King when necessity requires it, having placed his ships in the
middle of it, can so shut up the mouth thereof, that he can restrain a great
Navy either from entering in, or going forth; for sometime 200, and sometime
300 ships do arrive there together in one day out of diverse parts of Europe.
Here is also Roeschild heretofore the Seat of a Bishop, where are to be seen
diverse famous monuments of many Danish Kings and Dukes, now almost wasted and
decayed. Beneath Zeland are the Islands following Amigria, Huena, Weem,
Moenesland in which is the City Stegoa and many others. Zeland has one
Bishop, whose Seat the Prelate of Roeschild (as I said) did hold heretofore.
Scania.
Scania among all the Provinces of the Kingdom of Denmark is famous for the
largenes and wealth thereof. This some have called Scandinavia for Scondania,
that is, the pleasant part of Denmark, some Scania, and others Sconingia,
commonly it is called Sconen. Pliny calls it Scandia and Scandinavia, which
he falsely supposes to be a very large Island. But Ortelius thinks that this
Scandia and Scandinavia which Pliny mentions was not Scania, but that
Peninsula, which at this day does contain three very large Kingdoms, Norwey,
Swethland, and Gothland beside other Countries. The Situation.
This Scania is every where encompassed with the Sea, except it be where an
arm of Land stretches out Northward, and from thence bending back Eastward
is joined to Swethland: yet the deep valleys and high Rocks which lie between
these two Countries, make it to be so difficult a journey out of Scania into
Gothland and part of Swethland, that it is easier to adventure to go by Sea,
than to undergo the trouble by land. This Country is inferior unto none in
the temperature of the Climate, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
the fruitfulness of the Earth, the conveniencie of the Havens, in Sea
commodities, in fishing, in Lakes or Rivers, in hunting of wild beasts, in the
inexhaustible veins of Gold, and Silver, Brass, and Lead; in the frequencie
of Towns, and in their Civil institutions. Whence, as Munster witnesses, The
quality of the Soil.
it still retains the name of Scandia. It was heretofore divided into two
Dukedomes Halland and Bleking, now it contains three and twenty
Prefectorships, and fifteen Cities. The Metropolis or chief City thereof is
Londa or Londia, where the Archbishop of the Kingdom resideth. Here is also
Malmogia, which is also called Ellebogen, being a famous Mart-towne, and the
special City of the whole Country for Faires and continual traffic, which
the people of the Country do use there. In Halland is the Castle Warburg,
built on the high tops of Mountains. It was taken by the Swedens, and
fortified with a Garrison of their own in the year 1565, when Daniel
Ranzovius by by the command of King Frederick the second, did straightly besiege
it, that at last it was enforced to yield it self up. This man famous for his
virtues and valor was slain in the year 1569. being shot through the head
with a bullet sent from a brass piece of Ordinance. Near unto this Country
are the Islands Landoe, Hannoe, and Bornholm, a famous Island divided into
four Prefectorships, and containing three Cities and one Castle. There is also
Gotland, in which the ancient and once flourishing Mart-towne of Wisby is
seated, but now the traffic being removed to other cities, it is decayed,
both in Inhabitants, and wealth. Besides corn, with which this country
abounds, it affords not only plenty of cheese, butter and diverse sorts of
skins, but fair fur trees, of which there are great woods for the making of
masts for ships, and also lime and stone for building. The Rivers of Denmark
are Egidora, commonly called Eyder, which Ptolomy calls Chalusus. This River
divides the Frizians from the Ditmarsians, and so discharges it self into the
British Ocean. The fish-full and navigable River Stora, (which arising in the
inner part of Holsatia, waters and washes some Towns, together with the
noble house of Brandenberg belonging to the Ranzovian family, and afterward
powers it self ito the River Albis) and diverse others. The This Sea is called
by some Mare Suevicu^, by Pompo^^us Mela, Sinus Colanus, and by Strabo, S^nus
Venedicus
Balticke Sea which we have made to be the bound of Denmark on the East, the
Germans call it Oastzee, but the inhabitants do now call it Belts from the
Latin word Baltheus which signifies a Belt or military girdle, because in
manner of a girdle, it embraces and encompasseth either Chersonesus. Tacitus
seems to call it Mare pigrum, that is, the slow Sea, from the effect, as
Ortelius thinks, because it is not moved as other Seas, for the Tides thereof
are scarcely discerned, as they do affirm that have often sailed on it, and it
flows in a perpetual course from East to West. Helsingera at the Bay of the
Sund, has the royal Castle Cronburg, being the defense and strength of the
farthest Island from the shore of Zeland. This Castle Frederick the second
King of Denmark, did build with great cost, and raised it from the bottom of
the Sea by laying many stones under water between wooden planks for a
foundation; it is so strong and firm, that it despises the huge waves of the
Sea with stormy weather rowles against it. There is in the City Lundis a very
curious Clock wherein much Art is expressed, called Saint Laurences clock:
and set up in the lower part of the Church, where it has a Table of wood
fastened to the wall distinguished with many circles of diverse colors. In this
clock by certain Indexes the present year, month, and weeks, also the
particular day and hour of the day is represented to the eye, thereby are
showed the fixed and movable feasts, the motion of the two great Luminaries, the
Sun and Moon, their places in the Zodiac every day, and their positions
and aspects one toward another. And as these things appear outwardly, by
reason of certain engines, and wheels framed within to that purpose, So is
there added a covering so made by Art, that as often as the Clock strikes, two
little Images like two Champions do meet together, and do give one another so
many blows as the Clock strikes strokes. But that which is more wonderful
is this, in the middle of this Table, as it were in a Throne, is placed the
Image of the Virgin Mary, holding her Infant in her arms: on both sides of her
there are, as it were, two Gates, and before her feet a Theater of a
semicircular form, with the arch thereof turned toward the spectators, within
there is a devise with the Images of the three wisemen, having every one their
servant. The whole engine being turned as he pleases that keeps it,
straightway the Images come forth. And before the rest there comes as it were a
threatening Herald, who brandishing his sword knocks at the left doare, that
being opened he goes forward while two Images seem to blow two trumpets
before him. He that is the first of the wisemen, walks with a stately pace.
But when he comes to the Virgin Mary's Image he reverently bends himself
unto it, as if he did adore her. And so also do the other two. The servants
go on without doing any obedience or making any show of reverence, the last of
them shuts the right gate, that the sound of the Clock when that is shut
may be heard more plainly. But of this enough.

THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARK. WHICH CONTAINS PART OF THE NORTHERN IVTIA.
THE Western and special part of Denmark is Iutia, commonly called Iutland,
which Ptolemy calls the Cimbrian Chersonesus, and Pliny Cartrin. The name
This runs forth Northward in manner of a Peninsula, between the British
and Germane Seas, as Italy does toward the South. The Southern bound thereof
is the River Eydera, The Situation
and it lies many miles in length from the River Albis or Elve, toward the
North: The greatest breadth of it is not much. This Country is divided into the
Northern and Southern part, as we have already spoken. The Northern Iutia,
Iutia
called the Northern Cimbrica, which is described in this Table, extending it
self toward Norwey, does over against Saga, a Town famous in regard of the
quicksands and shallow Sea near it, The Situation.
end in a strait and narrow form like a wedge. This Country is broadest about
the Market Town of Aleburg, where Lymford winding it self into it, and
passing almost through all Iutia Westward, parts the Country Wensussel from
the rest, except it be for a very little space, and so makes it as it were an
Island. This River being carried in a great channel, makes many famous
Islands by encompassing them about, and having many Bays as it were, and
several branches, it does divide and give limits to diverse Provinces,
Northern Iutia is fertile in producing and bearing Fruits, Corn, Barley, and
the like: It has also in some places very fruitful pastures. It abounds
with so many herds of Oxen, and brings up so many Cowes, that it sends an
incredible number of cattle into foreign Countries, and especially into
Germany, whither there are yearly brought almost 150 thousand Oxen, besides
Cheese, Butter, Tallow, and Hides. It does bring forth an excellent breed of
Horses, of which a great number are transported to other places. Iutia
heretofore was subject to the Saxons, but not the other Northern Countries.
Out of this Country the Cimbri 150 years before Christ's birth, came and fell
upon Italy like an impetuous storm, to the great terror thereof. For they
having joined to themselves the Tentons, the Tigurines, and Ambrones, conspired
utterly to extinguish the Roman Empire Syllanus could not resist the violence
of their first approach, nor Manilius their second onset, nor Caepio the
third. All of them were put to slight and beaten out of their Tents, insomuch
as Florus thinks they had been quite undone and overthrown if Marius had
not lived in that age. This Cimbrian war continued eight years after the
Consulship of Syllanus, even to the fifth Consulship of Marius, who at the R^ver
Athesis, called by the Germans Ets^h, and by the Italians ^adica, did quite
cut off their Army consisting of Cimbrians, Teut^us, and and Ambrones. But
because in this place we have by chance made mention of the Cimbrians, whose
name is famous in Histories, we will speak somewhat more of them: and because
Iunius a learned ^an does discourse most learnedly of them, I will not think
it much to set down his own or other words to the same effect. It appears in
Moses Books, says he, that Iaphet had a son called Gomer, or by changing of
a letter Gomer, which word signifies with the Hebrews one perfecting a circle.
But the genuine sense of the word, (hitherto unknown to Writers unskilful in
the Cimmerian language, because none has declared the obscurity) will be as
manifest and clear as the Meridian Sun, if you gently break the word in
pieces. For what other thing does Goom her, being disjoined, signify in that
language, or if you pronounce it Gomer, than I go about in a circle, or I
finish a perfect course? Hence also is that orbicular order of Arts, which the
Grecian Writers call Encyclopedia, and Fabius the circle of learning, (because
it is endless as a ring) called Gomera. Rightly therefore that auspicious name
happened unto the offspring of Iaphet, which spread themselves over the World,
and as the name does signify, did finish that course that was given and
prescribed to them by lot, having traveled over all Countries from the rising
of the Sun to the setting thereof. For no man is so rude and ignorant in the
knowledge of History, that knows not that the Goths and Vandales (who were
the offspring of the Cimmerians or Cimbri) did possess both the Hesperiaes.
Wherefore, since by the consent of all men the Cimmerians did descend from
Gomer, who at first did possess the inward part of Asia, and being expelled by
the Scythians, repairing Westward did pass into Scandia, and from thence unto
the Cimbrian Chersonesus, I see no reason how a more convenient name can be
given to Gomer the Author of the Cimbrian Nation, and to the people retaining
their fathers name, tha^ from the desire of circuiting and wandering about. For
I think no man has read of any Nation that has traveled a greater circuit
of earth, as Josephus, an accurate Writer of the Jewish antiquities, does
perspicuously and diligently explain when he writes that the posterity of
Gomer coming out of Armenia, did run out into the River Tanais, and from
thence with their multitudes, did overspread all Countries of Europe, as far
as the utmost coasts of the Gades. Plutarch in the life of Marius has clearly
explained the desire that was in that Nation to propagate and finish this their
course when he reports thus of them. The Cimbrians, as often as they change
their seats, do attempt the neighbor Countries by wars, yet not with a
daily or continual violence, but every year when the season serves they make
some inroade, and seeing there are diverse and several names of people amongst
them, they call their troops by a common appellation Celtoscythians. Some do
report that there was no great company of Cimbrians, who were anciently known
to the Grecians, but that some banished men or seditious persons, cashiered by
the Scythians, THE SECOND TABLE OF DENMARK.
IUTIA SEPTENTRIONALIS.
map of Denmark (Jutland) passed from Now called Ma^delle (...)
Maeotis into other parts of Asia under the conduct of Lygdamis: and that the
greatest and most warlike part of the Nation did seat themselves on the
outmost coasts of the O^ Northern Sea ^alled now Mare Crani^m, (...) Mar^ S.
(...)
Ocean, and did inhabit a dark Country, which in regard of the high and
thick woods, reaching even to the Forest of Hircynus, was to the Sunne-beames
inaccessible. Hitherto I have for the most part rendered his own words: but I
understand not whence Plutarch from the Germane Etymology, or Festus Pompetus
from the French, can prove that the Cimbrians were called thieves and robbers,
unless we take hired Soldiers for thieves and robbers, or unless it seem
that Plutarch did refer it to the manner of warring peculiar to that Nation,
who did set upon their neighbors with secret ambushment and assaults like
thieves, for he relates that Italy was strooken with fear by their fierce
inrodes, when they understood that a Nation of no name or settled habitation,
was like a sudden cloud of rain ready to fall upon their heads. Hitherto
Iunius. This Iutia is divided into four large Episcopal Seats, The Towns.
into the Ripensian, which is kept at Ripen, the Arhusian which is at Arhusium,
the Vandalican which is at Alburg, and the Wiburgian which is at Wiburg. The
Ripensian Diocese has 30 Prefectures, seven Cities, and ten royal Castles.
Queen Dorothy the widow of Christian the third erected and built a School at
Kolding, at her own proper charge and cost. The Arhusian Diocese has one and
thirty Prefectures, seven Cities, and five Castles. Arhusium or Arhusen is a
famous Mart-Towne, in regard of its Haven made by the great Promontorie of
Hellen, which extends it self through the Country of Mols, from the royal
Castle Kalloe, even to the high Mountain ^llemansbergh, and by its own
situation, and some Islands lying near unto it, makes the Sea very placable
and calm for Mariners. Under this Diocese there are the Islands Samsoe,
Hielm, Tuen, Hiarnoe, sometimes called Gerno, Hilgenes, and many other. The
Vandalican Diocese, called also the Diocese of Burglaw, has thirteen
Prefectures* and six Cities. The most special parts thereof are Wendsyssel,
Handharet, Thyland, and Morsoe. Wendsyssil or Vensilia, that is the Land or
Seat of the Vandalls has six Prefectures, three Towns, and one Castle. Here
is the Mountain Alberg, in which are certain Monuments of Giants, the
adjacent Isles are Grysholm, Hertsholm, Tydsholm and others. In Handhaeret is a
Rock of great height, called Skarringelint, and on the coast thereof those two
quicksands, which they call Sandores and Brac^^. The Isles subject unto it are
Oland and Oxeholm. Thyland has four Prefectures, one Town called Thystad or
Tystet, where Christian the third built a School for the nurture of Youth, and
one Castle called Orumna. Under it are the Islands Hansholm, Ostholm, Iegen,
Cifland, Egholm, Bodum. Morsia has three Prefectures, the City Nicoping, the
Castle Lunds^od or Lundgard, and an Island adjacent near unto it, called
Agero^. The Diocese of Wiburg does contain sixteen Prefectures. three Cities,
and as many Castles At Wiburg the general Council of the most Noble and wise
Trium-vi^^, concerning enquiring into, and judging of civil matters, is
continued almost all the year, unless sometimes when they are wearied with
that troublesome office, they refresh themselves, and recollect their strength
in their own Country houses. Hither are brought the causes of all the Cimbrian
Chersonesus, as complaints of bounds, controversies concerning inheritance, and
all capital causes, as slaughters, adulteries, thefts, poysonings, etc. Near
to the Peninsula Wenslia, where ending in a Cone, it bends by degrees toward
the East, is that corner of Iutia, so perilous and fearful to Mariners: for
a great ridge of rocks run so far into the Sea, that those who would be
free from danger, come not near to the shore by 8. miles. Such also is all
the Western shore of Iutia, so that those who purpose to sail into Norwey,
or out of the Ocean Eastward, are enforced to take a large compass to avoyde
it: and to this purpose there are four Mountains on this shore, which the
Mariners observe as Sea-markes. The Inhabitants of this Country seeing they
have no fit Haven for ships to ride in, draw them out of the deep upon the
shore so far, that the waves of the Sea by beating upon them cannot bruise
them. The Sea.
In this Sea there is plenty of fish, and especially of Herrings; and therefore
the Inhabitants use fishing much. These things being declared, The commodities.

The manners of the people.


I will add something not impertinent to conclude this place withal, which
is, that the people in these Northern Countries have been, and yet are cold
and dry, of a large stature, fair complectioned, well colored, merry,
jocund, suspicious, crafty, and provident in business, healthful, proud,
loving to their friends; they eat and drink much, they digest well, and
therefore live long, they abound with blood, they are blunt in behavior, and
in regard of much heat about their heart, they are quarrellous and
contentious, they love dangers, hunting and traveling, they are obstinate in
defending their own opinions, and yet mindful of Justice, they are very
docible and apt to attain Languages, they are lovers of the Muses, and do
strictly perform their covenants and bargains, they have many children, which
the weomen with great difficulty bring forth; their women are also beautiful,
and both wise and sparing in the government of their Family: but they die for
the most part of Catharres, the Kings evil, the Pleuricy, the Fistula, the
Dropsy, or Ptisicke. Achilles Gassarus affirms that Guns were here first
invented by a Monk.

THE THIRD TABLE OF DENMARK. Jn which are part of the Dukedom of SLESWICH and
HOLSATIA.
The Dukedom of Sleswick.
SO much concerning Northern Iutia, the Southern follows, which the Ancients
did call Nordalbingia, because it is separated and parted toward the North from
the rest of Germany, by the river Called by the Germans Elve, which signifies
in their tongue eleven because it has so many fountains, whence so called.
Albis. It contains the two Dukedomes of Sleswick and Holsatia, of which we
will speak in order. The Dukedom of Sleswick takes his name from the
Metropolis and ancient Mart Town of Sleswick. Heretofore this Country was
called the Dukedom of Iutia, which Woldemare Nephew to Abel King of Denmark
received to hold in fee of King Ericus, about the year 1280. But the Royal
Line of the Kings and Dukes being extinct, and the Dukedom of Sleswick being
thereby fallen to the Crown, The ancient Government.
Margaret Queen of three Kingdoms gave it to Gerard Earl of Holsatia, on this
condition, that he should acknowledge to hold it of the King of Denmark. The
Towns.
The Cities which are subject to this Dukedom, because they have the same
privilege with other parts of Denmark, therefore they have the same Laws
with them. The Subjects may appeal from the Sentence of the Magistrates of any
place to the Princes and their Senators, and not farther, as it is provided by
their privileges. But the general government of both these Dukedomes
belongs to the King of Denmark, and the Duke of Holsatia by turns. When it
is devolved, and does fall to the King, it is governed by his Substitute in his
name. The chief Town of this Dukedom is Slesvicum, commonly called
Schleswick. It has its name from a German word, in regard it is situated near
Slia, in the Bay of the Baltic Sea: for Wick signifies in the Saxon language
both a Town, and a crooked winding or Bay of the Sea, as Becanus has observed
in his Books of Gothish and Danish matters. Crantzius and those who have writ
the Saxon Histories, do give it an other appellation besides Sleswick, which
is still in use with the Danes and Freeslanders: for they call this Town in
their language Heidebui or Heideba, because, they say, it was first built by a
certain Queen of Denmark, whose name was Heth. It has a convenient
situation for traffic, and a convenient Haven for commerce and trading. Not
far from this Town is seated the Castle Gotorpi. Here is a famous Custom
or Toll, for it has been observed, that in plentiful years, fifty thousand
Oxen being driven out of Denmark into Germany, have here been paid toll
for. There is also in this Dukedom, Flensburg, a famous Town, lying among the
high Mountains, near the shore of the Eastern Sea. It HOLSATIA
THE THIRD TABLE OF NORWEY.
map of Denmark (Holstein) has a Haven so convenient, deep, and safe, that
many of the Citizens may load and unloade ships even at their own doors. And
here are the Towns Husenum or Hussum, and Haderslebia. This Dukedom has
only one Bishopric, two Chapters, three Monasteries, and diverse Castles
belonging to the Prince and his Nobles. The order of Senators, whereof I have
heretofore made mention, The Senators
does consist of the number of 24 persons of the Gentry, to whom is joined a
general Chancellor, and two Doctors of the Law.

The Dukedom of HOLSATIA.
Holsatia whence so called.
SOme do suppose, that Holsatia was so called from the many Woods and Forests
which are in it, for the Cimbrians and Low Germans do call a wood holt: and
some do derive the Etymology of the word from a hollow stone, because the
Dukes of Holsatia were formerly called Dukes of the hollow Stone. It is bounded
on the East with the River Bilena, The Situation
on the West with Stora or Steur, on the South with Albis, and on the North
with Eider. The quality of the Soil.
The Country it self is woody and full of Forests, whence they have such
store of fuel, that they are able to supply Freesland with wood, when they
themselves also do keep great fires. But although their woods are very
spacious, so that they seem to have no end, yet they seldom have any great
Oaks in them, but are full of Beech-trees, with whose waste an innumerable
sort of Hogs are fatted. The Land, for the most part, does afford them every
three years great store of fishing, and a very rich and plentiful harvest.
For three years together it is tilled, sowed, and mowed, and three years
afterward the Lakes are let in, to feed the fish and grass, thereby a
certain fat and slimie matter is brought in, The variety of living Creatures.
which does fertilize the fields. This place bears neither Vines nor Olives;
but there is much hunting of wild beasts. And this Country does breed a
great number of horses. Holsatia is divided into four parts, Dithmarsh,
Holsatia, Stormaria, and Wagria. These were heretofore Counties, and afterward
changed into a Dukedom, by Frederick the third Emperor, at the suite and
request of Christierne the first, who now is charged to maintain 40 horsemen,
and fourscore foot, for the use of the Roman Empire. Dithmarsh at the first
enjoyed freedom and liberty for some hundred years; The ancient government.
and albeit it were granted by the Emperor Frederick to Christierne the first
in fee, yet it was not at that time subjected. Afterward his Sons, King John,
and Duke Frederick did undertake to make an expedition against it, in the year
of our Lord 1500, but the Dithmarsians having overthrown their Army, defended
their own liberty, until they were conquered and overcome by the Nephews of
Christierne the first, namely Duke John, Adolphus, and Frederick the second
King of Denmark, in the year of our Lord 1559. In Holsatia are these Cities,
first Segeberg, in Wagria, a Country of Holsatia, 16 miles from Lubeck. 2,
Itzohoa, a fair Town in regard of the nature and situation of the place, and
the resort of ships unto it. 3, Stormaria is encompassed, and, as it were,
embraced in the arms of a fishie and navigable River, which arising in the
inner parts of Holsatia, does wash the walls of certain Towns, and the noble
Ranzovian House of Bredenberg, and afterward does discharge it self into the
River Albis. Here is in this Country Chilonium, commonly called Kile, which
is an ancient Town, and has a large Haven, in which (to the great commodity
of the Holsatians) diverse sorts of merchandise are brought out of Germany,
Livonia, Denmark, and Swethland. Also Krempe, and Reinholdsburg or Rensburg,
the former takes his name from the River gliding by it, the later from the
first builder. Here are moreover Meldorp, Heiningsted or Henste, and
Tellingsted in Dithmars, and Hamburg the Metropolis of Stormaria, Th^^ Town was
(...) C^stle and called H^^b^rg.
a renowned Mart-Towne near the River Albis, which after many devastations and
calamities suffered in the wars, was at last reedified, and in the time of
Henry the fourth Emperor, it began to be encompassed with walls, and to be
beautified with three Gates and twelve watch-towres. In this City Albertus
Crantzius, an eloquent and true Historian lived and was buried. This Country
is full of Lakes, and especially Dithmars, whose Inhabitants (trusting to the
benefit of their Lakes) did refuse to acknowledge obedience to the Kings of
Denmark, though of late they have been compelled thereunto. The chiefest
River of note which waters this Country is Egidora or the Eidera, there are
also some others, the most whereof may rather be called Brooks or Rivulets
than Rivers: but the B^ltick Sea, in that part where it washes the Dukedomes
of Holsatia and Sleswick, has safe and pleasant Bays, which are safe harbors
for Merchants, and weather-beaten ships. In some places also it affords great
store of fish, and especially of Salmons. It is a plain Country, seldom
raised with any mountains, yet one it has between Lubeck and Hamburg, of a
pleasant situation, and famous for the ornaments of peace and war, with which
Henry Rantzovius did adorn it. It has an ancient Castle seated on it, famous
for the antiquity and first builder thereof, and at the foot of the hill a
Town adjoining to it. Here are many woods, with which the Country of
Holsatia is beset and replenished, but especially Dithmars, as the woods of
Borcholt, Burgholt, The Woods.
Alverdorpenholt, Resenwalde, and many others. The Holsatians had heretofore 48
men, who were Presidents and Governors of the whole Country; The Senators
to these they made their appeal out of the several Parishes, and they did
judge all matters. But they being subdued, and the Country now divided into
two parts, in each of them there are twelve special and principal men,
together with a Prefect, who, for the most part, is a Doctor or Licentiate at
Law. These have all yearly pensions from the Princes, and they have a Clerk
joined to them, as also an Overseer or President out of the Holsatian
Nobility. The one of these Prefects, which is for the King, is called the
Prefect of Steinburg, and the other being for the Duke, the Prefect of
Gottorpe. Yet the Subjects have leave to appeal or make suite to the Princes
and Senators of either Dukedom, as well of Sleswick as Holsatia, but not
further. They had heretofore a written Law, which now by degrees is changed,
and reformed according to the Common Law, compiled by Henry Rantzovius the
Kings Substitute, The Laws and Institutions.
by Sigefrid Rantzovius, heretofore Lord of Nienhs, the Lord Adam Trazigeriu,
and the Lord Erasmus Kirslemius, according to which Law all causes are decided,
and punishments pronounced against delinquents and offenders.

Holsatia has four Orders or degrees of people: The Nobles, the Clergy, the
Citizens, and the Countrie-men, whereof there are two kinds, for some possess
goods of their own being hereditarie and free; others hired goods or lands,
for which they pay rent and do certain services. The Nobles have Castles and
Lands, together with the royalty of hunting, fishing, and hawking, which, for
the most part, are hereditarie unto them. The whole Country has not above 24
Families, The Noble Families.
whose names are mentioned in the Holsatian Chorographie, but diverse Families
there are that are descended from the same stock, as the Rantzovians do at
this time possess an hundred and fifty Castles, and diverse other possessions.
The Aleseldians and Powischians have almost as many. Holsatia has one
Bishopric, namely Lubeck, for the Bishopric of Hamburg is subject to the
Bishopric of Breme. The contentions which happen among the Nobles are judged
by a Senate of Dukes, the Princes, for the most part, sitting Presidents in
judgment as it is provided by their privileges and Laws. From the order of
Senators any one putting in a sufficient caution may appeal to the Imperial
Chamber. The Citizens enjoy privileges peculiar to themselves, and use the
Roman Law, or else the Lubeck. The Subjects may appeal from the judgment of
the Senate of their own City, to the judgment of four Cities, appointed to
judge and determine of all special matters. From them again they are
permitted to appeal to the Princes and Senators of Holsatia, and also further
even to the Imperial Chamber, so that fit security be put in. Countri-mens
cases or suites are pleaded by their Lawyers, even in the open fields, where
are present the Noblemen thereabout, the Prefects, and two Assistants. There
they come forth and do make their appearance, who have any suit one against an
other; the Defendant and Plaintiff being both heard, the whole company or
assembly of Countrie-men are bidden to go forth; and then their causes being
diligently weighed on both sides, they return again, and the suitors being
called in, they give sentence in their case according to Law and right.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF DENMARK. CONTAINING FIONIA WITH THE ISLANDS LYING ROUND
ABOUT IT.
SO much according to our Method concerning the Dukedom of Sleswicke and
Holsatia: Fionia follows with the Isles lying round about it. Fionia, Fionia
whence so called.
commonly called Fuynen is the chief of all other Isles lying in the Bay of
Codonus from Zeland. It takes its name from the beauty thereof, both in
regard of the form and situation. The Situation.
It is separated from the Continent of Denmark, by so small and narrow a Sea
flowing between them, called Middlesar, that it seems almost to cleave unto
the Continent. This Island as it looks on the West toward Iutia, so on the
East toward Zeland. It is 48 miles in length, and 16 in breadth. The Land (that
I may omit the Sea which is full of fish) is a fruitful soil, The fruitfulnes
of the Soil.
and very profitable to the husbandman. For it abounds with such plenty of
corn, that it sends store thereof yearly to other far Countries, especially
Wheat and Barley. And the ground, albeit it be very fruitful and endowed with
the gifts of Ceres, yet it is never dunged. Whence the Cities and Towns
thereof are annoyed with filthy smells of the dung of cattle, which is cast
out, being thereof no use, as Munster writes. This Country abounds with so
many Droves of Oxen, The variety of living creatures.
and breeds such a number of Cowes and Horses, that it sends yearly into
Germany great Herds and Droves of them. And in regard of the many woods which
are in the Island, there is great store of game for hunting, as Hearts, Hares,
and Foxes. In the middle of it is the Metropolis or mother City called
Ottania, or Ottonium commonly called Ottensel being a Bishops Seat, The Cities.
built as it appears by many testimonies by Otto the first, about the time
when he compeld King Herald to receive the Christian faith. This City is a
famous Mart for the whole Island, in which about Epiphanie or Twelfetide there
is a great meeting of the Islanders and especially the Nobles, as there is at
Kile in Holsatia. Fionia is divided into five and twenty Prefectures, sixteen
Cities, and six royal Castles. The other cities are in a manner equally
distant from Ottonia, which is as it were the Center, and are so built of the
Sea shore, that in regard of the conveniencie of the Havens, they traffic
not only in the Balticke Sea, but also exercise their negotiations throughout
all Swethland, and Norwey, Russia, the Low Countries, and Germany: the chief
amongst them are Niburch, Swynburch, Foborch, Assens, Bowens, Middlefart, or
Milvart, and Kettemynde, or Cortemund. The chief royal castles are Newburg,
Hagenschow, Hinsgagel, Eschburg, and the Court of Rugard. Here are many
Villages, and not a few Noble-mens houses. For this Island in regard of the
pleasantness of the Climate, and fertility of the soil is much esteemed by
the Nobles. The sea does yield great plenty of fish, and every Bay is so full
thereof, that ships or boats being over set with them can hardly sail or row
against them, which yet they do not take with any fishing engines, but with
their hands. Those who dwell by the Sea side, besides tillage and husbandry,
do use fishing, both which do furnish the^ with all things necessary for
housekeeping. There are some places in this Island famous for warlike
achievements done not many years past. The commodities of the Sea.
For there is a certain mountain called Ochenberg, not far from the Castle
Hagenschow, in which John Rantzovius Knight and General of the field, for King
Christian the third, in a great battle did overthrow Christopher Count of
Oldenburg, in the year of Christ 1530, on the eleventh day of June, in which
conflict were slain two Counts, the one being the Count of Hage, the other of
Tecklenburg, whose bodies being afterward taken up out of the field were
brought to Ottonia, and buried in Canutus his Church about the same time also
on the Mountain Fauchburg, which is 4 mile distant from the Town Ascens, some
thousands of the Rebels were slain and put to slight. This Country is adorned
with many woods in which are great store of wild beasts. In the city of
Ottonium there are two famous Temples or Churches, one consecrated to Canutus,
The (...) buildings*
the other to Saint Francis. In this latter John King of Denmark, and his
son Christierne, when they had spent 37 years in banishment and captivity,
were buried in the year 1559: about the other is a large and spacious
courtyard, in which the King of Denmark did renew his ancient league of
friendship, with the Dukes of Holsatia and Sleswicke, An. 1580, they report
also that the mother of King Christian the second did place up a certain Altar
here belonging to the Minorite Friars, a wonderful curious piece of work
carved in wood, the like whereof is not to be found in Europe. The Islands.
Out of this Island from the Town Ascen^ it is eight miles into Iuitland or
Iutia, and from Nyburge into Zeland is a passage of sixteen miles long through
the Baltieke Sea, which is very dangerous, especially if the Sea be rough, for
when the East Sea being increased by the receipt of many rivers is thrust
forward with a violent course, it often happens that contrary winds do raise
such mighty waves, and make the sea so unquiet, that Mariners are many times
to great danger drawn in with these gulphlike windings of the waters and
sometimes swallowed up by them. And so much concerning Fionia: now let us pass
to the other Islands. Under Fionia are contained ninety Islands situated toward
the South, and the most of them habitable: the chief whereof are these:
Langeland
Langeland, Lawland. Falstre, Aria or Arr, Alsen, Tosing, and Aroe. Langeland
is 28 miles in length. In it there is a Town called Rudkeping, and Traneker a
royal Castle, beside many villages, Parishes, and Noble-mens houses. Lawland
is separated by the strait of Gronesand from Zeland, Lawland.

The fertility of the Soil.


and by a small arm of the Sea from Falstre. It is so fruitful in corn and
filberd Nuts, that ship-loads are brought from thence into other Countries. It
has five towns which are these, Nistadt, Nasco, Togrop, The Towns.
Roth, and Marib: besides royal Castles, Noble-mens houses, many Parishes and
Villages. Falstre.
Falstre is 16 miles long, and has these two Cities THE FOVRTH TABLE OF
DENMARK.
FIONIA
map of Denmark (Funen) Stubecopen, and Nicopen, which in regard of the
pleasantlesse and beauty thereof is called the Naples of Denmark Out of this
Island near a royal Palace, there is a frequent passage into Germany, namely
to Warnemund, which is 28 miles long. It furnishes neighbor countries every
year with much corn. Arta being distant 6 miles from Elysia, is clothed with
woods, and therefore assordeth much recreation for hunters, it has three
Parishes, and some Noble-mens houses, with the Town and Castle of Coping. It
belongs together with Elysia to the Dukedom of Sleswi^ke, and is under the
government of the Duke thereof. Elisia or Alsa, commonly called Alsen, is an
Island of a reasonable bigness, for it is 16 miles in length, and 8 in
breadth, being not far distant from the Dukedom of Sleswicke, and looking
toward the Bay die Flensburger Wick, it is parted by it from the first seat of
the English. The Rantzovian Musaeum tells us that the Romans did call these
Islanders Elisians. As also those who inhabit the next Island, Arians: which
appellation or name they still retain to this day, Ptolomie relates, that the
English were the ancient inhabitants of the Northern Countries, by the Sea
side: to which Tacitus adds the Elisit, Arit, and the Mommy, whose names also
are still used in the Islands Alsen, Arr, and Moen. There is a Town in Alsen
or Elisia called Sunderburg and a Castle of the same name, with other Towns,
as Norborch, Osternholm, Die Holle, and Gammelgard. It has thirteen populous
Parishes, whence it can set forth many thousands of Soldiers. It is very
woody, by reason whereof it affords Hearts, and many kinds of wild beasts
for hunting. It has great store of Seafish and fresh-fish, and much wheat,
and it is every where fit for feeding and pasturing of cattle. Tussing or
Tosinga being the chief Isle among all the other Islands, lies near unto a
town of Fionia called Swineburg, and is four miles in length. In this Island
besides Parishes, there is the Palace of Kettrop, belonging to the
Rosenkransians, and Rantzovians. Aroe is situated near the Dukedom of
Sleswicke where they pass to the Town Alcens in Fionia by the Arsensian Bay,
and has four Villages. There are also these Islands, Ramso, Endelo, Ebilo,
Fenno, Boko, Brando, Toroe, Aggerins, Hellenis, Iordo, Birkholm, etc. Let so
much suffice to have been spoken concerning Fionia, and the Islands lying
round about it. And now to conclude, I will here, rather then no where, add
unto the rest a Description of Huena or Ween seated in the Sound, in which is
the Castle of Vraniburg, filled with many accurate and elaborate Astronomicall
instruments, The middle of this Island, where this Castle stands, has the
Pole elevated about 56 Degrees and 55, and is situate from the West 55 Degrees.
It is in compass 8160 paces, every pace being 5 foot, so that the whole
circuit of it is equal unto two common German, 18 English miles. This Island
being placed in the most famous strait of the whole Kingdom through which many
ships sail out of the Eastern into the Western Sea: and on the contrary
with a gooly prospect has in view many chief Towns of this Kingdom, which
stands as it were round about it; in Zeland Hasnia, 12 miles distant from it
South Southwest, also Helsinger, (where those ships that sail or pass by, do
pay custom or tribute) and the Castle Cronaburg both distant from it on the
Northwest 8 miles, Helsingburg which lies on the shore of Scania, is as far
distant from it toward the North, and on the same shore is Landskrone being
four miles from it: toward the East lies Lunda or Londen, which although it
be not a Sea-towne, yet is but 16 miles distant from hence. And although the
Island be not very great, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
yet no part of it is barren or unfruitful, but produces great store of
fruit, and abounds with cattle, it brings forth Does, Hares, Cunnies, The
(...) living Creatures.
and Partridges in great plenty, and is very convenient for fishing. It has a
wood of Hasell trees, which are never worme-eaten, but has no Dormise.
Heretofore it was remarkable for four Castles, whose names do yet remain,
Synderburg, which was seated on the Southern shore, Norburg on the opposite
Northern shore. Karheside which stood toward the East side of the Island, and
Hamer toward the West, the foundation of these four Castles may be yet seen,
but there are no ruins thereof remaining. This Island lies very deep in the
Salt-sea, and yet it has many fresh Rivers and Springs, among which there is
one Spring that never freezeth with the violence of the Winters cold, a strange
thing in these Countries.

BORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA.
The nam^, and whence s^ called.
BORVSSIA being the farthest coast of Germany, takes its name from the people
called Borussians, as Erasmus Stella witnesses. These, as Ptolemy affirms,
placed themselves by the Riphaean Rath (...) the Riphaean wo^ds which are a
part of Hy^cinia, for (...)

The Situation


Hills, where they run out Northward, not far from the head of Tanais arising
out of them, and weary of their own habitations, with a strong head and
violent force, they seated themselves in these places, and called the whole
Country from their own name Borussia, which now by wiping out one letter, and
pronouncing another more softly, is called Prussia. Borussia beginning from the
River Vistula, which boundeth it on the West, and running to the Balticke Sea,
which compasses the Northern side thereof, The (...) of the So^le, and (...)
has the Alani or Lituanians, on the East, and on the South the Hamaxobij, i.
the Scythians inhabiting the European Sarmatia. It has a pleasant air, but
somewhat cold All the Country is more fruitful than the neighbor Provinces.
The ground is very fertile in bearing of corn, and such as far excells the
corn of Poland and Lithuania. It has as great store of Bees and Honey, as any
of the other Northern Countries. The variety of living creatures
There is also in it much cattle, and great store of game for hunting. The
great and vast woods bring forth many kinds of wild beasts, as Bears and
Boares, with which they abound, yielding a sort of Bears very strong and
swift, called Bubali. They bring forth Buffons being a wild kind of Oxen, and
wild Horses, whose flesh the Inhabitants do eat. They bring forth Alces,
which they commonly call Elandes: and white Weesels or Ferrets. The Borussians
for the most part were Idolaters until the time of the Emperor Frederick the
second, in whose reign, and in the year 1215. some (...) of their (...) under
the wills of Achen. Anno 1100.
Knights of the Dutch order, or the order of the Cross did overcome them, and
taught them the Christian Religion. After the Provinces and Cities of Borussia,
An. 1419. being moved thereunto by the covetousness and cruelty of those of
the order of the Cross, did revolt to Casimirus King of Polonia. And 30 years
after the first defection revolting again, they sold Mariburg with other
Castles and Cities to the King for 476000 A Floren is ^cording to the ^nglish
val^^tion, three s^^^^ings.
Florens. But the Marians refusing to yield obedience to the King, they a long
while contended by a doubtful and uncertain war, until at last the whole
Country came into the hands of Albert Marquess of Brandenburg, the last
Governor of that Order, who afterward at Cacrovia was made a Duke, and a
secular Prince by Sigismund King of Polonia. They report that Prince Venedusus
did divide Borussia into twelve Dukedomes, whereof these are the names: (...)
of ^^ties.
Sudavia, Sambia, Natangia, Nadravia, Slavonia, Bartonia, Galinda, Warmia,
Ho^kerlandia, Culmigeria, Pomesania, and Michlovia. BORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA.
PRUSSIA
map of Prussia Sudavia was so wasted by those of the order of the Cross, that
now of a Noble Dukedom at this day there are scarce seven Towns remaining,
and those very mean. In Sambia are many Cities, as Lebenicht built in the
year 1256: Kneyback built in the year 1380. Regimount, called by the Germans
Keningsberg, and built in the year 1260 by Duke Albert. Fischusen built in the
year 1269: and lastly Lechstet, built in the year 1289. In Natangia there are
these Cities, Valdonia, Girania, Zinten, Crentzburg, Heiligenbeil, Fridland,
Shippenbeil, and Brandenburg. In Nadravia there are a few Cottages only
remaining, but all the Towns of note wasted. In Slavonia are these Cities,
Ragnet, Tilse, Renum, Liccow, Salaw, Labia, Tapia, Vintburg, Christaderder,
Baytia, Cestia, Norbeitia, Vensdorfe, Angerbury, and Dringford. In Bartonia are
these Towns, Nordenburg, Iabansburg, Iurgburg, Insterburg, Richtenerder,
Barton, and Rhenum. In Galindia are these Towns, Ortleburg, Rastenburg,
Neyburg, Passenhume, Dreschdow, and Luzenburg. In Warmia are Ressen, Seburg,
Bitstein, Wartenburg, Allensteyn, Melsak, Heilsberg, Werinedit, and Gustat. In
Hockerlandia are Brunsburg, Tolkemit, Munhuse, Scorpow, and Elbing the greatest
of them all, being built on the Sea shore, and famous for the wealth of the
Citizens, and frequencie of Merchants. In Culmigeria are Turuma, or Thorn, a
famous Marti Town, built near the River Vistula, or Weisel, in the year
1235. Also Culmina or Culine, Wentslaw, Althasis, Graudentz, Gilgehburg,
Schonsee, Strasburg, Bretchen, Neumarckt, Pappaw, Fridech, Leippe, Lesen, Golb,
Reden, Berglaw, and Lantenburg. In Pomerania is Marienburg, a large City, built
in the year 1402. Also Newtich, Stum, Christburg, Preusmarck, Salfeld, Merine,
Holand, Lichstad, Osterod, Rosenburg, Mariemweder, Garnesie, Lebmul,
Hohenstein, Schonenberg, Culenburg, Neunburg, and Salaw. In Michlovia all is
wasted and destroyed, except Straburg, The Rivers.
only. Prussia is a Country, in regard of the navigable Rivers, Bays, and
Havens, fit for the importation or exportation of diverse commodities and
merchandises. The chief Rivers are Called at this day Dravaniz, and anciently
Visula, Bisula, and ^ridanus.

The commodities of the Sea.


Vistula, Nemeni, Cronon, Nogent, Elbing, Vusera, Passerg, Alla, Pregel, Ossa,
Vreibnitz, Lua, and Lavia. In which, as in the Lakes there are great store of
fish, Moreover, on the shoares of Borussta near the Balticke Sea, a certain
kind of Amber is gathered, which the Inhabitants call Barstein from burning,
and Augstein, because it is very good for the Eyes. The Greeks call it
Electrum, because the Sun is called Elector, having recourse as it were to
the fable of Phaethon. Servius upon the eighth Aeneid says, that there are
three kinds of Amber, one of which comes out of trees, another which is
found in the earth: a third which is made of three parts gold, and one part
silver. Pliny writes that the Germans called it Glessum or Glesse, because
it is not unlike unto it, seeing both of them are perspicuous and transparent;
and from thence the Romans did call this Country Glessaria. There are many
kinds of it, the white has the best smell, which was cheap at the first, the
next are the yellow and waxe-colour: the yellow is the best of all, having a
translucent shining color like flames of fire. There is some which is as soft
as boiled or decocted Honey, and therefore is called Honey-Amber: there is much
used of this Amber in many things; being heated with rubbing, it draws unto
it chafe and dry leaves, as the Lodestone does Iron. Borussia has also
woods which were never cut, The Woods.
whence great store of wood is carried away for the building of ships and
houses: they have straight trees to make Mastes for Ships, which are carried
from thence into far Countries, and lastly they have other riches of their
own, from which the Inhabitants receive great profit; as Bees and wild Beasts
of which we spoke before. The Country is divided at this day into Russia
Regis, and Russia Ducalis. The King of Poland does immediately possess either
bank of the River Vistula, even to the mouth thereof. Also the Island which is
enclosed with Vistula and Nogo, the Towns and Castles to the new Bay, as
Elbing, Tolkenit, Frawenberg, and Brunsberg, even to the mouth of Passaria, and
the whole Diocese of Warmia, being large toward the South, and adorned with
Towns and fields, hanging like a Bladder, in the middle part of Borussia. The
manner of government
But although Borussia be immediately subject to the King, and is but one
Kingdom with Poland, yet it has a public Council, Laws and Judgments, an
Exchequer, and the management of wars peculiar to it self. There are two
Bishops in it, one of Warmia, who has his residence at Brunsburg, and the
other at Culmes. There are three Palatines, as the Palatine of Culmes, of
Marienburg, and of Pomeran. Three Castles, as the Castle of Culmes, Elbing, and
Gedane, commonly called Dantzick, and so many Under-chamberlaines. There are
three chief and prime Cities, Turuma, Elbing, Dantzick. These assemble
themselves together to deliberate and give Judgment in matters of controversy
twice every year, in the month of May at Margenburg, and at Michaelmas at
Graudents. There are eighteen Captains or Prefects of the Kings Castles and
revenues. The (...).
As in the Palatinate of Marienburg, the Captain of Stuma, Gneva, Meva,
Stargardia. In Pomeran the Captain of Slochovia above Tuchol, near the River
Bro, the Captain of Sueza, Tuchol, Dernias, and Puske. In the Palatinate of
Culmes the Captains of Brodnicke, Graudents, Radine or Reden, Colba, Rogosna,
Rogenhausen, and three others. The Dukedom of Borussia belonged heretofore to
the Germane Order, or the order of the Cross, being converted into an
hereditary Dukedom by Albert of Brandenburg Master of the Order, and being
rent away from the Germane Empire, it came into the protection and obedience of
the King of Poland, in the year 1525. The Prince thereof taking his place in
all Counsels, meetings, and assemblies next to the King. If any contention
arise between the King and the Duke, it is decided at Marienburg or Elbing by
the Kings Counsel, who are sworn by a new oath to Judge rightly. The Laws
and Institutions.
But the Nobles or others having an action against the Duke do commence it
before the Dukes Vassalls, being deputed and appointed by the Duke to give
judgment, and from them an appeal is permitted to the Kings and the Dukes
Counsel residing at Martenburg. Every one ought there to be called into
judgment where his goods are, or where he dwells, neither can he be
compelled to stand to foreign trials, and so be kept from his right. The
Judges are so placed in the Provinces, that out of three named by every
Province, the Duke chooses one, to judge according to the Law of Culmes, and
the Institutions of the Province: But if the Duke do any thing against then
Privileges, Laws, or customs, and upon suite made do not hear their
grievances, it is in the choice of the chief men in the Province, without
being thought to be rebellious and seditious, to fly unto the protection of
the Kings Majesty of Poland, and by the virtue of some covenants and
agreements between the King and the Duke, may request him to defend their
Privileges. There are in the Dukedom of Borussia two Bishops, one of Sambia,
The Mountains
who has his residence at Kings Mount, commonly called Konningsperg: the other
of Pomesania, whose seat is at Marienwender, and these have all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in their own power. Concerning the Religion and Rites of the
ancient Borussians, Meletius tells wonderful things in his tenth Epistle to
Georgius Sabinus. They worshipped Devils (says he) instead of Gods, and now
also in many places do secretly worship them. They Religiously worshipped
several unclean creatures, namely, Serpents and Snakes, as if they had been
the servants and messengers of the Gods; for these they kept within their
houses, and sacrificed unto them as unto their household Gods. They held that
the Gods did dwell in Woods and Groves, and that they were to please them by
sacrificing unto them in those places: and to pray unto them to send them rain
or fair weather. They held that all wild Beasts, especially the Alces living
in these Woods, were to be reverenced as the servants of the Gods, and
therefore they were to abstain from injuring of them. They believed that the
Sun and Moon were the chiefest of all the Gods. They did worship Thunder and
Lightning according to the opinion of the Heathens, and were of opinion that
they might by prayers raise or calm storms and tempests. They used a Goat
for their sacrifice, in regard of the generative and fruitful nature of that
creature. They said that the Gods did inhabit in excellent fair trees, as
Oaks, and the like: wherefore they would not cut down such trees, but did
religiously worship them as the houses and seats of the Gods. In such account
also was the Elder tree, and many others. They were heretofore barbarous and
ignorant of Learning, so that they would have thought it an incredible thing,
if any one should have told them that men could make known their minds one to
another by the sending of letters. But of these things enough, he that
desires to know more, let him have recourse to Erasmus Stella his antiquities
of Borussia, in his second book thereof.

LIVONIA OR LIEFLAND.
IN my method Livonia or Levonia, commonly called Liefland, does follow, The
Country whence so called.
concerning the original of whose name I dare affirm no certainty. But
Althamerus writes thus of it. It may be, says he, that the Livonians, the
farthest people of Germany toward the So called, because the Vene^^ anciently
lived there.
Venedick shore, dwelling under the Parallel of the Island Scandinavia, which
is called Gothland, were derived from the Lemovians, but I had rather derive
them from the Efflui, for that they are commonly called Eyslenders. Ptolemie
also mentions the Levonians in his second Book, cap. 11. And a little after
speaking of the Aestii, he says, that Beatus Rhenanus did correct the corrupt
reading of Tacitus, and did again rightly set down the Nation of the Aestii.
In as much as Rhenanus says, it did appear, that it was in the first copy
Aestui in stead of Aestii, the ancient Writers of Books putting U for I. And
Althamerus says, if it were in the ancient copy the Efflui, he durst
affirm, that the Eyslanders were so called from them, by a little alteration of
the word. These people also are called Sudini, and their Country Sudina,
joining to Prussia. Some do place the Lectunni hereabouts, from whom it may be
that their name was derived. Livonia is stretched toward the Balthick Sea, or
the Venedick Bay, being 500 miles in length, and 160 in breadth. Borussia,
Lithuania, and Russia do encompasse most part of it, the rest the Livonian Bay
does hemme in. The Situation and fruitfulness of the Country.
The Country is plain and very fertile, it brings forth corn in such
abundance, that in dear times and years of scarcity it supplieth the wants of
other Countries. It abounds also with the best flax, and breeds store of
cattle. Besides, there are in the woods of this Country many Bears, Alces,
Foxes, Leopards, Cats of the mountains, and here are many Hares, The variety
of living Creatures.
which according to the season of the year do change their color, in like
manner as they do in Helvetia upon the Alps: in the Winter they are white, in
Summer of an Ash color. And here is such plentiful hunting of wild beasts,
that the Country people, though they be cruelly used by the Nobles, are not
prohibited from it. In brief, Livonia wants none of those things which are
necessary for the preservation and sustentation of man's life, except wine,
oil, and some other things, granted by the divine bounty to other Countries,
as being under a more warm and gentle Climate, which yet are brought hither in
great abundance. Livonia (being Anno 1200 by the industry and labor of the
Merchants of Bremes, and especially by the Knights of the Dutch order, brought
and converted to the Christian Faith) when it had a long time suffered the
miseries of foreign and civil wars, and had been made, as it were, a prey
to the neighbor Kings and Princes, The Government.
at length in the year 1559, being under Gothardus Ke^lerus the last Governor
of the Dutch Oder, it was received into the protection and government of
Sigismundus the King of Poland, as a member of his Kingdom, and of the great
Dukedom of Lithuania. But Gothardus resigning his Order on the fifth day of
March Anno 1562, in the Castle of Riga, before Nicholas Radziwilus the King of
Polands Commissarie, and Palatine of Vilna; as first the Cross, afterward the
Seal, then his Letters Patents, and all Charters which the Order had received
from the Emperors and Popes, besides the keys of the Castle of Riga, and of
the gates of the City, the office of Commendator, the privilege and power of
coining money, the custom of fish, and all other rights belonging to him: he
was presently proclaimed by the aforesaid Palatine in the Kings Majesty's name
Duke of Curland and Semigallia, and straightway the Nobility of Curland and
Semigallia did take their oath of allegiance before him, as to their lawful
and hereditary Lord. The next day the Duke of Curland, sitting in estate, was
proclaimed in the Court of Riga Governor of Livonia, and received the keys of
the castle and the gates of the City; after which the Nobility and the
Citizens had all their rights and privileges restored and confirmed unto them.
Livonia is divided into three parts, distinguished both by situation and
language, namely into Estia, The Cities.
Lettea, and Curlandia. The Provinces of Estia or Eastland are Harria or
Harland: the chief City whereof is Revalia or Revel, being situated toward
the North, near unto the Balthick Sea, and nothing inferior unto Riga; it was
built by Voldemata, and has a famous Haven. The Citizens use the Lubeck Law,
and do coin foure-square money. Also the Province of Viria, Virland, or
Wirland, in which are Weisenburg, Tolsberg, and Borcholm, the Seat of the
Bishop of Revalia. In the third place is Allantika, where is the Town Nerva or
Nerve, by a River of the same name; over against which is the Castle called
Ivanow Gorod, belonging to the Moscovites, for the river that runs between
these towns does part Livonia from Moscovia: also Nyschlot or Neuschlos. In
the fourth place is Odenpoa, in which is Derpt or Topatum, an Episcopal City,
Wernebes, Helmet, and Ringen. In the fifth place is Iervia or Ierven, in which
are We^ssenslein, Lais, Overpolen or Ober Paln, and Vellin or Fellin. In the
sixth place is Wichia or Wicke, wherein is Abseel or Hapsel, Leal, Lode, and
Pernaw. Near to the Estians lie the Islands Osilia or Osel, Dageden or
Dachden, Mona, Wormse or Worist, Wrangen, Kien, and many others, in which they
use partly the Estian language, and partly the Swedish. The Cities of Lettea or
Letten are Riga, Kokenhusen, Wenden, and Wolmar. Riga is the chief city of
Livonia, near the River Duina, which does discharge it self into the Venedick
Bay. This city is fortified with a strong Wall, with strong Towers, and pieces
of Ordnance against any assault, and is strengthened or fenced with double
ditches and sharp stakes round about it. It has a Castle well provided, in
which heretofore the Governor of Livonia (being of the Teutonick or Dutch
Order) kept his residence; and this Castle, though Gothardus Ketlerus,
aforesaid, did govern in the King of Polands right, yet he did usurp no
authority over the City: for the Citizens being strong, and defenders of
their liberty, cannot endure to have any Governor or Captain over them. They
do only pay tribute and yield obedience LIVONIA. OR LIEFLAND.
LIVONIA
map of Livonia (Latvia, Estonia) to the King of Poland, in other things they
have Laws peculiar to themselves. Besides, here is a Market of all Northern
commodities, as of Pitch, Hemp, Wax, Timber, and such other things. The Towns
and Castles of Curland are Goldingen, Candaw and Windaw, which the Polanders
call Kies, and the Germans Wenden: this Town was famous heretofore, for that
the Master of the Teutonick Order did keep his Court here, and Parliaments
were here wont to be held; now it is defended by a Garrison of Polanders. There
are also the Cities Durbin, Srunden, Grubin, Pilten, Amb^t^n, and Hase^^ot. The
Cities of Semigallia are Mitovia, commonly called Mitaw, where the Duke of
Curland kept his Court; also Seleburg* The Lakes.
^a^^^burg, Doblin and Dalem. The River Duina does divide Semi^allia and
Curland from Lettea, and the rest of Livonia. In Livonia there are many Lakes,
the chiefest is Beibus which is 45 miles long, and does abound with diverse
kinds of fish. The Rivers are Duina, Winda, Beca, (...)
and some others. Duina or Duna (which Ptolemie calls Turuntus, and Pe^cerus
Rubo) running out of Russia, a great way through Lithuania and Livonia, at
length eight miles below Regia powers it self into the ^avorick Bay and the
Balthick Sea. Winda in like manner discharges it self into the Balthick Sea,
which near unto the mouth thereof is very deep, and dangerous. The River
Beca, which the Inhabitants call ^^^^^^k, is carried in one channel to the
Ocean, and there rushing down headlong from the steep Rocks, as Leunclavius
says, does make those dease which dwell near unto it, as they report the
Water-fals of Nilus does those who inhabit near unto them. The Country has
no mountains, The Woods.
but is full of thick woods: for here are the great arms of Hercynia, and
other such. At the mouth of Duina near to the Sea is Dunamunta or Dun^mund (an
impregnable Castle, not far from Riga) kept by a Polish Garrison, to which
all ships do pay a certain tribute as they pass by. (...)
There is also in the midway Blokaus, a royal fortress, which commands
ships as they sail by it. There is moreover the castle and city Felinum or
Fellin, in the Dukedom of Estland, which the German hired Soldiers, together
with the last Governor of Lavonia, William Furstenberg, by most detestable
treachery did betray to the Duke of Moscovia. Ternestum (which others call
Taurum) in this Country was heretofore a strong castle, but after it had been
taken by the Moscovites, the Lithuanians marching under the conduct of their
Captain Nicholas Radziwilus Palatine of Vilna, by undermining, and by planting
powder under it, did quite demolish it in the year 1561. In Livonia many yet
do live in a heathenish manner, and wanting the true knowledge of God, The
(...).
some adore the Sun, some a Stone, and there are those who do worship
Serpents, and Bushes. When they are to interre and bury a dead body, they
banquet freely round about the dead carcass, and do drink to the dead man,
pouring also upon him a great pot of drink. Afterward they put him in a
Sepulcher, and lay by him an hatchet, meat, drink, and some money for his
journey, and then they cry out, Get thee gone into an other world, to rule
over the Germans, as they have here ruled over thee and thine. They first
received the Christian faith under the Emperor Frederick. They account it a
fault to be laborious and painful. The women borne in the country carry a
great state with them, and do despise those women which come from other parts
They will not be called women, but Mistresses, and they never busy themselves
with any woman's work, but do vagarie and wander abroad in the Winter time in
Chariots, and in the Summer by Boat. The drink of the country is Mede,
Beer, and Wine (which the richer sort only use, being brought from foreign
countries) especially Rhenish Wine. Their habit^.
The women do disgrace the beauty and comeliness of their bodies, by the
disguisednesse of their garments. The commodities which are transported out of
Livonia into Germany and other Countries, are Wax, Honey, Ashes, Pitch and
Tar, Hemp, Their commodities*
Skins of diverse wild beasts, and Hides. Also that kind of corn which the
Latins call Secale, and we Rye, is yearly transported in great plenty from
hence into Germany and other bordering countries. Having explained and
declared thus much concerning Livonia, I hope it will be a matter acceptable
to the Reader, if here for conclusion I shall add some thing concerning those
Lycaons, or men transformed into wolves, who are reported to be very frequent
and common in this place. There are Writers, who think themselves worthy to be
believed (among which is Olaus Magnus) that do affirm, that in this Country
every year some men are turned into wolves. I will here set down his own
words, thereby to recreate the mind of the Reader with the relation of an
unheard of noveltie: and thus he writes in his 18 Book cap. 45. Although in
Prussia, Livonia, and Lithuania, all the Inhabitants all the year are much
endammaged by ravening Wolves, because every where in the woods they tear in
pieces, and devour a great number of their cattle, if they stray never so
little from the flock or heard; yet they esteem not this loss so great, as
that which they sustain, by men changed and transformed into wolves. For in
Christmas, in the night time, such a company of men^wolves do gather
themselves together, and show such fiery cruelty both toward men and other
creatures, which are not wild by nature, that the Inhabitants of this Country
do receive more detriment and loss from these than from true and natural
wolves. For as it is found out by experience, they do besiege men's houses
standing in the woods with much fierceness, and do strive to break open the
doors, that so they may destroy and prey upon the men and other creatures that
are within. But of these things we have spoken enough, let us go forward to
Russia.

RUSSIA, OR MOSCOVIA.
The names
RUSSIA which is called also Roxolonia, is twofold, the Black and the White:
The former bordereth on Polonia, the latter is a part of Moscovia. Moscovie was
without doubt so called from the River Moschus or Morava* which gives its name
also to the chief City Mosco through which it flows. The (...)
The Territories thereof are extended far and wide, and it is bounded on the
North with the Icie Sea, on the East it has the Tartarians, on the south the
Turks and Polonians, and on the West the Livonians and the Kingdom of
Swethland. In all which spaces of ground many large countries are contained,
and therefore the Duke of Moscovie does thus enstile himself. M^s^^^i^
The Great Lord, and by the grace of God Emperor and Governor of all Russia,
also Great Duke of Volodimiria. Moscovia, great Novogrodia, Pskovia,
Smolonskia, Thweria, Iugaria, Permia, The Situation.
Viathkia, Bulgaria, etc. Governor and Great Prince of Novogrodia the Less,
of Czernigovia, Rezania, Wolochdia, Resovia, Bielloia, Rostovia, Iaroslania,
Poloskia, Biellozeria, Vdoria, Obdoria, and Condimia, etc. The temperature of
the Air in Muscovia is immoderately cold and sharp, The temperature of the
Air.
yet it is so wholesome, that beyond the head of Tanais toward the North and
East, there is never any plague known, although they have a disease not much
unlike unto it, which does so lie in the head and inward parts, that they die
in few days of it. The Country in general neither brings forth Vine nor
Olive, nor any fruit-bearing tree except it be Mellons and Cherries, in regard
that the more tender fruits are blasted with the cold North winds. (...) of
the Soil.
The corn fields do bear Wheat, Millet, a grain which the Latins call
Panicum, and all kind of Pulse. But their most certain harvest consists in
wax and honey. Here is the wood Hercynia being full of wild beasts. In that
part which lies toward Prussia great and fierce Bugles or Buffes are found,
which they call Bison. And also the beast called by the Latins Alces like an
Heart save that he has a fleshie snout like an Elephant, long legs, and no
bending of the hough, and this creature the Moscovites call Iozzi, The variety
of living creatures.
and the Germans Hellene. Besides, there are Bears of an incredible bigness,
and great and terrible Wolves of a black color. No Country has better
hunting and hawking than this. For they take all kind of wild beasts with
Dogs and Nets, and with Hawks which the Country of Pecerra does plentifully
yield, they kill not only Pheasants, and Ducks with them but also Swannes and
Cranes. The Countries of Russia or Moscovia are very large. All the Cities,
Towns, Castles, Villages, Woods, fields, Lakes, and Rivers are under the
command and government of one Prince, The Government*
whom RVSSIA, OR MVSCOVIA.
Russia cum Confinijs
map of Russia the Inhabitants do call the great Czar, that is King or
Emperor, and all the revenues that arise from them, are brought into the
Princes exchequer. There are no Dukes or Counts, which can possess any thing
by a Tenure of Freehold, or can pass the same unto their heirs. He does
bestow some villages and Towns upon some, but yet he uses the labor of the
husbandman, and when he list takes them away again. So that he has absolute
command over his Subjects, and again his Subjects honor and reverence him as
a God, and do show obedience to him in all things, without any refusal. The
chief Metropolis or mother City of the whole Kingdom is Moscovia commonly
called Moschwa, being conveniently situated, as it is thought, in the middle of
the Country. It is a famous City as for the many Rivers which meet there,
The Cities.
so for the largeness, and number of the houses, and for the strength of the
Castle. For it lies near the River Moschus with a long row of houses. The
houses are all of wood, and divided into Parlers, Kitchings, and Bed-chambers:
all of them have private gardens both for profit, and for pleasure. The
several parts of the City have several Churches. It has two Castles one
called Kataigorod, the other Bolsigorod, both which are washed with the Rivers
Moschus, and Neglinna. Moreover in Russia there are many Countries, as first,
the Dukedom of Volodimiria, which title the Great Duke does assume to
himself, it is named fom the chief city Volodomire being seated on the
banks of the River Desma, which runs into Volga. This Province is of so
fruitful a soil, that the increase of one bushel of wheat being sown is
oftentimes twenty bushells. Secondly, Novogrodia which though it be inferior
unto the aforenamed Country in pasturage, yet not in the fruitfulnes of the
soil. It has a wooden city, called by the same name with the whole Dukedom
Novogrod, being seated where the Rivers Volga and Occa do flow one into
another. This city had always the chief pre-eminence in regard of the
incredible number of houses, for the commodity of a broad and fishie Lake, and
in regard of an ancient Temple much reverenced by that Nation, which about five
hundred years ago was dedicated to S. (...) to this (...) was (...) the (...)
between (...)
Sophia. Here is a memorable Castle built of stone upon a rock at the great
Charge of the Duke Basilius. This City is distant from the City Moscovia an
hundred Polish miles, and from Riga, the next haven town, it is little less
than five hundred. Thirdly Rhezan which is a Province between the River Occa
and Tanais, having store of Corn, Honey, Fish, and Foul: it has these Cities
built of wood, Rhezan seated on the bank of Occa, Corsira, Colluga, and Tulla,
near to which are the Spring-heads of the River Tanais. Fourthly the Dukedom
of Worotinia, which has a City and a Castle of the same name. Fifthly,
Severia which is a great Dukedom abounding with all things, it has great
desert fields, and many Towns among which the chief are these, Starodub,
Stewiarkser, and Czernigow. The bees in the woods do yield them great store of
honey. The Nation in regard of their continual wars with the Tartarians is
accustowed to arms, and ready of hands. Sixthly, the Dukedom of Smolen^^o,
which being seated near the River Borysthenes has a City of the same name,
watered on the one side with Borysthenes, and on the other side environed with
deep ditches, and rampires armed A MORE PARTICVLAR DESCRIPTION OF SOME
PROVINCES OF MOSCOVIA.
MOSCOVIA.
map of Russia (partial) with sharp stakes. There are also these Dukedomes and
Provinces, Mosat^kia, B^elskia, Rescovia, Tweria, Pleskovia, Vodzka, Correllia,
Biele^zioro, Wolochda, Vstiuga, Iaros^avia, Rostow, Dwina, Susdali, Wrathka,
Permia, Sibior, Iugra, Petzora, and Novogrodia the Greater, which they call
Novogrod Wi^lki in which is a very great City of the same name, bigger than
Rome it self. Petzora takes its name from the River which the mountains and
rocks do hemme in on both sides. There are spacious countries which pay
Tribute to the great Duke lying northward in a great space of Land; as Obdora,
in which is the Idol called Zolota Baba, that (...) Golden old woman, also
Condora, Lucomoria, and Lappia. There are many great Lakes in Moscovia, (...)
as Ilmen or Ilmer, also Ladoga, and the White Lake which the Inhabitants call
Biele^ezioro. There are also many lane Rivers, (...)
as first Bor^sthenes or Pripetus, commonly called Nioper and Nest^r, o^ by the
addition of a letter Dnieper and (...)
Dnester. Secondly, Tu^^^t^^ which is that same with Ptolemie, which
Herbersterntus calls Rubo, but the Inhabitants Duina and Oby. Thirdly, the
River Rha, which Ptolemie mentions, and is now called Volga and Edel. There is
in this country the River (...)
Ianais, which the Italians call Tana, the Inhabitants Don. Beside, the river
Occa and the lesser Duina, called likewise Onega, etc. Here are the Moates
Hyperboret or Riphaean mountains, mentioned by Pliny in his 4 Book Chap. 12.
and by Mela in his 3 Book, which are impassable, (...)
because they are covered over with continual snow and ice. The wood Hercyma
which Isidorus calls the Riphaean wood, takes up a great part of Moscovia,
it is inhabited, having some few scattering houses in it, and now by long
labor is made so thin that it cannot, as most suppose, show such thick
woods, and impenetrable forests as heretofore. Moscovia has innumerable
costly Temples or Churches, and very many Monasteries. The Duke looks to
matters of government, and administration of Justice by the help and
assistance of twelve Counselors who are daily present in the Court. (...)
Among them, the Pre^ec^u^e ships of all the Castles and Cities are
distributed: and they receive the letters and Petitions which are directed to
the Prince, and do answer them in his name. For the Prince himself receives
no letters, neither does he set his hand to any that are written to his
Subjects, or any foreign Prince. The Bishops are chosen out of the Friars as
men of a sanctimonious and holy life: There are many Monasteries of these
Friars in the Kingdom of Moscovia, and yet all of the same habit and Order, of
which they say that S. Basil was the first founder. There are in the whole
Kingdom of Moscovia eleven Bishops which they call Wladdicks, that is, in
their language Stewards or Dispensers. They call their Priests Poppes or
A^^hipoppes. (...)
The Metropolitan Bishop lives in Moscovia, who was heretofore confirmed by
the Patriarch of Constantinople, but now being chosen by the great Duke only,
he is consecrated by two or three Bishops, and is displaced at the Kings
pleasure. Under this Metropolitan are two Archbishops, the one at N^vogarais
the Greater near the River Low^a, the other at Rodovia. There are no
Universities or Colleges in all the Empire of M^^^otia. The Moscovi^es are of
the Greek religion, which they received in the year of our Lord 987. They
suppose that the Holy Spirit, being the third person in the Trinity, does
proceed from the Father alone. They took the Sacrament of the Eucharist with
leavened bread, and permit the people to use the Cup. They believe not that
Priests Dirges, or the piety or godliness of kindred or friends can be
avaleable to the dead, and they believe that there is no Purgatory. They read
the Scripture in their own language, and do not deny the people the use
thereof. They have Saint Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, and Gregory translated
into the Illyrian tongue, and out of these, as also out of Chrysostom, Basil
and Nazianzenus, the Priests do publicly read Homilies instead of Sermons; for
they hold it not convenient (as Iovius says) to admit of those hooded Orators,
who are wont to Preach too curiously and subtlely to the people concerning
divine matters, because they think that the rude minds of the ignorant may
sooner attain to holiness and sanctity of life by plain Doctrine, than by
deep interpretations and disputations of things secret. They make matrimonial
contracts, and do permit Bigamie, but they scarcely suppose it to be lawful
marriage. They do not call it adultery, unless one take and keep another
man's wife. They are a crafty and deceitful Nation, Then Diet.
and delighting more in servitude than liberty. For all do profess themselves
to be the Dukes servants. The Moscovite line rather prodigally than
bountifully, for their tables are furnished with all kind of luxurious meats
that can be desired, and yet not costly. For they sell a Cock and a Duck
oftentimes for one little single piece of silver. Their more delicate provision
is gotten by hunting and hawking as with us. Then Traffic.
They have no wine made in the Country, and therefore they drink that which
is brought thither, and that only at Feasts and Bankets. They have also a
kind of Beer, which they cool in Summer by casting in pieces of ice. And
some delight in the juice pressed out of sour cherries, which has as clear and
pure a color, and as pleasant a taste as any wine. The Moscovites do send into
all parts of Europe excellent Hemp and Flax for rope-making, many Oxe-hides,
and great store of Wax.

THE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA, Samogitia, Blacke-Russia, and Volhinia.
SOME would have Lithuania so called from the Latin word Lituus, (that is) a
Hunters horn, because that Country does use much hanting. The Country whence
^^^^lled.
Which opinion Mathias a Michou rejects, and delivers another concerning the
Etymology thereof: for he says that certain Italians, forsaking Italy in
regard of the Roman dissentions, entered into Lithuania, calling the Country
Italy, and the Nation Italians; and that the sheepheards began first to call
it Litalia, and the Nation Litalians, by prefixing one letter. But the
Ruthenians or Russians, and the Polonians their neighbors changing the word
more, at this day do call the Country Lithuania, The Situation.
and the people Lithuanians. It is a very large Country, and next to Moschovia:
It has on the East that part of Russia, which is subject to the great Duke of
Moscovy: on the West it has Podlassia, Masovia, Poland, and somewhat toward
the North it bounds on Borussia; but full North it looks toward Livonia and
Samogitia: and on the South toward Podolia and Vol^^nia. The quality of the
Climate.

The fertility of the Soil.


The air here is cold, and the winter sharp. Here is much wax and honey
which the wild Bees do make in the Woods, and also much Pitch. This Country
also affords abundance of corn, but the harvest seldom comes to maturity
and ripeness. It has no wine but that which is brought hither from foreign
Countries, nor salt, but such as they buy and fetch out of Britain. It
brings forth living creatures of all kinds, but small of growth. In the
Woods of this Country there are Beasts called by the Latins Vri, and others
called Alces, besides Buffes, wild Horses, wild Asses, Hearts, Does, (...)
Goats, Boares, Bears, and a great number of such other. Here is great plenty
of Birds, and especially of Linnets Besides in this Country and Moscovia there
is a ravenous devouring beast called Rossemaka, of the bigness of a Dog, in
face like a Cat, in the body and tail resembling a Fox, and being of a black
color. The Nation of the Lithuanians in former years was so unknown and
despised by the Russians, T^^ Ancient Government.
that the Princes of Kiovia did require nothing from them but Corke-trees, and
certain garments as a sign of their subjection in regard of their poverty,
and the barrenness of their soil, until Vithenes Captain of the Lithuanians
growing strong, did not only deny tribute, but having brought the Princes of
Russia into subjection, compelled them to pay tribute. His successors did
invade the neighbor Nations, and by hostile and sudden incursions did spoil
them, until the Teutonick order of the Cross began to war against them, and
to oppress them, which THE DVKEDOME OF LITHVANIA.
LITHUANIA.
map of the Duchy of Lithuania they did even to the days of Olgerdus and
Keystutus Captains of the Lithuanians. But at last ^agello, who afterward was
called Vla^^slaus, was made great Duke of Lithuania. This man being oftentimes
oppressed by those of the order of the Cross, and by Christian Armies, did at
last incline to the Polanders, and having Wh^ (...).
embraced the Christian Religion, and married Hedingi^ the Queen of Polonia,
he was made King of Polonia, committing the government of the Country of
Lithuania to his Cozen German Skirgellon, as to the supreme Duke of Lithuania.
The great Dukedom of Lithuania is now divided into ten special Palatinates or
Provinces, The Cities.
the first whereof is the Palatinate of the Metropolis or chief City Vilna,
which the Inhabitants call Vilenski, but the Germans commonly Die Wild: it was
built at the confluence or meeting of Vilia and Vilna by Duke Gediminus, in the
year 1305: and is the Seat of a Bishop, subject to the Archbishop of Leopolis,
and also of the Metropolitan of Russia, who has seven Bishops under him, that
be of the Greek Religion, as the Bishop of Polocia, Volodomiria, Luca in
Volhinia, Luckzo, Pinsca, near to the River Pripetus, Kiovia, Praemislia, and
Lepolus. Vilna or Wilna is a populous large and famous City, being encompassed
with a wall and gates which are never shut. The Churches thereof for the most
part are built of stone, and some of wood: there is in it a curious Monastery
of the Bernardines, being a famous structure of squared stone: as also the Hall
of the Ruthenians, in which they sell their commodities which are brought out
of Moscovia. The second Palatinate is the Procensian, the Towns whereof are
Grodna by the River Cronus, where Stephen King of Poland dyed. And Lawna at the
confluence of Cronus, and Villia or Willia, also Kowno, Iada, and Vpita. The
third Palatinate is the Minscensian, wherein is the City Minsko, and the
Castle ^^^lanaw, also Radoscowice, Borissow, Lawisko or Liwsko, Swislo^z,
Bobreisko, and Odruck The fourth Palatinate is the Novogrodian, in which is
Novogrodeck, a large City, and built of wood: also Slonim, Wolkowi^z, and many
other Towns. The fifth Palatinate is the Briestian, so called from the City
Briesti, being large, and built of wood, and here is the City of Pinsko. The
sixth is the Palatinate of Volhinia, in which is Luezko, the Seat of a Bishop:
also Voladamire, and Kerzemenesia. The seventh Palatinate is Kiovia, in which
there was heretofore a large and ancient City of the same name, seated by the
River Boristhenes, as the ruins which lie six miles in length do easily
demonstrate. There are also the Towns Circasia or Kerkew, Kamova and Moser.
The eighth is the Palatinate of Miceslow, near to the Rivers Sosa and
Borysthenes in the borders of Moscovie, wherein are the Towns of Miceslaw,
Dubrowna, (...), and Sklow; beside Mohilow, By^how, ^^czycza, and Strissin with
their Castles. The ninth Palatinate is the Witebscian, in which is the City
Witebsk situated by the River Duna, and Orsa, near Borysthenes. The tenth
Palatinate is the Polocensian, which is so called from Poloteska, a City lying
near to the confluence of the River Polota and Duna, between Witsbek and
Livonia: There are also the Towns, Disna, Drissa, and Dr^^^a, with their
Castles. These things being explained, let us speak something of the Rivers of
Lithuania. On the East side Lithuania is bounded with the Rivers Oscol, The
R^^e^s
Ingra, and the lesser Tanais, all which with many others do run into great
Tanais. There is also in Lithuania the River Borysthenes, which arising out of
a plain marish ground, and running through Russia, does vent it self at last
into the Euxine Sea: and the Rivers Wilia and Niemen, the latter whereof
runs a great way with a very crooked winding stream, and at last
disburthens it self into the Prutenick or Finnish Sea: also Duina and other
Rivers, beside Lakes, and standing waters, of which the Country is full, and
all these do afford great plenty of fish, which are very delectable and
pleasant in taste. Moreover the Country is covered with very great and spacious
woods. Sigismund that happy and auspicious King of Poland, The Woods.
did unite the Palatines and Castellans of the Provinces of Lithuania into one
body of a Commonwealth with the Polanders, and did design a certain place
and order in the Senate of the Kingdom, The Senators.
to all the Noble men, Bishops, and Palatines of this Country, so that out of
the Kingdom of Poland, and the Provinces united unto it, there are in the
Senate fifteen Bishops, one and thirty Palatines, thirty of the greater
Castellans or governors of Castles, and fifty of the less, beside those who
are called the Officials of the Kingdom; as the Marshalls, the Chancellours,
the Vicechancellors, and the Treasurers, of which we will speak more largely
in the description of Poland. Their manners
Marriages amongst the Lithuanians are easily dissolved by mutual consent, and
they marry again and again. The wives have openly men-concubines by their
husbands permission, whom they call connubij adjutores, i. helpers in marriage;
but on the contrary, for men to follow whores is counted a reproach. When any
one is condemned to die, he is commanded to punish himself, and to hang
himself with his own hands, which if he refuse to do, he is threatened and
beaten with stripes until he kill himself. Their flocks do afford them
great store of milk for their food. The common bread which they use is very
black, The food.
being made of Rye or Barley together with the branne: but the rich men's bread
is very white, being baked and made of pure Wheat. They seldom use any wine,
for the common people drink water, and such as are of ability drink Ale,
which they brew of diverse sorts of corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, and
Millet, but such as is unsavory. They have abundance of thick and thin Mede
boiled in diverse manners, and with it they make themselves merry, and
oftentimes drunk. Lithuania seems almost to be inaccessible, as being almost
all overflowne with waters: but in Winter there is more convenient trafficking
with the Inhabitants, and the ways are made passable for Merchants, the Lakes
and standing waters being frozen over with ye, and spread over with snow.
Their chief wealth is the skins of beasts, as of Weesills, Foxes, and those
which are more precious, as Martens, and Scythian Weesills. Their commodities.
Of these they make a great profit, as also of their Wax, Honey, Ashes, and
Pitch. The best Wainscot is cut here and brought into Germany through the
Balthick and Germane Sea, and out of this Country all wooden Architecture both
public and private through all Germany, and the Low countries is made, as
also for the most part such wooden housholdstuffe as belongs to houses: but
enough of Luthuania, we will now add something concerning the rest. There
follows in our Title Samogitia (which in their language signifies the Lower
land) the Russians call it Samotzekasemla, Samogitia

The names


it is a Northern Country, and very large, being next to Lithuania, and
environed with Woods and Rivers. On the North it has Livonia, on the West it
is washed with the Balthick or Germane Sea, which is properly called the
Balthick Bay, and toward the Northwest Borussia joyneth unto it. It abounds
with the best, whitest, The fertility of the Soil.
and purest Honey, which is found in every hollow tree. It has no Town nor
Castle; Their manners
the Nobles live in Lodges, the Country people in Cottages. The people of this
Country are of a great and large stature, Their food.
rude in behavior, living sparingly, drinking water, and seldom any drink or
Mede; they knew not until of late the use of Gold, Brass, Iron, or Wine. It
was lawful with them for one man to have many wives, and their father being
dead to marry their stepmother, or the brother being dead to marry his wife.
The Nation is much inclined to Fortune telling and Southsaying. The God which
they chiefly adored in Samogitia was the fire, which they thought to be holy
and everlasting, and therefore on the top of some high mountain the Priest did
continually cherish and keep it in by putting wood unto it. In the third place
is Russia, Russia
by which name in this place we understand the Southern or Blacke-Russia,
whose chief Country is Leopolis or Lemburg built by Leo a Moscovite: it is
famous by reason of the Mart kept there, and the Bishops Seat. The City
Leopolis.
Beside the Country of Leopolis there are three other in this Russia, to wit,
the Country of Halycz, Belz, and Praemislia. In the fourth place is Volhinia,
Volhinia.
which is situate between Lithuania, Podolia, and Russia; The Situation.

The fertility of the Soil.


it abounds with fruits in regard of the fertility of the soil. The
Inhabitants are strong and warlike, and do use the Ruthenian language. This
Country did pertain once to the great Duke of Lithuania, but now it is joined
to the Kingdom of Polonia. It has three divisions, the Lucensian,
Wolodomiriensian, and Cremenecensian, and there are three Provincial Cities,
The Cities.
Lucko, Wolodomiria, and Kerzemenec, which have many Towns and places of
Defense under them. Lakes.
Here are many Lakes and standing waters full of fish, Woods.
and woods full of wild beasts. There is also in this Table Podolia, Podolia.
situated by the River Tyras. It is a most fertile Country, The fertility of
the Soil.
being sowed once, and reaped thrice: the meddowes are so proud and rank, that
the Oxens horns as they graze can scarce be seen above the grass. The Cities
The chief Cities are Camienies, Bar, Medziboz, Brezania, and Braslaw. But let
these things which have been spoken hitherto, suffice concerning this table,
we pass now to Transylvania.

TRANSYLVANIA, OR SIEBENBVRGEN.
TRANSYLVANIA is the mediterranean part of ancient So called from the Daci, the
first Inhabitants, who afterward passing into the Cimbrick Chersonesus were
called Dani.
Dacia, which the Romans called Dacia Ripensis, The names
and it takes its name from the woods and mountains wherewith it is
encompassed, as the Hercynian woods, and the Carpathian hills. It is called
commonly Because it has on the Frontiers thereof 7 Castles for its defense.

The Situation


Septem castra, by a name borrowed from the German word Siebenburgen, and the
Hungarians call it Herdel. On the West it is bounded with Pannonia, on the
North with Polonia, on the South with Walachia, and on the East with Moldavia.
Transylvania is very fruitful, and has great plenty of corn through the
whole Country, which (besides daily experience) that coin of Trajans does
witness, in which Ceres stood, holding in her right hand the horn of the
goat Amalthaea, which signifies plenty; and in her left hand a Table, with
this inscription or motto Abundantia Daciae. i. the abundance of Dacia. The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
It brings forth excellent wine about Alba Iulia, Deva, Egmedine,
Birthilbine, and Fenuscine, It has also great store of fruit, among which (to
omit the rest) it has most excellent Damask Prunes, Quinces, sweet Cherries,
which may be compared with those that grow in Italy, and Mellons. Here are
also excellent choice herbs, which grow in every place, as Rhubarbe, the
greater Centory, Gentiana with a yellow and purple flower, Sea-wormewood, the
herb called Libanotis, saffron, and many others. There are many famous Mines
of Metal in this Country, as Mines of Gold at Sculattin, which the Hungarians
call Zalakna, and at Rimili Dominurdz, which signifies the River or Rivulet of
Lords. In these places great wedges or pieces of gold are cut forth, which as
soon as they are dug out they can presently make use of without any
accurate refining. The Roman pieces of golden coin which are often dug up in
these places, do witness this plenty, for they have on the one side the
image of a man with a broad hat, and with this inscription on it C. Cato, and
on the other side, Dacia in the form of a Goddess, holding a Book in her
right hand with this inscription AVR: PVR. Moreover, there are silver Mines at
Offera and Radna Copper is dug out of the same Mountains, out of which the
gold and silver comes. Steel is dug and found at Cyk, Iron at Thorosco,
and Vaidahuntada: and lastly Sulphur and Antimonie are found in the Copper
Mines. There is such great store of saltpits in Transylvania, that it sends
abundance of salt to other Countries. And there is such a great company of Oxen
in it, The ^arie^^ o^ living Creatures.
that the largest and fairest ones are often sold for a Floren. What shall I
speak of the excellent metall'd horses which it breeds, which amble and pace
naturally? What should I mention the diverse kinds of Birds? as Eagles,
Faulcones, Pheasants, Partridges, Peacocks, Woodcocks, Snipes. And what should
I reckon the water-fowle? as Swans, Bustards and Bitterness, etc. I pass from
these to the wild beasts: for this Country has great Forests, and spacious
woods, in which are Bears, Buffes or wild Oxen, Elkes, Hearts of a large
stature, Leopards, Martins, Does, and white Hares. Diverse Nations heretofore
inhabited this Country, of whom there is yet a remnant in Hungaria, as the
^azyges, called by Pliny Metanastae, beside the Getes, Bastarnians, Sarmatians,
Grecians, Romans, Scythians, Saxons, and Hungarians. The Romans did conquer it,
when the Emperor Trajan overcame Decebalus King of Dacia, and reduced it into
the form of a Province, calling the City Zarmizegethusa after his own name
Vlpia Trajana; The ancient Government.
but Galienus lost it two hundred years after, and from that time the
Inhabitants having laid aside the Roman humanity, speech, and eloquence, began
to resume their former wildenesse and barbarism, calling themselves
Walachians. After the Romans, the Scythians under the conduct of their Captain
Artilas seated themselves in this place, and built seven free Towns. The
Saxons succeeded the Scythians in the time of Charles the great, who forsaking
their Country, seated themselves likewise in these parts, and built themselves
seven free Cities, following the example of the Scythians. The Hungarians came
last, who partly allured with the vicinity and neernesse of the place, mingled
themselves with the Dacians: and afterward being provoked by injuries, they
conquered the whole country, in the reign of Stephen King of Pannonia, whom
they styled the holy. By them some Towns were also built. The mountainous part
of Transylvania was lately subdued by Matthias Huniades, whose surname was
Corvinus, and afterward by Stephen King of Hungary. This Matthias took alive
one Dracula, a Vaivode or Prince of the mountainous Transylvania, a man of
unheard of cruelty, and after ten years imprisonment, restored him to his
former place. Transylvania is now divided into three Nations, differing both in
manners and laws, and inhabiting several parts of the Country: namely into
the Saxons, the Ciculi, and Hungarians: The Saxon Transylvanians, as all other
German Nations, have a peculiar dialect or language unto themselves: they
inhabit the strongest cities and castles, and do excel the other Nations.
They have seven Seats, namely Zarwaria, Zabesia, Millenbach, Rensmarke,
Segesburg or S^hesburg, Ollezna, Schenkerstall, and Reps: all which have some
villages under them. The Ciculi near to Moldavia, being descended from the
Scythians, do live after their own laws and customs, and do distribute
their offices by lot. They are divided into seven Regions, which they call
Seats, the names whereof are, Sepsi, Orbai, Kysdi, Czyk, Gyrgio, Marcus Zeek,
and Aranyas Zeek. The Hungarians and Transylvanian Nobles being mingled with
the Saxons, and the Ciculi do, for the most part, agree with them both in
speech, habit, and armor. All Transylvania is able to set forth ninety
thousand armed men and more. There are seven chief Cities in Transylvania,
having a reasonable distance one from an other, The Cities.
among which Cibinium is the Metropolis or Mother-citie, and is now called
Hermanstat: It is seated on a plain, not shut up with mountains, but spread
into a great breadth. It is not much less than Vienna in Austria, but it is
far stronger both by Art and Nature: for in regard of the many Fish Ponds and
Lakes round about it, no Army TRANSYLVANIA OR SIEBENBVRGEN.
TRANS:SYLVANIA
map of Transylvania can come unto it 2, (...)
Brasso or Corona, which the Germans call Cronstat, and is sometimes called
Stephanopolis, being seated amongst pleasant mountains, and fortified with
Walls, Ditches, and Rampires. Here is a famous Universitie and Library. 3,
Bistricia or Noesenstat, which is seated on the plain of a large valley, and
has on either side hills full of Vines. 4, Segoswar o^ S^hespurg, which is
partly situated on a hill, and partly at the foot thereof. 5, (...) Pt^l^mie
(...).
Megies or M^dwisch, which is situated in the midst of Transylvania, being
fruitful in wine, and stored with all commodities that are either gainefull or
necessary for food. 6, (...) Millenb^^^
Zabesium or Zaaz, which lies in a plain and deep valley, encompassed with
waters full of fish. They say that this was the first seat of the Saxons 7,
(...)
Coloswar or Clausenburg, which is likewise sweetly seated in a plain, and is
beautified not only with fair walls without, but with stately buildings
within. Here is also Alba Iulia or We^senberg, an ancient city, and a Bishops
Seat, it is situated on a steep hill, which has a large plain spreading it
self round about it. It has on the East the River M^^^, and on the other side
the River called in the Hungarian language ^^^ay, which descends from the
Alps. Heretofore it was called T^^^, and in Trajans time it was the Palace
of King Decebalus. As tou^ching the payments of taxes and tributes, there are
in Transylvania eight principal circles or divisions of ground called
Chapters, all which together they call the Universitie, as first the
Bist^^ensian Chapter, which has in it Bistricia with 23 royal Towns. 2, The
Regne^sian Chapter, which has more than 30 Towns. 3, The Bar^ensian Chapter,
which has the city Corona, with thirteen royal Towns. 4, The Kisde^sian
Chapter, which has Segesburg, and eight and forty towns. 5, The Chapter
called the chapter of two Seats, which does contain the city of M^^ie^ with
six and thirty towns. There are two Chapters of the Cibinian^, one of which
contains Cibinium, and three and twenty towns, and the other which they call
Surrogative, contain about 22 Villages. Last of all, the Zabesensian Chapter,
which has Zabesium with seventeene Villages. This Country has many Lakes and
standing waters, (...)
which are full of excellent fish. There are in it three navigable Rivers, (...)
Aluta, Morus, called also Marus and Marisus) and Samu^: the two former arising
out of the Scythian Mountains, the last of them falls into Tibiscus, the
other runs straight forward into Danubius* Samus (which the Germans and
Hungarians call Thimes) arises out of the Alps called Colota, and likewise
slideth into Tibiscus. There are also ^ther Rivers, as Kockel the Greater and
the Less, Sabesus, Chrysus, Chry^^^^os, and Strygius, etc. the three last
whereof have little grains or land of gold in them, and do sometimes bring
down pieces of gold of half a pound weight. Diverse kinds of excellent fish
are found in them, and the aforesaid Rivers, as namely the greater and lesser
Sturgeon, three kinds of Carpes, the Salmon, the River and Lake-Lamprey, the
fish called Silurus, the Mullet, an other rare kind of Lamprey, the white and
black Trout, the scaly Gudgeons, and those that have no scales, unknown to
other places: besides Pikes, Perches, Tenches, and the common Lamprey, all
which are found there and of a great size. There are Mountains near unto
Walachia Cisalpina and Moldavia, which do produce Agarick and Turpentine
Trees. The Wood^
There are many woods in Transylvania, and amongst the rest Hercynia, in which
besides the wild beasts abovementioned, there are wild Oxen and Horses,
whose manes do reach even to the ground. (...)
There are also in this Country many Castles well fortified: among which the
chief is called the Red Castle, being a strong defense, and seated on the
Alps, near to a running stream, where there is a straight passage between
the Mountains into the Country, and it is, as it were, the fortress thereof,
so that no one can enter into it on that side, if the Governor of the castle
bar up the way. There is also an other fortified castle beneath the Town
Millenbach near unto the Town Bros, where also near unto the River, there is
a way leading into Transylvania between the vales and snowie Alps. Now it
follows that we should add something concerning their manners which are
diverse and various, because (as we said before) it was formerly possessed by
diverse Nations, and is still at this day. The people of Walachia are rude,
Their manner^
and ignorant of good Arts and Disciplines, they are of the Greek Religion,
but their manners and customs savor of Paganism, in regard that they much
esteem of Oracles, swear by Jupiter and Venus whom they call Holy, and in
many other things come near unto the customs of the Gentiles. They have no
Towns, or brick-houses, but do live in the woods and forests, having no
defense against the violence of the weather but a few reeds, or cottages of
reeds. The other part of Transylvania in most places is of a more fruitful
soil, and the people are more civilized, and of a better behavior. The
Scythians speech in Transylvania differs little from the Hungarian speech at
this day, though heretofore they differr'd much both in speech and writing, for
they (like the Hebrews) did begin to write from the right hand to the left.
The Ciculi are a fiery and warlike kind of people, among whom there are no
Nobles or Rusticks, but all of them are of one rank. The Hungarians have great
power and authority above all the rest. And let so much suffice to have been
spoken briefly concerning Transylvania.

TAVRICA CHERSONESVS.
THis CHERSONESVS was so called by Ptolemie from the Tauri a certain people of
Scythia in Europe. Strabo calls it the Scythian Chersonesus. Pliny in his 2
Book and 96 chapter calls it, The names.
after the Latins, the Peninsula of the Taurians. Appianus calls it the
Pontick Chersonesus, and Paulus Diaconus calls it Stephanus says it has
been called by others Taunais, Alope^ia, and Maotis.
Chersenesa. At this day it is called Precopska, and Gesara by Antonius
Pineti^. It is a large Peninsula, stretched out toward the East, between the
Euxine Sea, and the Maeotick Lake, even to the Cimmerian Bosporus which divides
Europe from Asia. It has a gentle winter, and most temperate Air. For at the
end of December winter begins, and is at the sharpest or coldest in the
middle of February, as having then most snow, The Situation.

The temper of the Air.


which yet lies not above three days when the cold and frost is most
constant. The Winter never lasts longer than the beginning of March. All the
whole Country is very fruitful, The fertility of the S^^le.
and very fit for feeding flocks of cattle. Yet albeit the Inhabitants have a
fertile soil: many of them do not till their fields nor Sow them. They have
abundance of Horses, Camels, Oxen, Kine, and Sheep, on which they live. The
variety of living Creatures.
There are also great store of dainty foul, which oftentimes the Christians,
and Turks, and sometimes the Polanders, that come thither as strangers, are
wont to take. There is much hunting of Hearts, Goats, Boares and Hares, both in
the Tartarian and Turkish Dominions near the Sea. This Chersonesus has hard
and rugged mountains, that running through the middle of it do divide it into
the Northern and Southern part; as the Apennine Mountain does divide Italy.
Mahomet in the year 1475 did possess the Southern part, and made it
tributarie to himself. But in the Northern part the Tartars wandering in the
broad fields between Borysthenes and Tanais, and continually changing their
places of feeding their cattle, The ancient Government.
possessed the Town called Crim as a royal Seat, and from thence they were
called Crim Tartars. Afterward having cut through the Isthmus of the Taurick
Chersonesus, when, near unto the Ditch which they call Praecop, they built a
City a royal Seat of the same name, they were from thence called
Praecopenses. The King of these Tartars, when being joined in league and
society with the Turks, he had at their request banished his own brother,
who made war against him, and had besieged Capha, at last both himself and
his two young sons were cut in pieces by his Counselors, whom he had with
large gifts corrupted for the aforesaid purpose, and so gave an unhappie
example of the Ottoman friendship. For he being slain, the Tartarians, who
were hitherto free, untamed, and companions and brethren to Ottoman were now
made servants, and after the manner of the other Turkish Provinces were
compelled to receive and acknowledge not a King but a Beglerbeg, that is a
Viceroy to govern TAVRICA CHERSONESVS.
Taurica Chersonesus
map of Crimea them. But the Turkish Empire may be easily known by the
Descriptions of Wallachia, Greece and the Turkish Empire, and therefore for
brevities sake we refer the Reader thither. Besides Cazan and Astrachan
which are Kingdoms belonging to the Tartarians, who do till fields, dwell in
houses, The Cities and Towns
and at this day are subject to the Moscovite, and besides the aforesaid
Praecopenses, there are other Field- Tartars, who live in the fields in great
companies, observing no limits, and of these we will speak in their proper
place, to wit, in the Tables of Asia. In the Southern part of this Chersonesus
is the Metropolis, Capha, heretofore called Theodosia, a famous Mart-towne,
being the ancient Colonie of the Genois. It is situate near the Sea. And has
a fair Haven. It seems that in the time of the Genois it was very populous.
But when the Turks almost two hundred years since, in the time of Mahomet the
Great took it from them, the Italians were reduced to such a strait, that
there are few tokens remaining of their being there: for the City has for the
most part lost her former beauty. The Italian Churches are thrown down, the
houses decayed, and the walls and Towers on which the Genois colors and
ensigns were placed, with Latin Inscriptions, are fallen to ruin. It is now
inhabited by Turks, Armenians, Jews, Italians, and a few Grecian Christians;
It is famous for traffic as being the chief Haven of the Chersonesus, and
has an infinite company of Vine-yards, Orchards, and Gardens. Besides this
town there is Perecopia called by the ancient Greeks Eupatoria, Pompeiopolis,
Sacer Lucus, Dromon Achillis, Graecida, Heraclium or Heraclia.* Also Cos^ovia a
famous Mart-towne, and I^germenum, having a stone Castle, beneath which is a
Church, and many Caves, that with great labor and pains are cut and hewed out
of a rock, for this town is seated on a great high Mountain, and takes its
name from those Turkish Caves. It was heretofore a fair Town and full of
wealth and riches. Here is Chersonesus Corsunum or Cherso, which is the
ancientest city of Taurica. This the Turks called Saci Germenum, as it were,
the Yellow Castle, for this Country has a kind of yellow soil. The
admirable and wondrous mines of this place do testify that it was heretofore a
proud, rich, delicate, and famous Colonie of the Grecians, and the most ancient
city of the whole Peninsula, being much frequented, magnificent, and having a
fair Haven. Here is the Castle and Town of Iamboli or Balachium, Ptolemie
calls this City Taph^os and Pliny Taphra.
Mancopia or Mangutum (as the Turks call it) and the Town of Cercum with a
Castle. Here is the city and castle of Cremum, which the Tartars call Crim,
having an ancient wall very strong and high, and in regard of its largeness it
is far unlike the other cities of the Taurick Chersonesus. And in the utmost
part of this Country is the city Tanas near the mouth of the River Tanais,
the Russians call it Azac. It is a famous Mart-towne, unto which Merchants do
come out of diverse parts of the world, for that every one has here free
access, and free power to buy or sell. There are many great Rivers in this
Country, running down out of the Mountains. The chiefest whereof is
Borysthenes, commonly called Nieper a deep and swift River which runs from
the North into the river Carcinites or Hypaciris, now called Desna, The Rivers.
and so into the Euxine Sea near the Town Oczacow. Also Don or Tanais, Ariel,
Samar that runs into Don, with many others. The This Strait is called by
Martianus, O^ Maeotid^^; by Marcellinus, Pat^res Angustia; by the Italian^,
B^^cadi S* Iovanni, by Castaldu^, S^^t^^d^ Cassa; and by the Tartars Vo^per^.
Cimmerian Bosphorus, to which this Chersonesus (as we said before) is
extended. It is a narrow Sea two miles broad, which divides Europe from Asia,
and by which the Maeoticke Lake does ^low into the Euxine Sea. It is called
from the Cimmerians who dwell upon the coldest part thereof, or from the town
Cimmerium as Volaterranus would have it. The This L^ke is called commonly
Mardelle S^b^^^he by the Italians Mard^lla Tana, and by the Arabians Ma^^l
Aza^h.

The Se^.


Maeotick Lake is near the mouth of Phasis (commonly called Fasso, and by the
Scythians Phazzeth) receiving Tanais into it. The Scythians call it Temerenda,
that is, the mother of the Sea, as Dionysius witnesses, because much water
flows from thence through the Cimmerian Bosphorus into it, as also much from
other places, which does so replenish and fill the Lake, that the banks
thereof can hardly contain it. This Lake in regard it receives many rivers,
abounds with fish. There is also the This sea is called by some, mare
Boreale, by Claudianu^, Po^tus Amazonius; by Flaccus, ^out^^^ S^ythicu^* by
Fe^^us Avienus, Pontus Ta^^^^us: by Herodotu^, and O^osius, Mare Cammerium: by
Stra^o, Mare C^l hi^: by Apolonius, lib. 4 Mare Canchasium* by Ta^^^tus, Mare
Pen^^cum: by A^^st^d^^. Mare P^astan^^* by Ovid, M^re Sa^^^ati^um: by the
G^th^s, Tanais: by the Italians, Mar^ Ma^o^e: by the Greeks, Ma^roth^laffa: by
Lucian, Pontu^ Niger: and by the Turks, Carade^is.

The mountains.

The manner of government.

The Senators.


Euxine Sea, the upper part of whose water is sweet, and the nether part salt.
This being heretofore called the Axine, and according to Sophocles the Apoxine
Sea, because no Ships could arrive here, or in regard of the barbarous Scythian
borderers who killed strangers, they afterward called the Euxine, by the figure
which they call Euphemismus. But they called it Pontus as if it were another
Ocean, for they supposed that those who sailed on it did perform some great
and memorable act. And therefore says Strabo, they called it (...), Pontus, as
they called Homer the Poet. There are many rugged and steep mountains in this
Chersonesus, especially those which run through the middle thereof. The
greatest and highest of them has a great Lake on the top of it. But so much
hitherto concerning these things. Now let us proceed to other matters. Justice
is administered among the Tartarians by the Law of Mahomet in the Cities and
Towns of the Chan, and the other Sultanes. They have their Priests, their
Judges in their Towns, and their Begi or Praefects, who do hear and decide
private injuries. But the Chan himself with his Counselors does judge of
capital matters, as murder, and theft. In declaring whereof they need no
Lawyer, neither do they use the subtlety thereof, nor excuses, or prolonging
matters by delay. For the meanest of the Tartarians or strangers do freely
declare their own wrongs and grievances before the Judges, and the Chan
himself, by whom they are quickly heard and dispatched. They instruct their
sons when they are children in the Arabicke language, they do not keep their
daughters at home, but deliver them to some of their kindred to be brought up.
When their sons come to ripeness of years they serve the Chan or the
Sultans, and when their daughters are marriageable, they marry them to some of
the chief Tartars or Turks. The best of the Tartars in the Princes Court go
civilly and decently in their apparel, not for ostentation or pride, but
according as necessity and decency requires. When the Chan goes abroad in
public, the poorest men may have access unto him, who when he sees them does
examine them what their wants and necessities are, and whence they did arise.
The Tartarians are very obedient to the Laws: and they adore and reverence
their Princes like Gods. Their Judges according to Mahomets Law are accounted
spiritual men, and of undoubted equity, integrity, and faithfulness. They
are not given to Controversies, Lawsuits, private discord, envy, hatred,
Their manners.
or to any wanton excess either in diet or apparel. In the Princes Court,
none wear Swords, Bows, or other weapons, except it be Travelers, or
strangers that are going on some journey, to whom they are very kind and
hospitable. The chief men eat bread and flesh, drinking also burnt Wine and
Metheglin, Their food.
but the Country people want bread, using instead thereof ground Millet
tempered with milk and water, which they commonly call Cassa. They use cheese
instead of meat, and their drink is mares milk. They kill also for their
food Camels, Horses and Oxen when they are ready to dye or are grown
unserviceable, and they often feed on the flesh of sheep. Few of them do use
Mechanicke Arts in the Cities and Towns, few do use Merchandising, and those
Artificers or Merchants that are found there, Their trading and traffic.
are either slaves to the Christians, or else they are Turks, Armenians,
Jews, Cercesians, Petigorians who are Christians, Philistines, or Cynganians,
all men of the lowest rank. But let this which has been spoken suffice
concerning the Taurick Chersonesus, and the Northern Countries. Let us pass
to the Description of Spain, which we have placed next, and take a view
thereof.

THE DESCRIPTION OF SPAIN.
SPAIN is a chief Country of Europe, and the first part of the Continent, it
was so called, as Iustine notes from King Hispanus. The names and whence so
called.
Some would have it so called from Hispalis a famous City, which is now called
Sevill. But Abraham Ortelius, a man very painful in the study of Geographie,
when he had read (in the Author that treats of Rivers and Mountains,
following the opinion of Sosthenes in his third Book,) that Iberia now called
Georgia, a Country of Asia, was heretofore called Pania from Panus, whom
Dionysius (having conquered the Country) made Governor over the Iberians, and
that from thence Modern Writers did call it Spain: moreover when he had
observed that almost all Writers did derive the first Inhabitants of Spain
from Iberia, he was induced to believe that the Country was so called rather
from that Spain, than from Hispanus or Hispalis. This opinion is the more
probable for that Saint Paul does call this Country Spania, in his Epistle to
the Romans, The Situation.
chap. 15. verse 28. as does also Saint Jerome, and many others. So called from
the Cantabri, a people of Spain who inhabited upon the coasts thereof.
But that which the Latin Writers call Hispania, and Ptolemie, Stephanus, and
others, do call Ispania, leaving out the aspiration, Strabo, Pliny, and others
do testify that in ancient times it was called Iberia and Hesperia. It was
called Iberia from Iberia a Country of Asia, The Atlanticke Ocean, though it
be sometimes taken for the whole Ocean, yet it is taken properly for that Sea
which washes Europe and Africa upon the West. It is called by Ptolemie Mare
occiduum and exterius, by Florus Mare externum* and the Arabians call it Magrib.
from whence many do derive the first inhabitants of Spain, though some do
fetch the word Iberia from King Iberus, others from the River Iberus, and
Avienus from Ibera a Town in Baetica or Andaluzia. Some report that it was
called Hesperia from Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as Horace thinks from
Hesperia the daughter of Hesperus, or rather from Hesperus the Evening-starre,
under which it was supposed to be situated, because it is the farthest Country
Westward of the whole Continent of Europe. And seeing Italy might have the
same name, Horace calls this Hesperia ultima. Appian reports that it was
heretofore called Celtiberia, which yet is rather to be thought a part of
Spain heretofore called Celtica, as Varro witnesses. Gulielmus Postellus, and
Arias Montanus, in his commentaries upon Obadiah, do note that the Hebrews
did call it Sepharad: and so much concerning the name; the Quantity and
Quality follows. The Quantity does consist in the bounds and circuit
thereof, So called from two Islands in the Mediterranian Sea, named Majorca and
Minorca, but anciently both of them Bal^ares.
and in the form and figure which arises from thence. Concerning the bounds
of Spain, the Ocean does wash two sides thereof, the North side the Cantabrian
Ocean, and the West the Atlanticke. The Iberian or Balearicke Sea does beat on
the South side, where is the Bay of Hercules, and on the East it has the
Pyrenaean Mountains running along with one continued ridge from the Ocean,
(where stands Flaviobriga, at this day called Funtarabia) even to the
Mediterranean Sea. Hence it is that they make two famous Promontories, the one
called Called by Ptolemy, Ocaso; by Mela, ^asen, by Martianus. Iarse; by
^^^a^o, Idanu^.
Olarso, which shoots out into the Ocean, the other which taking its name
heretofore from the Temple of Venus, but now called Cape de Creus, does jet out
into the Mediterranean Sea. The utmost length of Spain is 200 Spanish miles:
the breadth where it is broadest is 140 miles, and where it is narrowest it is
60. Johannes Vasaeus in his Chronicle of Spain does report, that Spain is so
narrow at the Pyrenaean Hills, that when he traveled over them, on the
Mountain of Saint Adrian, he saw the Sea on either side: namely, the Ocean
which was next unto him, and a far of as far as he could see, he discerned
the white waves of the Mediterranean Sea. They suppose that the whole compass
thereof is 2480 miles. Ptolemy, Strabo and others do compare Spain to an
Oxe-hide stretched out on the ground, the neck whereof is extended toward
France, which cleaves unto it. The neck I say, which reaches in breadth as
far as the Pyrenaean Mountains, from the Mediterranean Sea, to the British
Ocean: the fore part of it is stretched from New Carthage even to the
Cantabrians, and the hinder part from Hercules Bay, to Gallicia and the
British Sea* that which represents the tail of the hide, is the This
Promontorie some have called Sacrum ^ugam* and others Caput Europ^* ^ the head
of Europe.
Holy Promontorie called at this day Saint Vincents Promontorie, which
stretches it self out into the Atlanticke Ocean, far beyond any other part
of Spain. Spain is under the middle of the fourth, all the fifth, and part of
the sixth Climats, where there is an excellent temper for the producing of all
things. For it is neither scortched with the violent heat of the Sun as
Afric, nor troubled with daily winds as France; but lying between them both,
The temper of the Air.
it has a temperate Winter and Summer. Hence it is (as Iustine witnesses)
that Spain has a very wholesome air, the equal temper thereof being never
infected with Moorish fogges. Beside the cool blasts of wind which come from
the Sea, and do as it were search all parts of the Country, do drive away all
earthly vapors, and so make it very healthful. Yet all parts of Spain are
not of one quality, for toward the North, as it is something cold and
obnoxious to the Sea, so it wants fresh water, and therefore affords no
convenient habitation: especially, seeing the most parts of it are full of
Rocks, Forests, and woody places. Toward the South where it extends it
self in a continued ridge of Mountains, The fertility of the Soil.
it has a happy and good soil, being watered with many great Rivers, and
refreshed with seasonable rain, so that it brings forth fruits of all
kinds. It is not only a bountiful mother, but also a nourisher and breeder
of living Creatures. It is very fruitful not only in producing those things
which do grow out of the earth, but also those things which are generated and
hidden in the bowels thereof: who can reckon up the excellent living
creatures, which are bred on the Land and in the Sea? There is great plenty of
fruits through all Spain, and most of the fields are so fertile, that they
return unto the husbandmen thirty bushels for one that is sowed, and
oftentimes forty. It produces many herbs as well unsowed as sowed, which have
sovereign virtues in them, especially in mountanous places; where differing
from the other parts, it brings forth Hemp, and has more store of fruit,
and fairer. There are two sorts of apples in this Country, which THE
DESCRIPTION OF SPAIN.
HISPANIA
map of Iberian peninsula (Spain, Portugal) are chief note, the wrinckled
apple, and the King apple. Also there are four special sorts of Pears, sweet
both in taste and smell, the Apian and honey-peares; the pear called Muscatum,
being the least of all kind of pears, the wine-peare, and the pear called by
some Pintum, and by the Spaniards Sine Regula. What should I mention the Olives
that are here? amongst which those are the best which come from Hispalis, and
are far bigger than any Wallnuts. What should I speak of other fruits? The
Lemmons and Orenges that grow here are commended by all men: the Quince-peare
which they commonly call Membrillos and Pomegranats that are good for medicine,
are here in great abundance. What should I speak of the Wines of this Country,
having an excellent taste and smell, and being made in all parts, yet in some
places better than in other? Spain was heretofore (as now also) rich in mines
of Gold, Brass, Iron, Lead, and other metals: and it does not only boil
and make salt, but in some parts thereof it is dug out of the Earth. For as
it is made in many places in Spain of pit or Well-water, as at Seguntia and
elsewhere, insomuch that the King sets a great custom thereon, so there are
Mountains (if we may believe Marineus Siculus) which have native salt in them.
Besides, Spain is rich and plentiful in all kind of Cattle, so that the
Woods, Mountains, Meddowes, Fields, and Forests do resound with their
bleating and lowing. It breeds the best horses: Baetica breeds more than
other parts: Asturia breeds the strongest, and Spanish Gennets are called
Asturcones. In some parts of Spain there are bred those that are of such
swiftness and and agilitie, that antiquity did fabulously believe that they
were begotten by the wind. It has no Lions, Camells, or Elephants, except
those that be brought from other places, but there are great store of Does, The
variety of living creatures
Hearts, Boares, Bears, Hares, and Cunnies, which do afford them much game and
sport in hunting of them. Haec sane docet versiculus Catulli,
Cuniculesae Celtiberiae sili.
These things Catullus verse
Does unto thee declare
O son of Celtiberia where
So many Cunnies are.
There are in Spain (besides other birds which invite them to fowling)
Eagles, Hernes, Hawks, and the bird called Atta, first brought out of Sicilie,
also Cranes, Geese, Partridges, ring-Doves, wild and tame Ducks, etc. But of
these things enough: I come now to the Government, which is the next point to
be spoken of, according to the order of our method. I do not purpose here to
weary the Reader by reckoning up out of Iustine, Diodorus, Josephus, Eusebius,
Hierome, Berosus, and his Translatour Annius Viterbiensis, the ancient Kings of
Spain, and their achievements both at home and abroad. Tubal never was in
Spain, nor in Europe, The Government.
but lived in Asia. Neither are Iberus, Iubalda, Brygus, Tagus, Baetus, and
others to be accounted as Kings thereof, unless we will grant that Kings in
ancient time, were borne of Rivers and other inanimate things. Again, the
Catalogue of the Kings succeeding them, is no better than fabulous, as also
those things be which the Lydians, the Thracians, Rhodians, Phrygians,
Cyprians, Phoenicians, Egyptians, Milesians, Carians, Lesbians, and Chaldaeans
are reported to have performed successively in this country. But those things
are more certain, which Writers have recorded were heretofore achieved by the
Carthaginians, Roman^, Goths, Vandals, Alani, Swethlanders, Huns, and their
Kings, for that the Writers of them were either present at those actions, or
else came to the knowledge of them by the faithful relation of others. Of
these things therefore I will speak briefly, and thus it was. When the
Carthaginians did rule all Spain, and had all things under their own command,
the Senate and people of Rome did send first of all the two Scipioes against
them with an army of Soldiers, in the beginning of the second Punick war*
who were slain in the seventh year of that war, Q. Fulvius Flaccus and Ap.
Claudius Pulcher being Consuls. The next year P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus
being sent next to his Father and Uncle, did perform many things very
prosperously, and first of all made a Province of it, Q. Caecilius Metellus,
and L. Veturius Philo being Consuls. First, Asdrubal and Mago Carthaginian
Captains, being overthrown and put to flight in the battle, near to the
City Baetula (which is supposed to have been in that place where now Baeca and
Vbeda are seated) and the Spanish Armies beaten out of Spain, he established
a league of friendship with Syphax King of the Massilians, who is now called
Biledulgerid; a little after he compelled the rebellious people of Spain to
yield themselves unto him, and having made a league with Massanissa King of the
Masaesulians, and the Gaditanes, he committed the government of the Province
to L. Lentulus and L. Manlius Acidinus, and returned to Rome. After Scipio, L.
Cornelius Lentulus the Proconsul did govern Spain, and after many prosperous
acts and achievements, entered the City in triumph. Three years after, C.
Cornelius, Cethegus, and Minucius Rufus being Consuls, the two Spaines were
first bounded, and two new Pretors sent into them, C. Sempronius Tuditanus into
the hither Spain, and M. Helvetius Blasio into the farther. Two years being
scarcely past, so great a war began in Spain, that it was necessary, that a
Consul should be sent out with an Army: Marcus Portius Cato Consul being
allotted to go into the hither part, did so appease and quiet rebellion, that
the Proconsul in regard thereof triumphed. This is that Cato, who, as Livie
writes and others, by a wonderful stratagem, did throw down the walls of many
Spanish Cities in one day. After Cato's victory, Spain was diversely
possessed, and many times lost and regained again, so that there were above 30
triumphs for victories obtained here. They did not begin to pay any tax,
before the time of Augustus Caesar, who having by long continuance of wars
tamed all Spain, and overthrown the Cantabrians and Asturians that had
longest of all made resistance, divided the whole Country into three
Provinces, Baetica, so called from the River Batis, Lusitania, and
Tarraconensis, so called from its city Tarracon; and every one of these have
their Diocesses or Circles of jurisdiction. In Baetica there are four
Diocesses Gaditana, Cordubensis, Astigitana, and Hispalensis. Lusitania has
three Diocesses, Emeritensis, Pacensis, and Scalibitana. Lastly, Tarraconensis
has seven, Carthaginensis, Tarraconensis, Caesar Augustana, Cluniensis,
Astura, Lucensis, and Bracarensis (See Pliny lib. 3. Strab. lib. 3. and
others.) Thus things by degrees being changed, the chiefest Provinces were
under the Romans command, even until the Consulship of Honorius the third, and
Theodosius the third. At which time the Vandals, Suevi, and Alani being called
into France by Stilico, when once (having passed the Rhene) they had set foot
in France, being in a barbarous manner spoiled by the Goths, and the Kings
Adolphus and Vallia, whom the Emperor Honorius had sent to aid and set France
at liberty, they passed at last over the Pyrenaean Hills. Afterward the Goths
inhabiting France, for many years possessed Spain, having taken it from the
Romans; for being assailed by the Frankes, they again made war upon the
Vandals. The Frankes drove the Goths out of France, and the Goths drove the
Vandals and Alani out of Spain. At which time the Vandals and Alani being
called by Boniface into Africa, which he governed for the Emperor, left
Spain to the possession of the Goths. When the Goths, having driven out the
Roman Garrisons, had made Spain their own, and had a long time Kings of their
own who ruled in it, at length they were overthrown in a great battle by the
A rose chief Captain was o^^ ^a^is, who overthrow Ro^^ri^^ and his (...),
consisting of ^^000 foot, and 35000 horse.
Arabian Saracens, and King Who having sent Julian on an embassage ^o the
Moors in Africa, in the mean time deflo^^ed his Daughter Cana; to revenge
which m^a^^e (...).
Roderick being killed, they lost almost all Spain. Those that survived after
the battle, when they had fortified themselves in the Mountains of the
Astures, Cantabrians, and Galicians, by little and little they began to recover
the Countries, Cities, and Castles which they had lost. At last the Saracens
party growing weak in Baetica Hispania, and the Goths having recovered all
Spain, they again were overcome by Ferdinand Catholic King of Aragon, and
thrust out of Spain, so that the whole Country returned and came again into
the hands of the ancient Lords thereof. But whereas in the times of the Moors,
five Kings, namely of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugal, of Granada, and Navarre
did possess Spain, at this day Philip the fourth, son unto Philip the
third, who was Nephew unto the Emperor Charles the fifth is sole King thereof.
It was heretofore diversely divided. The Romans first divided it into the Hither
and Farther Spain. They called that the Hither part which was nearest unto the
chief City and the principal Countries of the Empire, being situated
between the River Iberus and the Pyrenaean Mountains: they called that the
Farther part which lay more remote, being stretched out beyond Iberus even to
the Ocean. In following times we read that Spain was divided into six
parts, Tarraconensis, Carthaginensis, Lusitania, Galicia, Baetica, and
Tingitana beyond the narrow Sea in Africa. In the time of the Moors there were
many Kingdoms in Spain, which were afterward divided into five, as the
Kingdom of Castile, of Aragon, of Portugal, of Granada, and Navarre. But now
by a new distribution the whole Empire is divided into three Kingdoms, namely
of Aragon, Castile, and Portugal. Under the Kingdom of Aragon is contained,
besides Aragon, Catalonia, Valentia, Majorica. Under the Kingdom of Castile
are comprehended Biscay, Leon, Asturia, Galicia, Estremadura, Andalusia,
Granada, Murcia, and both the Castiles, with the Canarie-Ilands. Under the
Kingdom of Portugal is comprehended, besides Portugal, Algarbia. The Cities
which are in the whole Kingdom are almost innumerable. The chief of them are
Hispalis, Madrid, Tarraco, Lisbon, The names of the Cities.
Granada, Pampilona, Valentia, Barcino, commonly called Barzelona. The seventh
German Legion now called Leon, S. Lucar, Corduba, Nebrissa, Compostella,
Toledo, Salamanca, Complutum, Pintia, Caesar-Augusta, now Saragossa, Asturica
Augusta, and many others. Here are admirable Lakes: near the town Beiara is
a commodious and wonderful Lake, which breeds Turtles, being a black kind
of Fish, but excellent in taste; and, as Marineus Siculus witnesses,
prognosticating and foretelling of rain and storms to come, by the great
noise which they make, so that the sound thereof is heard like the roaring of a
Bull, eighteen miles thence. The Lakes.
There is a certain Lake on the very top of the Mountain Stella, as Vasaeus
writes, in which fragments and pieces of Ships are found, when notwithstanding
it is more than 12 leagues distant from the Sea: and the same Author notes,
that the Inhabitants do affirm, that it boyleth, and is tempestuous, as often
as the Sea is rough or unquiet. The most diligent Writer Suetonius says, in
his Description of the life of Galba, that thunder fell down into the Lake of
Cantabria, and that afterward twelve axes were found therein: There is also the
pleasant Lake which Pliny mentions lib. 3. Nature. histor. cap. 3. not far
from Valentia, at this day it is called Albu^era. The Rivers follow. Spain is
watered every where with many Rivers, there are some who reckon an hundred and
fifty, and over them 700 Bridges, the chief whereof is the Bridge of Segovia
and Alcantara. There is in this Kingdom the River which Ptolemie calls Iberus,
and now is called Ebro, it breaks forth in Cantabria out of the Mountain
Idubeda, with two fountains or spring-heads, that on the right hand in the
Aucensian wood called Monte d'Oca, the other on the left hand near a Town
which the Inhabitants call Fuentibre: and so increasing with the receipt of
great Rivers, being first entertained in the fields of Calaguris, it runs
unto and visits Iuliobriga and Tudella, two Towns of Navarre, and then it
waters Iulia, Bolsa, and Caesar-Augusta. Departing thence, it glideth
Southward, and by and by Northeastward, by the people of Laletania, now called
Galetani, and the rich City Toriosa. At last being enlarged with many Rivers
flowing into it, and having run almost four hundred miles forward in length,
it enters so violently with two mouths into the Mediterranean Sea, that
having thrust it self 50 paces thereinto, yet the water is sweet and fresh.
This River is called also Doria, Duria^, Dorius, and commonly Dueto.
Durius is the greatest River in Spain, because so many Rivers do run into
it that it would be too tedious to reckon them up, it flows out of the
Mountain Idubeda, where it is called Sierra de Cocolo, it divides the
Vectones from the Asturians, and the Portugalls from the ancient Gallicians.
And having viewed the Tower Sullana, called Tordesillas, Salabris, Miranda, and
other Towns forty English miles beneath Lamego, near to a Town of Portugal
which is called Porto, with a violent course, it does mingle it self with the
Western Ocean. The River which Ptolemie and others call Tagus, arises in the
high cliffes of the Mountain Orospeda, some fifty furlongs from a little
town which is called Tragacet, not far from the City Concia, now called
Guensa. And gliding by the Which is a people which inhabit the Country of
Toledo.
Carpetan^, it visits Toledo, the royal city, and having a bridge there
over it, it waters the noted fair Cities of Talavera, Augustobroga,
Alcantara, and others, and so cutting almost through the middle of Portugal,
it discharges it self into the West Ocean beyond Lisbone, by a mouth or
outlet (as some observe) which is seven miles and an half broad. The
Inhabitants at this day call this River Tato. The Portugalls Tejo. The River
Tagus having sands mingled with gold, as Solinus in his Polyhistor, and
Isiodorus Lib. 13. Etymolog. cap. 21. do witness, has been preferred before
all the other Rivers of Spain* Emanuel Henricus, a man worthy of belief, does
affirm in Ortelius, that it has at this day golden sands, as also many other
Rivers of Portugal. And Pomponius does testify, that it has great store of
Fish, Oysters, and Pearls in it. The river Anas well known to the Latin and
Greek Writers takes its original out of the great Lakes, in Laminitania, as
Pliny writes Lib. 3. Naturalis Histor. cap. 1. now called Campo de Montiel,
and gliding by the A people of Tar^ace^ensi Hispania.
Oretam, near to a Town, which the Spaniards call Cagnamanus, and so to
Metallina where Vitellius pitched his Tent, as the ancient inscriptions of the
place do show, it hides it self at last in the bowels of the Earth, though
Georgius of Austria Provost of Harlebeck does witness in Ortelius, that this
is rather a common opinion, than true, and by and by after it has run some
15 miles, as if it rejoiced to have many new births, as Pliny says, breaking
forth near Villaria, and having run and glided by Meri^la (where it has a
long stone bridge over it) and other Cities toward the South, it ^owleth it
self into the Sea near the Castle of Marin. The Spaniards call it at this day
Rio Guadiana, by borrowing a word from the Arabians, for with them Guad
signifies a river. The river which Ptolemie calls B^tis does arise near
Castaon out of the mountain Orospeda, as Strabo and Stephanus do write, and
out of that part thereof which is called Sierra^ Alcaraz. This river running
Westward from its fountain, and gliding by Corduba and other towns, at last
declineth Southward toward Sevill and with a large mouth (being one league over
but full of slatts and sands) discargeth and emptieth it self into the
Atlanticke Sea not far from Caliz. Here is a fair river which the ancients
called Auro, and Olivetis, Strabo and Pausamas call it Tartessus. Livy notes
that the Inhabitants did call it Circes, which name it retained for a long
time, as Marius Niger witnesses, notwithstanding the Africans had gotten
Spain; and yet at length it was by them called Guadalquivir, or as others
write Guadal^hebir, as it were to say, the great river. Here is also the river
Minus in Hispania Tarraconensis, the head whereof begins eighteen miles
above the Sextian Altars, which are now called Lugo, near to a town commonly
called Castle Ferde. This river passing by the town called Porto-ma^in, and
sliding by the bridge Belsarius, and the City Orense, at last joyneth it self
with the river Avia at Valentia, and having run eighteen miles further it
does cast it self into the Ocean. There are other rivers as Lethe, Turtus,
Limaea, Sicores, Chalibs, Austra and others of lesser note, which I leave to be
unfolded or described by others, lest I should be too tedious. The commodities
of the Sea
The Sea calls on us nex to be entreated of, together with the Bays and
Havens, which belong unto it. Spain is enclosed on every side with the Ocean
and the Mediterranean Sea, except that part which is joined to the Pyrenaean
mountains and to Aquitania. In regard whereof it is very fit to traffic and
merchandise with all parts of the old and new world. The Sea round about it
does afford abundance of all kinds of fish, as Whales, Congers, Tunies,
Soales, Lampreys, and the like: beside Oysters and other Shellfish. There are
three famous Bays of Spain, which lie all toward the Mediterranean Sea, the
Sucronensian, Illicitane, and the Virgitane. The greatest of them all is the
Sucronensian, receiving the Sea, as Mela says, with a large mouth or inlet,
which within grows narrower and narrower. The Ill^^tane is the middlemost in
bigness, now called Puerto d'Alicante. The least is the Virgitane Bay, and is
so called, as Mela writes, from the town Virgi, now styled Vera or Bera:
Ptolemie corruptly calls this town Vr^e or Virge, Autoninus as erroniously
calls it Vrei, and Pliny with no less error Vrgi. The Gaditane Bay was so
called in Mela (lib. 3.) from Gades: now it is called Baia de Ca liz. The
chief Havens in Spain are first that which the ancients called Magnus,
between the Nerian and Scythian Provinces, which now is called Corunna.
Secondly, Amibalus Portus, now called Alber, in the Kingdom of Algarbia.
Thirdly, that which Pliny calls Amanum, now Fuentarabie, as Villonovanus, or
Barnino as Moralis thinks. Fourthly, Portus Tarra^onensis of which the
Italian Poet Silius writes thus, Lib. 15. The stranger in the Haven then does
land
Of Tarraconia, while the ships do stand
In the safe harbor, labor is laid by,
And fear of the deep Sea, while here they lie.
And lastly, the Haven of Venus, so called by Mela, Mountain ^
which lyoth at the foot of the Pyrenaean hills. Now follow the mountains,
the chief whereof are the Pyrenaean mountains dividing Spain from France.
Ptolemie and others call them Pyrenea, and Stephanus calls them Pyrena,
Tibullus Pyrene, Livy and others call them Saltus Pyrenaeus, the Spaniards
generally call the^ Los Pirencos, for they have diverse names in diverse parts
thereof. Some would have them so called from fire, or because they are often
struck with thunder, or because all the woods thereof (as Diodorus writes in
his sixth Book) were heretofore set on fire by sheep-heards, and so burnt
down. Silius the Italian Poet does give them this denomination from a maid
called Pyrena, the daughter of Bebryx, whom Hercules lay withal upon this
mountain, and being afterward torn to pieces by wild beasts, she was buried
here. The Pyrenaean mountains (as they do) stretching and extending themselves
from the East unto the West even to the Celtick Promontorie, divide Spain into
that part which lies on the hither side of the mountains, and that which is
on the further side thrusts forth a mountain near the fountain of Iberus
toward the South through the breadth of Spain. Strabo and Ptolemie do name it
Idubeda. But it is commonly called Saltus Aucencis, and Monte d' Oca, from the
ancient City Auca, some ruins whereof may be discerned at Villa Franca beyond
Burgos. Also there is the mountain which arises out of Idubeda, called by
Strabo Orospeda, and by Ptolemie Otrospeda. Yet has it not one certain name
for all the whole mountain: for whereas Alvarius Gomecius calls it Sierra
Vermigia, Florianus Sierra Mollina, and Clusius Sierra Morena: these names are
but names to part of it. Calpe is reckoned with Orospeda. For so this mountain
is called by Ptolemie and others. It is near to the Bay of Hercules, which is
commonly called the Bay of Gibraltar. Part of Orospeda is high and ^ockie, and
reaching from the City of Hispalis to Granada, it does lift up it self near
Archidona. It has its name, and deserves still to be famous, by reason of a
memorable example of love, which was showed thereon, for the Spaniards call it,
La Penna de les Enamorades, or the Lovers Mountain. Paulinus calls it
Bimaris because it looks on two Seas, the Inward and the Outward. Strabo
says that the mountain Calpe is not very large in compass, but that it is so
high, that to those who are far off, it may seem an Island, some do
fabulously suspose it to be one of Hercules Pillars, and Abela over against it
in Afric to be the other, both being the bounds of Hercules labors: they say
that it was heretofore one mountain, and that Hercules dug it through, and
so altered the shape of it. Out of Alcarassum do arise the mountains called by
Pliny Montes Mariani, by Ptolemie in the singular number Marianus, and by
Antoninus mons Mariorum. They are now called Sierra Morena. The noble river
Baetis does water the bottomes of their mountains on the left side. Near to
Barcinon or Barcilona there is a mountain which the Inhabitants call Mon-Iui:
some do translate it Jupiters mountain, and some do better render it the Jews
mountain, for that they were heretofore buried in this place, where many of
their Graves and Sepulchers do yet remain. On the top thereof there is a
Town, from whence a watchman, by setting up a linen flagge in the day time,
and a fire in the night does give notice to the City Barcinon of the
approaching of any ships. Spain is every where full of woods, and trees
bearing singular and excellent kinds of fruit, which it would be too long to
recite in particular. There is a wood near unto the Town called Monte Majore,
in which Nature alone has planted Oaks, Chestnut-trees, Nuts, Filberds,
Cherries, Prunes, Pears, Figs, wild Vines, and all kind of fruit trees,
very high and fairly spread. Not far from the Town Beiar or Bigerra, is a
most pleasant wood, where Lucius Marinaeus Siculus writes, (...) public in
priva^e works
that he has measured Chesnut-trees, which have been forty foot about. It
has many woods also to fell and cut, which do afford the Spaniard wood enough
for the building of ships. What shall I speak of the public or private works
in this kingdom? here are many magnificent Temples, many Abbeys, Friaries,
Monasteries, Hospitals for strangers, and for the sick. Here are many famous
Kings Palaces, many magnificent and fair houses belonging to Noblemen and
Knights, and innumerable other public and private edifices. The King of Spain
is borne not chosen or elected to the Crown, yet is he inaugurated, and
sworn to defend this people and their privileges when he takes the oath of
alleagiance of them. The Kings children are called Infantaes. Among whom the
eldest son, who in his fathers life is declared King by the consent and oath
of the Nobles the Citizens, and people, is called Prince of Spain. Although
the King have supreme power over all persons and over all causes, yet he
seldom decrees any thing, but with the consent, The manner of Government
and by the counsel of twelve men, who being the chief of the whole Kingdom
do make a royal Senate. By them matters of moment are discussed and
determined, but matters of more secrecy are consulted of by a Privy Counsel,
which consists of the King, The Senators and their numbers.
the Dictator of Leon, the President, and the third part of the Kings Counsel.
Those things which concern the Indies and their government, are handled in the
Senate, which they call the Indian Senate, by one President, and twelve
Counselors. Matters of war are handled in the military and warlike Senate,
which the 12 Royal Senators, the Dictators of Leon and Castile, with others
do make up. Besides these There are beside these Cou^sells the Counsel of the
Low Countries, the Counsel of the order of S. John, and the Counsel of the
Inquisition.
there are also in Spain three Prefectureships of Right and Justice, which
they call Places of hearing, or Chanceries, one being in Castile, the other in
Granada, and the third in Gallicia: Every one has a President and 12 Senators,
and if that Suitors receive no satisfaction or redress of their greevances
from them, their causes are brought before the Royal Senate. Lastly there is
the Treasurer of Castile, having four Questors under him, whose office is to
receive the Kings Treasure, and to take and give account thereof. There is a
great company of Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls in Spain. Besides the Prince of
Asturia and others, I find that there are about 23 Dukes, as the Friensian
Duke, the Duke of Medina-Rivi-Sicci, of Alua, of Alcala, of Albuquerqua, of
Scalona, of Osuna, of Averi, of Bejar, of Gandia, of Sessa, of Infantasg, of
Medina Caeli, of Medina Sidonia, of Maqueda, of Najar, of Feria, of Segorbia,
of Sonna, of Villa-Formosa, of Verragua, Pastrana, and Franca-Villa. And these
have for their yearly revenues some forty, some an hundred thousand Ducats.
A Ducket is according to our English valuation 6 s* 8 d
The Dukes of Infantasg, and Medina-Sidonia have a far greater revenue: for
the latter has 130000, and the former 120000 Ducats per annum. These are the
Marquesses, the Marquess of Villa Nova, of Astorga, of Aquilar, of Denia, of
Mondejar, of Navares, of Savia, of Velleza, of Comares, of Aiomonte, of
Altamir, of Veladra, of Vearina, of Carpio, of Camarassa, of Cortes, of
Monte-Majore, of Guardia, of Monte-Clare, of Las Navas, of Poza, of Steppa, of
Tanara, of Villa-Franca, of Drada, of Cavietis, of Falcis, of Fomesta, of
Molina, of Ciralva, of Valesis, of Vallis, of Zaara, of Ardalis, of Tarifa, of
Alcanisa, and For there are in all 45 Marque^^^^s.
others, the greater part having annual revenues from ten thousand to 40000
Ducats. There are also about an hundred Earls, whose yearly revenues are
from ten thousand to 25 thousand Ducats, the chief of them are the Earls of
Benaventum, of Albua, Miranda, and Oropoza. It would be too tedious to the
Reader to reckon up, the Vicounts, which are ten in number, the Barons, the
long roll and Catalogue of Vice Roys, Governors, Prefects of Provinces, and of
the Sea: and lastly the long Catalogue of Gentlemen, and diverse orders of
Knights; as in Castle, Knights of the order of Saint Fo^nded by King R^y^^ of
(...) Anno. 984.
James, of A T^ New-C^^^^l where the order was instituted by Ferdinand of Leon,
and confirmed by Pope Lucius Anno 1183.
Alcantara, of A Town which Raymuna Abbot of Pisu^a, defended against the
Saracem, and therefore instituted this order.
Calatrava, and of the order of Saint John: in Aragon and Catalonia, Knights of
the order of Montesa: in Portugal Knights of the order of This order was
instituted by Denis King of Portugal, and confirmed by Pope John the 22th
Aunt. 1321.
Jesus Christ, (whereof the King is the Master) being very great, and having
all the Provinces which are found out in Afric, Asia, or America, annexed
unto it. But it will not be amiss if we observe by the way that of all the
Families in Spain, the ancientest is the Paciecian Family, for Hirtius in his
Commentaries makes mention of L. Iunius Paciecus, in that place where he
entreats of Corduba: as also Cicero in the 6th Book of his familiar
Epistles, to wit, in his Epistle to Lepta. These following Families are also
very noble and Illustrious, to wit, the Meridonian, Toletane, Cerdean,
Cardonean, Larensian, Velascean, Gusmanean, Pimentellane, Stunican, Henritican,
Oriosian, Cordubentian, Limensian, and the Mondragonian Families, to which we
desire others to add others, and crave pardon if we mistake their places in
ranking of them. We have spoken of the Politic State and government: the
Ecclesiastical follows. The Church of Hispalis was in ancient time the
Primate and chief of Spain, and afterward the Church of Toledo, until that
great overthrow and devastation of the Kingdom. For Toledo coming into the
Barbarians hands, the Bishopric of Bacara had that dignity: but when being
recovered by the Christians, the Toletan Bishopric sought its former
dignity, and the Baracensian to retain what it had gotten, there arose a
contention, as we may read Lib. 1. Decretal. so that the matter is yet
undetermined. Moreover Vasaeus in Chronico 1o cap. 20o. shows who were
Presidents in Spain from the time of the Romans and Goths. But after Spain
was recovered again out of the hands of the Barbarians, the Bishoprics with
their ancient Cities were restored, and some newly instituted. We read that
Spain has at this day seven Archbishops, and 41 Suffragane Bishops
subordinate to them. The first is the Archbishop of Toledo, Chancellor of
Castile, who next unto the King and his Progeny is the greatest man in
dignity and wealth. The Bishops that do obey him, are the Bishop of Burgos,
whose Sea^e was heretofore at Aura, (whence it was called Auritanus
Episcopatus* and corruptly in some Counsels and other public Acts,
Auxitanus, but was after translated from thence to Burgos, the Metropolis of
Old Castile, by Alphonsus the sixth, who restored Toledo to the Christians by
the authority of Pope Urban the second, in the year 1097. Also the Bishop of
Cuena, the Bishop of Osma, called commonly Episcopus Oxmensis, and corruptly in
Counsels Oxomensis* the Bishop of Corduba, (whose Bishopric is most ancient
and famous by means of Osius once Bishop thereof) the Bishop of Iaenensia,
Palentia, and Segovia. The second is the Archbishopricke of Hispalis, under
which there were heretofore eleven Bishoprics, though there are now but three;
namely of Malaga, Gades, and the Canarie Isles. The third is the Archbishopric
of Compostella. The Seat of this Bishop was heretofore Iria Flavia, a
Sea-Towne of Gallicia, and commonly called Padron: but being afterward
translated to Compostella, it began to be called the Bishopric of
Compostella, or of Saint James, under which are the Bishops of Coria,
Placentia, Asturia, Gamora, Salmantica, Orense or Auria, Tude or Tide, a Town
of Gallicia, seated by the River Minius, and commonly called Tuy. The Bishop of
Badaios, (which is now called Episcopus Pacensis) and the Bishop of Mindonia,
whose Seat was heretofore Ribadeum, commmonly called Mandonnedo. The fourth
Archbishop is the Archbishop of Granada; under whom is the Bishop of Almeria,
and the Bishop of Guadix, heretofore called Episcopus Accitanus, for that which
heretofore was called Acce, is now called Guadix. The fifth is the Archbishop of
Valentia, under which are the Bishops of Carthage, Orignella, Segobrica, (whih
is now called Segorbia) and Majorca. The sixth is the Archbishop of Tarraconia,
under whom are the Bishops of Ilerda, (commonly called Lerida) Tortosa, Herlua,
Barcinon, Genida, Vrgella, and Vich. Lastly, the seventh is the Archbishop of
Caesar. Augusta, who has under him the Bishops of Pampilona, Calagurris, Osca,
and Balbastro: the Bishops of Leo and Oviedo are subject to none. Portugal
has three Archbishops, namely of Bracara, Olisipona or Lisbon and Funchala;
under whom are the Bishops of Ebora, Visca, Guarda, Conimbrica, Porta, Lamego,
Silva, Cepta, and Leria. Concerning the other Bishops, you may consult with
Vasaeus, L. Marinaeus Siculu^, Damianus a Goes, and others, who do curiously
observe and note what are the revenues which belong to every Bishopric, as
also to Abbeys and Monasteries. Those who belong to the Inquisition are of the
Ecclesiastical State: they were first instituted and ordained to examine the
Moors, Saracens, and Jews; but afterward in process of time they began to
extend their power and authority over all that were not of the Roman Church
and Religion. In the next place we will note the Academies or Universities in
Spain, which are about two and twenty; the chief whereof are Salamanca,
Compludo, Conimbrica, or Conimbra, Pincia, Saganta, Osca, and Lerida. The
Spaniards have happy wits, yet do they learn or study little, because they
think themselves learned when they are not: they love the craft and subtlenes
of Sophisters. In the Universities they speak Spanish more than Latin,
mingling their speech with many words belonging to the Moors. They seldom
leave any offspring or monument of their wit to their own posterity, much
less to strangers, in regard their language is defective. Yet there have
been, and are some learned men, who by their excellent learned works and
writings, have graced their Country, and made it famous unto other Nations.

If we seek for Divines, there will come forth Vigilantius Priest of Barcinon,
Aquilius Severus, Prudentius Bishop of Armentia, Osius of Corduba, Avitus a
Priest, Marcianus Bishop of Barcelona, Paulus, Orosius, Pacianus, and his son
Dexter, Audentius, Isidorus, the interpreter of the Apocalypse, Iustinianius,
the President of the Church of Valentia, Leander Bishop of Hispalis, Martinius
the President of Mandova, Fulgentius the Bishop of Carthage Eladius the
Archbishop of Toledo, Isidorus Bishop of Hispalis, John Bishop of Gerunda;
Eutropius, Valentinus, and Franciscus Ximenes Cardinal and Archbishop of
Toledo, and father of the Universitie of Compludo, who caused the Holy Bible to
be printed in diverse languages, which is commonly called the Complutensian
Bible. If we seek for those which have been skillful in the Canon Law, we
shall find Bernardus of Compostella, Raymundus de Pennya Forti, and Hugo
Barcinonensis. If for other Lawyers, we shall find Pope Calixtus the third,
Gomezius, Didacus Covarruvias, and Antonius Augustinus Archbishop of
Tarraconia, a man very learned and skillful in the Roman antiquities. If we
enquire for Physicians, we shall meet with Avicen, Averroes, Rasis, Almanca,
and Messahallah. If for Historians, we shall find Trogus Pompeius, Iustine,
and others. If for Philosophers, we shall meet with L. Anneius Seneca and his
sons Seneca, Nonatus and Mela, Lucius Iunius, Moderatus Columella, C. Julius
Hyginus, Sotion, and Johannes Vives Valentinus. If we search for
Mathematicians, behold Pomponius Mela, Abrahamus Cacutius, Alphonsus King of
Castile, Henricus the Infanta of Portugal, Henricus Marquess of Villena,
Arnoldus Villanovanus, and his Scholar Raimundus Lullius. If we enquire for
Orators, we shall find beside Seneca, Portius Latro, and M. Fabius
Quintilianus. Lastly if we would reckon up some Poets borne here, we may make
account of Sextilius Hena: L. Annaeus Seneca, and Lucan who were Cosins: M.
Valerius Martialis, Rufus Festus Avienus, Aurelius Prudentius, Pope Damasus,
Caelius Sedulius, and many others: I omit for brevities sake the later modern
Poets. The Spaniards are by nature hot and dry, swarthe-coloured, to help
which the women use a kind of painting: they are well limbed and strong set.
They are the most superstitious of all people, so that other people do learn
from them both ceremonies, complements, and large titles. They have a great
dexterity in concealing their thoughts both by silence and dissimulation. They
have a kind of an affected gravitie, which makes them incur the hatred of
all other Nations, which, as Marianus shows, is an individual concomitant or
companion to great Kingdoms. The women are not very fruitful in bearing
children: they abstain much from wine, and are seldom seen abroad, as
imitating therein the Roman Matrons. They use strangers discurteously, and in
foreign Countries they will reverence, praise, and extol one another. They
are great observers of Justice, so that Justice is administered to all, even
from the highest to the lowest: and so great is the painful industry of
Magistrates, that there are few or no robberies committed. Beside, they keep
their hands free from blood, and other wicked acts, and whosoever offends the
Laws, or does trespass against any one, though never so mean, is punished
for it. They are still attempting some great matter, for having suppressed their
enemies at home, and overthrown the Saracens, they seek for to discover and
get for their King the most potent parts of the world. When two or three meet
together, of what place or condition soever, they always discourse of the
Commonwealth and serious affairs, they seek ways how to weaken their
enemies force, they devise stratagems, and invent a thousand engines, which
they open and make known to the Captains. In the field they can endure both
hunger thirst and labor. In battle and matters of war they are more politic
than stout: they are of a light body, and being lightly armed, they not only
easily pursue their enemies, but when they are put to it, they can easily save
themselves by flight, (always meditating on some military or warlike
design). In their feasts and banquets at home they are frugall, sober, and
content with a little, but abroad they have more delicate fare. They use
handsome convenient garments, well made and fashioned. Spain does afford to
the neighbor Countries, and also to remote Nations, Silke-wooll, Cloth of all
kinds, Salt, Sugar, Honey, Orenges, Pome-Granats, Lemmons, pickled Olives,
Capers, Grapes, Figs, Pruines, Almonds, Chestnuts, Anny-seed, Cumming-seed,
Coriander-seed, Rice, Saffron, Oil, Wax, Alume, Vermilion, Purple, Saltfish,
Bay Berries, preserved Fruits of all sorts, Alablaster, Coral, Gold, Silver,
Iron, Steel, Tin, Copper, Lead, Dying Oade, Quicksilver, Gotten, precious
stones, Aromatickes and sweet Spices, which are brought from the Indies and
other places. And in exchange for these, the Europaeans, the Africans, the
Asiatians, and the Americans, do give the Spaniards such commodities, as their
own Country does not afford.

PORTVGALL AND ALGARBIA.
HItherto we have described Spain in general, now our Method requires that
we should decipher it in particular and by parts. We said in our general
Description, The names and whence so called
that it was diversely divided. But we will make a faithful Description of the
parts of Spain, in such order as it is delineated by Hondius. He describes
it in six Tables in this order. In the first Portugal is described: in the
second Biscay, Guipuscoa, and Legio: in the third the New and Old Castiles: in
the fourth Andalusia, in which is the Country of Hispalis and Gades: in the
fifth is Valentia: and in the sixth is Aragon, and Catalonia. Portugal which
offers it self in the first place, was anciently called Lusitania, and M.
Varro and Plinte do affirm, that it received this name from Lusus the Son
of Liber, and Lysa who was drunk with him: for it was called Lusitania, as it
were, the Country of Lusus. Marcianus thinks, it was called Lusitania from a
River which is now called Tagus. Some suppose it was called Portugal a Portu
Gallorum, which is as much to say, as the Frenchmens Haven. But Andraeas
Resendius, The Situation
whose opinion other learned men do follow, does observe, that the name of
Portugal is derived a Portu Cale. This Country, if we consider the breadth
thereof from the South Northward, is greater than Old Lusitania, but if we
consider the length from the West Eastward, it is lesser. Portugal at this day
runs forth Northward, beyond the meeting of the two Rivers Minius and Avia
even to the Town Ribadania, seated on that bank of Avia which looks toward
Gallicia, and a straight line being drawn from thence Eastward, it reaches
even to Miranda, seated upon the River Durius, and from thence toward the South
to the Mouth of the River Ana, on that side where it bordereth on Castile,
Estremadura, and Andaluzia; on the Northwest it looks toward the Atlantic
Ocean, so that the whole compass thereof is thought to be 879 miles. The
temper of the Air.
This country has an excellent sweet and temperate Air, and a clear and
fruitful Climate. It abounds with Wine, Oil, Oranges, Pome-citernes, The
fertility of the Soil.
Almonds, Honey and Wax. The fruit of this Country does excel that which
grows in others near unto it. And though the Inhabitants have not out of
their fields sufficient store of corn, to sustain them with food, yet there
is much transported thither out of France and Germany. This Country does
breed many living creatures, especially great store of Horses, and those so
swift of foot, that they imagined them to be begotten by the wind. The
ancient Government.
The Kingdom of Portugal began about the year 1100, for at that time it
became a part of Spain. Chronicles do mention, that the first of the Line of
the Kings of Portugal was Henry Duke of Lotharingia, Earl of Limburg, (a man
of a great courage and ready of hand) who removing into Spain, married Tyresia
the Daughter of Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile and Legio, and took for a
Dowry that part of Gallicia and Lusitania which is now called Portugal, and
which not long before, by his own valor, he recovered and got from the
Saracens and Moors. He dying about the year 1112, there succeeded him his
Son Alphonsus, who calling himself Dake of Portugal, was enstiled King
thereof by his whole Army, in the year 1139, having obtained a victory
against Ismarius, and four other Kings of the Siracens and Moors, leaving to
posterity five Scutcheons for their Arms, in remembrance of that
achievement. There succeeded him almost in a right line, Sanctius, Alphonsus
the 2, Sanctius the 3, Alphonsus the 3, Dionysius who first began to usurp the
title of the King of the A people of ^^usita^^ called also Turdecans.
Algarbians, also Alphonsus the fourth, Peter, Ferdinand, John, Edward,
Alphonsus the fifth surnamed Africanus, John the 2, Emanuel, John the 3,
Sebastian slain in Africa, Henry the Cardinal, and Antonius who because he
was a Bastard was expelled, Philip the second King of Spain, Nephew to Emanuel
by Isabel his eldest Daughter, and Father to Philip the 3, whose Son Philip
the 4 does now reign. The Metropolis of Portugal is Olisippo, as it is called
in the ancient faithful copies of M. Varro, Pliny, Antoninus, and Mela. For in
vulgar writings it is written sometimes Olysippo, and sometimes So called,
because as some say, Ulysses in his ten years travels coming hither built it.
Vlysippo, and diverse other ways: now it is called Lisbone, or, as the
Inhabitants do pronounce it, Lisboa. It is a great Town of traffic,
abounding with riches, and it is a famous storehouse of foreign commodities,
which are brought thither out of Asia, Africa, and America. It has a pleasant
and commodious situation almost at the mouth of the River Tagus: it is now very
large, being built on five Hills, and as many Vales or descents, but heretofore
it was less, being seated only on one hill as some do report. On that side
which is toward the Sea it has two and twenty Gates, and on that side which
is toward the Continent it has sixteen. It has threescore and seventeene
watch-Towres upon the walls. The Parish-churches are twenty five, besides many
Chapels and Churches belonging to the Monks, the Anachorets, and the Nuns.
The Cities beyond Tagus do acknowledge Lisbone to be the Mother-citie, as
Ebora (called by Ptolemie Ebura, and now commonly Evora) Begia, commonly called
Bega or Beia, and heretofore Pax Iulia, by Antoninus and Ptolemie Setubal,
heretofore named (as Clusius supposes) Salacia: Also Alcasar de sal in the
Country of Algarbia, and Almada, which Ptolemie calls Caetobrix, and Antoninus
Caetobriga. Beyond Tagus not far from Lisbone Northward the Town of Cascala
is seated: and as you come a little nearer to the City you meet with a little
Town called Bethleem. There are also Leria, Tomar, and Guarda, all Towns of
note. Not far from Tomar lies Ceice, which Antoninus calls Celium: Also
Alanguera by the River Tagus, which Damianus a Goes being his own native Town
thinks to be so called, quasi Alankerke, (that is) the Temple of the Alanes:
It was heretofore called Ierabrica, but now Coimbra, and it was heretofore the
head City of the Kingdom of Portugal. There is also the Town Viseum,
commonly called Viseo, Pliny calls it Vacca, but now it is called Ponte
Fouga. The third Council of Toledo does PORTVGALL AND ALGARBIA.
PORTUGALLIA OLIM LUSITANIA.
map of Portugal mention Lameca commonly called Lamego. Lastly Braga which
lies between the Rivers Durius and Minius, it is now so called, though
Ptolemie calls it Bracar Augusta, Antoninus Braccara Augusta, and Pliny
Augusta Bracarum. It is reported, that it was built by the Gauls, surnamed
Braccati, in the year before Christ's birth 290, and the Romans having
conquered it, gave it the surname of Augusta. It was heretofore so famous, that
here were the seven great Assemblies or Parliaments, which were kept and held
in the hithermost Spain, so that four and twenty Cities, as Pliny
reports, did bring their suits and causes hither to have them tried. The
Rivers.
The Rivers of this Country are Anas and Guadiana, Tagus or Taio, Mondego or
Monda, Durius or Duero, and Minius or Mino: two of these being famous, to wit,
Tagus and Durius.) Portugal on the West and South looks toward the Atlantic
Ocean, which, The commodities of the Sea.
besides fish which it yields in great abundance, does afford many other
commodities. This Country is indebted unto, and receives all her plenty from
the Sea, which she acknowledges, in so much, that it may more worthily be
called the golden Sea, than golden flowing Nilus, because by the help hereof
they have commodities imported and brought in from all parts of the earth, so
that it stands in need of nothing; and again those commodities wherewith it
abounds, it exporteth by shipping to traffic with foreign Countries. There
is also (besides the Havens which we mentioned before) the Haven of Setubal,
The Havens.
Dubal, or Tubal, which lies Southward from Olisippo or Lisbone. Here are few
Mountains, and those not very great, as namely those which the Inhabitants
call Sierra de Monchiquo: The Mountains.
de Chaldecatao, de Sordedas, called heretofore the Mountains of the Moon,
etc. And these, for the most part, are full of woods and thickets. There are
also very great and thick woods, in which the Princes of Spain are wont to
hunt. The public and sacred works.
In the little Town of Bethleem, there is a Temple dedicated to the holy Virgin
Mary, and built very costly: also the Monument of Emanuel King of Portugal,
which he appointed to be built in his own lifetime, yet was it afterward
enriched and beautified by John the third the Son of Emanuel. There are
moreover in that part of Portugal which lies between Tagus and Durius (as
Vasaeus writes) besides the Metropolitan Church of Bracara, the Cathedral
Church in Portugal, and five other Collegiate Churches, more than an hundred
and thirty Monasteries, the most of which have most large revenues, and about
1460 Parish-Churches. In that part which belongs to the Church of Bracara
there are reckoned eight hundred Parish-Curches, whereby you may easily collect
and know the fertility of this Country. I do not mention the Hospitals for
strangers, for the diseased, and for Orphans, The Universities.
the Tower the fair houses, the pleasant gardens, and Universities which are
in this Kingdom, as namely Ebora and The Masters of this University made the
Commentary upon most part of Aristotle, called Schoks Commbricensis.
Coimbra or Conimbrica; the first was lately instituted by Henry Cardinal of
Portugal, and President of the same City; the other also was lately
instituted by John the second King of Portugal. The Portugals are the
strongest of all the Spaniards, the quickest, the most nimble, and light of
body, so that they can easily pursue or retire from the enemy. Their
disposition is to be proud and selfe-conceited of themselves, Their manners
and their own affairs; and they say themselves, that they live by opinion
and conceit, that is, they sustain themselves more with that which they think
themselves to be, than with that which they truly are. Their traffic.
They are skillful in sea-matters, and are famous for their Navigations to
unkowne parts of the world, where they grow rich by trading and merchandising.

Under Portugal at this time is the Kingdom of Algarbia. Algarbia whence so
called.
It takes its name from the Arabic tongue, and does signify a happy and
plentiful Field or Meadow, in which are all things necessary for traffic. A
straight line drawn from the River Anas between the Rivers which are commonly
called Vataon, and Carei-vas to the little Town Odeseiza, The Situation
that is, from the East Westward, does separate from Portugal this Kingdom of
Algarbia, which is the least and unnoted'st Kingdom of all Spain. There are
carried hither out of diverse parts of Spain, down the River Anas all sorts of
Wines, Sacks, Bastards, Roman Wine, and others of the like sorts, which being
shipped, are transported into France, the Low Countries, and other parts. It
has in it the Towns of Balsa, (so called by Ptolemie, Pliny, Antoninus, and
Pomponius Mela, The Towne^.
but now Tavila, as Coquus supposes) and Ossonoba, so called by Pliny and
Antoninus; it is called also by Pliny Lusturia, by Ptolemy Ossonaba, by Pinetus
Gibraleon, by Clusius Exuba, by Varrerius Estombar, as also by Moralis, and it
is thought to be the same which is now called Silvis or Selves. There was also
in the same place near the Holy Promontory the City which Pomponius calls
Lacobriga, the ruins whereof are yet to be seen near the Sea-Towne Lagos, at
a Village which is called in the Portugal language Lagoa, as Vasaeus writes.
Algarbia at the first was given in dowry by Alphonsus the 10 King of Legio or
Leon, (as ancient Annals do report) unto Alphonsus the third King of
Portugal, The ancient Government.
when he married his daughter Beatrice, which he begat on a whore. Dionysius
was derived from this marriage, who first of all began to usurp the title of
King of Algarbia. But thus much shall suffice concerning Portugal and
Algarbia, I pass to the other parts of Spain.

GALLICIA, LEON, AND ASTVRIA DE OVIEDO.
GALLICIA (which is also written Galecia or Gallaecia, and takes its name from
an ancient people called Calla^^i) has on the North and West the Ocean, on the
South Portugal with the River Durius flowing between them, and on the East
Asturia. This Country in regard it has many rugged mountains, The Situation.
and wants water, is but thinly inhabited. It abounds so with Horses, that
they are supposed to be begotten by the wind. Pliny notes, that here are rich
mines of Gold. Niger writes that the rivers hereof do bring down earth
mingled with gold, silver, and tin, and that the soil it self is full of
gold, brass and lead, so that golden clods are oftentimes ploughed up. The
mountains afford great store of wood for building of ships. Gallicia does
exceedingly abound with fish: The (...) of the Soil.
especially with Salmons, Congers, a kind of fish which they call Pescades,
and many other dainty fishes, which being salted are carried into diverse parts
of Spain. In the month of November and December, a great number of those fish
are taken, which they commonly call Vesugos, being two or three pound weight;
they are carried fresh and sweet into Castile and are sold there, for the cold
does easily preserve them: they have an excellent taste, yet those are best
tasted which are taken in the Ocean, and not in the Meditterranean Sea. For the
coldness of the Ocean does fatten the fish, and therefore those which are taken
most Northward are the best. The most part of the Inhabitants do live in
mountains, on which they build convenient houses. Concerning the name and
original of the Callaicians, let the Reader have recourse to Johannes Bishop
of Gerunda, Lib. 2 Paralipomenorum Hispaniae, Roderieus Toletanus (Lib. 10. de
rebus Hispanicis cap. 4.) and others. The Metropolis of Gallicia is
Compostella, where is worshipped S. James the Apostle, who together with the
Universitie making the City famous gives unto it the name of S. Iago, it was
heretofore called Briantia, as Franciscus ^arapha, Ambrosius Moralis, The
Cities.
and Villanovanus do think; Orosius calls it Brigantia, who says, that
there is in it a very high watch-towre: Ptolemie calls it Flavium Brigantum,
Beuterus, C^q^us, and Johannes Mariana do call it Betancos, Florianus and
Gomectus call it Coruna, and Johannes Bishop of Gerunda (Lib. 1.) calls it
Compostella, saying it was so called quasi Compos Stella, for so the evening
star was called which makes these countries wholesome. There is extant at
Salamantica in the Library of the College of our Savior the History of
Compostella, the growth and increase of the Church of Compostella described in
two volumes, written by the command of Didacus the first Archbishop thereof:
concerning which you may also read Lucius Marineus Siculus, in his fifth Book,
and in GALLICIA, LEGIO,
GALLICIA
map of Galicia (Spain) Chapter concerning religious houses in Spain, and the
wonderful miracles done therein. The Lesser Towns are Orensium, a City near
the River Minius, and called by Ptolemie Thermae Calidae, as Gomecius thinks
in the life of Franciscus Zimenius, where he adds, that the Swedish people
of Germany, who heretofore did subdue these parts, in their native language did
call it Warense; though Ortelius says it should rather be written Warmsee,
which signifies the Warm Lake. Also a Town called in Latin Lucus, and by the
Inhabitants Lugo, Pomponius calls it Turris Augusti, Pliny, Aresti, and Arae
Sextianae, and Ptolemie Promontonum Arae Sestii, near to the Cantabricke Ocean
in Artabria. Also, Pons vetus, Ponte Vedra, and Ribalaeum, commonly called
Ribadeo. Other towns Marinaeus Siculus mentions in the beginning of his third
Book. Gallicia got the title of a Kingdom a thousand and sixty years after
Christ: For that year Ferdinand (the son of Sanctius Major King of Navarre)
being King of Castile, when he had married Sanctia the daughter of Alphonsus
the fifth, and so united the Kingdom of Castile and Legio: having three sons,
he made by his will Sanctius King of Castile; Alphonsus King of Legion and
Asturia; and Garcia King of Gallicia (which he enjoying in the right of his
wife, was till then but an Earldom) and Portugal. Sanctius being not content
with this division which his father made, thrust his brother Alphonsus out of
his Kingdom, and slew Garcia his other brother. Now when Sanctius had ruled
about six years, and was at last beheaded by Vellidus through treachery,
Alphonsus who lived as a banished man with the King of the Moors at Toledo, did
not only recover the Kingdom of Legio, which his father gave him by Will, but
also got the Kingdom of Castile, Gallicia, and Portugal. Alphonsus had three
children lawfully begot on three wives, by Isabell Queen of France he had
Sanctia, who was married to the Earl Rodoricke, who brought new Colonies into
the City which is commonly called Ciudad-Rodrigo; by Zaida a Moore, daughter
to the King of Sevill, he had Sanctius, who was slain in a battle against the
Saracens; and lastly, by Constantia he had Vrraca, who out living Sanctius and
Sanctia (who dyed without issue) after she had been wife to Raimundus
Berengarius Earl of Tolosa, married Alphonsus King of Aragon, and had an heir
by him who was afterward Alphonsus the seventh, the most powerful King of all
his predecessors, and one that deserved to be called Emperor of Spain. From
that time Gallicia, Castile, and Legio have always but one King. Near to
Legio, Leon.

The Situation.


and bounding thereon on the North is Asturia, on the West Gallicia, and on the
South and East old Castile. It takes its name from the seventh German Legion,
which was seated and placed here under the command of the Emperor Nerva, as
some suppose. The Metropolis hereof is that famous City which takes its name
from the Country, and is called by Ptolemie Legio septima Germanica; Antoninus
calls it Legio Gemina; but it is now commonly called Leon, which name I
cannot see why Franciscus Tarapha should rather derive from Leonigildus King of
the Goths, than from the Legion it self. Moralis does deliver also that it
was heretofore called Sublantia, and writes that some evidences of that name
are extant in a place but a little distant from Legio, called Sollanco. L.
Marinaeus Siculus writes thus concerning the Church of Legio, in his third
Book of Spain. Although the Church which the City of Hispalis has built in
our age, does exceed all the rest for greatness, although the Church of Toledo
surpass the rest for treasure, ornaments, and glass windows, and the Church
of Compostella for strong building, for the miracles of Saint James, and other
things: yet the Church of Legio (in my judgment) is to be preferred before
them all for admirable structure and building, which has a Chapel joining to
it, in which lie buried seven and thirty Kings, and one Emperor of Spain. It
is worthy of memory that this City was the first from which about the year
716. the recoverie of Spain, (which formerly the Moors and Saracens almost
wholly possessed) was begun. For (as also Rodericus Toletanus in his sixth Book
of Spanish matters for many Chapters together, and Roderick Sanctius in the
first part of his Spanish History cap. 11. do relate) Pelagius the son of
Fafila Duke of Cantabria, and descended of the royal blood of the Goths,
being made King by the remainder of the Christians who fled into the
mountains, made a great slaughter on the Moors; and being scarcely entered
into his Kingdom took Legio from the enemies. This man afterward making it
the Seat of his Principality, built a new Castle there as a Fort and defense
against the violence of their incursions. Asturia.
And laying aside the arms of the Kings of the Goths, gave the Lion Rampant
Gules, in a field, Argent; which the Kings of Legio do use at this day. Fafila
the son of Pelagius succeeded him in the Kingdom, and (he dying issuelesse)
there succeeded him Alphonsus Catholicus, the son of Peter Duke of Cantabria,
being descended from the stock of Ricaredus Catholic King of the Goths, who
married Ormisenda the only sister and heir of Fafila. The government of
Legion remained in the hands of Alphonsus his family, even to Veremundus the
24 King of Legio, who dying in the year 1020. without a Successor, his sister
Sanctia married Ferdinando of Navarre, King of Castile, and brought the
Kingdom of Legio to be joined and united to his kingdom. Asturia has on the
North the Ocean, on the East Biscay, on the South old Castile, and on the West
Gallicia. It produces and brings forth gold, and diverse sorts of colors,
otherwise it is but little tilled, and thinly inhabited, except it be in those
places which are next to the Sea. Here was the Seat of the ancient Astures, who
were so called (as Isidore writes lib. 9. Etymolog. cap. 2.) from the River
Asturia, (whereof Florus makes mention in the fourth Book of his Roman
Histories, and others) From whom Ptolemie calls the Country it self (...),
and the Latins Asturia, as also Astyria, as is evident by what I have read in
ancient marbles. At Rome in the pavement of the Chapel which is in the Temple
of Saint Gregory in the mountain Caelius, there is a broken marble-table
engraved with these words, Acontit
L. Ranio. Optato. V. C. Cos
Curatori. Reip. Mediolanensium
Curat. Reip. Nolanorum. Procos. Provincia
Narbonensium. Legato. Aug. Et Iuridico
Astyriae. Et. Galaecia. Curatori. Viae
Salariae, etc.
Moreover I see it called Asturica in a marble-Table, which is at Rome beyond
Tiber in a private Roman-citizens house. (I will set down the words in the
Description of Italy, where I shall speak of the Alps joining to the Sea)
And it is called at this day Asturias. Pliny (lib. 3. cap. 3.) does divide the
Astures into the Augustini and Transmontani. The one being on the hither side
of the mountains toward the South, and the other beyond the mountains
Northward near the Ocean. Concerning the Astures, Silius the Italian Poet
writes thus ( lib. 1.) -- Astur avarus
Visceribus lacerae Telluris mergitur imis,
Et redit infelix effosso concolor Auro.
The covetous Asturian will go
Into the bowels of the earth below,
Whence he returns in color like gold Oar
Which he unhappily dug up before.
The Metropolis of the Province is This City is called by Moletius, Asturum
Lucus, and by Tarapha, Br^gentium.
Oviedo, of which Rodericus Toletanus writes much ( lib. 4. de rebus Hisp.
cap. 14.) where among other things he gives the reason, wherefore it was
called the Bishops City. Here is also Astorga, called anciently Asturica
Augusta, and some other small Towns.

BISCAY, GVIPVSCOA, NAVARRE, and Asturia de Santillana.
BISCAY (as Johannes Bishop of Gerunda affirms) takes its name from the
Bastuli the ancient Inhabitants of Baetica, The Country whence so called.
for they coming from Lybia into that part of Spain which is called Baetica,
and being beaten and expulsed thence by the Moors, they fled into the
Mountains of Galaecia, and so building themselves houses, the whole Country
was called from that time Bastulia, which is now called Biscay. Some do call
Biscay Viscaia, which word has some affinity with the name of the Vascones.
Biscay is a Country of Spain lying near the Ocean, and very full of hills,
out of which arise 150 Rivers. The Situation.
It has a more temperate Climate than other parts of Spain. For being
environed with great Mountains, it is not troubled with too much cold, nor
burnt with too much heat. The Country is full of trees fit for the building
of Ships: which not only Spain does acknowledge, The temper of the Air.
but other Countries, whither whole ship-loades are often transported. The
fruitfulnes of the Soil.
Here are abundance of Chesse-Nuts, Hasel-Nuts, Oranges, Raizins, and all kind
of Metals, (especially Iron and Black-lead) besides other commodities. Where
they want wine, they have a kind of drink made of pressed Apples, which has an
excellent taste. Here are also store of beasts, The variety of living
creatures.
fish, foul, and all things which are convenient and necessary for the
sustaining of man's life. The Whence the Country was called Cantabria.
Cantabrians did heretofore inhabit that Country which we now call Biscay,
but it was larger than Biscay is now, and contained Guipuscoa and Navarre.
These Cantabrians were a famous people, and much celebrated by many Writers.
They thought that was no life which was without wars: and when all the people
of Spain were subjected, and reduced to the obedience of Rome, they alone with
the Asturians, and some others who joined with them, The ancient Government.
could not be overcome; until at last C. Caesar Octavianus Augustus did subdue
this stout Nation, being broken and wearied by a war of almost five years
continuance, (he himself going against them, and the rest that were not
obedient to the Romans) by the industry and valor of Vispanius Agrippa, and
of the other Generals which he brought with him. The Towns.
There is in Biscay, besides other Towns, one special Town of note called
Bilbao, which is, as some do suppose, by changing of the letters (which is
frequent with the Spaniards) as much to say as Beluao, that is, Bellum vadum,
Didacus Lopeus de Hazo, Prince of the Cantabrians built it, in the year of
Christ 1300, or thereabouts. This Town is especially commended for three
things, the convenient Situation, the plenty of Corn, and the wonderful great
traffic and merchandising which is here, for whatsoever comes or is brought
from England, France, or the Low Countries, is transported and carried through
this Town into other parts of Spain, and whatsoever Spain does communicate
by way of traffic unto other Countries, it is exported and carried through
it. Here are Citizens, who at their own proper charge do yearly build three
or four ships. On the side of the City there is a little town on the
Seacoast, commonly called Portugallete, from whence a certain River, or
rather a great arm of the Sea does flow into it, even unto the houses of the
Inhabitants. By reason of which, diverse kinds of wares are daily for a small
matter imported and exported. There are also fair Havens in Biscay. There is
no kind of fish but you may have it here, and that good and new. The
Sea-shell-fish here have pearls in them, but of a mean sort. The people of
the Country are courteous, merry, and eloquent. It is a custom and fashion
that the Virgins in Biscay, as long as they are unmarried, do never let their
hair grow, neither do they cover themselves with any veil; but presently
when they are married, they cover their heads with a Quoife, made like a
Helmet, of linen cloth of a golden color, which they wrap up in such a manner
that it stands forth a pretty way like an horn upon their foreheads. The
Spaniards here have great store of trading with the French, the Germans, The
traffic.
the English, and other people. It especially affords wool, so that all
Marketplaces are full of buyers and sellers.

GVIPVSCOA was heretofore the Country of the Cantabrians, some do call it
Lipuscoa and Lipuisca, The Country.

The names.


yet corruptly, as Stephanus Garybayus an inhabitant thereof notes. But whence
it has this appellation I cannot easily determine, unless perhaps it takes
it from the ancient City Opuscua. The Situation.
It is enclosed and bounded on the East with the River Vidosone, (which is also
called Vidorso, Alduida, Huria, and Beoyvia, being in the middle between
France and Spain) and the Pyrenaean Hills; on the South with the Kingdom of
Navarre; on the West with Biscay, (of which I spoke before) and on the North
with the Cantabrick Sea. This Country is very temperate, The temper of the
Air.
neither feeling too much cold, nor too much heat of the Sun. It has a
moist and variable Climate. It is very rugged and mountainous, and therefore it
is not every where tilled, but yet those places which are tilled are very
fruitful. It has but few Vineyards, The fertility of the Soil.
except it be on that side which is next to the Sea. But it has every where
great store of Iron and Steel, so that no Country has better or greater
abundance; for so much of it is dug here as is sufficient for many
Countries. Moreover, not only Vulcans shop, but Mars his Armory seem to be
placed here by Nature: for there is here so great plenty and store not only
of Iron and Steel, but also of wrought Armor, that in some writings belonging
to the Country it is deservedly called the Wall or defense of the Kingdoms of
Castile and Legio. Navigierus writes, that in this Country so much Iron and
Steel is dug, that every year they make 80000 Ducats gain thereof.
Therefore not without cause does Pliny write, lib. 34. cap. 45. that there is a
whole mountain there of Iron: There is, says he, a very high BISCAIA AND
GVIPVSCOA.
BISCAIA ET LEGIO.
map of Basque country (Biscay and Guipuscoa, Spain) mountain of Cantabria on
the Sea side (a thing incredible to be spoken) which is all of Iron. Ptolemie,
Pomponius, and Pliny do place here the Orogeviones, the Autrigones, and the
Varduli. The Metropolis is This is also called Testosages by Ptolemy, and by
Martialis Palladia.
Tolosa, seated at the confluence and meeting of Araxis and Orta: There are
also other Towns, as Placentia, where there is an incredible company of
Ironsmiths; Motrico, or as others think it should be written, Monte de Trico,
from the Rock which hangs over the Town; Fuentarabia, which Ptolemie calls
Phlasiobriga; the Fane or Temple of Saint Sebastian, heretofore called Hisuru,
afterward Don Bastia, and now corruptly Donastien, signifying the same with
Saint Sebastian, for Don signifies that among the Cantabrians, which Sanctus
does with the Latins, and Sancto with the Castellanes; and many places in
Cantabria have, for the most part, diverse names, in regard of the difference of
speech: the Cantabrians call them by one name, the other Spaniards by an other,
and the Frenchmen by an other name, and yet they commonly signify one thing.
This Town is situated at the mouth of the River which is called by Pomponius
Mela Menascus, by Ptolemie Menosca, but now is called Rio Gurumea, The River
Chalybs.
or Vramea. The River Chalybs does rise up hereabout, the water whereof is very
good to temper Iron withal, so that the Spaniards do approve of no other
Armor, but that which has been tempered therewith. Iustine lib. 44. says,
that the bordering people were called Chalybes from this River. The Fane of
Saint Sebastian has a very large Haven (not made by humane Art, The Havens.
but by Natures providence) where ships do ride securely and safely, being
defended from the violence of wind or Seas. The entrance into it is between
two Castles, the one whereof standing toward the East is built on a high
Mountain, The Mountains.
higher than that which is on the West side, which is only placed on a rock.
The Inhabitants are like in manners to the Inhabitants of Biscay, and speak
the same language. They are by nature ingenious, politic, well accomplished,
neat, easy to be allured, but hard to be compelled, desirous of honor,
stout defenders of their own privileges, nimble, courageous, ready and quick
in handling their Arms, and apt for war. The women also are very strong and of
a warlike spirit, well bodied, well favored, although they accustom and use
themselves to labor, which is a cause why they are less proud. Those that
dwell by the Sea side do get much by fishing, and especially by taking those
kind of fish called Baccali.

The Kingdom of Navarre, which was also anciently called the Kingdom of
Sobabre, in all parts is as fertile, and abounding with all things necessary
for man's life, as any other Kingdom of Spain. And though commonly it be
thought to be very small, yet it has six and fifty walled Cities. The
Inhabitants of this Country were heretofore very stout and warlike, and such
as oftentimes shook off the yoke of the Roman subjection, yet at the last
they were wholly subdued, and brought into obedience to the Romans. When Caius
Julius the Dictator being killed at Rome, Octavianus Augustus succeeded him.
For Augustus sent four Legions against them, who entering the Province did
waste it with fire and sword. When therefore they saw that they were unable to
resist the Roman forces, the most of them fled to the mountains which were
very steep and inaccessible, and are now called Navaia, lying length-wayes
between Mescua, and Eulates. Here when they had dwelt a long time, they were
called from those Mountains Navinii, and afterward the Moors possessing
Spain did corruptly call them Navarri. But being oppressed by the Tyranny of
the Moors, and compelled to forsake their own habitations, they betook
themselves to the Some suppose, that Navarre had its name from a Town among
the Mountains called Navarrin.
Pyrenaean Mountains, where they chose themselves a King, and for many
successions of Kings lived according to their own Laws, even till the year a
thousand five hundred and thirteen, when Pope Julius the second did by the
sentence of Excommunication deprive Johannes Albretus King of Navarre of his
Kingdom as a Schismatic adhering to Lewis the 12 King of France, and gave a
fair pretext and occasion to Ferdinand the Catholic K. to invade Navarre,
which he long gaped for; he therefore sending Duke Alban, did drive King John
out of his Kingdom, and left it to his Successors. The chief City of
Navarre is now commonly called Pampelona, some call it Pompeiopolis, as if it
were built by Pompeius Magnus. It is situated under the sixteenth Degree and
eleven Minutes of Longitude, and the 44 Degree, and 43 Minutes of Latitude.
There are besides these chief Cities, Sanctus Johannes, Pedis Portus, Mons
Regalis, Amaya, Estella, Olyta, Taffala, and Tudela.

THE OLD AND NEW CASTILE.
The Country, whence so called.
CASTILIA or Castella, which takes its name from the Castle, that King Pelagius
(having recovered Legion from the Moors) did build, was heretofore called
Bardulia. The describers of Spain do make it twofold, the Old and the New.
Asturia and Biscay do compass the Old Castile on the North: (...)
on the West, Portugal; on the South, New Castile; (the Mountains which run
through the length of Spain, lying between them) and on the East Aragon and
Navarre. The Country is very fertile, full of wine, and all kind of Fruits,
Saffron, and all kind of living Creatures: and this was the beginning of the
Kingdom. Pelagius having taken again Legio from the Moors, built a Castle as
a defense against the violence of the Barbarians, the Governors whereof were
called Earls of Castile, The fertility of the (...).
and did acknowledge the King of Legio a long time as their Prince, even to
Ordonius the second, the fourteenth King of Asturia and Legio; who having
called the Earls and Nobles of Castile unto him under the color of parley,
beheaded them. This wicked act the Castilians stomacking, The (...) Government.
and having cast off their obedience to the Kings of Legio, they choose two
Judges out of themselves, Nunius Rasura, and Lainus Calvus, (one to give
Judgment, and the other to oversee matters of war) whose children and
posterity were afterward called Earls of Castile, even to Sanctius Major King
of Navarre, who (when by his warlike valor he had taken Corduba and Toledo
from the Saracens, and had thrust out all the Moors out of Navarre, Aragon,
Castile, (...), Portugal, and other parts of Spain) restored all Spain to
the Christians; and having married Eluira the daughter of Sanctius, Earl of
Ca^, and sister to the last Earl of Garsia, writ himself in the right of her
d^^y, not Earl, but King of Castile, and left the Kingdom to his Son (...),
who was enriched with the Kingdom of Legio by his wife (...) Sanctius the
son did succeed Ferdinand, and after him his brother (...); whose daughter
V^raca (for the heir male died) when after the decease of Ra^mundus
Berengarius Earl of Tolosa (her former husband) she had married Alphonsus
King of Aragon; the Kingdoms of ^^ra^on, The C^^^es
Castile, and Legio, came to be united. The Metropolis of (...) Castile is the
City of Th^^ (...) is built (...) rather ^^part by Nugno B^lid^^a German.
(...) contendeth with Toledo (...) the P^^ma^^ship of Spain
Burges, commonly called Burgos: Ptolemie thinks it should be called Bravum.
It is an ancient City, famous for many things, and deserves to be accounted
one of the chief Cities of Spain; for it has an hundred and fifty lesser
Towns under it, every where beautified with great, fair, and convenient
houses, adorned with market places, streets, bridges, Temples, Friaries, and
Rivers, and is very notable for the incredible diligence of the Inhabitants of
whatsoever age, sex, or condition. Round about the Metropolis diverse Towns are
pleasantly and commodiously seated, as Palentia situated THE OLD AND NEW
CASTILE.
CASTILIA VETUS et Nova
map of Castille on the bank of Carrion, Pliny calls it Palantia, as also Mela,
Ptolemy, and Appianus: Strabo calls it Pallantia, and Antoninus corruptly
Peralantia. Also the Town Valdoletum, heretofore a Royal Seat, and one of
the seven Ancient Universities of Spain. It is the fairest and most
delightful place, not only in Spain, but also in all Europe, as being seated
on the most pleasant bank of Pesuerga: neither is there any City which can be
preferred before it, for the fertilenesse of the soil round about it. It has
a fair and large marketplace, the circuit wereof is seven hundred paces; and
whereas this Town is very famous for many respects, yet it is especially
honored by the birth of Philip the second King of Spain. It is commonly
called Valladolid, which some do interpret the Vale of Oletus: Ptolemie calls
it Pintia, and Antoninus Pin^^a, as Cusius thinks. Also Simanca, called by
Antoninus Septimanca; and Camora which Ptolemy calls Sarabris, as Clusius
thinks, but Antoninus corruptly Sabaria. Yet Florianus del Campo, and
Gomer^us do think that Sarabris was that Town, which is commonly called Tora,
and in Latin Taurus, near to the River Durius. This is a famous Universitie,
and instituted by Ferdinand the second of Castile. Anno 1240.
Salmantica is not the last in account which Pylaenus calls Salmatis, but is
commonly called Salamanca. Not far from hence, near the River which is
commonly called Gada, is the City of Count Rodoricke, called anciently Ciudad
Rodrigo, which (as Vasaeus and Clusius think) Ptolemy would have to be
Myrobriga. From hence Southward is Coria, heretofore called Caurita, as Clusius
writes: Andraeas Schottus does affirm that by the Modern Latin Writers it
was called Cauria. About nine leagues on the East from Cauria is Placentia, a
fair City; whose Cittrons and other Fruits, as also their white bread, are
chiefly commended and desired: it is commo^^^ called Plazentia. Placentia has
many pleasant Towns und^ jurisdiction, among which is Xavahicium proud of her
woods* and lying in a Valley like an Altar, (as Marinaeus notes) in the
innermost part of a Church. The Mountains adjacent and lying near to
Placentia, are named from the City Verade Placentiae. Also Here Tostatus was
Bishop.
Avila, called by Ptolemie Olbula, as Clusius would have it. Not far from the
Fountains of Areva lies Segobia, which Pliny and Antoninus call Segovia, and
Ptolemie Segubia: it is a City famous for Cloath-making, and wherein, as
Vasaeus writes, this is memorable, that no man is seen idle, neither are
there any beggars, unless it be those who are impotent through age or
sickness: seeing none do want means how to get a living or how to employ
themselves. That City which is now called Aranda near the River Durius,
Ptolemie would have to be Rhanda of the Vaccaeans in Tarraconia: Antoninus
calls it Rhanda by the correction of Hyeronimus Surita; for heretofore it was
called Randachunia. That Town which an uncertain Writer calls Exoma, Pliny
calls Vxoma, who often adds that this name is often used in other places; it
is read Vxsama, with an S. in an ancient Marble: and now it is called Osma. But
let so much suffice concerning the Cities and Towns: we pass to New Castile.
New Castile on the North cleaves to the Old Castile, New Castile.
on the other sides it is enclosed with Portugal, Extremadura, Andaluzia,
Granada, and Valentia: The Situation
It abounds with corn and other grain, being situated on either side of the
River Tagus. The Metropolis of this Country is Toletum, as the Latins call it;
Ptolemy calls it Toleton, now it is called Toledo: and Villanovanus in Ptolemy
says that it was once called Serezola: The fertility of the Soil.
it is the Center and Navell as it were of Spain; it has a very cliffie,
rugged, and unlevell situation, and the ascents are so steep, that it is very
difficult traveling through it. The Cities.
The River Tagus does wash the greater part of it, and does fence it against
enemies: it is fortified with 150 watch-Towers. There are a great number of
Noblemen in this City: The Citizens are very industrious. It is beautified
with many fair Edifices and buildings, as also with a rich and stately Church.
There have been 18 national Counsels held here, when as so many have not
been held in any other place. Madritum, commonly called Madrid, does reverence
Toletum as her mother and Queen: it has an wholesome air and situation. It
abounds with all things, and the Kings of Spain have an house of residence
in it. Not far from hence is Villamanta, which (as Montanus and Villonovanus,
and Tarapha would have it,) is that Town which Ptolemy calls Mantua in
Tarraconia. That Town which by an Arabicke word the Spaniards do now call
Alcala de Henares, Ptolemy believes so certainly to be Complutum, that it is
called so in Latin in all public acts. It is seated on a plain, near the
River which they call Henares, and abounds so with all things necessary for
man's use, that it needs no supply from other places. Antoninus places
Segontia between Complutum and Caesar-augusta: it is at this day called
Siguensa. Now I return to Hispalis, and from thence passing by the Palace,
the bridge of Alcantarilla, and the Towns Cabeca and Nebrissa, I come now to
the Town Fanum Luciferi, for so the Latins do name it, and Strabo in his
fourth Book, where he adds that it was heretofore called Lux Dubia, now they
call it Saint Lucar de Barrameda. Not far from hence almost four leagues
toward the Northeast, there is a Town which has a famous ancient Bridge, now
called Talavera, and as Beuterus and Moralis do suppose, named by Livy Aebura.
Here are also the Towns Cuenca, which Pliny calls Cacenses: Lebazuza, which
Antoninus calls Libisosa; and Castola veja, which the same Antoninus calls
Castulo. The River Tagus does water New Castile, together with other Rivers and
Rivulets which run into it, and the Springhead of the River Anas or Guadiana
is in this Country. But enough of these things, I come now to the public
works. Five leagues from Madrid toward the West, you may behold the
magnificent and sumptuous Monastery of Saint Laurence, who was of the order of
Saint Jerome. It was the work of Philip the second King of Spain, and may
compare with the Egyptian Pyramides, The public seats.
the Grecian and Roman Temples, Theaters, Amphitheaters, or other famous
places for the structure: for there is scarce any thing equal or second to it.
Quade reports that it has eleven several Quadrangles, and every one
incloystered.
The Frontispice of it looking toward the West, has three stately gates; the
middlemost and chief whereof leads you into a Church, a Friery, and a
College: that on your right hand brings you into the Offices belonging to
the Monastery, and that on the left hand brings you into the Schools. The
four corners are adorned with four curious Towers, which are exceeded by two
other Towers placed one by another at the foot of the Church. Above the gates
of the Church do stand the Statues of the six Kings of Israel cut out in
Marble, and being 17 foot high: on the North side there is a Palace adjoined
to the Church, which is able to receive the King and all his train. On the
South side there are diverse sumptuous Galleries, and on the East side a garden
set with all kind of herbs and flowers, and enriched with many other
ornaments. Also an Hospital for the Sick, a Room for an Apothecarie, and
other places. Lastly, every thing does so amaze the beholder, that it is better
for me to be silent with modesty, than to make a mean description of those
things which remain. There is also in this Country the famous Palace of
Toledo, (reedified by Charles the fifth) adorned with new buildings and Royal
furniture: in which, besides many other singular things, there is a water-worke
made by the wonderful invention of an Italian, which by the help of a great
wheel, draws up water out of the River Tagus; and so imposing an artificial
violence upon nature, does force it to ascend through Pipes into the highest
part of the Castle, where it being received into one large Cisterne, is
dispersed again by Pipes, and serves for the use of the Castle and the whole
City: for it does water gardens, and serves for Noble men's houses, Stews,
Fullers of cloth, and other necessary uses of the City. Here are two
Universities, Complutum a famous Academie for all Arts, which was instituted by
Francis Ximenius Cardinal, and Archbishop of Toledo. The Universities.
The other is the Academie or Universitie of Toledo, being a famous nurserie of
Learning and Wisdom. All disciplines and Mechanicke Arts are greatly esteemed
in the City Toledo; and ten thousand men do live thereby, The Trades and
Mechanicke Arts.
dressing Wool and Silk.

ANDALVZIA. Jn which are the Countries of HISPALIS and GRANADA.
ANDALUZIA is a part of Hispania Baetica, it is supposed that it was heretofore
called Vandalia from the Vandals, The name and whence derived.
a people of Germany, who formerly came into these parts. Therefore some having
searched more nearely into the name do think it was called Andaluzia, quasi
Wendenhuys, that is, the house of the Vandals, yet Marius Aretius does think
it was called Andaluzia quasi ante Lusitania, the letters being somewhat
changed. On the East it has Granada, on the North New Castile, on the West it
is bounded with the Diocesses of Badaios and Silvis, and the River Anas; and on
the South it looks toward the Atlantic Sea. The chief part of it is the
jurisdiction of Hispalis. This has on the East Corduba, on the West Algarbia,
on the North it cleaves to that part of Portugal which is called Magistratus
S. Iacobi. And the other part toward the South is enclosed with Gades, and the
Mediterranean Sea. It is in a temperate and flourishing Climate, and is
miraculously fertile in bringing forth Corn, The Situation,
Wine, Oil, and all kinds of fruits, with which it replenishes foreign
Countries. Spain in these parts that are encompassed with the Sea (as Pliny
says) may be compared with Italy: which commendations we suppose may be
chiefly understood of that part which looks toward Hispalis, as being exposed
to the Sea, and the gentle Western gales of wind. And indeed this Country so
abounds with all kind of things, The temper of the air, and fertility of
the Soil.
and therein so far excells all the Provinces of the World, that Pliny had
worthily preferred it before Italy, but that he being an Italian would not
disgrace his own Country. Here is great store of all kinds of Cattle, and
especially of Cunnies. We said before, that Andaluzia took that name from the
Vandalls, because they being driven out by the Goths seated themselves in this
place: though afterward being thrust out from hence, they went into Afric.
Thus it was: Rodericke the 25 King of the Goths, The Ancient Government.
in whom the line of the Kings of the Goths was extinguished, did send one
Iulianus an Earl to Mauritania Tingitana as Governor thereof: and in his
absence did violate his daughters chastity, making a whore of her; which when
her father heard, he called the Saracens out of Afric, thinking thereby to
ease his just sorrow, by revenging it on the King who was the cause thereof.
These Saracens coming in by the Straits of Hercules in the year of Christ
714. under the conduct of their Captain Muzamissus, in two years space got
possession of all Spain, except Asturia which was fortified by the natural
situation of the place. In this little time there were slain on both sides
700000 men. The Saracens having gotten the Empire, and having rooted out the
Christian Religion as much as they could, they divided the Kingdoms among
themselves. The first Kingdom that they instituted was at Corduba, which they
called Abenalibeticum. The other was at Hispalis, and the third at New
Carthage. But at last being driven out of these parts by Ferdinand the third,
they went unto Granada in the year 1216. and afterward by Ferdinand the sixth
were quite thrust out of Spain in the year 1494. The Metropolis of this
Country is that which Pliny calls Hispalis, Ptolemie Ispalis, Silius Hispal,
Gratianus Spalis, and which now is called Sevill. Arius Montanus thinks that
Hispalis is a Carthaginian name, derived from Spila or Spala, which signifies a
plain or green country. Some (among whom is F. Tarapha) do refer the name
thereof to Hispalis the son of Lybian Hercules, but Isidorus, as in many other
things, is ridiculous in this matter, for when he had noted that this City was
built by Julius Caesar, and so called from his name and the City of Rome Iulia
Romula; he says that it was so named Hispalis from Piles or Stakes upon which
he supposed either all or part of the City to be built, as being situate in a
moorish place. It is a City near Baetis pleasantly seated, It is ^ miles in
compass.
great in compass, round in form, beautiful, and adorned with Temples, and
many houses. So many things may be declared concerning it, that there is an
ancient Proverb of it, Quien no ha Visto Sevilla, no ha visto Maravilla. It
has been the mother and fosterer of many happy wits, among which was Here
likewise studied Avicen, Pope Silvester the second, and Le^nder.
Benedictus Arias Montanus, a great Divine, and very skillful in diverse
languages, as his works set forth by him do witness. Having spoken something
of the Metropolis, I will describe some of the other Cities, not keeping any
certain order, yet so, as that which is nearest to the Metropolis shall be
placed first. Five leagves from Hispalis is Palatium, or Palantia, which is
commonly called Palacios, from an ancient Castle that stands on one side of
it. It is seated in the way which leads to S. Lucar, and the Gaditane
Straits. Next unto this is Cabaca, a little Town seated in the entrance of the
mountains, which do extend themselves Southward toward Malaga, and Cabecis,
(three leagves off toward the North-East) commonly called Lebrixa, by Ptolemie
Nebrissa, and by Pliny Veneria. The builder thereof is supposed to be Liber
Pater. It is a pleasant and a pretty little Town with an ancient Castle,
encompassed round about with pleasant fields, and is famous by reason of Aelius
Antonius once a citizen thereof and an ornament and honor to all Spain.
Moreover the Town which is commonly called Carmona, by Strabo Carmon, by
Antoninus Carme, and by Ptolemie, Chermenia and Marchena, heretofore (as says
Onuphrius) called Martia; this Town is seated on a little hill which has a
plain on every side for its prospect. There are also these towns, Loja, on
the right hand bank of Baetis: Axalita built of old stone (as Clusius
witnesses) and called Flavium Axalitanum, as appears by an ancient
inscription: Moron, heretofore called by Clusius, Arucci; Ossuna called by
Appianus, Orsona; by Strabo, Orson; by Pliny, Vrso; and Genua or Gemina
Vrbanorum; by ancient Inscriptions, Vrsaon; and by Hirtius, V^sao. The town
Eceja, by the river Singulis, Xenil or Chenil, called by Ptolemie, Astygis; and
by Pliny, Augusta Firma, is a little Town 13 leagues from Hispalis. Penastor
(in the mid way between Hispalis and Corduba on the right hand bank of
Baetis) which Ptolemie, thinks to be Illipula magna, but Pliny, Ilpa Italica
in the Jurisdiction of Hispalis; and not ANDALVZIA.
ANDALUZIA
map of Andalusia (Spain) many miles hence on the bank of the same River,
Corduba, commonly called From hence comes our Cordo^an leather.
Cordova. Pliny says, it was named Colonia Patricia, and Moralis does also
prove the same by inscription on an ancient marble; Johannes Gerundensis says
that it was called Corduba, quasi Cor Batis, that is, the heart of Baetis. It
has bred famous Soldiers, and great Here was borne Lucan the Poet, and the
two Seneca's.
Scholars. And it is happy in her fruitful fields, pleasant gardens, and
beside many other gifts, in her wholesome waters; Silius the Italian Poet lib.
3. calls the soil of Corduba a golden soil when he says, Nec decus
auriferae cessavit Corduba terrae.
Corduba's soil is of so rich a mould
It will not yield to that which bears gold.
Five leagues from Corduba, Southward, is Mons Major commonly called Monte
Major, Ptolemie thinks it to be Vlia a City in Hispania Baetica, and so does
Antoninus. Some few leagues from Corduba is Montoro, Antoninus supposes it to
be Epora. Ptolemie erroneously calls it Ebura instead of Epora, (when
notwithstanding the former is not a Town of Baetica, but of Lusitania) but
worst of all Pliny who names it Ripepora Foederatorum. Not far from Lucar is
the Town which the Spaniards call Xeres de la Frontera, as though it were the
beginning and bound of Spain on that side where it stands. This town
Navagierus thinks to be the same with that which Livie and others call Asta:
Antoninus with an asperation calls it Hasta, Moralis writes that it does
still retain the name of Asta, and thinks it to be that place near the
river Guadalet, which is commonly called Masa de Asta. But Ortelius supposes
that it was drowned with the Island Tartessus in the mouth of Baetis. An
hundred furlongs from the mouth of Baetis stands the Town Chipiona, which
Strabo (lib. 3.) calls Capionis Turris. At the mouth of the River Lethes,
(which is now called Guadelet, or in the Arabian language Bedalac) there is a
Town which is called Portus S. Mariae, and commonly El puerto de S. Maria.
Having passed over Lethes the next town you shall meet withal is Whose Duke
was Captain^ General of the Invincible A^mad^, A. 1^^8.
Medina Sidonia, and somewhat more Southward toward the Sea-shoare is Conilium
a famous town of Spain, six leagues distant from the City Gadiz, and
subject to the Duke of S. Lucar, and Medina Sidonia. There is also Carteja,
called commonly So called because Tariffa the L^^d^ of the Mo^ unto Spain,
here landed.
Tariffa; and not far from thence is the Town Vegelium, commonly called Vegel
It is indeed a little Town, but yet famous for the situation and beauty of it,
for it is seated on a hill which is environed round about with a large plain,
so that it has a fair prospect, as far as the eye can reach, not only upon
the plains and green meadows, toward the East, as also the Mountains of
Afric, and the Southern coast, but likewise upon the great and troublesome
Ocean toward the North and West. Lastly, from hence toward the Northwest lies
the town Hard by this Town was fought the notable battle between Caesar and
the sons of Pompey.
Munda, for so Pliny names this town which now is called Monda, though some
do think that to be old Munda which now is called Ronda veja. There are in the
Diocese of Hispalis, an innumerable company of Monasteries and Nunneries. It
would be a tedious thing to reckon up the Hospitalls for strangers that are in
this country, seeing there are in Hispalis it self an hundred and twenty, which
are richly endowed some of them having eight thousand Crowns, and some
fifteen thousand Crowns yearly revenue. Hispalis is the most beautiful of
all the Cities of Spain, in regard of the Religious houses and Churches which
are therein: among many Churches, the chiefest is the Church dedicated to Saint
Mary, than which the Christian world cannot show a better, if you consider
either the greatness and majesty of the work, which carries with it an
excellent beauty; or if you behold the height of the Tower, wrought with
admirable workmanship, from whence there is a pleasant prospect over all the
City, and the fields that lie round about it. What shall I describe the royal
furniture of the Kings Castle in this City, than which the Kings of Spain
have none more fairly or curiously built? What should I mention the Palaces
here belonging to Dukes, Earls, and other Nobles? Or why should I speak of
the Citizens houses, adorned with pleasant Fountains and Gardens? I pass by
the ancient Aquaeducts, by which water is conveyed into several parts of the
City, and those later which were brought with great cost and labor to the
Pillars, commonly called Hercules Pillars, and dedicated to public delight,
besides many other ornaments of this City since, I fear lest I be tedious.

VALENTIA AND MVRCIA.
The Country whence so called.
VALENTIA takes its name from the Metropolis thereof, being a fair
Mart-Towne, and of great antiquity: On the South it looks toward Murcia: on
the West toward both the Castiles: The Situation.
on the North toward Aragon: and on the East the Sea beats on it. It has a
more temperate Air, The temper of the Air.
and a more pleasant Climate than any other part of Spain: yea the Kingdom of
Valentia has such a gentle Climate, (the warm Western winds breathing upon
it) that at any time, even at Christmas, and in the Month of January the
Inhabitants may carry Posies of flowers in their hands, as they do in other
places in April and May. It is an excellent Country, having plenty of all
things, as Sugar, Wine, Oil, Corn, and diverse other fruits. It has Mines of
Silver in a place which they call Buriel, The fertility of the Soil.
between Valentia and Dertosa. And there are stones found which have, as it
were, golden veins and lines running through them, in a place which is called
Aioder. At the Promontorie Finistratum there are Iron Mines, and near to
Segorbia there are some signs remaining of a Quarrie, out of which Marble was
heretofore dug and carried to Rome. In some places Alablaster is dug up,
but Alume, Tin, Marking-stone, and Chalk is found every where. The Moors by
a long succession of Dukes held the City of Valentia for a long time, though
it had been often besieged by the Kings of Aragon, until James the first,
King of Aragon by a long siege obtained it, and enforced their Captain Zaen
Maure together with fifty thousand Moors to depart the City, The ancient
Government.
and to fly unto Denia, carrying with them their Gold, Silver, Armor, and
Household Stuff. Valentia being thus forsaken, King James sent a Colonie to
replenish it again. The Colony consisted of Catalonians and Aragonians, their
Captain being Berengarius Palatiol Bishop of Barcelona: Vidalus Cavelia Bishop
of Ossa: Peter Ferdinandes d' Acagra, and Simon de Vrrea Knights; they
distributed the whole City among the new Inhabitants, which were 384 families,
according to their several dignities, and adorned the Commonwealth with new
Laws. This Country obtained the title of a Kingdom in the year of Christ
788, as Ortelius writes out of Petrus Metinensis, and Petrus Antoninus
Beuterus. The History has it thus: Hisen King of Corduba being dead, there
succeeded him in the year of Christ 788 his son Alca, whose uncle Aodala
Lord of Valentia called to him his Brother (whose name was Culema, and had
been disinherited) out of Taviar; these two Brethren uniting their forces,
came to Corduba, and endeavoring to expel their Nephew out of his Kingdom,
were overcome in battle, so that Aodala fled for his safety, and returned to
Valentia: VALENTIA, AND MVRCIA.
REGNI VALENTIAE TYPUS
map of Valencia and Murcia (Spain) But the chief of the Moors interposing
themselves between the Uncles and the Nephew, they brought them to that
agreement, that Aodala should write himself King of Valentia, and that Culema
should receive every month out of the revenues of Valentia a thousand of
Moradines (which was a kind of money) for the maintenance of his table, and
five thousand Moradines more for the provision of other necessaries. To which
agreement when Aodala had consented, he first styled himself the King of
Valentia. The ancient Inhabitants of Valentia were the Hedetani, which (as
Ptolemie thinks) were the same with the Sedentani. Secondly the Biscargitani,
whose Metropolis was Biscargis, whereof there is some mention made in the
Inscription of Caesar's coin, as Hub. Goltzius witnesses: and these seem to
have been of the Heditanians, seeing Ptolemie names Biscargis to be amongst
them. Thirdly the Leonicenses, whose Metropolis Ptolemie calls Leonica, and
places it also among the Heditanians. Fourthly the Co^^stani, from whom Pliny
names the Country of Contestania in Tarraconia. Their memory is preserved by
the Town Contayna, or, as some pronounce it, Contentaina, at the head of that
River, at the mouth whereof the Town Oliva is seated over against the Pityusian
Islands. Fifthly, the Lusones, whom Appianus places by the River Iberus in
Iberia, near to the Numantines, but Strabo at the Fountains of Tagus.
Sixthly, the Lobitani, whose Metropolis Ptolemie calls Lobetum, and which
Beuterus writes was first called Turia, afterward Avarazin, and last of all as
at this day Albarazin. Seventhly, The Torboletae in Iberia, near to the
Saguntines, from whom Ptolemie calls the City Turbula, now perhaps called
Torres. Lastly the Celtiberi, so called by Pliny lib. 3. cap. 3. Pomponius
Mela lib. 3. cap. 13. and other Latins, but by Ptolemie Celtiberes; for though
some do place them in Old Castile, yet the most in Valentia. Among the Cities
of this Kingdom Valentia (commonly called Valencia) is the Metropolis, and a
Bishops Seat: It was built by King Romus, as Vasaeus and others write, and
from him called Rome: And the Romans having afterward amplified and enlarged
it, did call it Valentia, a name signifying the same which (...) in Greek
does. But this seems a fable to Resendius, who reports, that it was built
and so named by the Portugals and other Soldiers. It is seated in the
innermost part of the Bay of Sucronia, on the right hand Bank of the River
Turia. It is famous for its manners, institutions, and He^^e ^. Dominick Father
of the Dominican Friars studied.
profession of all Arts both Liberal and Mechanic. It is happy in great
wits, and desirous to preserve peace and concord within it self. It has many
Gentlemen in it, and is very rich in Merchandise. We will not pass by that
which L. Marinaeus Siculus notes concerning the Valentians: They have (says
he) a custom every year on the Feast of Saint Matthew, that having made many
supplications and prayers, they repair to the place of execution, and there
they take up the bodies of those who have suffered death, whether they be
hanged up, or lie on the ground, gathering also together their scattered bones,
if any be; and by and by having laid all things on a Beer, they carry them to
the common burying-place of the City, and there with sacrifices and prayers
do bury them. Petrus Medinensis relates, that there are in this City ten
thousand springs of water. Heretofore on the left hand bank of Turia not far
from Valentia stood Saguntum, which Ptolemie affirms to be a City of the
Heditani, Strabo and Pliny do place it a mile off from the Sea; Strabo
calls it Saguntus, Stephanus Zacynthus, and Antoninus corruptly Secundum and
Secunthum. The most do think it now to be the same with Morvedere, being so
called, as some suppose, from the ancient walls thereof. Appianus makes it the
Colonie of the Zacynthi; some do suppose, that Saguntis the Son of Hercules
was the builder of it, and some would have it named from the Iberian Sagi.
Silius the Italian Poet describes the situation of it in his first Book:
Livie in his 30 Book says, that the walls of Saguntum were cemented with Lime
and dirt mingled together, which was an ancient kind of building. It seems
by Pliny, that the Saguntini did heretofore reverence Diana, being brought
thither by the Zacynthians their Progenitors, two hundred years before the
destruction of Troy. Pomponius Mela says, that the Saguntians are faithful in
the midst of troubles and adversity. Concerning the overthrow and devastation
of this noble City, which through their admirable constancy and great
fidelity toward the Romans happened in the year from the building of the
City 535, ( M. Lucius Salinator, and L. Aemilius Paulus being Consuls) you may
read and have recourse to Livie, lib. 21. Polybius, lib. 3. Orosius, lib. 4.
cap. 14. Eutropius, lib. 3. Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6. Silius the Italian, lib. 1.
Valerius Maximus, lib. 6. cap. 6. Augustine, lib. 3. de Civit. Dei, cap. 20.
Aemilius Probus in Hannibal, Cicero in his Philippicks, and many others. There
are also at this day these famous places in Valentia: First Segorbia, which
Ptolemie and Strabo, as also Vasaeus, Clusius, Tarapha, Emanuel Henricus, and
Augustus his coin do call Segobriga. Pliny also calls the Inhabitants
Segobricenses, placing them in the chief part of Celtiberia. But Moralis
thinks, that Segobriga should be called Injesta, or Cabeca el Griego: and
Ioannes Mariana is of the same opinion. Hieronimus Surita professes that he
knew not where this Segorbia was. Secondly, there is Denia, called by Cicero
and Pliny (as Florianus, Morialis, and Clusius will have it) Dianium, and
Dianium Stipendarium. Thirdly, Incibilis, so called by Livie, and by Frontinus
Indibilis, where Scipio put Hanno Captain of the Carthaginians to flight: It
is thought by Florianus to be Chelva. Fourthly, that Town which Pliny calls
Illici, Ptolemie Ilicias, Pomponius Illice, and in the Inscription of coin
Ilce Colonia; Ptolemie also calls it Illicitani (whence comes the appellation
of the Illicitane Bay) and now some call it Alicanta, and others Elche, which
comes somewhat nearer to truth. Fifthly Belgida, a City of Celtiberia which
still keeps its old name. Sixthly Leria, which Ptolemie calls Hedeta, (whence
the Heditani have their name) Clusius and Moralis Oliete, and later Writers
Liria. Seventhly the Town which Florianus calls Orcelis, and Gomecius and
Clusius Horivela and Oriola, but Nebrissensis Zamora. Eighthly, the Town which
Livie and Ptolemie call Bigerra, Beuterus and Vasaus Bejar, and Clusius
Villena. Ninthly the Town which Strabo calls Setabis, Ancient Stones Satabis,
(as Clusius witnesses) and is now called according to Florianus his opinion
Xativa. This Country has many Rivers, The Rivers.
and especially Turia, which Pomponius calls Duria, and Ptolemie Dorium. The
Inhabitants do keep the Arabic word, calling it Guetalabiar, which signifies
pure Water. This River brings great commodities to those places by which it
flows. There is also the River Xucar (called of old Sucron and Surus) which
rises out of the Mountains of Orespeda. The Mountains.
Valentia has two Mountains, which are called Mariola and Pennagolosa, which
being full of diverse sorts of rare herbs and plants, do cause a great number
of Physicians and Herbalists to resort unto them out of diverse parts of Spain,
in regard of the rarities which are found there. The City of Valentia being
venerable for antiquity, has many ancient Marbles which remain to posterity,
engraven with Roman inscriptions, some of which may be seen in Beuterus,
Ambrosius Moralis, Hottomannus and others. In the City of Saguntum, now called
Morvedre there was a Theater, The public works.
a Scene, and many other Relics of antiquity, as the Sepulchers of the
Sergii, of L. Galba, and Sergius Galba, and other Romans, with the stones
whereof a Monastery was built for the Friars of the Order of the Trinity.
Valentia has a famous Universitie in the City so called, and also an other
Universitie at Gandia, which was not long since erected and founded by the Duke
of Gandia, that the Fathers of the Society of Jesus (of which Society he
became one himself) might study there. The City of Valentia, in regard of
its government of the Commonwealth, does excel all the Cities in Spain. The
Country wherein this City is seated is inhabited, for the most part, by a
Nation which are descended from the Moors, and therefore they do yet retain
their Ancestors speech and manner of life. That is not to be omitted which M.
Tully does speak in his last Oration against Verres, in the praise of
Valentia: Valentinorum (says he) hominum honestissimorum testimonio, that is,
by the testimony of the Valentians who are most honest men. The Trades.
Much silk is made in this Kingdom. Valentia (as Olivarius Valentinus
writes) has great store of traffic and trading: for diverse sorts of wares
are exported from thence, as silke-thread of all colors, and raw silk as it
comes from the Silke-worme, the best cloth also is carried from thence into the
Isles called Baleares, The traffic.
and into Sicilie and Sardinia: Besides, there is exported from thence Rice,
Wheat, Sugar, Raizins, Figs, and preserved fruits into many Countries in
Europe.

ARAGON AND CATALONIA.
ARAGON took its name either from the Autrigonians, a people of Spain, as
Laurentius Valla witnesses; The Country whence so called.
or from Tarracone an ancient City, as it pleases Antonius Nebrissensis and
Vasaeus. Some suppose it was so called from the River Aragon, which rising
there, does flow into Iberus. Some do derive it from the the Altar of
Hercules, called in Latin Ara, and his sports called Agonalia: which if it be
true, it is a wonder that Ancient Writers are so silent concerning Aragon. The
Situation.
Navarre cleaves to this Kingdom on the Northwest, Calatrava toward the
Southeast: On the Southwest it looks toward Castile, and on the North it
has the Pyrenaean Mountains. The Country is for the most part rugged and dry
toward the Pyraenean hills, The quality of the Soil.
so that you shall not meet with a house for many days journeys: yet here are
some fruitful Valleys abounding with the best corn, and other fruits, and it
is refreshed with sweet Rivers. All Writers do report that Ranimirus was the
first King of this Kingdom. The Cities.
He was made King of Aragon, in the year 1016. But concerning the Kingdom and
the Kings of Aragon, as also Valentia and Catalonia how and from whom they had
their beginnings, and of their union, you may read Rodericus Sanctius in the
first part of his Spanish History. cap. 13. The ancient Government.
Also Lucius Marinaeus Siculus de Regibus Hispaniae, lib. 8. and others. The
Metropolis and head City of the Kingdom, Pliny and others do call
Caesar-Augusta, Ptolemy Caesarea-Augusta. It is now called Sarragosa, and is a
famous Universitie. They report that the builder thereof was Iuba, King of
Mauritania, who called it Saldyba, that is, the house of Iuba: but afterward,
the former name being left off, it was called Caesar-Augusta. It is seated on
the bank of Iberus, in a plain place, and has a long stone bridge which
serves the Inhabitants to pass over the River, (as Strabo speaks in his
third book). The City lies in the form and shape of a shoo-soale: It has
four gates looking to the four quarters of the world. It is encompassed with
strong walls, and well fortified with many Towers. In this City the Kings of
Aragon were wont to be crowned by the Archbishop and Primate of the whole
Kingdom. The other Cities are these; first that which Ptolemy and Plutarch do
call in Latin Osca, and is now called Huesca; but Velleius Paterculus
fabulously calls it Eteosca, where he writes that Sertorius was slain.
Secondly the City Tyriassona near the Mountain Cacus, which some do suppose
was built by the Tyrians and Ausonians. Thirdly Iacca, lying in a valley,
heretofore the Seat of the Iaccetani. Fourthly Calatajut, standing in a
Plain, and built out of the ruins of Bilbilis, which together with many other
Monuments of Antiquity, are to be seen a mile and an half from the Town, on
a Hill which is commonly called Bambola or Banbola. This Mountain is enriched
almost on every side with the River Salon or Xalon, where Valerius Martialis
lib. 10. Epigram. 103. does place Bilbilis, being borne a Citizen of it;
Paulinus calls it Bilbilis hanging on the rock: Ptolemie corruptly calls it
Bilbis, and Martial calls it Augusta Bilbilis, as also do the Inscriptions
of ancient coin. Fifthly Barbastrum (famous for Iron Crosse-bowes) which
Ptolemie calls Burtina, and Antoninus Bortina, as some think. Sixthly
Monsonium, seated in the middle or navell of the Kingdom, not far from the
Bank of the River Cinga, near which there is a hill, from whence the Town
takes its name. It is a Town that is famous by reason of the meeting and
convention of the Kingdoms of Aragon and Valentia, and the Principality of
Catalonia where it stands. It is commonly called Moncon, and has not only a
fruitful Soil, but a sweet and open Air. Seventhly Fraga, between Ilerda
and Caesar-Augusta: Ptolemie calls it Gallica Flavia, and Antoninus Gallicum, as
Varronius thinks, though some do place Gallicum there where now stands
Zuera. Eigthly Gurrea, heretofore called Forum Gallorum, which Antoninus
places between Caesar-Augusta and the Pyrenaean Hills. Ninthly, Ajerbium,
where it is thought that Ebellinum sometime stood, which Antoninus and others
do mention. 10ly Vrgella, which Aimonius calls Orgellum, and Ptolemie Orgia.
It is a Town not far from the Fountains of Sicoris or Segre. There were
also other Towns which are now so ruinated, that there remains nothing of
them; among which was the Town Calagurris Nassica, being an other besides that
in Navarre. The Citizens thereof are called Calagurritani by Caesar in his
first Book of Commentaries: and Suetonius notes, that Augustus had a Guarde
of them, (in the life of Augustus cap. 49.) Pliny names them Nassici. The
Rivers here are Iberus or Ebro, and Gallego or Gallicum with others.

The Country whence so called.
Catalonia commonly called Catalunna follows. Volaterranus thinks that it
was so called by the Goths and Alanes, and that it should be written
Gothalania, Beatus Rhenanus (lib. 1. Rerum German.) supposes that it was
called Cattalania from the Catti and Alans, who joining together broke into
this part of Spain. Some think it was called so from the Castellans, the
ancient people of Spain, who seated themselves in these places; and there are
others who think it was called Cathalonia from Othogerius Cathalon, The
Situation.
of whom Marinaeus Siculus lib. 9. De rebus Hispanicis: and L. Valla de
Ferdinando Aragon: Rege lib. 1. have written much. The quality of the Soil.
It is bounded with the Pyrenaean Mountains, the Mediterranean Sea, and the
Rivers Iberus and Cinga. The Country it self is, for the most part, barren,
and has nothing but some wild fruit in it. The Metropolis at this day is
Barcelona, a fair City, which being situated on the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, The Cities.
does declare her antiquity, by the proof and witness of many ancient
buildings. The most of the Spaniards do report, that the builder thereof was
Amilcar surnamed Barcha, the Son of Hannibal Captain of the Carthaginians:
who being overcome ARAGON. AND CATALONIA.
Arragonia et Catalonia
map of Aragon and Catalonia (Spain) at Sea, was hanged by the enemy) and the
Father of Hannibal the great Emperor: it is called by Ptolemie Barcinon, by
Paulinus Barcinus, by Iornandus Barcilona, and anciently Faventia (as Pliny
witnesses.) Marinaeus Siculus lib. 13. de Rebus Hispanicis does praise this
City largely, and describes the situation of it lib. 15. It was heretofore
much less than it is now, being a furlong off from the Sea. It had four
Gates, which looked to the four corners of the world, equally distant one from
an other, and are yet to be seen in the heart of the City, having Ox heads
carved upon them, in token of peace and quiet tillage, as some would have it.
In process of time it was encompassed with double strong Walls and Towers, and
it grew to be so great, that it is worthily now thought to be the chief City
of Catalonia. Concerning the Earls of Barcelona, and their original, we must
have recourse to Rodericus Toletanus, lib. 6. de Rebus Hisp. cap. 3. and L.
Marinaeus lib. 9. Next to this City follows the City Tarraco, which Ptolemie
and Strabo call Tarracon, it is now called Tarragona: It was a City so famous
heretofore, that the better part of Spain was denominated from it. And Mela in
his 2d Book calls it the richest of all the Sea-Townes. Secondly Vigua,
commonly called Vicque or Vich, and by Ptolemie Ausa. Thirdly the City Girona,
which Pliny and Antoninus call Geronda, and Ptolemie Geroundes. Fourthly
Tortosa, which Ptolemie calls Dertoosa, an ancient Stone Dertosa, Antoninus
Derdosa, and Strabo Dertossa, Pliny mentions a people called Dertosani.
Fifthly Lerida, which Ptolemie, Stephanus and others call Ilerda, the situation
whereof is thus described by Lucan, lib. 4. Belli Pharsalici: Colle tumet
modico, lenique excrevit in altum
Pingue solum tumulo, etc.

A little hill, not steep, of fertile lands
Swells up, on which the old Ilerda stands;
Before the Town flows Sicoris soft stream
Among Spaines Rivers of no small esteem,
On which a Bridge of stone high-arched stood
To Endure the violence of a Winters flood.
Other matters are also entreated of concerning this City, as the victories
obtained there by M. Petreius, and L Afranius, Pompey his Generals: concerning
which Caesar has fully written in his first Book of the Civil War. Sixthly
the Town which Silius, lib. 3. Polybius lib. 3. and Ptolemie do call Emporia;
Stephanus Emporion, but is commonly called Empurias or Ampurias. Seventhly
Blanda, so called by Pomponius and Ptolemie, but commonly called Blanes, as
Beuterus, Florianus, and Navigierus will have it. Eigthly. Manresa, which
Florianus thinks Livie does call Athanagia. Ninthly Rosae, commonly called
Roses, Livie calls it Rhoda, Stephanus Rhode, Strabo Rhodope, and Ptolemie
Rhodipolis. 10ly Colibra, which Ptolemie and Pliny call Iliberis, Strabo
Ilberris, and Pomponius Eliberri. It is a Village which was heretofore part of
a great City; some would have Iliberis not to be Colibra, but an other Town,
Paldus would have it to be Salsulae, Olivarius Euna, and Mercator Illa. There
where Catalonia is now, heretofore stood Iulia Lybica, of which some ruins
only remain, not far from the Town Linca; also near the Pyrenaean hills, a
Town which Antoninus calls Cinniana, and the Town called by Ptolemie
Deciana. Johannes Gerundensis lib. 1. Paralipom. disputes and proves, that
the Country of Ruscilion among the Pyrenaean Mountains, belongs to
Catalonia, wherein was a Town which Pliny calls Ruscino, Strabo Royskinoon,
Ptolemie Roysinoon, and Avienus Ruscinus. Some parts of it do remain not
far from a Town called Perpignan, near to a Tower of the same name: for
they call it the Tower of Roscilion. Catalonia has a famous and ancient
Universitie called Ilerda, which (it is thought) Horace did point out Lib. 1.
Epist. ult. in these words.

Aut fugies Vticam, aut unctus mitteris Ilerdam:
From Utica thou either now shall flee,
Or else sent to Ilerda thou shall be.
Here Pope Calixtus the third taught publicly the knowledge of the Law, as
Platina witnesses.

These things may suffice which have been spoken hitherto concerning Spain.
But yet I think it fit to add, by way of conclusion, the excellent testimony
of a Frenchman concerning this Kingdom, wherein whatsoever we have hitherto
said in praise and commendation thereof, is briefly and pithily repeated by way
of recapitulation. This Frenchman whom I mentioned, was called in Latin
Pacatus, who writ a most learned Panegyric to Theodosius the Emperor being a
Spaniard, in which he speaks to this purpose. Now it will appear, that he
is declared Prince, who ought to be chosen of all men, and out of all men. For
first, Spain is thy Mother, a Land more happy than all other Countries, (the
great Fabricator and Maker of all things has been more favorable, in
enriching and adorning this Country, than the Countries of others Nations) for
it is neither obnoxious to the Summers heat, nor subject to the Northern
cold, but is seated in the temperate Climate, and by the witty diligence of
Nature, it is, as it were, an other world, as being enclosed on one side with
the Pyrenaean Mountains, here with the Ocean, and there with the shores of
the Tyrrhenian Sea. Besides, add to this the many famous Cities which are
therein, the whole Countries being either tilled, or full of fruits and
flocks, the gold-bearing Rivers that water it, and the sparkling precious
stones that enrich it; I know that Poets in their Fables which they have
invented to please the ear, have attributed miraculous things to some Nations,
which whether they are true or not, yet are very strange: neither do I now
seek out the truth: Let Gargara (as it is written) yield a great increase of
corn: let Menavia be praised for her flocks, Campania for the Mountain
Gaurano, Lydia for the River Pactolus, Spain has every thing that is
praiseworthy. It brings forth hardy Souldies, expert Captains, eloquent
Orators, and famous Poets. This Country is the Mother of Judges and Princes:
this Country yielded the Emperors Trajan and Adrian, and the Empire is
beholding to this Country for thee. Let Crete, which boasts of Jupiters
being nursed in it when he was a child, give place to this Country: let
Delos, honored by the birth of two Gods, and noble Thebes of Hercules who was
brought up there, yield unto it. We know not whether you believe what you have
heard, but Spain has lent us this God-like Emperor who is now present, and
whom we see. He that desires to know more concerning Spain, let him consult
and have recourse to Johannes Vasaeus, Marinaeus Siculus, Marius Aretius,
Damianus a Goes, Franciscus Tarapha, the Bishop of Gerunda, Annius
Viterbiensis, Florianus a Campo in Spanish, Ambrosius Moralis and others.
Amongst the Ancients also we may consult and have recourse to Caesar, Strabo,
and others, whom Damianus a Goes shows in his Book entitled Hispania.

CATALONIA MORE PARTICVLARLY DESCRIBED.
CATALONIA was heretofore called Marcha Hispanica, Comitatus Barcinonae, and
Hispaniarum Marchionatus. The names.
This Country of Spain lies farthest Eastward of all the rest. It has on
the West the Valentinians and Aragonians near unto it; from the former it is
separated by the River Alcanar or Cenia, from the later in some places by the
River Arnesius, in other parts by the Rivers Iberus, Sicoris, and Nogvera. On
the South it stretches it self lengthward toward the Mediterranean Sea: The
Situation.
On the East, near to the Lake Salsulae or Salsas, and a Castle of the same
name built there by the Emperor Charles the fifth, over against the
impregnable Castle of Leocata, which is upon the Frontiers or entrance into
France, it touches Aquitania: Lastly on the North it is bounded with the
Pyrenaean Hills. It is more than eight hundred Italian miles in compass. It is
in length from the Lake Salsulae to Valentia two hundred and fifty miles, and
in breadth from the Vale of Caralis or Calaris to the shore of Barcinon ninety
four miles. In Summer it has every where a good wholesome Air, and is
temperate in Winter, especially toward the Sea shore, which lies Southward.
The temper of the Air.
For that part which is Northward is cold, and has many snowes. The whole
Country, unless it be in some parts, is very mountainous, and yet it has
many green Meadows, flourishing Pastures and very fruitful Valleys. The
Country in general has such store of Corn and Pulse, but especially Apples,
Wine, and Oil, that it is inferior unto none. The fertility of the Soil.
Neither does it want Mines of Gold, Silver, and other metals, which the River
Sicoris declares by those fragments or sands of gold and silver which it
casts up when it overfloweth; as also some other Rivers of Catalonia. The
best Iron is dug forth here in great plenty, besides Brass, Steel, and
Lead. Of late there was found near Signimont a fruitful vein of shining
precious Stones, which are of a blew or Violet-colour, called Amethysts. There
is also found near unto the Town of Tivica the Onix, which resembles a man's
nail in whiteness, having some veins which run through it, which are in
color like the Sardonix or Jasper: Blood-stones also which have a great virtue
to stay blood are found on the East side of Rubricatum or Lobregat. The
Dertosians have many Quarries of Jasper, which shines and is of many colors,
as purple green, pale, Rose-colour, white, and duskish. At Tarraconia and
Benda diverse kinds of Marble are dug up out of the bowels of the Earth: and
in some places shining and translucent Alablaster is dug forth, of which
they make windows to let in the light, and to keep out the wind; these are
the stones with which Pliny confesses that the higher Spain does abound.
Many places in Catalonia do yield Alume, and Cobblers Ink or Blacking: also
Hemp for Rope-making, which (as Pliny witnesses) is as white and fine as any
flax, by reason of the nature of the water wherein it is steeped. And seeing I
am fallen into this matter, I cannot but in praise of the plenty of all things
which Catalonia has, make mention how that this Country does build Ships of
great burden, even from the Keele to the highest Sails, but especially
Galleys; The variety of living Creatures.
and having furnished them with all warlike provision, they lanch them forth
into the Sea near to Barcinona: Besides, innumerable wild Beasts do wander
through the Forests of this Country, and great store of Cattle every where.
The ancient Inhabitants.
The Ancients did place diverse sorts of people in this part of Spain, as first
the Castellani, whom Ptolemie calls (...), and Villanovanus and Verrerius do
call them Ducatus Cardone. 2 Those whom Avienus calls Indigeti: Ptolom. (...),
and Stephanus (...). 3 Those whom Livie and Ptolemie call Ilergetes, and
Polybius lib. 3. (...). Fourthly those whom Martial calls Laletani, Ptolemie
(...), Strabo (...), and (...). Fifthly those which Aimonius calls Cempsi, and
Dionysius and Eusthathius (...). Sixthly, those whom Plinte calls Cerretani,
Iuliani, and Augustini, Ptolemie (...), Strabo (...), Silius Ceretani, Avienus
Ceretes, and Stephanus (...), of whom there appears and are yet remaining some
tokens in Cerveira, Puigcerda, and Condado de Cerdania. Seventhly those whom
Xilander calls Vetteres an ancient people in Tarraconia, dwelling between
the River Iberus and the Pyrenaean Hills, near to the Sea, and called by Strabo
(...), though Causabone would have them called Secerrae, whom Antoninus makes
mention of. Eigthly the Ligyes, whom Thucidides lib. 6. and Halicarnassus lib.
1. do call (...), who dwelt near to the River Sicanis, and are those perhaps
whom Avienus calls Ligures. Ninthly those whom Livie and Pliny call Ansetani,
and Ptolemie (...). 10, Those whom Pliny calls Larnenses, near to the River
Larnus, at the roots of the Pyrenaean Mountains. And lastly, those whom
Ptolemy calls (...), near to the City Dortosa, Livie Ilercaonenses, and Caesar
Ilurgavonenses.

Catalonia is famous both for strong and wise men, for wonderful
achievements, and for many victories gotten by diverse Nations. For in
Catalonia the Carthaginians heretofore contended against the Inhabitants, Their
ancient valor and virtue.
the Romans against the Carthaginians, the Goths against the Romans, the
Saracens against the Goths, and the French against the Saracens, besides the
contentions which afterward happened between the surviving remainder of the
Goths, and the Earls of Barcinon: Who can relate the wars which the Sons of
the Earls of Barcinon, being Kings of Aragon, did wage with other Nations? and
the great victories which were gotten to the admiration of all men? The
Baleares (commonly called Majorica and Minorica) Ebusa, Murcia, Valentia,
Sardinia, Sicilie, Naples, Athens, and Neopatria can only declare them.
Concerning the Metropolis or chief City of Catalonia, and the other Cities
and Towns, look into the former description. On the very top of the high
Mountain Canus in the County of Roscellion, there is a certain great Lake
which has abundance of those great fishes in it which we call Turturs: into
which if any one cast a stone, the water is presently troubled, and sends
forth vapors, which being condensed and converted into CATALONIA More
particularly described.
CATALONIA
map of Catalonia clouds do cause a tempest immediately to follow with
thunder, lightning, and hail. The Country of Balneole or Aquae Voconis has a
Fountain of a golden color, so that you may see any thing that is cast into
it. And there is a wholesome Fountain in Catalonia, the water whereof being
drunk often and in great abundance, does not only not oppress the stomach,
but also miraculously cures men of many diseases: they fabulously report, that
S. Maginus after some prayers to God to give it that virtue, did dig and open
it with his staff, being in a dry mountanous and stony place. Over against
the Town Aulotum there are about 12 Fountains arising or springing from
brass mines, which both day and night all Winter and Summer do, as it were,
breathe out a thin vapor, warm in Winter, but so cold in Summer, that no
man can endure it for any while; and the water, if the Inhabitants do set any
bottles into it (as they often do) makes them as cold as Ice, so that the
water which is in these bottles affords a delicate drink to cool the heat
of the stomach. There are also many Fountains always hot, which shows, that
there is some fire there which lies hidden in the bowels of the Earth. There
are more than four such hot Fountains in Catalonia, and all of them very
excellent to help diverse kinds of diseases, wherefore many that have griefs
and infirmities do resort unto them from all parts. Catalonia does abound with
Rivers, for it has almost fifty which run through it, The Rivers.
and all of them very full of Fish: some are small, but yet very pleasant
streams, some are of a middle size, and lastly there are some very fair ones,
as namely Tettus, (which is also called Ruscison) Techum (which is also called
Tetrum) Fluvianus (otherwise called Clovianus and Plumialbus) Tardera
(otherwise called Tarnum) Besotium (which is also called Bisocto and Betulo)
Rubricatus, Cinga, Sicoris, and Iberus. All of them do flow and run into the
Sea except Cinga and Cicorus, the former whereof runs into Sicoris, the
later into Iberus, which being much enriched with the watery tribute of these
and other Rivers becomes one of the greatest Rivers in all Spain. The best
Coral grows in the Catalonian Sea on the East thereof. There are Mountains
and very high hills every where in Catalonia, The Mountains.
and those so clothed with the constant liverie of green bushes, shrubs, and
many kinds of trees, that the most of them are full of woods and thickets.
There are many Beech-trees on them, many Pine-trees, abundance of Oaks, many
Holme-trees, innumerable Maple, abundance of Hasel, Nut, and Chesse-nut-trees,
and infinite store of Corke-trees, whose bark is very thick, and being bark't
and taken off, grows again. Crystal is found in the Mountains of Nuria, on
the Cardonensian rocks. And that which any one will wonder at, as being worthy
of admiration, there is found at the Town of Cardona a Mountain having very
wholesome salt growing in it, and shining against the Sun with a great deal
of variety and delight to the eye, out of which (as Pliny reports of the
Mountain Oromenus in India) salt is daily cut and dug, and yet grows
again; yea the Mountain still grows so much the higher, by how much the
more salt is cut out of the pits that are in it. There is also an other thing
very wonderful, and that is, whereas places where salt is found are barren,
and produce or bear nothing, yet this Mountain has many Pine-trees and Vines
upon it. In the Bishopric of Gerunda on the South side thereof, there is a
Hill of white small sand, which (as in Lybia) the wind carries here and
there, and makes great driftes of it, which are very perilous and dangerous
for those that travel that way. Here I cannot but mention the Mountain
called Mount Serrato, being distant toward the East seven leagues from
Barcinona, it is very rockie and cliffie, in manner of a rugged Saw, and so
high, that from thence the Pyrenaean Mountains, and the farthest Mountains of
the Island Majorica may be seen. This Mountain is full of great shining
Stones like Iaspers. There are some Fountains which spring and flow out of it:
it produces many herbs which have special and sovereign virtues: and it is
watered toward the North with the River Lubricatus, and at length like Soractus
in Italy, and Tabor in Galile, it here raises up it self, wherefore it is
very delightful to behold. Now let us come to the public and private Works.
The public and private works.
There are every where many Churches in this Country, and many famous
Monasteries, especially that memorable Church of S. Michael a Fago, (built
between a Cave and an ancient Friarie of the Benedictines) over the top
whereof there runs a little Rivulet, which the Inhabitants call Tanez, and
from thence it presently rusheth down, so that the sound arising from the fall
of the water does much delight those which stand by it. There are besides so
many faire-built-houses disjoined from the City and Towns, and so scattered
through all the plains, fields, valleys, hills, mountains, woods, and groves
that are in the Country that all Catalonia may seem to be one City. It has
every where strong Castles and Towers, which are fortified not only by Nature
and the situation of the place, but by Art. Catalonia is a Principality, The
manner of government.
and contains in it the Archbishopric of Tarraconia, eight Bishoprics, to
wit, the Bishopric of Barcinona, Gerunda, Vrgell, Vicke, Ilerda, Dertosa,
Herlua, and Celsona; two Dukedomes, the one of Mont Albo, and the other of
Cardona: five Marquesates, namely of Ilerda, Dertosa, Pellearia, Camaras, and
Itona: eighteen Counties, the County of Barcinon (which does far exceed
all other honors belonging to Catalonia) the County of Gerunda, of Vrgella,
of Ceretania, of Bisuldinum, of Rossellion, of Emporia, of Ausonia, of
Minorisa, of Prata, of Palmosium, of Petraelata, of S. Columba a Queralto, of
S. Columba a Scintilliis, of Savallanium, of Vallisfogona, of Guimeranum, and
and Mont acuto. It would be too tedious to the Reader to reckon here the
number of the Vicounties and Baronies. The Schools.
It has six Universities famous for all Arts and Sciences. It subsisteth, for
the most part, by wool-dressing, and handy-craft-trades, The Trades.
by which the Inhabitants do live, pay their debts, sustain their Families,
get that estate which they have, and keep that which they have gotten. But let
so much suffice concerning Catalonia, let us pass to other Countries.

THE DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. To the studious and courteous READER.
SEeing we are not borne for our selves alone, but as much as every one can
do for the common good, so much the benificent Framer and Maker of mankind
does require of him, I thought it meet to accommodate and fit this
Geographicall Work, part whereof we here present, as much as I could to the
utility and benefit of the Commonwealth. The use and utility of Geographie in
reading Histories and retaining them, is greater than that I need to make any
admonition or description of; but there is an other greater dignity belonging
unto it, if it be directed to its proper end, and rightly used, and that is, it
does much avail to the knowledge of Politic Government, when the situation of
a place is not only described, but also the nature and condition thereof,
which is sometimes the office of a Geographer to do. And as that Painter does
not satisfy himself in his profession, which delineates a man according to
the proportion of his limbs, but does not with colors and physiognomicall
shadows express his nature and affections; so he shall but figure out an
unpleasing and, as it were, a dead Geographicall body or carcass, who having
set down places according to their symmetrie and proportion, shall not show
their Political respect which they bear one to an other. Wherefore I esteemed
it as a thing chiefly to be respected, that in every several Country the
nature and order of Government appendant thereunto, should be prefixed before
the Tables themselves, whereby I might somewhat benefit those who are studious
of political and public affairs. If our writing be in many places imperfect,
defective, or erroneous, the Reader needs not wonder, for the forms of things
throughout all Nations are not extant, neither have I found all that are,
purposely described by any Author; yet even as I could gather them out of
Histories, I have collected them, whereby thou may partly understand the
order and manner of every government, and so may supply and correct that
which is wanting in thy own Country, which if every one would do, how
profitable would Geographie be to Students? There are three heads especially to
be considered in the administration of Kingdoms, Principalities, and
Provinces, namely the Ecclesiastical State, the Political State, and the
Administration of Justice: first therefore according to the title of the
Country described in the Table, I will reckon up how many members or parts
there are of the Political State thereof, according to the order of dignity
as they are observed there. Secondly in distinguishing Noble-mens places (since
the whole government is in the hands of the Nobility) I will in the first
place reckon those who are Feudals to the Prince, and afterward those that are
free, descending still in order from the highest degree of Nobility, as Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and Lords. Thirdly, I will show into what Prefectures the
Country is divided: and I suppose that by these three things the Political
State will be sufficiently declared. In the administration of Justice, the
juridicall Diocesses shall be noted, and the higher Senates to which appeal
may be made. Lastly, in the Ecclesiastical State, the Archbishops, if there be
any, shall be placed first, and then the suffragan Bishops which are under
them, as also those which are suffragans to others. To reckon up all these
things requires much stud^e, but seeing for want of matter it may be briefly
delivered, I will perform what I may, that so I may stir up lovers of their
country to emulate a greater perfection in their writings. The several places
shall be noted with numbers, that they may be straightway found out in the
following Table; the first number shall contain the degrees and minutes of
Longitude, which shall be sought out in the Northern or Southern side of the
Table, the later shall have the numbers of Latitude, which are to be sought on
the Western or Eastern side. From these bounds, here by the direction of the
Meridian, and there of the Parallel of Latitude, you shall come at last to
their intersection, and so find out the place propounded. The situation of
those places which are in the description of the general Tables ought to be
sought from thence. But if so be that some names are not found in the table
following, it was the fault of the Chorographer who delineated it, for the
right designing and placing of principalities and dominions is not to be
omitted. The rule and government of Countries is in the power of the Nobility,
and therefore it is both profitable and delightful to know and distinguish
their several degrees, and the proper conditions of them. The highest degree
is that of Emperor or King, whom in order do follow the degrees of Duke,
Earl, Baron, the military Tribune, whom the Low-country-men call Banderheer,
quasi Bendae, that is, Lord of the Troops, which he leads under his Banner.
After him is the Knight, or he that has attained to be of the Horsemans
Order, whom the Frenchmen do call Chevalier, and the Low-country-men Ridder.
In the last place is un Escuyer, who bears Arms, but has attained to no
public dignity. There are three degrees of Earls, the first whereof the
Frenchmen call Viconte, who excels the rest in dignity and privileges,
Ludovic. Guic. would have him now called a Burgrave. And though this Order of
Earls in time has remitted something of its honor, yet in the beginning it
was of more excellent dignity, as the description thereof shall by and by
declare. In the second degree is the Earl Provincial, who is called in Dutch,
Landgrave. In the third degree is the Marquess, or Marckgrave. These are the
special degrees and orders of Nobility, among which the government of every
Country is divided. There are also some differences in these degrees which
might occasion a subdivision, but such as are distinguished rather by
privileges than by form of government. Yet moreover I will deliver the
lawful differences and conditions of every order which I have mentioned, as I
have found them in a certain French Book, entitled La division du monde:
deducing their creation from the lowest degree of Nobility, whence their
proprieties and order of government do most clearly appear. A Knight, says
this author, or a Chevalier shall be thus created of one that was a Squire
before, and bore arms in his Escutcheon. If he, having long followed the
wars, exercised arms, been present at many conflicts, has sufficient
means to maintain the state of his degree, and comes of a great, noble, and
rich Family; then in any skirmish he shall make known his request to the
General of the Army, or to some valiant generous Knight, and when the battle
is ended, he shall come unto the said General or Knight, and entreat him in
the name of God and S. George, to give him the Order of Knighthood. Whereupon
he shall draw out his Sword and strike him thrice with it, saying: I make thee
a Knight (or Chevalier) in the name of God and S. George, faithfully to defend
the Faith, Justice, the Church, Widows, and Orphans. But if the supplicant,
although he be valiant, yet be poor, he shall not be admitted, unless so
much yearly revenues be assigned and given unto him, as is necessary to
preserve and maintain the honor and dignity of his Order. And this is the
first degree of Nobility arising from the lowest. A military Tribune called
even Bander-heer shall be made of a Knight, if having long followed the wars
he has lands and revenues enough to keep and maintain fifty Gentlemen in
pay, that is, one Band of horse men which shall follow his colors in the war.
For no man can set up a Colors or standerd of his own, unless he can bring
into the field at his own charge a Troop or Band at the least of fifty
Gentlemen who receive pay from him. A Baron may be created of a Knight, or
also of a Noble Squire, which has four Castles in his dominion, and all power
within himself, for then the King may confer a Baronrie upon him: yet he
cannot give him this honor, unless he has behaved himself valiantly in the
wars. Therefore after the first conflict or battle he is made a Knight,
after the second a military Tribune, and after the third a Baron. The degree
of an Earl is the next, and first an Earl of the Marches, whom we call a
Marquess, that is, Marcgrave. And he may be created one, who has two or
three Baronies included in one Dukedom, and that by the Duke in whose
precincts they lie. He may be made a Provincial Earl, that is a Landgrave,
who has four Baronies in one Dukedom, by the Duke or the King, by the
instance or permission of the Duke. He may be made a Vicount, who has five
Counties or more within one Dukedom, or which are joined together by vicinitie
of situation. And (by the Kings permission) he may be created by the Duke with
great solemnity. But if the King himself be present the Principality is more
honorable. The Duke who is to be made of an Earl, must first possess in the
Kingdom wherein he is to be crowned, four principal Counties, and must
have in every one of them four other Counties or Baronies, which must be
bound to do fealty and service to them. But he must be crowned by the King or
Emperor whose subject he is, his Hatt being adorned with pearls and precious
Stones, in the most flourishing City of his territories, and that in a great
assembly of Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, a solemn festival being also
held, as it is the custom as the Coronation of Kings. He that is to be King,
must have four Dukedomes lying near together subject unto him, and in every
Dukedom four Cities, which he alone governs, in every one of these four
Cities one Archbishop, and under every one of these again ten Provincial
Bishops. He being endowed and adorned with these dominions and dignities shall
come unto the Emperors Majesty as to his superior, or shall invite him by an
honorable Embassage to come unto him, and so desire to be crowned by him. But
this seems to be a later manner of electing the Kings and other Princes, for
as long as those wandering Nations of the Goths, Vandals, Longobardes, and many
others did bring in their Kings with them, they did not measure the royal
dignity by large possession of lands, but by the multitude and strength of the
people which they brought in. Neither was there any other choice of Dukes, who
first began to be instituted by Longinus Governor of Ravenna in the year
569, and afterward by the Longobards, than for their valor and wise
achievements. Add to this that which Paulus Aemilius witnesses, namely, that
Dukes and Earls were in the beginning made Prefects by the King over Nations
and Cities on this condition, only that as often as there was occasion they
should be dismissed or changed. Now how could the before said Laws of creating
Princes (which are measured by, and do claim the hereditarie possession of
Lands) be in force at that time, seeing Dukedomes and Counties were conferred
by Kings and Emperors as a temporary bounty? Therefore though the precise
time of the Institution of them cannot be showed (for that French Book does
mention nothing of it) yet it is very likely, that under Otto the second
Emperor, or about the year one thousand, or a little after, that manner of
constituting and confirming dignities was ordained by the Monarchs. For even
until Otto the second, every Prince according to his power and ambition, did
aspire to greater dignity and royal Majesty. So out of one Kingdom of
Lotharingia or Lorreine, which being extended from the Rhene even to the River
Scaldis, was bounded with the Friesland Sea, and belonged to Lotharius the
Son of Lodovicus Pius, more Kingdoms did afterward arise, namely the
transjurane Burgundy, which being extended from the Mountain Jura even to the
Alps, did contain all Helvetia, the Rauraci, the Allobroges, and the
transjurane Burgundians: and the Kingdom of Provence which did certain some
part of Burgundy and Sabaudia, and was afterward called the Kingdom of
Arelatum, of which at this day the Elector of Trevers is called the
Archchan^^liour. It did also contain the Kingdom of Lotharingia, now also
called Lotharingia, and other Kingdoms between the Rhene and Scaldis, even to
the Friesland Sea; and heretofore it was called the Kingdom of It was called
Austrasia, either from one Austrasius a President, who^ Justinian the Emperor
let ov^^ this country, or from the world Aus^^^, because it is mo^^ Eastward
th^n ^n^ other part of France.
Austrasia. Again, this Kingdom of Lotharingia, Charles the bald, and his
Brother Lodovick did part between them, both of them preserving the title of a
King in all places. I omit the other Kingdoms which sprung up in that agely
the desire and asseciation of Sovereignty. But the Emperor Otto the second did
divide Lotharingia, having took away the name of a Kingdom, into nine
Dukedomes and Earledomes, as it were, into members pulled and separated from
the body, as Cuspinian has it, and having made a division thereof Anno 981, be
first made Charles the Brother of Lotharius King of France, Duke of that
Country which is now called Lotharingia, a^ Richardus Wissenburgius does
speak more at large. It seems that after that time the ar^itrarie erection
and raising of Kingdoms and Principalities did f^^le, the Monarchs now
contriving how to establish a settled Empire, which consists in the just
proportion and harmony of its parts, as in man the parts of the body to the
head. Therefore that some order might be perpetually kept in Principality and
in government; I suppose that at length about the same time which I mentioned
before, these aforesaid Laws were devised. And so, Reader, thou have the
distinct Degrees of all the Nobility, and the differences of their dignities.
Now if thou observe how Provinces in every Kingdom are divided in respect of
them, how the government and administration of the whole, and in what
proportion it is distributed among these degrees, what is every ones peculiar
office, what is the habitude or relation which they have one to an other, and
especially to their head, you shall behold either an excellent harmony tending
to the preservation of peace and tranquillity, strength and power, riches and
state, virtue and wisdom to the Majesty of a Kingdom, and the enlarging of
territories; or a confused disorder tending to instabilitie, declination,
destruction or inundation, according as there are diverse kinds of government.
If those matters which thou shall see or judge did succeed ill, thou may
consider whence that ill success proceeded; but if thou find any prosperous
and successful event, search the cause thereof, so thou shall behold which is
the best policy in governing of Commonweals, and shall study Geographie
with more profit.

An Admonition concerning the use of the Tables following.
WHen it was my purpose to reduce all Geographie to the consideration of the
Heavens, that the just symmetrie of places, as they lie in the Sphericall
figure of the Earth, might as near as could be observed in plano or on a
plain superficies, a due proportion of degrees of Longitude was to be set
down, according to the degrees of Latitude. Seeing therefore the Table could
contain but a few degrees of Latitude, I have reduced the proportion thereof
almost to the middle Parallel of the Table, so that what the proportion is of
that Parallel to the Meridian, the same should be the proportion of the degrees
of Longitude in the same Parallel to the degrees of Latitude, and so all the
Meridians are Parallels one to an other. But seeing there were more degrees of
Latitude, because there is a great difference of proportion in the Parallels
both in the top and the bottom unto the Meridian, lest the symmetric of places
should not be true, I have chosen two Parallels almost equally distant from the
middle and the extremes, to the proportion whereof, I have drawn the Meridians
to design and note out the degrees of Longitude, which are not then Parallels,
but according to the greater or lesser distance of the assumed Parallels, they
do incline more or less one to an other and to the middle Meridian of the
Table.

Moreover thou shall find the degrees of Latitude and Longitude designed and
set forth on the sides of the Tables, and for the most part, the degrees of
Latitude on either side of the Table, and of Longitude on the top and bottom,
seeing according to the usual manner of Geographers we place the North on the
higher part. But if the Country to be described be more extended toward the
South and North, than toward the East and West, then commonly we place the
West upward. Howsoever it be made the East and West sides shall always
represent unto thee the degrees of Latitude, the other two sides the degrees of
Longitude. And all the degrees are divided into 60 parts which they call
minutes, sometimes into single parts, when the magnitude will permit, sometimes
into two, five, or ten. This foundation being laid, we have followed the best
descriptions in delineating of Countries, in which I had much help from a
famous Measurer of Countries, and a most diligent Geographer to the King of
Spain called Christianus Grothenius, who had viewed many Countries, and
described them more largely and exactly than any other, and also from a most
diligent Geographer to the King of Spain Abraham Ortelius, who was candor and
courtesy it self, and who, in evidence thereof, liberally communicated unto
me what Tables soever he had gotten, though he had the same purpose that I
intended. Those who besides did help me any thing at all, I will mention in
due place, so that Students may give them their deserved praise, and I may not
be found ungrateful. And whatsoever has been offerr'd me by others, and I
found out by my own diligent search, I have compared together, that as near
as may be I might set forth accurate descriptions: yet in one thing which I
chiefly desired I am defective, namely in an exact numbering and reckoning up of
Principalities and Noble-mens places, which are much sought for in Tables that
are set forth: therefore (READER) thou must pardon that defect, and vouchsafe
to help me in describing the Political Order of the Nobility, and in
showing their places, names, and qualities, which will be an honor and grace
unto thy name. Little round circles do show the true situation of every place,
from whence their distance is to be taken, and these have some marks whereby
places are distinguished one from an other. The Villages are marked only by
round circles: where we meet with a Castle, we mark it in this manner ^,
and where with Friaries with a Cross thus ^: Towns have two Towers at least,
and Villages of note where Noblemen reside one. These things we observed as
notes. And we have taken easy marks for distinction, that so any may supply
those things which are omitted.

If any one would find out the Longitude and Latitude of any place, How by the
Map to find out the Longitude and Latitude.
he shall do it where the Meridians are Parallels, by taking with a pair of
Compasses the distance thereof from the one side of the Table, and by applying
the Compass so opened to the other side. If you have taken the distance from
the East side, the Compass from the same side in the North side will show the
degree and minute of Longitude. But if you have the distance from the North
side, it will show you the Latitude in the East side. When the Meridians are
not Parallels, the Latitude of a place shall be found out in the same manner,
as in universal Tables, where the Parallels are circular, for the distance of
the place taken from the next Parallel will show the same in the East side. But
the Longitude is to be sought out with a thread or ruler laid upon the place,
and turned about, until on the North and South side the same minute of the
same degree be on either side designed, and whatsoever that is, is the
Longitude of the place assumed.

The miles in diverse Countries do differ much, therefore if you please to
compare them one to an other, bring them with your Compasses to the degrees of
the Meridian, and then find out how many miles are comprehended in one degree,
and you shall see how many miles of one country, and how many miles of an
other country do make up one degree; so you shall find the common German
miles (fifteen whereof are in one degree) four times larger than the Italian
miles, and double as much to the Swethish and Westphalian miles.

Sometimes you shall find a line joined to a little Circle, thus ^ ^ ^ which
shows the name pertaining to the place, being therefore added that you may
know what name belongs to every place.

An Index of the Tables in FRANCE.
1 Gallia universalis, or France in general. 2 Brittanie, Normandy, etc. 3
Lemovicium. 4 Santonia. 5 Aquitania. 6 Provincia. 7 France, Picardie, and
Campagnia. 8 Francia. 9 Picardia. 10 Campania. 11 The Country of the
Bellovacians. 12 Bolonia. 13 Aniou. 14 The Dukedom of Berry. 15 The Dukedom
of Burbon. 16 Bourdelois. 17 The Country of Perch. 18 Touraine. 19 Poictou. 20
Cardureium. 21 Bresse. 22 Lionnois Forest. 23 Northern Langue dock. 24
Dauphine. 25 Lotharingia the Northern. 26 -- and Southern part. 27 The
Dukedom of Burgundy. 28 The County of Burgundy. 29 Sabaudia. 30 The
general Table of Helvetia. 31 Zurich. 32 Wiflispurgergou. 33 The Lake of
Geneva. 34 Argou. 35 Rhaetia. 36 A Table of all the Low Countries. 37 Flanders.
38 The Eastern part of Flanders. 39 Brabant. 40 Holland. 41 Zeland. 42
Gelderland. 43 Zutphania. 44 Vltrajectum. 45 Mechlinia. 46 Groeninga. 47
Transisulania. 48 Artesia. 49 Hanonia. 50 Namurcum. 51 Lutzenburg. 52 Limburg.
FRANCE.
I Have described Spain and the special Provinces thereof, The names and
whence so called.
now passing over the Pyrenaean Mountains, France offers it self, which I
will delineate as faithfully as I can. That part of Europe which is now called
France (as many do report) was heretofore called Galatia, from Gala, (...).
which in English signifies Milk, because it produces men of a white milkie
color, for that the Mountains (for this also they add) do keep off the
violent heat of the Sun. Diodorus writes, that it had that name from Galata
the Daughter of Hercules. Others do deliver Some say it was called from the
Hebrew word Galath, which signifies R^n* as if the first Inhabitants had been
so ancient a people, that they were drowned with the general Deluge.
other opinions. Ptolemie in his second Book, and other Grecians do call it
Celtogalantium. Some think it was named Gallia from Some affirm that it was
so named, because it was inhabited anciently by the Gauls, which came from
Gallatia, a Country in Asia the Less.
Gallatia, which word others derive otherwise. But these things are not of so
great moment, as that they should detain the Reader with a large discourse.
It Is certain that the name of Gallia was used by the Latin Writers, as we
shall understand more fully by that which follows. Postellus and See Montanus
upon Obadiah, verse. 20.
Arias Montanus do write, that the Hebrews did call it Tzarphat. It is now
called France from the Francks, a people of Germany near the Rhene, who
possessed themselves of this Country by force of Arms: it is commonly called Le
Royaulme de France. The Grecians did call the Frenchmen in general Celtae and
Galatae: and they were also (as Josephus witnesses) heretofore called
Gomeritae. And so much briefly concerning the name. The Situation and quantity
follows. I will unfold it according to the bounds, the longitude, the
latitude, and the compass thereof. Concerning the bounds of the Kingdom of
France, on the North, on which side it looks toward the Low Countries, it is
bounded by a line drawn from Callice unto Argentoratum or Strasburg, The
Situation.
which on the left hand leaves Artesia, Hannonia, Lutzenburg, and other
Countries; and on the right hand Picardie and Lotharingia: but that part which
lies against England, the great British Ocean does beat on; as likewise on
the West, making a great Bay into Aquitania. On the South, where it cleaves to
Spain, it has the Pyrenaean Mountains, and that part of the Mediterranean
Sea, which is called the French Sea. Lastly, on the East it is separated by the
Alps from Italy, by Iura from the Helvetians, and by the Rhene from the
Germans. Gallia or France (for I will use these words indifferently) is more
than 300. G. French miles long from the West straight forward unto the East: or
from the South-South-West unto the South-South-East above 330. In breadth it is
almost 285 miles; the compass of it is above a thousand and twenty; and this
is the quantity of it, the quality follows. It lies under part of the fifth
Climate, all the sixth and seventh, and part of the eigth, between the degrees
of latitude forty one and fifty three, and of longitude 20 and 38. And
although in general it lie very much open to the Northern winds, yet it may
be reckoned with the best Countries of Europe for the wholesomnesse and temper
of the Air. Claudianus calls it a happy Soil, Caesar lib. 3. Bell. Civ.
calls it a wholesome Soil, and Strabo the fruitful Mother of It is supposed
to contain (...) m^lli^^^s of living ^oule ^. He^lin. p. 76. The fruitfulness
of France.
Men ( lib. 2. de Bell. Gal.) The Country, for the most part, is plain, and
yet having in some places pleasant hills, and between them delightful
valleys, both of them wonderful fruitful. The fields are well tilled, and
do bring forth great store of Especially Pi^ardie, and ^ang^^d^^^. See (...)
page 59.
Wheat and other Corn. France (as Strabo witnesses) has great store of
Corn and Acornes. There is no place unoccupied, but where there are Marshes
or woods. It abounds with the best Wine, which they transport to Brittany,
Normandy, Picardie, Germany, the L^w-Countries, England, and other Countries
where Grapes can attain to no maturitie or ripeness, by reason of the
coldness of the Air. Also Athenaeus and Strabo do witness, that France had
Mines of Gold and Silver, but now they are supposed to be exhausted. That part
of the Country which is occupied by tillage, does feed and bring up all kind
of Cattle, by reason whereof it abounds with Flesh, Milk, Butter, Cheese,
Wool, and other things. The Frenchmen did peaceably possess all France,
under the reign of King Clodoveus, who first of all was made Anno 485
Monarch of all France, and first of all professed the Christian Faith, which
the Kings of France do use even unto this day. He did bear for his Arms the
three Hey^in, page 104. out of Paradine affirms that the A^^es of Fran^e ^n
the day^^ of Pha^amond the first King was Gul^^, thr^e Crowns Or: but Charl^
(...) them to Az^^^ ^ flower de lu^ Or.
Lillies or Flower de lises, which some do suppose were given him from P^elius
Mel (...) last part ^^ p^^ c. 7 (...) to b^ ^^lo. s.
heaven. After him, as they write, there reigned now in a right succession, now
in a collateral Childebertus, Clotarius the first, Cherebertus, Childericus
the second, Clotarius the second, Dagobertus Magnus, Clodoveus the second,
Clotarius the third, Childericus the third, Theodoricus, Clodoveus the third,
Childebertus the second, Dagobertus the second, Childericus the fourth,
Theodericus the second, and Childericus the fifth. He in the eleventh year of
his reign, and in the year of Christ 75, by the authority and command of
Pope Zachary, (to whom Pipine in a Book sent unto him had painted out his
opprobrious and reproachful life) was deprived of his Kingdom, and enforced
to become a Monk. In his place his Accuser Pipine was made King, the Son of
Charles Martel, otherwise called Because h^e was b^se Son to P^^in, who was
Pre^ect o^ Cont^oll^ of the P^ to Da^ ^he G^ea^ R^ (...)
Pipin, surnamed the Short, being before Prefect. After him there followed
Charles the Great, Ludovicus Pius, Carolus calvus or Charles the bald,
Ludovicus Balbus, Ludovicus the third, Charles the gross, (...)
Odo, Charles the simple, Rudolphus, Burgundio, Lodovicus the fourth,
Clotharius, and Ludovick the fifth, being the last of the posterity of Charles
the great, who being poisoned, the Kingdom was translated to Hugh Capet, a
chief man of France, Earl of Paris, and titulary Duke of France and
Burgundy. After Capet there succeeded Robert surnamed Pius, Henry the first,
Philip the first, Ludovicus the sixth, Ludovicus the seventh, Philip the
second, Ludovicus the eigth, Ludovicus the ninth, Philip the third, Philip the
Fair being the fourth, Ludovicus Huttinus the 10, (...)
Philip the fifth surnamed the Long, Charles the fourth surnamed the Fair, who
dying without any male Issue (...) whose (...) was (...) the great battle of
Gre^^e.
Philip of Valoys was chosen in his place, being the Son of Charles the first
Earl of Valoys. After him there followed In whose reign was f^ the battle of
P^^es by Edward the black Prince.
John of Valoys, Charles the fifth called the Wise, Charles Bene-natus the
sixth, Charles the seventh, Ludovick the 11, Charles the eigth, Ludovicus the
12, Francis of Valoys the Son of Charles the first Earl of Angelime, Who
drove Charles the fifth out of Germany.
Henry of Valoys the second, Francis the second, The Author of the great
Massacre at Paris
Charles the ninth, FRANCE.
map of France Henry the third, who being slain by the hand of a Iacobine
Monk, Who also after he had driven the Spaniard out of France, and had
enjoyed about ten years time of peace^ was most villanously slain by Raviliac.
Henry of Burbon the fourth, being the Son of Anthony Duke of Burbon was
proclaimed lawful Successor to him, and the most Christian King of Navarre
and France. The Frenchmen are cheerful and inclined to wars. Concerning
their valor, it will be worth our labor to hear Strabo a skillful man, by
birth a Capadocian, by learning a Grecian, in judgment ancient, and that had
traveled through many Countries. The whole Nation (says he) of those people
which are now called the French or the Galatae, delights in Martial
affairs, and is of a courageous stomach, hot at the first onset: They are of
a courteous and fair condition, and do abhor all wicked manners; so that
being provoked by any injury, they will presently fight and quarrel, without
any respect of the danger ensuing. Also no man is ignorant how great a terror
the name of the French^men was once to the Romans, the Grecians, and the
Asiaticans, when heretofore they came from their own Country to spoil and
destroy the Oracle of Apollo Pythius, unto which they resorted from all parts
of the world. Also when they took Rome and set it on fire; when they besieged
the Capitol, and when they built Cities in Italy, as Mediolanum, Comum,
Brixia, Verona, Bergomum, Tridentum, and Vincentia. France now is not so large
as it was heretofore, for that part of Italy which lies between the Alps and
Ancona was called heretofore Gallia Cisalpina, but now it is called Lumbardie:
and a great part of Belgia or the Low Countries now belongs to Germany,
which by the description of Caesar, Ptolemie, and ancient Writers did once
appertain to France. For they divided Gallia Here note, that though it be
beyond the Alps, in respect of Italy, whose Inhabitants were the original of
this name, yet in respect of us it is on this side of the Alps, and therefore
Gallia C^salpina as on the contrary the Italians C^salpina (...) ^ransalp^^a*
Transalpina, or that part of France which is beyond the Alps, called by
Pliny Comata, and by Ptolemy Celtogallia, into three parts, Celtica, Belgica,
and Narbonensis: Ptolemie divides it into four parts, Aquitania, Lugdunensis,
which is the same with that which Caesar calls Celtica, Belgica, and
Narbonensis. They bounded it then with the Pyrenaean Mountains, the Rhene, the
Ocean, and the Alps, when now all that which lies from Cales Eastward, is
reckoned as part of Germany not of France; and the Germans do challenge a
great deal on either side of the Rhene. The chiefest Cities are Lutetia
Parisiorum or Pari^, Massils, Narbon, Iaons, Pictavium, Bordeaux, Naeomagus,
Iuliomagus, Orleance, Rothomagus, Rupella, and many others, of which we will
speak more largely in the particular descriptions. France has many Lakes, and
the chief of them all, The Lakes
is that which they call in Latin Lemanus, and the most do call the Lake of
France. Concerning which, seeing it is described in a particular Table of this
Volume, I will add nothing more in this place, but refer the Reader thither.
Not far from a Town called Bessum there is a Mountain and on it a great
Lake, being so deep that it is thought to have no bottom, no water, as far
as may be discerned, does flow into it; if any one cast any thing into it, he
shall straightway hear it thunder, and see it lighten, beside much rain and
hail will fall afterward. Not far from thence is the Lake Crypta, the round
mouth whereof is commonly called Creux de Soulcis, being a deep Abyss, whose
depth cannot be found out: and if a man cast a stone into it and afterward lay
his ear unto it, he shall hear a great murmuring noise, like as if it
thunderd a far off. In the Summer time, though nothing be cast into it, yet
a noise is heard in the hollow cavernes of it. And it is supposed that there
are winds in them, which do war, as it were, one against an other. Abitacum
or Avitacum, being a place in Avernia near Claromont, is so lively described
by Sidonius in his second Book, Epist. 2. as if it were delineated in these
times. Concerning the Lake Rubressus, you may read Pomponius Mela lib. 2. in
the Chapter wherein Narbon is painted forth; Pliny calls it the Rubrensian
Lake, but Strabo and Stephanus name it Limne Narbonitis. France has
innumerable Rivers both great and little. Ausonius Eidyllio 3 does reckon up
many of them, where he speaks thus of Mosella: Non tibi se Liger anteferet,
non Axona praeceps, etc.
Liger shall not prefer her self before thee,
Nor yet Axona, whose swift waters be
Still running on, nor Matrona that does glide
'Twixt France and Belgia lying on each side:
Nor yet Carantonus, the which does flow,
And back to the Santonick Bay does go:
Yea France shall make her Tarnis come behind,
Though sands of gold are unto it assigned.
And her Aturnus, though it madly run
Into the purple Sea, yet will not shun,
But first adore the River Mosel, as
Its Mistress ere 'twill to the Ocean pass.


And a little after. Both A River breaking out of the Alpe^, and now called
D^^nia.
Druna and Druentia which does flow
'Tweene crooked banks, and so does winding go,
Shall reverence and adore thee, and so shall
The Rivers that down from the Alps do fall.
And Rodanus, who as she along does glide,
Does name that Bank which lies on the right side:
Thee with blew Lakes, with streams that greatest are,
And with Sea-like Garumna I Will compare.
But the chief Rivers are Sequana, Ligeris, Garumna, and Rodanus. That which
is called in Latin Sequana, Ptolemie calls Zekouana, Strabo Zekouanos,
Stephanus Zekoanos, and Benjamin Siban; but it is commonly called Seyne. It
rises in the Dukedom of Burgundy, and having visited Paris, where it makes
a little Isle, and Rotomagum or Roan, at last with a great mouth it breaks
into the British or Norman Sea. It has a very dangerous harbor for ships to
ride in, and it requires much care to pass out of it, or come into it. The
Normans do commonly call it la Bare: for Seyne having entered into the Sea
straight^way, contrary to the nature of other Rivers, does flow back again,
rising up with a horrible noise as high as any spear. Here those that are
careless and negligent do run themselves upon unexpected dangers. The Seyne
as it runs along, does receive Nine navigable streams, says Heylin. p. 84.
diverse Rivers, of which the chiefest and most noted by the Ancients, are
Matrona, commonly called Marne, Esia, Which now they also call Isara*
Yse, commonly Ayse, Axona commonly called Ayne, Aisne or Esne. Liger, which I
named in the second place, is a River famoused by Caesar and others. It is
called Ligeros (or as it is better in some copies Ligeris) by Strabo in his
fifth Book, and by Ptolemie, but now it is called Loire and On this River
stand the City Orleans, Nantes, and many others.
Leire. The head thereof is at the Town Velaunum, which is called commonly la
Font de Leiro. It is larger than the rest, so that it is worthily called the
Father of the Rivers of France. And having run with a clear stream through
diverse Countries, (for it did anciently divide the That is, the Inhabitants of
Gallia Narbonensis, which comprehends the Provinces of Languedock, Provence,
and Daulphine, and this Country was so called from Narbone a City in
Languedock,
Celtae from the Aquitani, as Strabo notes) it does exonerate and disburthen
it self into the Western Ocean, by a mouth almost four leagues wide, but
somewhat troubled with sands. Two leagues and a half within, there are rocks,
which are called the Hogs. It receives into it many great navigable Rivers,
as Elaver commonly called Allier, Carus now called Cher, Vigenna now Vienne,
Viane, and Vignane, Meduana now called Main, and others. Garumna follows, by
which Caesar divides Gallia from Aquitania: Strabo lib. 4. calls it
Gorounas, Ptolemie Garuna, and Frontinus Garonna, which name it still retains
from its head, even to the Castle Blavia, but afterward it is called Geronde
and Girond. Gulielmus Brito calls it Gerunna. It rises out of the Pyrenaean
Mountains, not far from a Town which is commonly called Guadalup^ And so
having visited Tholous, Bordeaux, and other places, mingles it self with the
Aquitanian Sea, by a mouth of two leagues breadth: at the entrance whereof
there are some rocks, which are called the Asses. The Dutch Mariners do call
the Northern side Noorder-Esel, the Southern side Suyder-Esel, having a high
watchtower on it, which is commonly called la Tour Cordan. It receives these
navigable Rivers; Tarnis commonly called Lo Tarn, in French le Tar: Egercius,
which the Vascones do call Gers; Oldus commonly called Ooldt, or with an
Article le Old; Duranius now sometimes called la Dordogne, sometimes Dordonne,
and others. I have given the last place to Rodanus: This River was known by
all Writers both the Greek, who called it Podanos, and the Latin. The
Frenchmen call it le Rosne, but the Inhabitants le Ros: Oppianus in
Halieuticis lib. 4. and Philostratus in the lives of the Sophisters, do call
it Eridamus. Pliny writes, that it was named from Roda a Colonie of the
Rhodians in that Country. It rises not far from the Fountains of Danubius,
Rhene, Arola, Ticinus and others, near a Mountain which is commonly called
Briga; and having entered into the Lake Lemanus, near to the Town Nova-villa,
or Neuf-ville, it runs through it, so as it preserves its color, and so
proceeding to the Town of Geneva, it runs afterward with a violent course
into the Mediterranean Sea, with seven mouths or inlets, as Apollonius writes
in his Argonauticks; with five, as Diodorus thinks and others; with three, as
Artimedorus in Strabo, Pliny, and Ammianus suppose; with two, as Polybius and
Ptolemy think; with many, as Livie wisely does report, lest he might be
convinced of falsehood in a particular enumeration: at this day the Inhabitants
do name five and more, as Gras Neuf, Gras de Orgon, Gras Paulet, Gras Grant,
Gras d' Enfer, and Gras de Passon, which being toward Massilia, Pliny calls
Mossaleoticum, and Polybius Massalioticum: Rodanus does receive Arva; and This
River is called by Marcellinus Sangona or Saugonna; by Polybius Scora^; and
anciently Brigulus, as some have written.
Araris, now called Saone or Sone; also Isaris now called Isere: also Druna,
which is now called Dronia or Drosne; and Druentia now called Durance. But so
much shall suffice concerning the Rivers for the present. The British Ocean,
where it lies against England beats on France on the North, and also on the
West, as we said before; but on the South the Mediterranean Sea: toward both
these Seas there are many famous Bays; on the Ocean side is that which
Aethicus, and others call Sinus Aquitanicus, and Lucan most elegantly calls
Tarbellicus Ancon. There are also many other famous Bays in the same Sea, in
whose inward parts are seated the Towns of Diepe, Constantia, and others.
Toward the Mediterranean Sea there are two Bays called the Greater and the
Less. That part of the Mediterranean is called the Greater, where Rodanus does
power it self into it. Marcus Portius Cato calls it Angulus Gallicus, or the
French Corner, but Lib. 26. and 30
Livie, Lib. 43.
Iustine and others call it, for the excellence of it, the French Bay. Strabo
writes that the Lesser was near the Pyrenaean Promontorie, which is called
Promontorium Aphrodisium, and this Bay Mela calls Salsus. Antoninus places
also the Gamblacian Bay in Gallia Narbonensis. France had heretofore, as also
it has now, many famous Havens, of which Lucas Aurigarius has written fully
in his fifth Chart, and the four following, the chief whereof are
Staliocanus, Vindana, Brivates and others, named by the Ancients. That which
Ptolemie calls Staliocanus, some suppose to be that of S. Paul de Lion in
Britain, but others Roscou, to whom I am induced to subscribe, because the
later is more safe and convenient than the former, for though it has the
Island commonly called De Bas lying over against it, yet it affords a safe
coming in for ships of seven Else deep. Over against the former lies
threatening Taurus (an Island commonly called Le Taureau) which has innumerable
rocks lying round about it, some being hidden and some standing forth, that are
very dangerous to Mariners, except they take heed. Not far from thence in
the same Britannie toward the South, behind the bending of the Promontorie
called Gobaeum, is the Bay of Vindana, which is now called Fenstiers, or
Conquest; Iovius (though erroniously) calls it Breast; for that Haven which
Ptolemy calls Briovates, is now called Breast. Pliny makes mention also of
the Haven Zetoor, which is now called Lusson or Luxo. And of the Haven which
Ptolemie calls Santonum, but now is called la Rochelle, as Villanovanus
supposes. The Mountains and Woods now follow. Concerning the Mountains,
France is more mountainous in some places than in others. The highest parts are
Daulphine, Provincia, Subaudia, and Burgundia. The Andegavensian Country has
also some Mountains, which do run out into the borders of Brittanie and
Poictou. Ancient Writers do chiefly celebrate these Mountains of France,
namely Cebenna, Vogesus, and Iura. Cebenna is a Mountain, which, as Caesar
writes, divides those of Avergne from those of Vivareiz; Pliny calls it
Gebenna, Lucan and Ausonius do name it Gebennas, and Mela Gebennicos. The true
and genuine writing of it, as Scaliger notes in his letters to Merula, is
Cebenna with a C: for they are called at this day Montaignes de Cebenes and
Cevenes: Ptolemie and Strabo call them Cemmeni, some Latins do call them
Cebenna, Venetus calls them Cevennae, and Villanovanus calls them Montaignes
d' Auvergne: part of these Mountains is now called Tarara (as Guileelmus
Budaeus witnesses in his fourth Book de Ass) which lies in the way to Lions;
on the top whereof there is a seat cut in a rock, into which they set those
Merchants, who have not formerly used to trade at Lions. It is commonly called
la Chere de la verite, for they are enforced to swear the truth, whether they
have ever been at Lions or not, and to promise afterward to make them a feast
in honor of the City. There is also a Mountain which Caesar lib. 4. de bell.
Gall. Lucan. lib. 1. Pliny, and others do call Vogesus. Tacitus in the first
Book of his History does corruptly call it Vocetus or Vocetius, as it is
noted by learned men. Stephanus in his fourth Book calls it by the name of
the Alps, now it is called Mont de Faucilles, and it has also other names. It
does separate Burgundy and Alsatia from Lotharingia; it does send forth the
River Mosella, as Caesar witnesses, and infinite other Rivers, the most
whereof do run into the Rhene. That part from whence Mosella flows is
called Kratzer: which Ortelius writes, he understood out of a Book written
by Magnus Gruberus, in which he describes Rhene: adding withal, that in the
Chorographicall Table of Lotharingia, accurately delineated by Johannes
Scyllius, by the Dukes command and charge, this Country is called in French
Estaye, and Auff der Stay: and the same Scyllius does witness, that there
grows nothing there but the herb Asarum. Vogesus in the Valley Leberia does
yield pure silver, but (as Munster notes) not very much. I know not whether I
shall call Iura a Mountain of France or of Germany: heretofore it was all of
it, together with Helvetia, esteemed to be in France, but now a great part is
thought to be in Germany. The beginning thereof is placed on the confines of
Basil, near the Rhene, over against Waldzhut. It is high, and raised up with
many great stones. Caesar, Pliny, and others do mention it, Ptolemie calls it
Iurassus, Strabo Iurasius and Ioras. In our times the Inhabitants in diverse
places do call it by diverse names. Not far from the Castle of Hasburg, near
Burg, (which is a little Town, so called in the German Language from the Bridge
which is there built on one arch over the River Arola) it is called Botzberg,
from the Village Botzen, which, together with many orhers, is seated at the
foot of the Mountain. Munster, Scudus, Lazius, and others do think, that
this part of Iura was that which Cornelius Tacitus called Vo^^tus or V^ce^^^^.
But O^telius thinks, that it should be read in Tacitus Vogesus. There is also
by this part of this Mountain a great Valley called ^rickthal, from a certain
Village therein of the same name. And here and there are other Valleys, as
Lauffen-thal, S. Imers-thal, and the like, but none of them do cross the
Mountain, so that wheresoever you would pass over it, you must clime very
high^ Moreover between Araris and Farspurg this Mountain is called Schaffmat,
which in Latin is as much to say as Ovinum Pratum, or the Sheep pasture.
Between the Town Olten and the Prefectureship of Humburg it is called
Nider-Hawenstein, or the Lower-Cut-Stone, for that there is a way made through
the rocks. Between Walnburg and Balstalium it is called Ober-Hawenstein, or
the Higher-Cut-stone, where laden Carts are let down with ropes from the
steep parts of the Mountain. Toward the West it is called Wasser-val, that
is, the Ruin of Water. And as you go farther it is called by the Sabaudians
Iurten. That arm thereof which extends it self toward Basil, and near to
the River Byrsa, is called Blown; and it grows higher and ruggeder until you
come to Delsperg, where again it opens into a Plain. A little farther, as
you go to the French Monastery of Bellele, it rises again in height, and
afterward not far from thence it lesseneth and grows very low: from thence
again the Mountain extends it self from the East Westward with a stone
ridge: which (as it is reported) Julius Caesar did first make passible, by
digging, as it were, a Gate through the stones: Some do name this Gate
Pierreport, others the Rock-Gate, and some do call it Pierre-pertus, and Petra
pertusa: Merula who once passed by it witnesses, that it is truly and
accurately described by Sebastian Munster. And the same Merula mentions a
fair Inscription over the Gate, but that the letters of the first word are
more worn out than the rest. This is it, N:::.. Augusti via ducta per ardua
montis
Fecit iter Petram scindens in margin fontis.
This is the way which once Augustus made
Through this Mountain which his power obeyed.
He cut a way quite through this rocky mountain,
Even near unto the brim of a fair Fountain.
By this Fountain the Poet understands the River Byrsa, which breaks there
out of a rock with a violent stream of water. From thence Iura runs
Northwestward, between the Helvetians and the Sabaudians, and then by
Burgundia, which it leaves upon the South-South-west (whence Caesar says in
his first Book, that Iura in two places divides the Sequani from the
Helvetians) and by diverse Lakes, the chief whereof is Lemanus, where the
Mountain of S. Claudius running far and wide, at last ends near to the
River Rhodanus. Concerning other Mountains which do also belong to France,
and namely the Pyrenaean Mountains, I have spoken in the Description of
Spain: and I will discourse of the Alps when I come to entreat of Italy. I
will therefore now speak something of the Woods in France, which are many, yet
not so great or thick of trees, bushes, and briars as in other Countries: there
are many among the A people of Gallia Lugdunensis.
Cenomanni, as Les Forests de Versay, Longoulney, Persi, Sille, Charnay,
Audain, Maine, Concise: In Lower Britain there are le Forest de Bostblanc, de
Toriant, and de Guierche: Amongst the Picts in Poictou, there are le Forest de
Mouliore, Dyne, Bresse, Ligne, and others. Amongst Bituriges in Berry, the wood
Roberto may be seen with others. And amongst the A people of Gallia
Lugdunensis.
Andegavi, there are the Forests of Loursaie and Marson. The whole Country of
Bononia is, as it were, one entire wood, the parts whereof are Le Bois de
Surene, Celles, Hardelot, Dalles, and Boursin. Among the Verumandui, not far
from Perona, there are the woods Recoigne and Bouhan. In Picardia there are
Bois de Baine, de Beaulieu, de la Fere, and de Coussi. Neither does Lotharingia
want woods, as Warned-wald, le Banbois, Bois de Moudon, de Heyde, de S. Benoyt,
de la Voyge, Mortaigne, and Doseyne. In Burgundy there are many woods, whose
names I cannot now rehearse. I pass by also the other woods which are
dispersed all over France. Also for the Forest of Arduenna, the chiefest part
of it is in Low-Germany, and therefore it is to be described there, though
Claudian call it the French Wood; and Caesar lib. 6. de bell. Gall. call it the
great wood of France. Not only ancient Monuments and Records, but also
Churches, and other places dedicated to Religion, of which there is a great
number in the Cities and Towns of France, do witness, that the Frenchmen
were very much addicted to Religion, and were the chief of those that embraced
the Christian Faith. In the City of Paris alone there are 69 Churches, The
public works.
but the fairest of them is the Cathedral Church, dedicated to the blessed
Virgin Mary, the foundation whereof being long before laid, it began to be
built in the reign of Ludovicus, in the year 1257, and is the chief wonder
of France. It is borne up by an hundred and twenty Pillars: the length is 174
paces, the breadth threescore, and the height an hundred. The Quire is built of
fair Stone, on which are engraven diverse Histories out of the Old and New
Testament. It has in the whole compass of it 45 Chapels, strengthened with
Iron Grates: the Gates are eleven in all. On the front of the Church there are
three double Gates, beautified and adorned with the Statues of 28 Kings. On the
sides there are Towers, or rather Steeples, which are 34 Cubits high. The
greatest Bell, which takes its name from the Virgin Mary, requires twenty men
to ring it: and the second thereof, when the air is clear, may be easily
heard seven leagues. It were an infinite thing to describe the other Churches,
which are here and in other places, or to reckon up the Abbyes, the Friaries,
the Monasteries, the Hospitals for strangers, the Hospitals for the sick, the
Hospitals for the poor, and the Hospitals for Orphans. What should I speak of
the Castles, or of the Kings fair Palaces? What of the fair houses belonging
to Noblemen and Knights? What of the other public and private buildings?
Concerning these matters I had rather be silent than speak too little. The
State of France is now Monarchical: The manner of Government.
which kind of government Aristotle thought was most ancient and divine. The
King thereof is borne, not chosen by suffrages; and none can govern but one of
the Masculine Sex, as the So called from the words S^ Aliqua so often
mentioned therein.
Salick Law does require. The Subjects do so love, adore, and reverence their
King, as nothing more. The arbitrating and judging of all matters is in his
power. There is in France a College of twelve Peers, instituted by Some also
say, that these Pa^rries were erected by Hugh Capet, but others more truly
think the^ to be instituted by Lewis le Ieune Anno 1171, to aid and assist the
King in his Council.
Charles the great, in his war against the Saracens, and they are commonly
called les Pairs de France, because they were next and, as it were, equal in
dignity to the King. They have power to consecrate the King, and put him into
possession of the Kingdom. Six of these are commonly called Laics, the rest
are called Ecclesiastics, or Clergymen: The Laics are Dukes or Earls, as
the Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy, and Guienne: the Earls of Campania,
Flanders, and Toulouse. The Ecclesiastics also are Dukes and Earls; the Dukes
are the Archbishop of Remes, the Archbishop of Laon, and the Archbishop of
Langers: the Earls are the Bishop of Chaulons, of Noyon, and Beavois. There
are also eight chief Senates in France, which they commonly call Parliaments;
from which it is unlawful to make any appeal, as the Parliament of Paris, of
Toulouse, of Rotamagum or Roven, of Grenoble, of Bordeaux, of Dijon, of Aix,
and of Bretaigne. As concerning the Ecclesiastic State, there are twelve
Archbishopricks in France, to wit, the Archbishop of Lions (which is the
Primate) of Aix, of Vienna, of Rhemes, of Narbone, of Toulouse, of Bordeaux, of
Aux, of Bourges, of Tours, of Roen, and of Seen. There are these Universities
in the Kingdom, to wit, The Universities.
Paris, Poictiers, Bourges, Toulouse, Bordeaux, Nantes, Lions, Orleans,
Mompellier, Cahors, Grenoble, Valens, Rhemes, Angiers, Caen, Avenion, Dol, and
Massils, which is the ancientest of them all, and founded by the Grecians. Out
of these, as it were, out of so many Trojan Horses, an innumerable sort of
learned men both Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and others have come forth, whom
if I should endeavor to number, I should take upon my self a great task, and
should be tedious to the Reader. The Nobility of France do in general follow
the studies of good learning, with earnest diligence and continual pains, so
that they excel in all kinds of Disciplines and Arts. You may see there those
that are of great birth, and descended of noble Families, plying their Books
night and day, and busying themselves with the sacred Mysteries of the Muses.
There are those, who, to the great admiration of those that hear them, without
any premeditation, can in an admirable method, very readily discourse or speak
of any matter that shall be propounded. There are many Libraries in this
Kingdom, especially the Kings Library at Paris, and the Library of S.
Victor. The (...).
That I may omit other public and private Libraries, furnished with the best
and rarest printed Books, and with the choysest manuscripts. Now I come to
speak of their manners: Diodorus and Strabo do witness, that the Frenchmen
are very sharpe-witted, and reasonable good Scholars. Symmachus in many places
does commend their studies in good letters and learning. Marcus Portius Cato,
Originum lib. 2. says, that the most part do follow two things very
industriously, to wit, Warfare and Eloquence, that we may know that the ancient
French did carry away the glory of eloquence from other Nations. Strabo does
attribute to them a courteous Nature, void of malice. Iulianus an eye witness
does report of them, that they know not how to flatter, but that they live
freely and justly with all men. They have no more knowledge of Venus and
Bacchus than serves them for marriages for procreation, Their manners.
and for the moderate drinking of their own wines. Those things which some
speak on the contrary, are to be esteemed as railing speeches, proceeding
from an envious mind. For who sees not, that has read ancient Writers
concerning the disposition of the Frenchmen, and compared it with what it is
at this present, that that is false which Servius reports? namely, that the
Frenchmen are dull-witted; and that which Julius Firmicus annexeth, to wit,
that they are blockish; and that of Iulianus, who forgetting himself, says,
that they are stupid and rustic; that of Polybius, who says, that they do
not give their minds to Learning and good Arts. That which Diodorus,
Athenaeus, and Clement Alexandrinus do avouch, namely, that they are
unfaithful, given to gluttony and drunkenness; that which Livie and Polybius
report, to wit, that they are soft and effeminate; that of Mela, who affirms,
that they are desirous of gold, ambitious, proud, and superstitious; that of
Solinus, who says, that they are vain bablers: and lastly that which Plutarch
speaks in the life of Pyrrhus, namely that they are insatiably covetous of
money. Nevertheless it is confessed, that the Frenchmen may be corrupted with
many vices, by having commerce and traffic with other Nations. Florus says
lib. 3. cap. 10. that no man can say, that the French are only fierce, seeing
they deal fradulently, and by wiles. Ammianus lib. 15. shows, that they are
quarrellous: Diodorus does reprehend the Frenchmen for their intemperancie in
speech, and also notes, that they use a short and obscure kind of Language,
that they speak many things ambiguously of purpose, that they talk much in
praise of themselves, and in disgrace of others, and that they are detracters
and selfe-conceited or opinionated. Strabo also notes their boasting, which is
that French ostentation which Caesar speaks of lib. 7. and is exemplified in
many of his other Books: such is the boasting of Helvetius Divicon lib. 1.
while he extols and magnifies the virtue of the Helvetians, and does upbraid
the Romans with the remembrance of their overthrow. So Vercingetorix braggeth,
in his Oration, that he alone would cause a Council to be called out of all
France, which the whole world could not resist. Concerning the Religion of the
ancient French men, and their manner of worship which they used, Marcus Tullius
is not to be regarded, who writes thus in his Oration for M. Fonteius, The
Frenchmen are not moved with any Religion: Let us rather hear Livie, who
though in other matters he does unjustly tax this Nation, yet he affirms,
that they are not negligent in matters of Religion: and Caesar lib. 7. de Bell.
Gall. who knew this Nation well enough, when he says, that it was very much
given to Religion. Caesar says, that they especially worshipped Mercury: Max.
Tyrius does witness, that the Celtae or Frenchmen did worship Jupiter, and
for his sake they honored the highest Oak. Strabo testifies, that Diana had
a Temple at Massilia; and Polybius lib. 8. as also Plutarch do mention, that
Diana was worshipped and adored by the Gallo-Grecians. Lactantius, Lucan, and
Minutius Felix do report, that the Frenchmen had Esus or Hesus, Te^tates and
Teranes for their Gods: which most of the Learned do interpret to be Mars,
Mercury, and Jupiter. Ausonius makes B^l^nus to be the French-mens God, whom
Herodian calls Belis, the same perhaps with that which Tertullian calls
Tibilene, whom the Greeks and others think to be Apollo. Also the Frenchmen
did worship Abellio, of which, as Joseph Scaliger, writing to Ausonius, lib. 1.
cap. 9. notes, there do still remain some monuments. And Lucian reports,
that they did worship Hercules by the name of Ogmius. Athenaus writes, that
when the ancient Gauls worshipped their Gods, they did turn themselves to the
right hand. They did offer humane sacrifices to their Gods, especially to Mars,
as Caesar witnesses. But they never offered any sacrifice without their
Druides, as Diodorus witnesses. These Druides were Priests, heretofore much
esteemed by the Frenchmen, as also their Bards were, of whom Lucan thus
writes: Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas, etc.
Then you that valiant souls and slain in war
Do celebrate with praises that still are
Immortal, so that virtue never dies,
You Bards securely sung your Elegies.
You Druides, now freed from war, maintain
Your barbarous Rites, and sacrifice again.
You what heaven is, and Gods alone can tell,
Or else alone are ignorant; you dwell
In vast and desert woods: you teach no spirit
Plutoes pale Kingdom can by death inherit.
They in an other world inform again,
Death long life's middle is (if you maintain
The truth) the Northern people happy are
In this their error, whom fear greatest far
Of all fears incures not, the fear of death;
Thence are they prone to war, nor loss of breath
Esteem, and they do think it is a shame
To spare a life that will return again.


And so much concerning the French-mens Religion, now let us add something
concerning their customs and fashions: Livie testifies, that the French men
do come to Council in Armor; Strabo writes, that it was the manner of the
French Councels, that if any one did interrupt a Suitor, a public Officer went
to him, and drawing out his sword, did threaten him, and command him to keep
silence: and if he did not then hold his peace, the Officer did in the same
manner as formerly, the second and third time; and lastly he cut off so much of
the Interrupters cloak, so that the rest was good for nothing: Caesar says,
that the French-mens Councels are rash and sudden, and that they are
unconstant in Council, and desirous of innovation. The same Caesar notes,
that the Frenchmen, when any matter of note happens, are wont by a speedy
way, to notify it unto the Countries round about, and that is by acclamations
and shouting with the voice, for from them the others receive it, and they
again by the same means make it known to their neighbors. They do not
suffer their Children (says Caesar) when they are grown to ripeness of
years, to come unto them openly, because they should not neglect the service
of the wars: and they think it an unseemely thing for the Son in his
Childehood to sit in public in the sight of his Father. The men do make their
wives a dowry according to the portion which they receive with them, both
which are put into one stock, so as that which arises from it is kept to their
use: and which soever of the parties does outlive the other, he or she has
both parts with the use and profit which has arisen from thence. The French
women are beautiful, and like men for strength and stature, as Diodorus says;
they are fruitful, and when they bring forth children, they give them good
education. Servitude was usual in France according to the manner of other
Nations. And Caesar says, lib. 6. that the most of them when they are
oppressed either with debt or by great taxes, or by the power of great men,
they betake themselves to the service of Noblemen, who have as much power over
them, as Masters have over their Servants: yet they use them with more humanity
and courtesy than the Romans did. For the French Lords had these Servants, or
(as Caesar calls them by a French word) Ambacti, who attended on them to
increase their train, and they used them in service of war. Moreover they
commonly used (as Diodorus witnesses) thick earthen Cups, and wrought with
flowers on them. They did all suppe sitting, not on seats but on the ground,
upon the skins of wolves and dogs spread thereon, the younger youths serving
them at meat. And near unto them there was a fire made, and pots of flesh set
thereon, especially with Swines flesh both fresh and salt. But for the most
part, as Strabo writes, their meat was Milk. Athenaeus thus delivers his
mind out of Posidonius concerning this Nation: The French use to drink upon a
little hay spread under them, having little wooden Tables before them. Bread
(which, as Pliny notes, they make light with leaven) is there a common food.
They use much roasted and broyled flesh: and they take up whole joints in both
hands like Lions, tearing them in pieces with their teeth, and that which they
cannot pull in pieces, they cut it with a little knife. Those that live near
Rivers or the Seacoasts have fish as a common service at their Table, which
they broyle on fire with salt, vinegar, and cummin, which they put also in the
drink. And a little afterward he says, The rich and wealthy men do drink
wine which is brought out of Italy or out of Massilia, and that either pure by
it self, or sometimes mingled with a little water. But Pliny reports lib.
22. cap. ult. that they make a kind of drunken drink of fruit. Diodorus
says, that they made a drink of Barley, which they called Zythum, and an
other of water and honey. Concerning their habit, they wore a kind of Cassock,
Their Habit.
as Strabo notes, woven of thick wool, this Garment they called Laena, by
which is meant, as Joseph Scaliger does note, those garments which the
Frenchmen do now call Lansanguies, quasi Laurangiae, from the figure of a
Laurel or Bay-leafe, which is like unto a Rhombus. The French did use loose or
strait Breeches, which Tacitus calls a barbarous covering. Strabo says, that
the French in stead of Cloakes used to wear short Coats that reached down
but to the buttocks: the shape of which Garment may be seen in that which
Germans commonly call Pallatrock, or by contraction Palt rock. Diodorus says,
that they use to wear Rings on all their fingers, and without distinction:
Pliny in his natural History lib. 33. cap. 1. says, that they wore them
only on their middle finger. But of these things enough, I come to the
particular parts of France.

BRITANY, NORMANDY, and BELSIA.
BRITANNIA, commonly called Bretaigne, did receive both name, Laws, and
Inhabitants from the Britains, who being driven out of their Country by the
Saxons, seated themselves there, in the reign of Vortigerne, The Country
whence so called.
by whom they were called from thence to aid him against the Scots. It may
be, that before this time there were some Colonies of Britains in this part
of France, which being then increased by the exiles and banished men of
Britain, they used the same violence to the Aremoricans which they had
suffered at home, and expulsed them, as Scaliger says in his Description of
Cities, Vicit Aremoricas animosa Britannia Gentes,
Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.
The Britains the Aremoricans or^came,
And gave unto the Country their own name.
From these Armoricans, the Country was heretofore called Armorica, especially
that part of it which lies toward the Sea, and is now called Lower-Brittany:
For, as Camden witnesses, Armor does signify, in the ancient British Speech,
that which lies near or upon the Sea. On the East it has Normandy, and the
Cenomani Inhabitants of Le Maine, and the Andegavenses Inhabitants of Aniou:
The Situation.
and on the South it has Poicton: the other sides are enclosed with the
British Sea. It runs forth into the Sea far beyond all the other
Provinces, like a Peninsula, whence it is not unfitly called the Horn of
France, and does resemble the shape of a shooe-sole, the exterior part whereof
being round looks toward the Sea, the inward part toward the Mediterranean.
The length thereof is six days journey, and the breadth thereof three. It is
a pleasant and fruitful Country. The fruitfulness of the Soil.
It has many fair meadows and Pastures for Cattle to graze in: and also
veins of Silver, Iron, and Lead. The Britains grew on a sudden so
powerful, that they opposed the Goths, and hindered them from taking
possession of all France; for their King Riothimus brought 12 thousand
Britains to aid the Romans against the Goths, as Iornandes reports.
Callimachus also witnesses, that they were at the Battle against Attila. And
a weighty argument to prove the power of the Britains is, that the Kings of
France granted this Country (of the conquest whereof they despaired) to the
Normans, as being more accustomed to war, to subdue and conquer it. The
ancient Government.
Neither did this counsel want good success: for the fierceness of the
Britains was taken off by the Normans sword, and so it became to be obedient
to them, whereas it was subject before to the Kings of France. Afterward it
had Dukes of its own; the last of them was Duke Francis, who dying in the
year 1490, left one only Daughter to be the inheritrix thereof. She being
betroathed to Maximilian Archduke of Austria and King of the Romans, passing
through France, was taken away by Charles the eigth, who afterward married her:
by which marriage Britain was annexed to the Crown. It is now twofold, the
Higher and the Lower, The Cities.
that being near to Liger, this to England; and it is otherwise called
Ripiensis. The Metropolis of the Higher Britain is the City commonly called
This City is by some called also Corbilum.
Nantes, Ptolemie calls it Kondioviknon Nannetum, as Joseph Scaliger and others
do think. It was heretofore the Seat of the Dukes of Britain having the
title of a County, and it belongs to the Dukes eldest Son. It is situated
near Liger, and two other little Rivulets in a convenient place, not far from
the Sea, being a Bishops Seat, as also the four other Towns following, Vrbs
Redonica or Rhenes, Condate Redonum, as Ptolemie calls it, and as Antoninus
Condate: Dolum, now a Town, but heretofore a Castle commonly called Dol or
Doul; and Fanum Briocense commonly called S. Brien, a fair Town where there is
a high rock which affords an harbor for ships, and a Castle built thereon
for the defense of the City. There is moreover the Town of Sanctus
Machlovius, called in their own language S. Malo: And Dina a very fair Town,
which the Dukes of Britain sometime much delighted in. There are also other
Towns of Higher Brittany as Riculx, Chasteau-briant, Lambellum, Vitray, Iugon,
S. Aulbin du Cormier, Montcontour, Plerel, Iocelin, Malestroit, Pontigni, S.
Julian, and Encenis: Lastly toward Poictou, Cliffon, Raiz, and others. In the
Lower Britain there are these famous Towns and Cities: Venetia now called
Vannes, Fane de S. Paul, S. Paul de Leon, Triguier, Blavet, Morlaiz,
Quimpelray, Conquerneaux, Quimpercorentin, S. Renant des bois, and others. The
Dominions are the County of Montford, the Vicountship of Rolian, and Grello,
the principal place thereof is Chasteau Andron. Also the Country of Gueel,
The Rivers.
Baignon, Montfort, and Vannetais. The Rivers of Britain are Liger, The Sea.
Rausa, Ella, and others. The British Sea is fit for traffic, and out of it
the Inhabitants do extract salt, which being hardened in the Sun, The Havens
they sell to the neighbor countries. As for the Havens, besides the
abovenamed Cities and Towns, these Towns do afford the most convenient, to
wit, Breast, Ancrayum, Haucbont, and Pontsecrot, where great plenty of Oysters
are gotten. The Archbishop of Dol has these Bishoprics under him, the
Bishopric of Nantes, of Vannes, of S. Brien, in which three they speak both
the French and the British Speech: also the Bishopric of Cornovaille, S. Paul
de Leon, and Triguier; in which the British Speech, which they call Briton
Britonant is in use, which they suppose was the Language of the ancient
Trojanes. Also the Bishoprics of Saint Malo, Rhenes. All the Inhabitants have
not the same cheerfulness of mind, Their manners.
nor the same courtesy: the most of them are wary and desirous of gain, and
they are wont to debate of weighty matters amongst their cups.

Normandy whence so called.
NORMANDY was so called from the Northern people, for Nort in the German
Speech signifies the Northern part of the world, and Man joined with it is as
much to say as the North-men. It is a Country of France which was given as an
habitation to men that came from the BRITANY, NORMANDY, and BELSIA.
BRITA^NIA et NORMA^DIA cum confinijs
map of Brittany, Normandy, and Beauce (France) Northern part of the world out
of Denmark and Norwey, the incursions of the Normans into Germany and France
are signs hereof. Normandy is divided on the West from Britain by the River
Crenon, on the North it is bounded with the Ocean, The Situation.
on the South with the Cenomanni that inhabit Le Maine, and on the East it
has France properly so called, from which it is divided by the River Epta: All
the Country therefore does not belong to Gallia Lugdunensis, but some part of
it does appertain to Belgia. A good footman can scarce travel over it in
six days. It is a fruitful Country, and has abundance of Corn, besides
plenty of Apples and Pears, The fruitfulnes of the Soil.
that the Inhabitants do make their drink of them, and transport them to
foreign Lands: there are also great store of Cattle. Rollo a Norman, making
cruel inrodes and incursions into those parts of France which are near the
He so plagued and ransacked the Sea-Townes, that it was inserted in the
Letanie, From plague, pestilence, and the fury of the Normans go^d lord
deliver us.
Seacoast, and from thence into those which lie more inward, brought Charles
the Simple the King of France into so great a strait, that he married his
Daughter Gilla to Rollo, being converted to the Christian Faith, and gave him
all West^rich for her Dowry, besides a great part of Britain. He it was
that was created the first Duke of Normandy. The chief City of it is
Rotomagum commonly called Roan or Roven. It is seated by the River Sequana or
Seyn on the South, and this River brings up great ships, to the great
increase of traffic; on the East it has the lesser Rivers Rubecus and
Aubetta; and on the North it has fair fields, meadows, and high mountains.
The Seyne here has a fair Bridge over it, curiously and artificially built,
so that it is as great a wonder as any in France: for it is built of
Freestone, and has strong Pillars and fair Arches, very broad and high, to
the number of thirty and one. This City is famous for the Archbishopric and
Parliament held there. There are also these Towns, Aurenches, Eureux, Bayeux,
Sais, Constances, Lisieux, Alencon, Aumale, Longue-ville, Eu, Harcourt,
Tancarville, Maleurier, Mortain, Mongomery, Thorigni, Gisors, Caulx, etc. Some
make Normandy twofold, the Higher and the Lower. In the higher there are
three Dukedomes, Alencon, Aumale, and Longue-ville. The Counties are Eu,
Harcourt, Eureux, Tancarville, Malcurier, Mortaine, and Mongommery. This
Normandy does also contain that part of the Country which is commonly called
Vult, in which is Gisors or Caesortium the Metropolis of the County, and the
Baronie le Aigle. The Lower is divided into lesser parts, which are thus
called, Caulx, Bession, Constantine, Hovivet, Royaume de Yvetot, The ^^^lesia
stick State.
and Le vaulx de Vire. In Normandy is the Archbishop of Roan, under whom are
these Bishops, the Bishop of Sais, of Constances, of Lisieux, of Aurenches, of
Baieux, and of Eureux. All the Country is naturally hot, and subject to no
foreign Laws: They live according to their own Customs, Their Government.
which they very stiffely defend. They are very cunning and contentious, but
otherwise given to Learning and Religion.

BLISIA, commonly called La Beausse, is a very dry Country, and wants water
very much; yet it is fruitful, and has abundance of Corn: The fertility of
the Soil.
It is threefold, the Higher, the Midlemost, and the Lower; the Higher being
called Le haut Beausse, begins at a Village which is commonly called Ablys,
reaching to the Country of the Carnutes or Carnoti, and farther. There are in
it the Country of the Carnutes, The Situation
the Dukedom of Andegavium or Aniou, and the County of Perch. The Territory
of the Carnutes, commonly called the Country of Chartrain, cleaves on one
side to the County of Perch, and on the other sides to the Dukedom of
Orleance. It is inferior to no other part of France, both for fruitfulness
and pleasantness, for it abounds with all kind of Corn, Fruit, and
Cattle, and is not wanting in Wine. The chief Town is called Carnutum,
Ptolemie calls it Antricum, The Cit^^^
but now it is called Chartres. To this Territory are wont to be reckoned the
Counties of Dreux and Montfort, wherein are two Towns of the same names. The
Dukedom of Andegavium has an especial and peculiar Table to it self. The
County of Perch is divided into two parts, the one whereof is called the
Lower, commonly le Perch Govet, the chief Town whereof is Nogent Retrou: the
second is called the Higher, in which is the Town Mortaigne. The third is the
Middle, which lies on either side of the Banks of Liger, from Roven to
Vendomium or Vendosme; and from hence on the right hand Bank of the same River
Liger it extends it self from Castellodunum even to the Country of
Touraine. It excels the other parts of Belsia in fertility. Lower Belsia
remains. It is all Field-ground and plain, abounding with Corn, so that it
is accounted the Barn or Storehouse of France. It was anciently called
Genabum, but in these times Aurelia, for that in the year 276. The Emperor
Aurelius built it out of the ruins of old Genabum.
It lies between the Bishoprics of Orleance and Chartres, and runs out
from the Town Estampes toward the East to Sens, and on the South to the Bridge
of Orleance. In this Country is Aurelia commonly called Orleance, being
situated near the River Liger. It is honored with the title of a Dukedom,
and adorned with an Universitie. Here are also the Territories of Lorriacum
and Solonium, and the Archbishopric of Tours, which has under it the Bishop
of Le Man's and Angiers: As for the Bishops of Chartres and Orleance, they are
under the Bishop of Sens in Campania.

LEMOVICIVM.
LEMOVICIVM was so called from the chief City Lemovicum; The names, and
whence so called.

The Situation*


but it is not known from whence the name thereof is derived. Some do refer
it to Lemovices, the first establisher of this Country. It is commonly called
Pais on compte de It is called Limosin, quasi in ^imo s^a
Limosin. On the North and North East side of it lies Berry; on the East
Burbon, on the South and South-East Arverma, on the West and West-South-West
Pericort: and lastly on the North-West Poictou. There is a great ancient Elm
standing Northward between the Village called La Maison Nesuc (from the new
House that is in it) and Argentomum (a Town of Berry) toward the North, which
does bound and limit four Countries, Berry, Burbon, Arverma, and Lemovicium,
so that it is reported, that the four Princes of these Countries did here
talk and confer together, and every one of them stood in his own
Territory. The Soil is not every where equally fruitful, The quality of the
Soil.
being, for the most part, somewhat barren, yet it produces all kind of
fruits, especially Wheat, Barley, a kind of Grain called Panicum,
Chesse-nuts, and Wine, but of an inferior small kind, yet in the lower parts
of Lemovicium they have a richer sort. Some would have the Lemovicians (for so
Pliny calls the ancient Inhabitants, whom Strabo calls Lemobikes, and
Ptolemie Lemovikoi, from the City Lemovick) to be the native and ancient
Inhabitants of this Country, and they make Lemovi^es to be their Founder,
being descended from the Gomeritae or Galatae, The ancient Government.
as some do think. Some do suppose, that he was of the blood of the great
Lybian Hercules, who when he had come through Spain, and passed over the
Pyrenaean Mountains, lived a while in France. This is peculiar to this
Province only of all France, that whereas Writers do only name other
Provinces of France, and do not mention from whence the people of the Cities
were so called, here the contrary happens: for Caesar makes mention of the
Lemovicians and their City, and writes, that they were the first that yielded
unto him, for they were lovers of peace, and haters of discord. But after that
the Lemovicians had made a league with Caesar, they obeyed a Prince who was
joined in confederacy with the Romans, to whom they were subject until the
Goths did repel them, and possessed all Aquitania. They write that the
Frenchmen afterward, having driven out the Goths, did govern the
Lemovicians, and did set Earls and Dukes to rule over them, the one to manage
their Battles, the other to administer Justice. The most do divide Lemovicium
into two parts, the Higher and the Lower. Le Haut and bas Limosin. The Higher
(which is properly called Limosin) is plainer than the lower part, The Cities.
and the Metropolis thereof is Lemovicum. So many do think that A. Hirtius
did call it lib. 8. de Bello Gallico, but now it is called Limoges: Fulvius
Vrsinus calls it Limonum, by the authority of ancient Books; Ptolemie calls
it Ratiaston in Aquitania, as Joseph Scaliger writing to Merula supposes,
Villonovanus also assenting to him. But Bertrandus thinks that it is called
Rahastum in stead of Raiz, by the affinity LEMOVICIVM.
TOTIUS Lemouici ct
map of Limoges (France) and likeness of names. This City is seated partly in
a Vale, and partly on the top of a little Hill, being well fortified with a
Castle, and strong Walls: it has abundance of water, which springs from a
clear Fountain in the higher part of the City. This City is the Nurserie of
diligence and industry, and the prisonhouse of sloth and idleness. The women
do honor and much esteem of chastity and mercifulness. It is the Seat of
a Bishop. Here are also other Towns, which in the Language of the Inhabitants
are called La Soubsterraine, Le B^^sson, Barat, Dorat, Consolat, and others,
which for brevities sake I omit. Amongst them Chassusio is not to be forgotten,
as being famous for the yearly Faires of Cattle and horses, which are kept
there on Saint Georges day. There are also Abbeys in this hither part of the
Country, amongst the which are the Abbeys of Grandimont, and S. Leonard. The
lower part of Lemosin, being more mountainous than the higher, is properly
called La March de Limosin, limited with Avernia and Perigort. The chief
City thereof is Tutela or Tulla, commonly called Tulle, being situated in a
rugged mountainous place; and being the Seat not only of a Bailiffe, but of a
new Bishop, built out of the ruins of an old Monastery. In Latin he is
called Tutelensis Episcopus. There is also Vsarcha or Vsarche, a pleasant
Town, having a sweet Air, and seated near the River Vezer. Fame boasts,
that this Town is impregnable, and that it cannot be taken; whence there is a
Proverb, Cui Vsarchae est domus, arcem eum possidere in Lemovicum ditione: i.
He that has an house in Vsarcha, has, as it were, a Castle in the Country
of Lemosin. Histories do speak much of the virtue of the Citizens, and do
report, that they resisted the English, even when they conquered all Aquitania,
and that they remained constant and faithful to their Prince the King of
France. There is the Town Briva, seated on the pleasant and fertile Plain,
environed with woods, and having many Vineyards: It is the Seat of a
Chancellor. Heretofore, it is thought, it belonged to the Country of
Perigort, and that Charles the sixth King of France did join it to Limosin.
There are also other Towns, as Treignac, Donzenac, Alassac, Bellus-locus,
Meissac, Vsset, and Bello-mon. There are many illustrious Families in this
Country; The Families.
in the Higher there are the Families of Pierre-Bussire, The Nobles.
Chasteau-neuf, and Carsic, which are honored with Vicountships, also
Roche-Covart which is one of the ancientest Families in Aquitania, Maygnac, and
others. In the lower part is Pampadoura, Aumont, Roffignac, San-Iala, Gemma,
and infinite others. The Inhabitants of Lemovicium are very sparing in their
meat and drink, Their manners.
being content with a little; they hate dainty meats, but are great eaters of
bread, so that the Proverb says, A Lemovician is a Bread-devourer. In the
Villages they do not use to drink Wine. They are industrious, ingenious, and
wary, as being very provident in all things. The Common People are covetous,
and sluttish in their houses; the Nobility are magnificent, of a high spirit,
and liberal. The most of them do live until they be very old, for there are
those which do see their Grandchildrens Children. They say, that here near
Cousins, without any dispensation from the Pope, do marry amongst themselves,
and do not part their goods. Belleforestius writes, that he saw Families, in
which a hundred linkt together by the affinity of marriage did live together,
so that they seemed to be like Colleges. I will here add for conclusion that
which Johannes Puncteius writes concerning the original of the Lemovicians.

Ecce Lemoviculae seeds gratissima genti, etc.
Behold the Lemovicians pleasant Seat
In forty five degrees and half complete
Of Latitude, which does it self stretch forth
To take a view of the cold frozen North.
The Longitude even from the setting Sun,
Stretching it self toward the East, does run
As far as the Avernian Mountains, and
Touches beside the Biturigian Land.
But where that Phoebus dips his horses in
The Sea, till they to plunge therein begin,
Angolmum it does view, and does behold
Part of Pictavia: as toward the cold
North, on the Biturigians it confines;
And Southward to the Petragorians joins,
With whom in manners they do more agree
Than with the others that their neighbors be.
Fair Aquitania does contain this Land,
Which for good manners comes behind none; and
Vienna, that does from the Mountains flow,
Waters the upper grounds as it does go
With winding streams, which run out many ways,
While thousands of fair kine do by them graze:
This the Inhabitants in their speech do call
Vigana, which from thence does headlong fall
By Lemovicium's City, which does lie
Part in a Vale, part on a Hill so high,
Where Saints do glory in its Churches state,
Which unto holy Stephen's consecrate.
Fame does report, that Frenchmen of the line
Of Gomer held this Country at that time,
Nohemus off^spring troops of men did lead,
Which into diverse Countries they did spread:
From thence the true original then came
Of Lemovicians, who never changed their name,
Unless you will have the Phrygians for to change
Their Seats, while they did with Alvernus range,
And Limovices for to find new land,
And ease their grief which they at home sustained*
The Soil is barren whence no fruit does grow,
And no fair swelling Rivers in it flow.
It flourishes with men that in it are,
And is enrich't with many kinds of ware.
The Land is strong in Arms, and heretofore
The valiant English could not pass it over,
But were enforced on the mountains high
The French-mens quick resisting force to try:
Yea this same City valiantly sustained
The Visigothian siege, and honor gained:
Nor could the English furious attempt
Oppress it, when to take it they were bent:
And after threescore years were past, the Town
And walls thereof decayed, there were shown
Many strange Relics which most ancient were,
For some the face of Senators did bear.
And quicksilver even by the Pensils Art,
Or by Perillus skill, did there impart
Much grace unto the halfe-consumed eyes
Of the dead statue which unmoved lies.
Moreover, for the walls on Southern side
A Lioness in shape may be espied.
Who folding two whelps with her crooked feet
Has these three Verses underneath her writ.
The Lioness does cruel Dukes bring forth, and also crown,
The mad and wily offspring does this nurse oppressing frown,
But suffers underneath the weight wherewith he is pressed down.
SANTONIA: OR LE PAIS DE XAINGTONGE. THE ECCLESIASTIC ALL STATE. Santonia has
a Bishopric, namely of XAINTOGNE.
SANTONIA, called commonly Le Pays de Xaintogne, or Xaintongeois, and by the
ancient Inhabitants the Santones, the Marshalship of Guienna, has on the North
Poictou, The Country whence so called.

The Situation.


on the East Limosin and Perigort, on the South the River Garumna, and on the
West the Ocean, where are the Islands commonly called Les Isles d' Oleron, in
which there are great store of Cunnies and Hares. Heretofore the bounds of
Santonia were larger, which we may collect out of the Author of the
Ephemerides concerning the French war, who writes, that it reached almost to
the borders of Tholous; and that in the great war against Caesar, the
Council of the Princes of France did command, that twelve thousand men should
be levied out of it, when eight thousand only were levied out of Poictou, and
ten thousand out of Lemosin. The Country of Santonia does abound with Corn
and Wine, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
and it is counted one of the best Countries in France, as sending forth many
commodities into Spain, England, and other Countries. The Santones were
formerly seated here, for Caesar with others mentions them lib. 1. de Bello
Gallic. In some of his Books they are called Xantones: In his second Book he
calls them Santoni; and lib. 3. de Bell. Civili, Santonae: Strabo calls them
Santonoi, and Ptolemie Santoones, as Stephanus writes. The chief City of
this Country is Santonum, which in the native Language is called Saints, by a
plural termination, as all the other French Towns which end in S, namely
Paris, Rheims, and others. It was built by the ancient Frenchmen; and no doubt
but that Town which was anciently called Mediolanum is this Xantonum or
Santonum: for Antoninus calls it Mediolanum Santonum: the Itinerarie Table
corruptly calls it Mediolanum Saneon, and Strabo and Ptolemie call it
Mediolanon. Besides, there are diverse things which show the antiquity thereof,
as first many pieces of ancient walls standing here and there* also famous
Amphitheaters without the walls toward the West; thirdly in the Bridge over the
River This River is called by Ptolemie Canentelum.
Caroutonum or Charente, which flows by the City, there is an old arch with
a double inscription, on one side whereof there are these words, Caesari Nep.
Divi Iulii Pontifici Auguri; on the other are some letters which are almost
worn out, so that nothing can be gathered from them. Lastly there are many
ruins of an Aquaeduct in the high way from Mediolanum to Angeriacum. This
City is called Santonus by Ausonius in his 23 Epistle, as also by Lucan (if I
be not mistaken) lib. 1. And the same Ausonius calls the people Santones,
Epist. 14. and 18: as also Tacitus lib. 5. hist. August. and Sidonius
Apollinaris lib. 7. Epist. 6. It was called Mediolanum, for that the Frenchmen
(as T. Livius does witness) did build it in the Country of the Insubres or
Mediolanenses, which is very likely, that I may not say certain with
Causabone. If Strabo had more diligently considered and beheld the Country
lying round about this City, he would not have said, that it is sandy and
barren, but that it is rich and fruitful. The City is situated by the fertile
River Carantonum, which rises in a place commonly called Charemac, between
the Towns Limoges and Angoulesme. It is an Episcopal City, whereof
Belleforrestius numbreth 63 Prelates: S. Eutropius was the first, being sent
thither by S. Clement. And he, after he had converted this people to the
Ecclesiastical Faith, suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Domitian. The
last is called by Belleforestius Tristamus Bisetus, or Tristand de Biset. There
is in this City the Monastery of the Friars of the blessed Virgin, founded by
Godfry Earl of Santonia, and his wife Agnes Anno 1047. The thirtieth Bishop of
Santonum, being called Petrus Confoulanti, did build and reedifie the Bishops
house in the year 1102, and caused the walls of the Cathedral Church to be
repaired. After Mediolanum (or as some Latin Writers do call it Santonia)
follows Rupella, called in their Language la Rochelle. This seems by the
description of Ptolemie to be called Zantonoon akron, or Promontorium Santonum;
but it is called by Villanovanus This City is called by some Maluaso^
Blaye, which is interpreted Santonum Portus. This City is seated in the most
fertile part of all France, near the Bay of the Sea, which has twice a day
the Sea ebbing and flowing in it. It is not ancient, but lately built by the
Kings of France, in regard of the commodity of the Haven, and to repress the
invasions of Pirates, who did waste the whole coast of Armorica. The
conveniencie of the Haven here is so great, that the Citizens may have commerce
with all Nations of Europe, and wage war both by Sea and Land against their
enemies: for it is capable of many ships, it has a great conveniencie for
their going in and coming out, and is a safe and excellent harbor for them:
This City is thought to be impregnable by the strength of man, for a great Bay
of the Ocean does fortify the South side thereof, the North side the marshes
and boggie places (commonly called Salantes) do strengthen: and the other
parts are fortified with walls, ditches, towers, and strong Forts, which have
several names, so that no Ordnance or Cannon can make a breach into it. It is
a free City, which former Princes and others have adorned with many and great
immunities and privileges, and especially those which belong to Sea affairs,
for the Citizens choose a Mayor and Aldermen out of their own Corporation,
which govern the City, and they are not compelled to admit of any Then
freedom is now lost* for they were lately compelled by the now King of France
to receive a Garrison of Soldiers in the City, and to undergo the voake of
subjection.
foreign government, neither are they kept in awe by any Garrison of SANTONIA.
XAINTONGE
map of Saintonge (France) Soldiers. Rochelle did sustain a grievous seige,
in the 1573, by Henry of Valois Duke of Anjou, and afterward King of Poland and
France, of whom all Historiographers do make mention. In this siege, he did
use the thunder and lightning of Ordnance both by Sea and Land, as also furious
assaults, storms of shot, scaling Ladders, underminings, and all manner of
engines which could be invented or used. And on the besieged side, you might
have seen men, women, and children with great courage of mind sustain the
furious assaults of their enemies, and with constancy and cheerfulness
repair the ruins of the walls, keep down those that would have ascended up,
drive back their enemies to their trenches, pursue them, and at last fight it
out, for the most part, with good success. Moreover you might have beheld them
wearying the besiegers with daily sallying out upon them; and lastly subsisting
after nine assaults, in which though their enemies did fight valiantly, yet
they were enforced to retire with great loss. At length the Ambassadors of
Polonia coming the 15 of June, that they might bring with them Henry Duke of
Anjou, whom the States of the Kingdom had chosen for King, God used this as a
means to free Rochelle, being now exhausted and drawn dry of Corn, and
being weakened in warlike fortifications, besides the loss of many thousand
men, for now the King by Articles of peace confirmed by his royal solemn
edicts did grant, that Rochelle, Montalban, Nemansum, and other Cities which
did defend themselves, should be free to use their own Now the Rochellers are
compelled by the now King of France, to exercise their Religion without the
City.
Religion, such an event had this grievous siege, which endured almost for
seven months. In which time more than twenty thousand men perished in
conflicts, sallies, besieges, by wounds, hunger, and sickness. Rochelle is a
constant Seat for presidiall Senators, and other Lawyers. The other Cities
and Towns of note in Santonia, are commonly called S. ^ean d' Angely, Ponts or
Pont l' Oubleze, Blaye, Taillebourg, Borbesieux, Brovage, and Iosac, S. Iean d'
Angely, otherwise called Angeliacum and S. Ioannes de Angeria, is a new City,
although it be one of the speciallest and greatest of all Santonia. It renewed
its name from an Abbey, which was built in that place, to the honor of S. John
the Baptist; the foundation whereof happened to be in the reign of King Pipin,
who kept his Court in the Palace of Angeria, near the River commonly called
Boutonne, in the Country of Alnia; for hither (as they say) came certain
Monks out of the Holy Land, who brought with them the head of S. John Baptist,
by whose coming, the King obtained a famous victory over his enemies, and
therefore in remembrance thereof he built in that place where was the Palace
of Angeria, the Abbey of Saint John, there placing religious men, and endowing
them with great revenues, that they might there devote themselves to the
service of God: now by this means people flocking thither, and building round
about the Abbey, by degrees it began to be a City, as it is now at this day,
and was called by the name of S. John. All these things happened about the
year of our Lord seven hundred sixty eight, while Pipin waged war against
Gaifer King of Aquitania, whom he overcame, as it may be read in the History
of the Foundation of this Abbey. This City the Duke of Andegavium or Aniou did
besiege in the year 1569, and it was yielded to him after 50 days siege, the
King granting the Citizens th^se conditions: That they should march forth of
the City with their Armor, Horses, and Colors displayed. Santonia raises
great store of money by its Corn, which the Spaniards every year do
transport from thence, or Merchants which fell it unto them. And the City of
Rochelle is very rich, in regard of its neerenesse to the Sea, and especially
because of the traffic of the English and Dutch, whose shipping do often
arrive there.

AQVITANIA.
AQVITANIA, (whose Southern part is delineated in this Table) some would have
so called from the waters wherewith it does abound; The Country whence so
called.
and some derive it from the Town Aquis, or Aqs. It was extended (according to
Ptolemie) from the Pyrenaean Mountains even to Liger: But now (as Ortelius
witnesses) from the River Garumna to the Ocean, and the Pyrenaean Hills.
Toward the North-West it has the Ocean, which is called the Aquitanick Bay;
on the West Spain, on the North Gallia Lugdunensis, and on the South Gallia
Narbonensis. In it (according to Mercators account) there are five Dukedomes,
twenty Counties, and six Seigniories. Vasconia.
The Dukedomes are Vasconia or Guienna, Avernia, the Country of Engoulesme,
Berrie, and Turonia. Vasconia or Guienna being situated near the Sea, The
Situation.
between Bayon and Bordeaux, yields great store of wine, The fruitfulness
of the Soil.

The Cities


which is transported from thence into other parts of Europe. The chief City
in it is Burdigala or Bordeaux; the other Cities as Nerac, Condom, Mirande,
Nogerat, Orthes, Bazes, and Dax are of no great note: yet Dax is famous for her
hot Fountains, Salt Pits, and Iron-mettle. Burdigala, so called by Ptolemie,
is situated in a marsh, which the overflowing of Garumna makes, and is adorned
both with a Parliament and an University, in which the Professors of all Arts
and Sciences do instruct Youth. Avernia.
Avernia, or the Duchy of Avergne is partly a plain, The Situatio^.
and partly a mountainous Country. It has on the East Forest, on the South
Languedock; on the West Quercy, Perigort, and Lemosin, and on the North Berry
and Bourbon. Avernia is twofold, the Higher and the Lower. The Higher, which
is called Le hault pays d' Avergne, and (...) Avernia, The Cities and Towns.
has one prime City in it called This City is called by Ptolomie R^^es^^m
and (...) and by Mer^a^e^ Ri^^^.
S. Flour, being seated on a high Rock: the other Towns are commonly called
Orillac, Carlatum, Muratum, Buillons, le Puy, etc. There is also in it the
Territory and Bayliwick of Beaucaire. The Lower is rich and very fertile,
being full of excellent Wine, Fruit, Honey, Saffron, Cattle, Wool, Meadows,
and Woods. The Metropolis of it is This City was anciently called Arverna and
Gergobia.
Clarimontium, commonly called Clermont: It is proud of her Castle, and is a
Bishops Seat. The other Cities or Towns are 13 in number, of which Called by
Antoninus S^rion, and by others Serion.

Engoulesme.

The Situation.

The fruitfulness of the Soil.

The Cities and Towns.

Turonia.


Rion, Monferrat, and Isoire do excel the rest. Engoulesme on the North
joyneth to Poictou, on the West to Santonia, on the South to Perigort, and on
the East to Lemosin. It has abundance of very good Wine, fruit and Hemp. The
Metropolis of it is Inculisma now called Engoulesme, being an ancient City. It
is seated on a hill which hangs over the River Charente, in a remote place
from the Kings high way. The lesser Towns are those which are commonly called
Marton, Chasteau, Neuff, Blaisac, Chabannes, Confollant, Cuffec, Aigres,
Gourville, la Roche-Foucault, Marveil, Lanzac, Villebois, Momberon, and
Bouteville. Concerning the Country of Berry we will speak in a Table by it
self. Turonia commonly called Touraine, begins somewhat beyond the City
Amboise, toward Belsia, and ends at the town which is commonly called la
Chapelle Blanch, The Situation.
AQVITANIA.
AQUITANIA
map of Aquitaine being subject in spiritual matters to the Bishops of Anjou
and Chousai. For they appoint and set down limits between the Turonians and
Andigavians. The sweetness of the Air does make this pleasant country more
delightful, so that it is called the Garden and Orchard of France. It is
fruitful in Wine and Corn, and has woods convenient to hunt in. The Cities.
The Metropolis or Mother-citie of this Dukedom is Caesarodunum Turonum,
called in French Tours. This City excels for wealth, and fair edifices or
buildings. On the East side the River Ligeris or Liger, on the South and West
sides the River Idra do flow near unto it. The lesser Towns in it are
Amboise, Langes, Chinon, and others. The Counties of Aquitaine are Toulouse,
Narbonne, Albret, Armignac, Bigorre, Bear, Estrac, Commingcois, and Foix. Also
Ventadour, Pompadour, Montignac in Poicton, The State Ecclesiastic.
Perigort, Fronssac, Esparre, Lymosin, Touraine, March, the Vicountie of
Aulnay, and Basque. The Signories or Lordships are Planes, Grave, Chaloces,
Saintonge, and Auluis. There are moreover five Archbishops, first the
Archbishop of Narbon, under whom are these suffragans, to wit, the Bishops of
Carcassone, Agde, of S. Pont de Tomieres, Alet, Mompelier, E^ne, Besiers,
Lodeut, Nismes, and Vse^z. Secondly the Bishop of Bourges, under whom are ten
Bishops, namely the Bishop of Clermont, of Rhodes, of Lymoges, of Mande, of
Alby, of Cahors, of Castres, of Tulies, of S. Flour, and of le Puy. Thirdly the
Bishop of Bordeaux, under whom there are eight Bishops, namely of Poictiers, of
Lucon, of Matlezais, of Saints, of Engoulesme, of Again, of Codon, and of
Sarlac. Fourthly the Bishop of Toulouse, which has these Bishops under him,
the Bishop of Pamiers, of Mirepoys, of Montauban, of La Vour, of Rieux, of
Lombes, and of Papons. Fifthly, the Bishop of Aux, under whom are the Bishops
of Aqs, of Coming* of Tarbe, of Basas, of Lescure, of Lictoure, of Conserans,
of Oleron, of Ba^one, and of Adure, which some call Air.

The Kingdom of Arelatum.
THe Kingdom of Arelatum is so called from the City Arelatum. It contains
those Countries which lie between the Rivers Rhodanus and the Alps. Sabaudia
whence so called.
And there are in this tract Sabaudia, Delphinatus or Daulphine, and Provincia.
There are diverse conjectures concerning the name of Sabaudia or Savoy; some
derive it a Sabatiis vadis, from the Sabatican Fordes; others give it that name
quasi Sabbatorum Pratum, which Volaterranus calls Sabaudiensis Auwe, that is,
the Sabaudian Land: some would have it called Savoy, quasi Saul voje, a way
through Osiers and Willowes, or quasi Sauve Voye, that is, the safe way; which
I know not who is feined to have made by fabulous Writers, as being before
dangerous in regard it was full of thieves and robbers. Near to Sabaudia on
the North lies the Country of Burgundy, The Situation.
and Helvetia, having the Lake Lemanus lying between them: On the East it has
Valesia and Pedemontium, which have no certain bounds, but that high
Mountains do run between them; and on the South and the West is Daulphine,
with some part of Rhodanus, separating Sabaudia from the Dukedom of Burgundy.
The Air of Sabaudia is pure, and the country is very mountainous. The
fertility of the Soil.
In the Valleys and Plains the Soil is very pleasant and fruitful,
especially toward the North, near the Lake Lemanus, where it yields most
excellent rich Wine, which is called Ripalium, from the bank of the Lake. The
pastures do bring up and feed all sorts of Cattle, and especially there where
the lesser Mountain of S. Bernard does rise in height. The Metropolis or
Mother-citie of Sabaudia is Chamberiacum commonly called Chamberri, in which
there is a Parliament. The City is seated in a Vale, and encompassed round
about with Mountains. The Counties of Geneva, Morienne, and Tarentais, the
Marquesate of Susa, and some other Signiories are described with Sabaudia as
parts thereof: and lastly the Country of Bressa. The Country of Geneva
Antoninus calls Cenava. It is a very ancient This City is in compass about
two English miles, and is supposed to contain about 17000 Souls*
City, seated by the Lake Lemanus, and divided in two parts, which stand upon
the two banks of the River Rhodanus, but joined together by a wooden bridge,
on both sides whereof there are houses, though the greater part of houses be
toward the South, and the lesser toward the North. The Country of Morienne
does extend it self to the River Archus, where there is a fair Town called
S. Iean de Morienne. The County of Tarentaise, is almost enclosed with the
Alps, and the Rivers Archus and Ara: It is so named from the City Tarantais,
which the Inhabitants do now call Moustier, the Germans Munster in Tartaansen,
and the Latin Writers Munsterium. The Marqueship of Susa is so called from the
Town Susa, not far from the head of the River Doria or Duria, Daulphine
whence so called.
which does discharge and exonerate it self into the River Padus, called by
the Italians Po. There are also other Towns of Sabaudia, as Aiguebelle, Mont
Belial, Bellay, Ni^y, Montmelian, Incilles, etc. Delphinatus follows. Some
would derive the name thereof a Castello Delphini, which is called in French
Chasteau Some say it had its name from Dolphine, wise to Gu^gne the second
Prince of this Province.
Dolphine. Provincia cleaves unto it on the South, and Bresse on the North,
the River Rhodanus running between them: on the West side is the County of
Viennois, and on the East lies Pedemontium, The Situation.
and Sabaudia. The Archiepiscopall Cities here, are Vienna and Ebrodunum.
Strabo calls Vienna the Metropolis of the Allobrogians, Ptolemie calls it the
Mediterranean City of the Allobrogians: The Cities.
Stephanus calls it Biennus, and it is commonly called Vienne. Ebrodunum
Ptolemie calls Eborodunum, and Strabo Epebrodunum. It is a famous Town of the
Caturigians of the maritime Alps, which lie near the Sea. Antoninus calls
it Eburodunum, but in French it is called Ambrum. There are five Cities which
have Bishops, Valentia, Dia, Gratianopolis, Augusta, and Vapingum. Valentia
(according to Antoninus and Ptolemie) is commonly called Valence, and is the
title of a Duke. Dia is called by Antoninus Dia Vocontiorum, but commonly Dio,
and is the Metropolis or chief City of the Country, which in French is
called Pays de Diois. Gratianopolis was heretofore called Cularo, Isidorus
calls it the City of Gratianopolis, but it is commonly called Grenoble.
Augusta, near to the River Isere, Pliny calls Augusta Tricastinorum, where the
great Senate of Daulphine is kept, Sidonius Tricastina Vrbs, but now, as Joseph
Scaliger thinks, it is called S. Antony de Tricastin. That which Antoninus
calls Vapingum, or as some read it, Vapincum, and the Itinerarie Table Gap, is
now called Caput agri, and in French Gapencois. It is environed round with
Mountains. It was formerly, and is also at this day a famous Town; the
Inhabitants do call it L^^^l S. D^go. I pass by the lesser Towns. Provence
is to be described next, but before I come unto it, I will add something out
of Mer^ator concerning the State Ecclesiastic. Here are five Archbishops: as
first the Archbishop of Tarentais in Sabaudia, under whom are the Bishops of
Sitten and Augusta. 2ly the Archbishop of Am^rum; under whom are the Bishops
of Lagne, of Grass, of Lena, of N^^a, of S. Glande, of Valne, of Vap, which
some call Gap: of Bria^^on, and of S. Pol. Thirdly the Archbishop of Vienn^, to
whom there are six suffraganes, the Bishop of Valence and Dye, the Bishop of
^^viers, of S. Iean de Morienne, of Geneve, of Grenoble, and of Romans.
Fourthly the Archbishop of Aix, under whom there are five Bishops, the Bishop
of Aps, of Fre^ul, of Sesteron, of Eres, and of Vapinte. Fifthly the Archbishop
of Arclatum or Arles, under whom are the Bishops of Massilia, of Vasison, of
Tricaste, of Cavallion, of Avignon, of Orange, of Carpentras, and of Tollon.
The Archbishop of Lions and Primate of all France, has his residence in the
City of Lions, and has four suffragan Bishops under him, as the Bishop of
Autun, of Mascon, of Chalon by the River Saone, and of Langres.

PROVINCIA, OR PROVENCE.
HItherto we have described Aquitania and the Kingdom of Arelatum: Provincia
follows. The Country whence so called.
This most excellent part of France from beyond Rhodanus even to the River
Garumna was called Provincia, because the Romans many years before the
Nativitie of Christ did reduce it into the form of a Province, which name it
still retains in a small portion thereof (wherein is Massilia and Aquae
Sextiae) by way of excellency, to declare that it had pre-eminence both in
order and dignity above all the Provinces of the Roman Empire. Daulphine lies
near to Provincia on the North side, The S^tuation.
being parted from it with the Mountains commonly called the Mountains of
Velay, and by a great part of the River Drue^^ius or Durance, running between.
It is enclosed on the East side by the Alps and the River Varus, on the left
hand bank whereof stands the Town Nicaea, where Italy begins, on the
South the French Sea beats on it, and the Western bounds of it are partly
the Principality of Arausio or Orange, and the County of Avenio or Avignon,
which did formerly belong unto it, though now they appertain to other Princes:
and partly the whole River Rhodanus, as far as Lions and Arclatum, belonging
to the Jurisdiction of the Parliament of Languedock. The temp^^ of the Air
The Air here is gentle, mild, and very pure. The Country does produce not
only excellent Corn, but also Fruits, with little labor or tillage: The
fruitfulness of the Soil.
and here is as great plenty of Rasons and Figs, as may furnish the greatest
part of Europe. Here is such great store of Rosemarie, Juniper Berries, Chesse
nuts, Pome-Citternes, Lemmons, Oranges, Saffron, Rice, and the like, as if the
horn of plenty were poured forth upon this Country. The Vines yield excellent
rich Wines here, and the Soil is every where very good and fruitful.
Concerning the ancient Earls of Provincia some things are to be noted: We
read in ancient Annals, that in the time of Ludovicus the eigth King of
France, Raymundus Berengarius was Earl of Provence, and that Charles Earl of
Anjou, The ancient Government.
and Son to the afterward King Ludovicus did marry Beatrice his only
Daughter and Heir, and by that means got this Country. After him succeeded
Charles surnamed the Lame, being Prince of Salernum, and King of Naples. After
him his Son Robert succeeded, being Duke of Calabria, and King of Naples; and
after him his Grandchild Ioane (whose Father Charles Duke of Calabria was
dead before) for by the last Will of this Robert she was made Queen of Naples,
and Countess of Provence. This woman, that she might be revenged on her
Adversaries, did adopt Ludovicus of Anjou, Son to John King of France, and
left him her successor both in other Principalities, and also in this County.
After this Ludovicus, his Son Ludovicus the second was made Earl; and next
after him his Son Ludovicus the third, who was also adopted by Ioane the second
Queen of Naples, to be King of Sicily, and Duke of Calabria; This Ludovicus
having no issue, by the consent of the aforesaid Ioane, instituted his brother
Renatus to be successor in those Principalities. And he being unwilling to
resign his right in the Kingdom of Naples, and the County of Provence, to
Renatus Duke of Lotharingia, his Nephew did pass it over unto his brother
Charles, Earl of Maine, who made (his son Charles dying) Ludovicus the
eleventh King of France his heir. Some would have it that Renatus made him
heir after Charles, by his last will, although Renatus Duke of Lotharingia did
justly expostulate with him concerning the same. Here dwelled heretofore the
Salyi, the Aquenses, the Arelatenses, the Sextani, the Sentij, the Ebroduntij,
the Dinienses, the Vesdiantij, the Sanicienses, the Nerucij, the Vencienses,
the Vulgientes, the Aptenses, the Reienses, the Ostaviani, the Commoni, the
Foro-Iulienses, the Segestorij, the Albici, the Oxubij, the Deciates, and
others. There are in Provence under the Aquensian Parliament, besides many
Towns of no small note, two Cities which have Archbishops, and eleven that
have Bishops in them. The Archiepiscopall Cities are Aquae Sextiae and
Arelatum. The Latins, Paterculus, Solinus, and others, do call the first
Aquae Sextiae Colonia. Plutarch, (in the life of C. Marius) Sextilia, the
Itinerarie tables, Aquae Sestiae. The inscription of a stone at Lions, near to
S. Benedicts Church, Colonia Iulia Aquae. Lastly a certain ancient
inscription, and Vespasians coin, Colonia Iulia, Aquae Sexiae, Legio 25. It
was called Aquae, because there are bathes of hot water, whence also it is now
called Aix; and it was called Sextiae, from C. Sextius, who was Consul in the
year from the building of the City of Rome, 630. For he having subdued the
Nation of the Salyi, built this City, to the end, that he might place a Roman
garrison therein, and that he might drive the Barbarians from those coasts,
which open a way from Massilia into Italy: seeing the Massilians were not able
to suppress them, (you may read Livy lib. 61. from the 10. cap.) But
concerning the same, it was called Iulia Augusta, from C. Julius Caesar
Augustus, who did enlarge it with colonies, bringing thither the old Soldiers
of the 25 Legion. The Parliament of Provence is held here, which therefore is
called Parliamentum Aquense. Partly at this City, and partly in Italy did C.
Marius overcome the Cimbrians a people of Germany, and the Tigurini, and
Abrones, French Nations that banded themselves with them: of which History
elsewhere. The second City Orosius and Ausonius (Lib. de urbibus in Epigraphe
and ipso carmine 7o) do call In this town was called a Council by Constantine.
An. 313. for the quiet establishing of the Church.
Arelas, the same Ausonius, elsewhere does call it Arelatus: Caesar calls it
Arelate; as also Suetonius (in the life of Tiberius) Mela, and others. Strabo
calls it Areletae, Ptolemie Arelaton, Salyorum Colonia, and Pliny, Arelate
Sextanorum; but now by a word of the plural number it is called Arles. Festus
Avienus does report that the Graecians heretofore inhabiting it, did call it
T^elinis. Julius Scaliger witnesses that in a fair inscription on a pillar
which he had seen, it is called Mamiliaria, but the reason why is unknown.
Fl. Constantinus the Emperor, did enact and ordain that it should be called
Constantia, and that the assemblies and conventions of seven Provinces, namely
of Vienne, of both the Narbons, of both the Aquitanes, of PROVENCE.
PROVINCIA.
map of Provence Novem-Populana, and the Maritime Alps, should be held and
kept there; and Ausonius calls it Gallula Roma, in those verses which I
mentioned before. It is a City seated near Rhodanus, on the left hand bank
thereof. The Itinerarie table places it on the right hand, where now stands
Languedocke. Ausonius affirms that Arelatum is divided with the River
Rhodanus flowing between. Whence he makes it twofold in his book of Cities;
because Rhodanus divides and cutteth it into two parts. But now, the form and
face thereof being changed, it stands wholly upon that bank of Rhodanus
which lies toward Italy, and is environed on all sides with Marshes, in
which fierce Oxen are bred. Hence it is thought that it was once far greater,
and some believe that the other part of the City, which flourished heretofore
was wasted by the Goths. It appears in Ausonius that it was a Town of
traffic. And we read that the Kings of Burgundy did formerly keep their
residence therein, and afterward the Earls of Provence. D. Trophinus was the
first Bishop thereof, who was the Apostle Paul's Disciple; and in the second
year of Neroes reign came into France. From this man as from a Fountain, as
Sosimus writes, the Christian faith was diffused and dispersed through all
France. It has now a strong Castle, and is famous for its two Prelates
heretofore, Honoratus and Hilarious. So much concerning the Archiepiscopall
Cities of Provence; the Episcopal are eleven, amongst the which the chief is
Massiliae: the Latins, and also some of the Graecians do call it Masilia,
Strabo, Stephanus, and ancient coins do call it Massalia, Ptol. Masalia: but
now it is commonly called Marseille. It was once a Colonie of the Grecian
Phocoeans, and was built in the 45 Olympiad, as Solinus witnesses in the days
of King Tarquine, as Iustine notes ( Lib. 43.) Plutarch in the life of Solon
writes that it was built by Protus, otherwise Protis. Strabo shows that it
is seated on a rockie place, near the mouth of the River Rhodanus, and in a
remote part of the Bay, as it were in the corner of the Sea, as Iustine says
out of Trogus Moreover M. Tullius does so praise the Commonwealth of the
Massilians, that speaking in defense of Fontejus before the people of Rome, he
durst say, that their City did exceed not only Greece, but almost all other
Nations for discipline and gravitie. They reckon and begin the number of their
Bishops from Lazarus, whom Christ raised from death. So much concerning
Massilia, the other Episcopal Cities are Dine, which Ptolemy calls Dinia:
Grass, Glandeue, or Glanate, which learned Latin Writers do call the City
of Glannatica, and some Authors Glamnatena: They are deceived who make Plynies,
Mela's, and Antoninus his Glanum, to be the same with Glannate. For Antoninus
places Glanum between Cabellio and Arles, from which Glanata is far
distant: so that this Glanum is not now known. Also Sanas or Sanitium, a Town
in the Maritime Alps. This Town is now called Venza.
Vintium a Town not far from Senas, called by Dion, Ventiar, Apta Iulia,
which Antoninus calls corruptly Avia Iulia, and Abte-julia for in the
Itinerarie table it is called Apta Iulia, and is now called Apt: Ries, or
Reius, which in the Itinerarie table is written Reis Apolinaris: Feriuls, which
Plancus writing to Cicero, calls Forum Iulij; Ptolemy, Forum Iulium; Augustus
coin, Col. Iul. Octav. It is now a Sea or Haven Town, Cisteron which
Antoninus and the Itinerarie table calls Segustero. Josephus Scaliger (in his
Letters to Merula) Cestro; and Pliny, Cessero: But Merula thinks that Plinyes
Cessero is the same with Ptolemies Cessero, now called Castres. Lastly Tolon,
which the learned Latin Writers do call Telonium, and Antoninus, Telo
Martius, being a Town seated within a Bay of the Sea, nine leagues from
Massilia: so much concerning the Episcopal Towns. There are also other Towns
no less famous and ancient, as Antibe, which Ptolemy calls Antipolis, a Town
of Deciati; Pliny calls it Oppidum Latinum, and it is called a Colonie in the
coin of the Emperor Titus. Olbia, which is now thought to be that which is
called Years, or Hieres, near the Sea, almost three leagues from Telon. Over
against the Town lie those famous Islands, which Ptolemy calls Staechades;
and Stephanus Ligustidae. They are now called the Isles of Years, or Hieres, and
the best sort of Coral is gathered there; even as good as that in the
Ligustick Sea. Also S. Maximin, which Antoninus in his Itinerarie thinks to
be Tecolata, being six leagues from Massilia toward the North. Tarascon, which
Ptolemy calls Taruscon, being seated on the left bank of Rhodanus; and over
against it on the right hand bank Belloquadra, commonly called Beaucarie. The
Towns which have the dignity of a County, are Sault, S. Gilles, and others.

PICARDIE AND CAMPANIA.
ALthough the name of Picardie is not very ancient, yet no certain reason can
be rendered for it: The Country whence so cal^led
some conjecturing one thing, some another. Cenalis professes that he knows
not whether the Picardians borrowed this name from the Bigardian Heretics:
however, it is manifest says he, that they were of greater antiquity than the
Inhabitants of this Country. Some suppose that they were called Picardians,
because they were the first that used those Lances, which are commonly called
Pikes. (...)
On the West that I may make a plain description of the bounds thereof) is the
British Ocean, with some part of Normandy: on the North lie those Countries
of ancient Belgia, which are now called Artesia, or Artois, and Hannonia, or
Henegou^ on the East lies Luxenburg o^ Lorraine: and lastly, on the South
Campania, and that Country which by a more special name is called France. The
fertility of the Soil
It is a most fruitful Country, and the Storehouse or Granarie of Paris, and
most parts of France. It has but little wine, which proceeds rather from the
sloathfull idleness of the Inhabitants, than from any defect of the Soil or
Climate. (...)
Picardie is divided into three parts: the true Picardie, the Lower, and the
Higher. I will only speak here of the True Picardie, (called in French, La
vraye Picardie). It does contain in it the jurisdictions of Ambiana, Corbia,
and Pequignya, the Counties of Veramandois, and Retelois, and the Dukedom of
Tirascha. Ambiana (or Visdamie d' Amiens) was so named from the City Ambianum,
commonly called Amiens. Heretofore, as the Learned do think, it was named
Samarobrina; and by Ptolemie, Samarobriga. Antoninus in some of his books
calls it Samarba^iva, and in others Samarabriga. Briga in the ancient Spanish
language, and Bria in the Thracian speech, (...)
do signify a City; yet some do write that it was called Somonobriga from
its bridge, (in Dutch called Brug) which stands on the River Somona. Ambianum
is situated at Somona, which divides it into several parts: (whence some
suppose that the Emperor Gratian did name it Ambianum, quod aquis ambiatur,
because it is encompassed with water). It is thought to be one of the strongest
Towns in all France, both for the natural situation, and artificial
fortification thereof: it is entrenched with deep broad ditches, and is the
key of that part of the Kingdom. There is a fair In this Church Edward the ^
King of England did homage to Philip de Val^^, for the Duchy of Guienna
Church in it. The Inhabitants are reputed to be very honest and faithful. The
County of Corduba is so called from Corduba, which is a Town near Somona,
and is seated by a River which runs there into it. Peguignya is so called
from a Town commonly called Peguigny: which received its name PICARDIE AND
CAMPANIA.
PICARDIA
map of Picardy and Champagne (if we shall believe the common report) from one
Pignon, a Soldier of Alexander the great. It is famous in Histories, because
William Duke of Normandy, surnamed Long-sword, was slain by an ambushment
laid by Baldwin Earl of Cambray, who drew him thither under a color of making
a peace, as the Norman Annals do testify. The County of Veromandois (as
Geographers that describe France do note) contains under it the Counties of
the Suessons, and Laudunenses, the Territory of the Tartenians, and the Cities
of Noviomagus, and Fane de S. Quintin. The Suessones are commonly called
Suessons, or Soissonois, whose City is now called Soisson, having in it a
strong Castle. Antoninus calls it Suessones by the name of the Inhabitants; and
Ptolemie, Augusta Suessonum. The Country of the Laundunenses, now called
Laonnois, has its name from Laudunum, (mentioned in the life of Charles the
great) which is now called Laon, being seated on a hill. The Country of the
Tartenians is called in French Tartenois, the Metropolis whereof is Fera,
commonly called La Fere. It is a City strongly fortified, and commodiously
seated, near the confluence and meeting of the Rivers, Oysa, and Serva, having
also a strong Castle. The City Noviomagus, which Antoninus places between
Soisson and Amiens, and makes the seat of the eighteenth Roman Legion, is now
called Noion: Ptolemy calls it Noviomagos Vadicassimum, and others O^telius
thinks it probable that this is that City which Caesar in his Commentaries
calls Noviodunum.
Noviomus. It is a City which seems to be very ancient, and is a Bishops
Seat, the Prelates whereof style themselves Earls of Noion, and Peers of
France. Fane de S. Quintin, which was sometime the head Town of the Country,
and seat of the Earls of Vermandois was so called from Quintin, who suffered
Martyrdom there: whereas before it was called Augusta Veromanduorum: so much
concerning Veromandois. The Territory of the Retclians (commonly called
Retelois, is situate between Hannonia, Lotharingia, and Barrois: The
Metropolis thereof is Retelium. The chief City of Tirascha, (called La
Tirasche) is Guisa, having a stately Castle to defend it against the
Luxenburgians.

Campania.
CAMPANIA, called in French Comte de Champagne, was so called, from the broad
and long fields thereof, The Co^^^^ whence so called.
as Gregory Turonensis notes. For it is a very plain and champion Country,
and fit for tillage. The Territories of Brye, Burgundy, Carolois, and
Lotharingia, do encompasse it one every side. The Situation.
The temper of the air.

The fertility of the Soil.


The sky thereof is very clear, and the air temperate. The fields do yield
abundance of Corn, Wine, and all sorts of Cattle: and there are woods which do
yield great store of game both for hauking and hunting. Campania is described
both by it self, and also with the Principalities adjacent, and lying near
unto it. If it be considered properly by it self, it is twofold; the Lower,
and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the Territories which are
commonly called Ivigny, Bassigny, and Vallage. Modern Writers do call that
Tricassium, which is now called Troyes: The Cities.
It is a City near the River Seyn. Antoninus calls it This City is also
called by Gregorius Turonensis ^ Treca^.
Tracasis, and places the two and twentieth Legion there: Ammianus names it
Tricassa; Bid, Trecassa; Nithardus, Tricassinum: and anciently it was called
Augusiobana Trecasium, as Joseph Scaliger notes. It is now a Bishops Seat, and
has a strong Castle for its defense. The County of Ivigny does separate
Campania from Burgundy. The chief Town thereof is Ivigny, which is under the
jurisdiction of the Baylywicke of Troyes. Bassigny is so called, because it is
the better part of the Lower Campania, for Bas signifies in French beneath. It
is encompassed with the Rivers Matrona, or Marne, Mosa, and a little part of
Mosella, and it is watered with more Rivers than the other parts of this
Country. The Metropolis thereof is commonly called Chaumont en Bassigny, which
has the title of a Baylywicke, and a stately ancient Castle seated on a Rock
which is well fortified. These Towns are reckoned in it, besides Langres, of
which I shall speak hereafter: namely Montigny, Goeffy, Nogent le Roy,
Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Choiseul, Visnory, and Clesmont; being all strong
Towns, and the most of them fortified with Castles. The Territory of Vallage
is thought to be so called from the fair and fruitful Valleys which are in
it. The Towns of chief note are Vassy, near Bloisa, in the Country of
Guise; Fanum S. Desiderij, or S. Desire: and Ianivilla, or Ianville, the
inheritance of the Family of the Guises; some write it Iont-ville. There are
also in the Territory of Vallage Montirandel, Dentlerant, Le Chasteau aux
forges, Esclaren, and others. The Higher Campania is called Le Pays de Partoys,
having its appellation from a Town commonly called Perte. It is a most
fruitful Country, abounding with Fruits, Wood, and Hemp. The Metropolis
thereof is Vitriacum or Vitry, seated near the confluence and meeting of the
Rivers Saltus and Matrona. And there are also contained in it Argilliers,
Lasaincourt, Louvemen, and other Towns. Thus we have taken a view of Campania
by it self, now we are to describe the adjacent places, as the Dukedom of
Rhemes, and Langres, and the Counties of Catalaune, Ligny, and Motte, which are
free within themselves, and not subject to Campania. The Dukedom of Rhemes (or
the Duche Parrie, and Archivesche de Reims) is so named from a City which was
anciently called Duro^ortorum, but now This City was called Rhemes from the
Rhemag^* (...) a potent N^tion of these parts.
Rhemis. Ptolemy calls it Durocottorum: Strabo, Duricortora: Stephanus,
Dorocotteros: and Caesar Durocortum Remorum. It is a free City of Campania:
the Archbishop thereof is a Duke, and the first Peer of France; under whom are
these Bishops in this Country: the Bishop of So^sson, of Chaalon, of Amiens, of
Noyon, of Senlis, of Beaurois, and of Laon: In this City the Kings of France
are inaugurated and See H^ylen. page 120.
anointed with oil. The Dukedom of Langres (or the Duche, Patrie and Evesche
de Langres) has a City which was heretofore called Andomatunum Lingonum, but
is now commonly called Langres: Ptolemie calls it Andumatonon, and Antoninus
vitiously Antematunum; Pentingerus his Itinerarie table, Andematunum; Tacitus
Lingonum urbs and Gregory of Tours, urbs Lingonica. It is a Bishops See, the
Prelates whereof are Dukes and Peers of France. The County of Catalaune (or
Euesche, Conte and Pairie de Chaalon) was so named from the City Catalaune:
the later Writers do call it Cathelaunum, but now it is called Chaalon en
Champaigne: It is a Bishops See, situated on a plain near to the River
Matrona, and adorned with high Towers, which stand up like aspiring Pyramides.
In the County of Lignie is the Town Lignium, venerable for antiquity, near
the River Saltus. Concerning the County of Motte, (or Conte de la Motte) we
find nothing but the name thereof. The Country of the Briensians (whom
Nithardus calls Brionenses) is usually described with Campania, being an
ancient Country, and now called la Brye. It begins at a Village called
Cretelium, not far from the bridge of Charanton, where Matrona mingleth with
the River Seyn, the former whereof does almost part Campania, and the latter
Gastinois from the Briensians: for all that lies between these two Rivers,
even to the Dukedom of Burgundy, is esteemed to be in the County of Brye. It
was so called from a Town, commonly called Brye or Bray, Conte Robert, which
appellation it received from Robert, Earl of Brye, who had a mansion house
there. The Cities of Brye are Castellum Theodorici, or Chasteau Thierry.
Iatinum Medorum, or Meldarum urbs, which Ptolemy places by the River Matrona,
and is now called Meaulx, and Provinsium or Provence, a Town famous for sweet
smelling Roses: the Archbishopricke of Sens, with the Town of Pontium are
reckoned and accounted a part of this Country. Under this Archbishop are these
Bishops, the Bishop of Paris, of Meaulx, of Troyes, of Chartres, of Nevers, of
Orleans, and of Ausoire or Auxerce. Senonum urbs, formerly called Agendicum,
but now commonly Sens, is seated near the the River Icauna, which in French is
called Yonne. Besides these aforesaid Countries, which we have mentioned,
Mercator reckons these following, namely, Barsur Seine, Auxerre, Viconte de
Tonnerre, Pour suivent, Brain, Grandpre, Mailly, Vertus, Roussy, Retel,
Ivigny, and the Baronie of Iamville.

FRANCE.
THis Country, of which we do entreat does comprehend under it the
Prefectureship and Country (or as some would have it the Viecountship) of
Paris, the Dukedom of Valois, and the Territories of Heurepois, and Gastinois.
The Praefectureship of Paris, or la Proveste and Conte de Paris, is divided
into Territories, Paris, Goella, the I Will of France, and Vexinum Francicum. We
call that Parisium which is commonly called le Parisis. It contained heretofore
whatsoever is beyond the Gate of Paris, even to the Bridge called Pontorse, and
from thence even to Claya, toward Prye. The name thereof is almost worn out,
but that some Villages, as Louvres, Cormeille, Escova, and others, which the
Parisians call en Parisis, and some taxations of the Parisian Parliament, as
also a certain Coin commonly called Sols and Deniers Parisis, do keep it in
memory. Some think that the Parisian Gate was so called, because it was in the
way to Parisium. The chief City of this Parisium, and the Metropolis of all
France is Lutetia, so called by Caesar. The Cities.
Ptolemy calls it Leucotetia: Iulianus Lutetia: Marcellinus, Castellum
Parisiorum: Zosimus Parisium, and latter Writers Lutetia Parisius. But it is
now commonly called Paris. Some derive the name of Lutetia a Luto, from Mudde
in regard of the Marshes near unto it, and some from the Plaister-pits near
adjoining, quasi Leukoteichia, for it is built for the most part with
Plaister-worke. Paris was heretofore far less than it is now, standing only
on the Island which the River Seyne encompasseth, so that this great City was
very small at the beginning. But so small an Island could not at last receive
such a multitude of men as daily repaired thither. So that Colonies as it were
being drawn thither, and placed on either side of the Continent, Suburbs were
added thereunto, whence it was so enlarged by degrees, that now it is the
greatest City of all France. It is divided into three parts, the greatest
whereof lying North-East on the right hand Bank of the River, is the lowest,
and is commonly called la Ville: the lesser part on the left hand toward the
South-west is raised somewhat higher by little Hills whereon it is seated, and
it is called l'Vniversite; the middle is in the Island, which they call la Cite:
It is encompassed round with the River, being joined with two Bridges to the
lesser part, and with three to the greater part. Architremus an English Poet
has formerly celebrated the praise thereof in these Verses: At length a place
does come within your sight, The University here is accounted the chiefest in
Europe, as containing 55. Colleges.

Which is another Court of Phoebus bright,
For men it has Cyrrhaea may compare,
Chrysaea it is for Mettalls that there are.
It Is Greece for Books, for Students Inda, by
Athens it self judge its Philosophy.
It Is Rome for Poets which have there been found,
It is the sweet Balm of the world so round,
And its sweet fragrant Rose you would it think,
A Sidonis for Clothes, for meat and drink.
The Soil is rich and yields much Wine, yea more,
It Is fit for Tillage, and has Corn great store.
It Is very strong, and good Laws it can show,
The air is sweet, their site is pleasant too.
It has all goods, and is in all things neat,
If fortune only made these goods complete.


Not far from Paris is a pretty Town commonly called le Pont Charenton where
the River Matrona mingleth it self with the Seyne. Here is an Echo that will
answer thirteen times one after another, (and which is more wonderful) it
will retort a word of four syllables plainly and perfectly, four or five
times. So much concerning Paris: Goella follows, or la Goelle. The ancient
bounds thereof are worn out of knowledge, and only some places named from
Goella do keep it yet in memory. There is in it la ^onte de dam-Martin, so
named from a famous Town heretofore called Dam-Martin, though now it is become
a small Village, seated on a little Hill. L'Isle de France as the Frenchmen
do limit it, does comprehend all the Country from S. Denis to Passiacum and
Mommorantium, which lies between the corners and windings of Seyne, on the
one side toward Pica^dy, and on the other side toward Normandy. Others do give
it other bounds. S. Denis in Fran^e is a pleasant pretty Town, which the
ignorant of Antiquity and those that are credulous to believe Monks dreams,
do suppose was so called from Dionysius Areopagita. P^ss^a^um or Poissy is a
fair Town; Aim^niu^ c^lled th^s Tow^e Pisias.
where there is a Castle which the Kings of France heretofore much delighted
in. In this Castle before the Castle of S. Germane was built, the Queens of
France were brought to Bed and delivered, and the Kings Children educated and
brought up. Between Possiacum and Paris there is a Town consecrated to D.
Germane, commonly called S. Ge^mane en Lay. The ancient Town Mommorantium is
called in French Mommoran^y. Next to the Island is Vexinum Francicum, Vexin, or
(as others call it) Vulxin le Francois. It contains all the Country from the
River Aesia or Oyse, even to Claromont, toward Picardy. The memory thereof had
been quite extinguished, but that it is preserved in certain ancient Charters
and Records. So much concerning the Praefectureship of Paris, and the four
Territories thereof. The other part commonly called le ^ais de V^lois was so
called from the pleasant Valleys, which are the pride of this Country. Others
derive the name otherwise. It was heretofore a County but is now a Dukedom.
The first Earl of Valois was Charles the Son of Philip the third, King of
France, and brother to Philip the Fair: and afterward Philip the sixth being
the Kings Son did by propagation add many branches to the Stock of the
Valesia^ Earls. The Dukedom of Valois does extend it self even to Picardy.
The chief Town (besides Crespy) is Sentis, called by the FRANCE:
L'Isle de France Parisiensis Aget.
map of France proper (l'isle de France) (...) as some suppose Silvan^^tum,
because it is joined to a Wood. (...) an ancient Town having besides a Bishop,
a Provost, and a Baily (...). The Pr^fectureship of ^i^van^^tum has enriched
the Dukedom of Valois, with the Lordships which are commonly called
^ierr^sens, Bethisi and V^^b^^ie and the Towns Arg^ l^ Pent. S. Maxen^^,
(which is encompast with Ma^^sh^s, and is the bounds between France and
Picardie) (...), B^nville* etc. The same Praefectureship does also con^aine
(...) a Princes S^ some call it Car^l^p^ (...), who enlarged the Pr^^in^ts
thereof and fortified it. (...) are the Towns Mag^, Thor^^^e and Cre^l* (...)
does also contain the ^wick^, ^ureship, and Vicounty of (...) commonly called
(...)* and by some Per^^s^ur^ under which (...). Beside, (...) is under
Silvan^, being an ancient Provostship, under which are Pe^^^ng and Metu. Lastly
under Si^^an^ctum and the (...) of (...) there is the County of Bellova^um
which the (...) or Beau^^sin. The Metropolis thereof (...) commonly called
Beau^ Caesa^ (as (...) to (...) and the same (...) faith that the (...) did
nominat^^ and call i^ ^^^aromagrum. But (...) to speak the truth (...) thinks
to be the Town which is now called Gra^vi^l^^, or G^a^^^^^n^e* ^ some call it
(...) and Vigen^^^ Beaum^n^^n O^se. The City of (...) pleasant situation* and
fruitful Mountaine^ adjoining to it which are no^ very high but fit for
Tillage. It has also good (...) of Wines, (...) King of ^^an* in the year ^4^^
(...) great privileges to the Inhabitants thereof, special (...) men* becau^^
they (...) Duke of (...) without doing any thing. No^ (...) Town (...)
^ortifi^^ with a (...). So (...) third part of (...) follows called (...) and
^o (...) the little Bridge of (...) River to (...) and (...), where the River
(...) do ^^parate it from Ga^^in^^^. It cleaves to ^ay^ toward (...) the
Melo^^^ersian Vi^^ounty and Bayliwick (...) Metropolis thereof is Me^^dunum,
called (...) of the Commentari^s of the French we^^ Meti^scaum* but (...). The
Town is ^eated (...) an Island in S^^^ like Paris, and (...) strong Castle. The
Town ^ow commonly called Corbu^* and (...) the life of S. Pep^s Taran^asius.
Corb^lium a place famous for Fish* but ^^^^ciall for sweet Crabs and has a
strong Castle. There is in Heu^ Town called Pon^ Bellae-Aquae, in French
Fountain Bellea^ wh^^^ the King has a pleasant Palace. Heretofore it was the
Mans^ (...) Ludovi^us* afterward of Philip, and lastly of Francis o^ (...) are
many varieties in it. I have given the fourth place (...) Country of the
Gasti^ensians commonly called ^as^^n^: (...) from Heure^^^ by the River Verina.
I^ on (...) the Dukedome^ of ^^siampes and Nemous^, the Cou^ty (...) and
others. The Town of Stampae commonly cal^led (...) in the mid-war between
Paris and ^^rc^^an^nsium, or (...) the River Iunna or Iu^^^, which as C^r^o^^um
discharges (...) was heretofore a County, but now a Dukedom: The Town N^m^
is seated near the River ^^niu^ which ranneth into Seane little below M^^ctum.
It is one of the chief Dukedomes of France. Rup^S ^ertis, called by the French
Robe^^e^^, has the (...) of a County. In the Territory of Gastin^, besides
Milly and M^^er (which is the bounds between Gastin^ and Heurep^^) there is
M^n^^gium, so called, quasi Men's ag^^, that is, the Mountain of the Field, as
some do argue, because it has a fair prospect round about it. It was wasted
by fire 1518. and afterward as re-edified. There are Castles in the two former
Towns, and there is also in this, in which there is painted a Story concerning
a Hound that revenged his Masters death by killing him that had slain him.

PICARDIE. THE ECCLESIASTICAL STATE.
That part of Picardie which is subject to the King of France has 7.
Bishoprics under the Archbishopric of Rhemes: the Bishops of Suesson,
Silvanectum, Beavais, (which is in France) Noyon, Laon, Amiens, and the
Bishopric of Bouloygne. This Bishopric was formerly at Ternaen, but being
suppressed it was agreed that the Bishops Seat should be translated to
Bouloygne, Anno 1559.

PICARDIE.
The Country whence so called.
PICARDIE (as I said before) some think to be so called, because the
Inhabitants thereof were the first that used Lances, which is not probable.
Some say Picardy was so called from the Town Pequigny, or from a famous
Soldier called Pignon, the first Founder of the Pequignians and Ambianians,
who after the death of Alexander being made Captain of the War, after he had
conquered many Nations, arrived with a Fleet of Ships at Neustria, now called
Normandies; and harrasing those places he gave them afterward his own name.
On the West lies the British Ocean with some part of Normandy, on the North
lie the Countries of ancient Belgia, The Situation.
Artesia, and Hannonia, on the East Luxenburg and Lotharingia, and on the South
Campania, and that Country which is called by a more special name France.
Picardie as I have said also before is divided into three parts. The true
Picardy, the lower, A Vidamate is as much as to say Vice-dominatus, which is an
honor used only in France
and the higher. The true Picardy does contain Vidamates, of Ambianum, Corbie,
and Pequigny, the County of Veromandois, and the Dukedomes of Tirasche, and
Retelois. Ambianum has its name from a Town so called, situate at the River
Samona. This Town has a very fair Church, built with great Art, graced and
adorned with Images far exceeding all the curious pieces of Europe, and in it
as they fabulously report S. John Baptists head is kept whole. It has a
PICARDIE^
PICARDIA
map of Picardy title of a Bayliwick, but yet the Civil government, as the
ordering of the municipall Court, and the power to appoint watches which (...)
to be chosen out of the Citizens* belongs to a Consul appointed for that
purpose, The first Bishop thereof was F^^minus the (...), after whom (...)
Bishops succeeded orderly, the last of which was John Cre^itus, of the
Canaplensian Family. The Inhabitants are repured to b^ very honest and
faithful, and therefore have many privileges and immunities as being exempted
from serving in Foreign wars and from paying of Subsidies. Here the most
learned Physicians Silvius and Fe^nelius were borne and also the excellent
Orator Silvius, who with great commendations imitated many Books of C^^e^o^^.
This City (as we have said before) (...) built by Pig^ a Soldier of Alexanders
the great, if we will believe many Writers. In the year 1597. the Spaniards
treacherously invading it, made it their own, but Henry the 4. King of France
by siege and force of Arms compelled them to render it up again. The
Vidama^^e of Corbie is so called from Corbia, which is a Town (...) the River
^omona (...). The Vidamate of Pequigny is so called from Pequigny built as I
have before expressed by one Pigne^ a Soldier of ^l^xander the great French
Writers do testify that those of the English which survived after a certain
victory obtaind against them were all slain at this Town, who could not
pronounce the name thereof, for they pronounced it ^equeny in stead of
Pequigny. The Geographers that describe (...) do note that Veromandois does
contain under it the Territories of ^issenois, La^nn^is, and ^artencis: and
the Cities N^yon, and S. Quintins. The City of Soiss^ns is subject to Themes
the chief City of Calaa Belgica, and was honored by Caesar with the title of
a Royal City. It was in the power of the Romans, but was taken from them by
Cladoveus, after whose decease, his Sons restored it to that former honor
which it enjoyed in Caesar's time. The Inhabitants are a warlike people. In this
City, in the reign of Philip Augustus* there was a Consell held by the Clergy
of England and France, for that the King of England having thrust the Bishops
out of their Seats, had kept the Churches goods in his own hands for 6.
years* and afterward had banished the Bishops into Fran^e. In this Counsel he
had excommu^ication and wars denounced against him as an enemy to the Church,
upon which he was overcome in Battle, and all his auxiliary Forces which he
had out of Planders were overthrown: the Suess^nes among the rest behaving
themselves very valiantly against him. The Temple and Monastery of the blessed
Virgin in the City Soiss^ms was built by Ebroynus the Tyrant who was Master of
the Palace of ^rauce. The Bishops of Soissons from Sixtus to Matthew Paris were
79.. The Country of Laonois so called from the City Laon which i^ situated
between the Rivers Ayne, and Oysa on a Hill, and ^gisbertus says that
^l^doveus in the year 500. did honor this City with a Dukedom and a
Bishopric. He constituted Genebaldus to be the first Bishop thereof, and
after him unto Johannes Bu^^erius, there are reckoned 72. Bishops. It is also a
Bayliwick, under which are these Cities, Soissons. Noviomagus, or Noyon, S.
Quintins, Ribuaria, or Ribemont, C^u^y, Chau^y, Guise, Perona, Mondidier, and
Roia. Next adjacent unto Laon is ^^mpendium, called by the French, Compiegne,
and by others Par^p^^is, from Carolus Calvus, who in the year 896. did enlarge
and fortify it like Constantinople, erecting there also a Monastery to Saint
Cornelius. The Church of Compiegne, and the Monastery of the Dominicans and
Franciscans were built by S. Ludovicus King of France. The Metropolis of
Tartenois is Fera, commonly called La Fere, being a City well fortified and
commodiously seated, at the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Oysa, and
Serva, and having a strong Castle. Concerning the Cities Noyon and S. Quintins
there is enough spoken in the Description of a former Table. So much therefore
concerning true Picardie. There are diverse parts of the lower Picardie called
(Le Basse.) As Sancterra, Pontium, Bolonesium, Gu^naeum, and Oyum. Sancterra,
or Sancterre lies between Mons S. Desiderij, Perona, Roye, and Nesla. Mons S.
Desiderij, or Mondidier is a strong Place or Hold. Perona is situated at the
River Somona: here Herebert Earl of Veromandois kept Cha^les the Simple King
of France Captive, where he died and left the Kingdom much troubled. Roye is a
fair Town, fortified with a Castle. Antoninus calls it Caesaremagnus, as
also the Itinerary Tables. ^essa is a strong Fortress as many other places are
in this part of the Kingdom. In Sancterra have many famous men been borne,
and the ancient Lords thereof being Marquesses, formerly joined in affinity and
allied to the Family of the Courtneys, which descended from the Kings of
France. Pontium or in French Le Conte Ponthieu is so named, from the great
company of Bridges and Marshes which discharge and empty themselves into the
Sea, near to S. Valeri. The chief Town of the County is Abatisvilla,
commonly called Abbeville near the River Oyse, being a Bailiwick, and the
Seat of a President, from whence Causes and Suites in Law are brought to
Paris. The other Towns are Cr^toy, Rua, Treport, and S. Richeri, besides
Cressiacum, or the little Town of Cressi famous for the slaughter of 36000.
Frenchmen, under the conduct of Philip of Valots, in the year 1346. This
Country also does contain two other under it, to wit, the Counties of
M^^streul, and S. Paul* some think the former was so called quasi M^rs Reguis,
that is, the Royal Mountain, but others imagine it to be so named from a
Monster which had his dwelling house here. Lower Picardie contains the County
of Bononia, The lower Picardy.
commanly called Co^^^ de Boleigne, and the County of Guisne, of which we will
speak in the Description of Bononia. The chief Rivers of Picardie are Somona,
near to which lie the Town Ambianum, or Amiens and Abbe-Villa, The River is
called by Ptolemy Phrudis, and by Caenalis, Sambre.

This River Caesar calls Axona, and Caenalis Disne.


Oyse* or Esia, Scaldis, Escault, or Sceldt, and those which are commonly
called A^^^ and Scarpe. I come to their manners. The Picardians are of a good
disposition, well set, courteous, Officious, valiant, and prone to anger,
whence they are called hot heads: they are so soon assuredly given and
addicted to wine, so that a man can hardly obtain any thing of them, unless
he will bear them company in drinking. Yet they agree so well among
themselves, that if you offend one of them, all the rest will be your enemies.
The Nobles are warlike, and do most of all delight in military affairs. So
much concerning Picardy.

CAMPANIA, THE STATE ECCLESIASTIC.
Here is the Archbishop of Rhemes, under whom are eight suffragan Bishops: as
the Bishop of Laon, a Duke and Peer of France: the Bishop of Chalon an Earl
and Peer of France* the Bishop of Suesson, the Bishop of Terwaen, whose Seat
was translated to Boulogne, the Bishop of Amiens, the Bishop of Noviomagum, or
Noion, an Earl and Peer of France: the Bishop of Senlis, and the Bishop of
Beauvais; an Earl and Peer of France.

Here is also the Archbishop of Sens, under whom are seven Bishops, to wit, the
Bishop of Paris, of Chartres, of Orleans, of Nivers, of Auxerre, of Trois en
Champaigne, and of Meaux.

CAMPANIA.
The Country whence so called.
CAMPANIA called in French Comte de Champaigne, is derived as I have said
before, if we shall believe Graegorius ^uronensis, from the great and spacious
Field whereof it consists. For it is a very plain and Champion Country. The
Situation.
The Territories of Brie, Burgundy, Carolois, and Lotharingia do encompasse
it on every side. The Tricasses, Lingones, the R^mi, the Catalaunians, the
Meldae, the Senones, and others, who are now worn out of memory, were
heretofore seated in this Country. The Tricasses nominated in Plinies chiefest
Books, Ptolemy calls Trikasstoi, and Ammianus Tricassini, as also in certain
Panegyricks and in the Inscription of an ancient Stone. Hericus calls the
Trecae in the life of S. Germane, and others call them by contraction Tresses.
Their City is called Tricassium, and commonly Trois en Champaigne. Those which
Caesar, Pliny, and others do call Ling^nes, Ptolemy calls Do^gones, and the
same Pliny, Faederati. That Province which contains their City which is
Langres, is now called La Duche, Patre and Evesche de Langres. Those which
Caesar calls R^mi, Ptolemy calls Rhem^i; Pliny Faederati, and the Country
in which is their City of Rhemes is called Duche Pairie, and Archenesche de
R^ims, as we have before mentioned. The Learned do think that the Cathelaum
mentioned in Amianus Marcellinus should be written Catalauni. And so they are
nominated CAMPANIA.
CHAMPAGNE comitatus CAMPANIA
map of Champagne in Eutropius his Books. Their City is now called la Evesche
de Challon. In the Catalannian Fields. Atilla King of the Hunnes (in the year
from the building of the City of Rome 1203. and after the birth of Christ 450.)
was overcome by the Romans, Goths and Frenchmen, under the conduct of their
Captains Actius Patricius, Theodoricus and Merovaeus, there being slain on
both sides 162000. except 90000. Gepidaans and Frenchmen, who were slain
before. Iornandes cap. 36. does delmeate and set forth these Fields, and the
place of the Battle. The Meldae Pliny calls Liberi: Strabo Meldoi: Ptolemie
Meldai: and an Inscription engraven on an ancient Stone, Meldi. Strabo
precisely makes them and the Leuxovians to be the Parokeanitae, which are in
the middle of the Country where there is now the Town Meaulx near the River
Matrona. The Senones which are celebrated by Caesar, Pliny, and others. Ptolemy
calls by the same name, and places them in Gallia Lugdunensis. Strabo
thinks that there are other Senones near to the Nerviais, toward the West.
The former of them did make those horrible incursions into Italy so much spoke
of, and they did moreover wage a most fierce war against the Romans in the
year from the building of the City 364. which they called The Senonick French
war. Their Captain was Brannus an Nobleman of France. After the Fight or
Battle, they entered the City of Allia, and there having slain all they met,
and wasted all with fire, they besieged for many months the Capital, into
which the Roman youth had fled for their safeguard: but at last having made a
peace with them for a certain sum of money, contrary to faith and promise
they were partly slain, and partly put to flight by M. Furius Camillus the
Dictator, who entered the City with an Army. All these things Livie Lib. 5.
Florus Lib. 1. cap 13. and many other Writers do delineate in their proper
colors. Campania is honored with the title of a County, and was once the
Inheritance of Eudo Nephew to Gerlo the Norman by his Son Theobaldus: The
ancient government.
This Gerlo was he that accompanied into France Rudulphus or Rollo the Norman,
to whom Charles the Simple granted Neustria which was afterward called
Normandy. After Eudo there succeeded in a right Line, Stephen, Theobaldus the
2. whose son Theobaldus the third dying without issue, there succeeded him
his Cousin germane Henry surnamed the large, the son of Stephen King of
England, who was Brother to Theobaldus the second. Henry had a son who was
Earl of Campania, and the other Territories, but he dying without issue, his
Brother Theobaldus invaded the County, and writ himself Count Palatine of
Campania. This Theobaldus being afterward made King of Navarre upon the death
of Grandfather by the Mothers side, brought the County to belong to the Crown,
and left Henry his Successor both in Campania, and in that Kingdom. Lastly,
Ioane Daughter and Heir to this Henry being married to Philip the Fair King of
France, Campania and the other Provinces were united to the Crown of France,
from which they were never after separated. Campania as I have already spoken,
is usually now described both by it self, and with the Principalities adjacent
and lying round about it. As it is considered properly and by it self it is
twofold the Lower, and the Higher. In the Lower is Tricassium, and the
Territories which are commonly called Ivigny, ^assg^y, and Vallage. Modern
Writers do call that Tricassium, which is now called (...). Th^se who were
heretofore Earls of Campania, from this City were called Earl^s of Tricassium.
It is one of the greatest and fairest Cities in this Kingdom. The Latitude
thereof is 47. degrees, and some few minutes, toward the North. It is a
Bishops Seat, and Belles^^rr^tius reckons 83. Bishops thereof. Among these was
that famous Lu^^^, whom Sidonius Apollinaris praises for his virtues, ( Lib.
6. Ep. 1.4. (...) 9.) as also Paulus Diaconus (in Marciano) Bid (Lib. 1.
Histor. cap. 17.) and others. This City has a large Jurisdiction, and it is
the seat of a President, of Counselors, of Judges, and others of the Kings
Officers. The Towns have reference to it, namely, Bar Sur Seine, The Cities.
Mussil ^^^tique, La ferte Sur Auge, N^gent, Pent Sur Seine, Fruille, Chastel,
and S. Florentin, being all Towns of Campania. The Territory of Ivigny
separateth ^ampania from Burgundy. The chief Town thereof is Ivigny, which
is under the Jurisdiction of the Bayliwick of Tricassium. Bassigny is so named
because it is the better part of Lower Campania, as we have before declared.
The Metropolis thereof is named from the bald Mountain, which Ivonus
mentions ( Ep. 105) commonly called Chaum^nt on Bass^gny. It has an ancient
Castle seated on a Rock and well fortified, the Tower on the West side whereof
is called in French Donyon and La haulte fueille. This Castle the Earls of
Campania did heretofore make their Palace. No River runs by it, nor
affords water unto it, but that which Cesternes do yield, and a Fountain at
the foot of the Tower. There are also in Bassigny the Towns of Montigny,
Go^ssy, N^gent le Roy, Monteclar, Andelot, Bisnay, Ch^iseul, Visnorry, and
Clismont, being all strong Towns, and the most of them well fortified with
Castles, besides Andomatunum Lingonum, commonly called Langres, of which we
shall speak in an other place. The Territory of Vallage, is supposed to be so
called from the Valleys in it which are both fair and fruitful. The Towns of
chiefest note in Vallage are first Vasscium, or Vassy, near Blois, in the
Country of Guise. Francis Duke of Guise coming hither in the year 1562. was
the Author of that Vasseian Massacre, mentioned by the French Historiagraphers,
wherein many that professed the reformed Religion were slain on the Kalends of
March. Not far from thence there is a kind of earth found of which B^le
Armenack is made. The second Town of not is S. D^^^re or Dedu^^, which was
taken by the Emperor Charles the fifth, and afterward a peace being concluded
was restored again to the French. It has a strong Castle. The third is the
Town of Ian^^^ille, (or as some write is ^o^^t ville) which some do
fabulously report was so called from Ianus. It belongs to the Families of the
Guises. Prye, so called from a Town commonly named Brye, or Bray Count
Robert, is reckoned by some with Campania. The Country of Brye although it were
heretofore and also now is very woody, yet in fertility and fruitfulness it
is not inferior to any part of Campania. For it has a clear sky, and a
sweet and temperate air. It is watered with great, wholesome, and fruitful
Rivers. The Cities of Brye are Castellum Theodorici, Iatinum, Medorum or
Meldarum, now called Meaulx, Provinse, and others. Castellum Theoderick,
commonly called Chasteau Thierry is the Metropolis of the Country of Brye,
having a Baily and President in it. It has also a Bishops Seat, of which
Belleforrestius reckons 101. Bishops, the last of which number was Ludovicus
Bresius. Provinsy a Town famous for the sweet red Roses that are in it, and
for the Rose-cakes, and Rose Water which are made of them in the Summer time.
Here are some ruinous Monuments of Antiquity. And so much shall suffice
concerning Campania.

THE COUNTRY OF BELLOVACVM. COMMONLY CALLED BEAVVAIS, OR BEAVVOISIN. The State
Ecclesiastic. THE BISHOP OF BELLOVACVM IS A SPIRITVAL and temporal Lord, an
Earl, and Peer of FRANCE.
The Country of BELLOVACUM.
THE Country or County of Bellovacum, The Country whence so called.
called in French Con te de Beanvais, or Beauvoisin, did receive that
appellation by name from the Metropolis or chief City Bellovacum. It is a
pleasant Country, having Hills and Mountains round about it not very high, The
fertility;
planted with Vines: here also Meddowes, and there Pastures and Fields fit for
tillage. Beauvois has a thin subtle kind of earth found in it, of which
diverse kinds of vessels are made, and transported into many Countries, and it
is famous for the Flax which grows at a little Town commonly called Rule.
For those of Flanders and Hannonia, or Henegou, do buy it, and do make fine
webs of cloth of it, which they sell at home and transporte abroad both by Sea
and Land. The ancient Inhabitants of this part of France were the Bellovaci
(whom Caesar and Pliny do often mention) called by Strabo Bellolakoi, and by
Ptolemy Belluakoi. Caesar witnesses that these Bellovacians where the chiefest
of the Belgians, both for prowess, authority, and number of men, as being able
to bring 100000. men into the Field. The Author of the 8. Book de Bello
Gallico writes, that the Bellovacians did exceed all Frenchmen and Belgians
for matters of war. And Strabo in his 4. Book says, that the Bellovacians
are the best of the Belgians, and after them the Suessones. Caesar does in some
manner paint out the Commonwealth of the Bellovacians, when he shows, that
they were wont to elect their Princes out of themselves as amongst the rest
they did that Corbeus, who albeit his Army of Citizens was overcome, yet no
calamity could make him leave the Field, retire to the Woods, or yield himself
upon any conditions offered to him by the Romans, but sighting valiantly and
wounding many, he did enforce the enraged conquerers to cast their Darts at
him. Caesar also does mention the Senate of the Bellovacians and the authority
of the common people: whence that excuse of the Bellovacian Senate to Caesar:
That while Corbaeus lived, the Senate could not do so much in the City, as the
unskilful multitude. But although the Bellovacians in Caesar's time had a great
opinion for their courage and fortitude, yet at length being overcome they
yielded to the Romans, and were subject to them until the Frenchmen passing
over the Rhene possessed France. The Husbandmen of this Country in King John;
time did stir up a sedition, which was commonly called laquerte. And they
especially aimed at the Nobles, of whom they slew many, and pulled down their
Houses. At length Charles the Dolphin of France, (who was afterward King, and
surnamed the Wise) The King of Navarre, the Duke of Bourbon, and other Princes
and Nobles of the blood Royal did quiet this sedition, as knowing what would
be the event of it, and what troubles would spring there from, if it were not
extinguished in time. The Metropolis or Mother City of this Country is
Bellovacum, The Cries.
commonly called Beauvois. Guicciardine endeavoreth to prove by many reasons
that this Bellovacum is that Belgium which Caesar mentions in his
Commentaries, when he says that he wintered part of his Army in Belgium, and
adds withal that it is the Seat of the most valiant Bellovacians: for he
says that Caesar meant by this name Belgium, not a whole Province, but a City,
or some other particular place. They faboulously report that Belgius a King of
France the Son of Lugdus did lay the foundation of this City, and of the City
Lugdurum, a long time before the building of Troy, and called it Belgium whence
Gallia Belgica has its denomination. It is an ancient famous City, as having
besides a Bishopric, an Earl, who is one of the twelve Peers of France, and
there are also diverse Monuments found in it, which do witness that it was
once a great, rich, and populous City. It has an excellent situation, and is
fortified with Walls and Towers entrenched with broad deep Ditches, well
furnished with Ordnance, as also adorned with fair Churches. The chief Church
whereof is the Cathedral Church, consecrated to S. Peter, which is one of the
fairest Churches in France, and in which they report that the bones of Justin
Martyr, Eurotus, and Germerus are kept. The Bishops of Bellovacum do write
themselves Earls and Peers of France. The first of them was S. Lucian, after
whom succeeded 84. Bishops, whom Belleforrestius does reckon up, and makes
Charles of Bourbon the last of them. Bellovacum is governed by a Mayor, (in
like manner as the Merchants of Paris by a Proefect) and also by twelve Peers,
who are as so many Consuls being annual Magistrates, and elected by the
people, as the Magistrates of Rome were usually chosen. This City is rich by
clothing, and gains this honor to it self, that the fairest and best Carpets
in all France are made therein. A Nation Counsel was here held and kept in the
year 1114. Here was borne the great Historian Vincentius a Doctor and
Governor of the Monastery of the Dominicans, who lived in the year 840. In
this City was also borne Guilielmus Durandus, who was THE COUNTRY OF BELLOVACVM.
BELoVACIUM. Comitatus
map of Beauvais region (France) first here a Canon, afterward Deane of
Chartes, and last of all Bishop of Mande. He lived in the year 1286. There was
the place of Johannes Choletus his nativity, who founded a College at Paris
commonly called le College des Cholets, and was a Cardinal though of mean
birth: and lastly, here was borne Iohann^s Michael Bishop of Angiers, whom in
Anjou they esteem as a Saint. This is an argument of the riches of this
Territory of Beavais, that 11. or 12 miles round about this City, there are so
many Towns and Villages, and those so near one to another, that none of them
are above a mile distant. This City was exchanged for the County of Sancerrane,
which Roger Bishop of Bellava^nm surrenderd up to Eudon Earl of Campania, for
the County of Bellovacum, the Goods, Lands, and Dominion whereof he joined to
his Bishopric. The Country of Bellovacum contains Clermont, not far from
Bellovacum, which is a County, and appertains to the Royal house of Burbon.
Charles Duke of Burbon had by his wife Agres Daughter to John Duke of
Burgundy, two Sons John and Peter. John the second of this name married Ione
the Daughter of Charles the 7. and dying without issue left his Dukedom to his
younger Brother Peter. Peter the second Duke of Burbon of this name had by Anne
the Daughter of Ludovick the eleventh Susan, the Inheritrix of Burbon, who was
wife to the aforesaid Charles the younger Son of Gilbert, who also was the
younger Son of the abovenamed Ludovick Earl of Montpenser, and Brother to
Charles Duke of Burbon. But he having no issue, the Line of the eldest Son of
Ludovick, who was the first Duke of Burbon, was extinguished. James of Ponthium
the younger Son of Ludovick the first Duke of Borton aforesaid, had John Earl
of March by Ioane the Daughter of the Earl S. Paul. After him succeeded
Ludovick, John Vendemensis the second of this name, Francis, Charles created
Duke of Vendomium by King Francis the first: and also Antonius who was
afterward King of Navarre. He had by Ioane Albretane Queen of Navarre (the
Daughter of Henry the second King of Navarre and Margaret Valesia Cosin-germane
to Francis the first King of France) Henry the first of this name, King of
France by his Fathers right, and the third King of Navarre of that name by the
right of his Mother, the Father of Ludovick the 13. Let us return to Claramont
which is a Town fortified with a Castle, and here the Lord de la Rocque a
famous French Poet was borne. There is also the Town Belmontium, or Bellus
Mons, that is, the fair Mount, commonly called Beaumont which lies near the
River Aesia, commonly called Oyse. The County is commonly called la Comte de
Beaumont sur Oys^, being an ancient Praefectureship, under which are Persang
and Metu. The County of Belmontius has Princes of the Royal Stock of
Vendomium which are Lords thereof. Near to this Town beyond the River Aesia
or Oyse, the Country of Bellovacum begins. P. Merula supposes that Beaumont
was the same with that which Antonius calls Augustomagum, and Ptolemy
corruptly moves Ratomagus. Some think it to be that Town which Caesar
describes, Lib. 2. Belli. Gal. being well fortified by nature, as having high
Rocks round about it, and on one side away into it, somewhat steep. And so
much concerning the Country of Bellovacum, I pass to Bolonia.

THE COVNTIE OF BOVLONGNE. Wherein are these Countries: Guines, Ardres, and
the Baronry of Fiennes. Also the Bishopric of Tarvania, and Morinea, by which
the other Countries in spiritual matters are subject.
The Meridians thereof are placed at the Parallels 50. and 45.
THE Country of Bolonia, or as some call it, of Bononia, in French Conte de
Boulogne, is very large. The Country whence so called.
All this Country is Sandy, having a kind of Sand which they call burning
Sand: whence some do judicially think that it was called Bolonia from
Boullir, whereas indeed it was so named from the Town of Bulloigne, which is
now divided into the Higher and the Lower. The County of Bononia begins at
the Mountains of S. Ingelbert: and runs forth to the River Cancha, which is
the length thereof, and to the Wood Tournoth, The Situation.
which is the breadth thereof. Bolonia was made a County in the time of Carolus
Calvus King of France, at what time S. Paul, Oye, Guines, and Artesia were
honored with the same Title. It has many Towns and Villages, and amongst the
rest there is Bulloigne, which is twofold, The Cities.
the Higher and the Lower. The former is seated on a high ground, on which was
only a Borough Town, before the English besieged it. The latter being seated
in a plainer soil is washed with the Sea, and they are distant from each other
an hundred paces, or there abouts. And a certain Panegyric written by an
unknown Author, and spoken before the Emperor Constantine calls it
Bononiense opidum, or the Town of Bononia. Now it is commonly called Boulogne:
and the Low-Countrymen coming nearer to the ancient appella, tion do call it
Beunen. Joseph Scaliger in his Letters to Merula, Papiriut, Massorius, Leland,
Ortelius, and others do think that it was anciently called Gessoriacum. Also
Peutingers Table does confirm the same in which Gessoriacum is put for
Bononia. Antoninus calls it Gessoriacum, and does place there the 15. Legion,
and otherwheres he calls it Gessoriacensis Portus, or the Haven of
Gessoriacum, or Gessoriagum: Ptolemy calls it Gessoriacum a Haven of the
Moriakans: John Talbot thinks it should be named Galesium, and others that
it should be called Saint Aud^mar: Turnebus calls it the Town of Soacum:
and Boethius Slusa: Hermolaus Barbarus calls it Brugas, and Bilibaldus
Gand^vum. Robert Caenalis distinguishes Gessorlacum Portum, and Gessoriacum
Navale, and thinks the one to be B^n^nia, and the other Cassell. Hence came
that Godfrey of Boulogne, the Son of Eustathius Earl of Boulogue, who was
Duke of Lotharingia, and the first King of the Christian Solonians. Near to
Boulogne was the Haven Itius, which some thought to be the Town of Calis, whom
Ptolemy easily confuteth, who first places the Promontory of Itius behind the
mouth of the River Seyn, and afterward Gesoriacum a Haven of the Morinnians,
from which the Town of Calis is above tweenty Miles distant. M. Velserus is
persuaded that Gessoriacum is the same with Itium. Some think the Haven Itius
to be S. Andomar, enduced thereunto both because this City was in ancient times
called Sitieu, as it were the Bay of Itium, and also by the situation thereof,
which being very low, yet by the high shores which lie round about the City, it
seems it was a great Bay of the Sea. Camden in his Brittannia shows that the
Haven Itius was long accounted to be in that place which they now call
Withsan: near Blanestum. But we leave these things to be decided by others
Next to the County of Bononia is Guisnes which is parted from the County of
Oye, by a great Channel; which making the Territory impregnable, The County of
Guisnes.

The Towns.


and glideth by the chief Town called Guisnes, being divided into two parts,
one whereof is seated in the Marish ground, the other on the Continent, and is
naturally strong and well fortified. King Henry the second took it, Francis
Lotharingeus Duke of Guise being sent thither in the year 1558. Concerning the
Danes right heretofore, to the Country of Guise, Meyerus writes much in the
Annals of Flanders, and concerning this Country other Historiographers do write
other things which are not now to be mentioned. There are also other Towns, as
Hartincourt, Peuplinge, Conquelle, the Nievelletian Haven. This Country has
under it the Baronies of Ardres and Courtembrone, which are so called from
these two Towns Ardres and Courtembrone, and also the Barony of Fiennes.

Two miles from Ardres toward the Ocean is Calis, a Town well fortified both
by nature and Art, esteemed always to be the Key and Gate of France, which
Philip of Boulogne Uncle to S. Ludovick as they report, first walled about, it
having a Castle with a strong Tower, which commands the entrance into the
Haven. Edward the fifth, King of England took it the day before the Nones of
August, 11. months after that cruel Battle fought against Philip the sixth,
King of France, near to Cressy in the year 1347. which Paulus Aemilius, lib.
9. lively delineateth. The English did possess it 211. years, (for Philippus
Bonus a Burgundian did in vain besiege it in the year 1431. his Flandrians
forsaking him) and did keep it (as the English were wont to say) as the Key of
France, the Duke of Guises afterward took it, and the Frenchmen regained it in
the year 1558. in the month of February. In the midway between Calis and
Bononia toward the Mediterranean Sea is Teroane: which still retains that
name, although Charles the fifth passed it, and call it Terrennerbere^,
Anten^^^^ names it Tervanna or Tarvenna, the Itinerary Tables Tervanna, and
Ptolemy Tarvanna. Bovillus affirms that some do call it Taruba^um.
T^^themius in his History of France mentions the Terrabania^^. BOVLONGNE^
BOLONIA
map of Boulogne Some call it Tervana as it were Terra-vana, in regard of the
meandness of the Territory. In the Register of the Provinces; where the Cities
of Belgia are reckoned up, it is called the City of the Morinneans, that is, l'
Evesche de Teroane. In the Inscription of an ancient Stone, which in former
time was found in Gilderland it is called the Morineans Colony. The Territory
of Oyana or Terre de Oye, does reach even to Dunkerk* a Town of Flanders.
There are also beside Oya, some other small Towns. The Rivers.
I return now to Boulogne which is watered with stremes and Rivulets, which
running by the Town Arque, and S. Audomare do come to Graveling. Not far
from thence is the Bay of Scales, flowing even to the Castle of Ardera. There
are also two other Rivulets, namely, one in Marquisia, the other in Bolonia.
There is also the River Hantia or Hesdin, which does impart his name to the
Town Hesdin. There is also in this Country the Moorish streams of the
Pontinians, and the River Cauchia. Some of these Rivers do make Lakes and
Fish-pits, which are full of Fish, and are denominated from the neighboring
Towns: as those which they call in French le Vivier, d' Hames, d' Andre, d'
Arbres. All this Country toward the Sea is environd with sundry Hills, and in
the inner part thereof there are those Hills which they call in French les Mons
de S. Ingelvert, and les Mons de neuf Castle, and Dannes. All the Country is
interlaced with many Woods, as the Woods les Bois de Surene, Celles, etc. The
Inhabitants are accounted to be froward, and too much conceited of themselves.

ANIOV THE DVKEDOME OF ANDEGAVIA.
The Dukedom of Anjou contains Counties, Baronnies, and Seigniories, as
C^aon 1856. 4743, etc. which I have not yet found out, nor can distinguish;
these four Counties, Maine, Vendosme, Beaufort, and La Val do hold of it by
Homage and Fealty.

THE IVRISDICTION.
The Praesidiall Seat of the whole Kingdom is Angiers, under which are these
particular Juridicall Seats, Angiers, Samur; Bauge, 1945. 4725. and Beaufort
en Vallee, 1940. 4716.

The State Ecclesiastic.
Angiers has one Bishop of Andegauja, who is subject to the Archbishop of
Turone.

The Meridians are placed according to the Proportion of the 47. and 15.
Parallels to the greatest Circle.

The Dukedom of ANIOU.
THE Dukedom of Anjou follows in our Method, or la Ducke d' Anjou. C. Caesar
calls the people of this Province Andes, and Pliny names them Andegavi. It
begins at the Village Town Chousay; and ends between Moncontour and
Herrant, The Situation.
where the Territory of the Picts begins, lying South of it on the East; the
Turonians and Vindocinians do border on it: on the North the County commonly
called Maine, and l^ Val: and lastly, on the West it joyneth to Britain. The
Country is more fruitful and pleasant than large, having every where Hills
planted with Vines, and Valleies crowned with green Woods, flourishing
Meddowes, and excellent Pastures for Cattle. Here are good white Wines,
commonly called Vins d' Aniou. In brief, this Country does afford all things
necessary for life. In some parts also of this Province they dig forth those
blue kind of Stones, with which being cleft in pieces they do slate their
Churches and Houses to keep off the weather; and in French they call them
Ardoises. King i^ec^^us* after the Earl Paul was slain, got the City of
Indeg^^^a and left it to his Posterity, who were Kings of France* among whom
^arolus Calvus gave the higher part of the Province to Iorquatus, retaining
still the Royalty thereof to himself: and the lower part to Eud^^ Earl of
Paris, whose Nephew Hugo magnus by his Brother Rupert Earl of Andegavia, and
Duke of Celtica, gave it to Fulco, the Nephew of Iorquatu^. After Fulco there
succeeded in order Fulco the 2. and Gotefridus commonly called Grisgonella,
Fulco the 3. Got^fridus the 2. Fulco the 4. Fulco the 5. who was King of
Jerusalem, after Baldwin, whose Daughter, he being a Widdower had married: and
lastly Godfridus Barvatus the 6. who was married to Machtildis, the Daughter of
Henry the first, King of England. His Sons were Henry, who was the second
King of England of that name, and Gotefridus the sixth and William were Earls
of Anjou: whom when their Brother the King had overcome by war, and droven
them out of their Country, his eldest Sons did succeed him in the Kingdom of
England, and Gotefridus the 8. in the County of Anjou. The Uncle ^ohn King of
England did wage war against the Earl Arthur the Son of Gotefrid, and Duke
of B^ittaine by the Mothers side. Arthur had now done Homage and Fealty to
Philip Augustus King of France, for his Principality which he had of him: by
whose instigation leaving to take away Picardy from his Uncle the King, and
having passed his Army over the River and Ligoris, the King coming upon him on
a sudden took him prisoner, and brought him to ^otomagum, where not long after
he was put to death. The Mother of Arthur Constantia by name, the Daughter and
Heir of Conan Prince of Britain, did accuse King John of Parricide, before
the King of France aforesaid: who being summoned and not appearing* the Pears
of France did condemn him of parricide, and those Provinces which he had in
France they confiscated to the King: which sentence the King ex^cuting, he
took Anjou into his own hands, and left i^ to his Son Ludovick the 8, King
of France. After whom succeeded his Son Ludovick the 9. surnamed the Holy, who
granted this Province to his Brother Charles by right. After him followed
Charles the 2. who marrying h^s Daughter Cleme^tia to Charles Valesius, he gave
this Province with her for her Dowry. After whom succeeded Philip Valesius the
Son, and after him his Nephew John, who gave the greatest part of this
Country, which was honored with the Title of a Dukedom in the year 1350. to
his Son Ludovick. After him there followed in a direct Line Ludovick the 2.
and Ludovick the 3. who dying without an Heir the Principality came to his
Brother Renatus. He having no issue living, made Charles his Brothers Son
his Heir, and he made King Ludovick the 11. his Heir. And thus it was annexed
to the Crown of France, and continued so united, until Francis the first gave
the revenue thereof to his Mother Aloisia ^abande. King Charles the 9. gave it
to his Brother Henry, who was afterward King of Polonia and France. The
Metropolis or Mother City of the Dukedom is Andegavum, Paulus Diacorus calls
it the City of Audegavia; it is commonly called Angiers. Ptolemy calls it
Iuliomagus Andicavarum. It is seated THE DVKEDOME OF JANIOV.
ANIOU
map of Anjou on both the banks of the River Maine, which has a Stone bridge
over it. It is well governed having a Bishop, a Marshall, and a Baily, and a
President. It has a famous University, instituted by Ludovick the second Duke
of Anjou in the year 1389. Francis Baldwine being called thither, who
professed the Law there. This Dukedom has many fair Towns, some whereof are
bigger than others. I will reckon some Towns according as they are called in
French, as namely, Samur near Liguris with a Castle; also Montrencau, Bauge,
Beaufort, Brissac, Monstreul-Belay, Maleuvrior, Ghantoceau, Viliers, Duretail,
la Plesche, Chasteau-Gontier, Segre. In this Province there are many Lakes and
Rivolets, and above 40. Rivers. There are also great Fish-pits, and an infinite
number of Fountains. The chief Rivers are Lagures, Loire: Vigenna, called la
Vienne, Viane and Vignane: Meduana now called Main, Sarta commonly called
Sartra and Lorius. Beyond the City of Andegavum there are some ancient ruins,
which are commonly called Grohan. Here they say that the Romans did heretofore
build a Theater, and some of the Walls do yet remain. And great store of old
coin is dug forth. Besides other Counties, Baronnies, and Signiories, these
four Counties do Homage and Fealty to this Dukedom, Maine, The Country of
Maine.
Vendosme, Beaufort, and la Val, of which we will entreat in order. The County
of Maine, commonly called Conte de Maine is the first. In Ptolemies time the
Cenomanians did inhabit this Country. And the Province of the Cenomanians was
inhabited as soon as any other part of France. The bounds thereof were
heretofore longer than they are now, which may be gathered by that which Livie,
Polybius, and Iustine have deliverd concerning the irruption of the Cemonians
into Italy. The nature of the Soil.
One part of the Country is fruitful, the other barren, and the Inhabitants
live more by hunted flesh than by bread or wine, which yet they do not
altogether want, for some parts of this Province are so fruitful, that neither
Andegavia, nor Tutonia can excel it for good wine, or fruits. The Soil is
full of Herbage, and fit for Pasturing of Cattle. The ancient government.
But we read that this Province being comprehended under Aquitania, was
sometime subject to the Dukes of Aquitania, until the King of France Ludovi^k
the 9. and Henry ^he 3. King of England, did agree that, that which belonged to
the King of England in Aquitania, which was bounded on the North with the River
Caranton, and on the South with the Pyrenaean Mountains, should for ever
belong to Normandy, and to the Countries of the Cenomanians and Andegavians, in
consideration whereof 1500. Crowns were to be paid unto him. John King of
France gave Andium and the County of the Cenomanians to his second Son
Ludovick. The Letters Patents of this Donation or Gift dated 1360. may be
seen in the Kings Rolls. After Ludovick there succeeded Ludovick the second,
his Son, and Ludovick the third his Nephew. These three were Kings of Naples.
Ludovick the third dying without issue, his Brother Renatus succeeded after
him, whom Ieane Queen of Naples, the second of that name, did make her Heir
both of the Kingdom of Naples, and of the County of Province. Renatus had by
Isabe^l the daughter of Charles the Bold his Son. John Duke of Calabria, who
dyed before his Father Renatus. This John had by Mary the Daughter of Cha^^^
Duke of Purbor, Nicolas Duke of Calabria, and Marquess of Pon^un^ who dyed
without issue, his Grandfather Renatus yet living. Ren^^^ would not resign his
righ^ to the Kingdom of Naples, and the County of Pro^^r^t to his Nephew
Renatus, but left it to his Brother Charles Earl of the Cenomanians: who dying
a little after, did institu^e and make Ludovick the 11. his Heir. In former
times the whole Country was divided into two parts. The City of the Cenomanians
belongs to the King of France, but the City Maena or Maine with the
Marquiship, being now made a Dukedom acknowledges the Guises to be Lords
thereof. The chief Town is by the River Sartra, commonly called le Men's. At
the first it was a Bayliwick, and after Henry the second time it had a
President, and diverse Towns did bring their appeals and suites hither. The
Dukedom of Vend^sme or the Put^he de Vend^sme begins at Baugencia^um, which
is the bounds between the two Belsia which are called Sol^nia and Vindocina,
which stretches out far and wide even to the Sa^tones. It is so called from
the Town Vindocinum, commonly called Vendosme. That which Ptolemy calls
Ovindikon (for so it is read) is a City of the Aulercian Cenomanians in Gallia
Lugdunensis We do affirm nothing. For that Ovinatken, is perhaps the Town
which is now called le Ma^s, which is Scalig^rs opinion also. The Earls of
Vend^sme are descended from from the Stock of the Burbons. We read that the
first Earl hereof was Ludovick Barbonius, the Son of John Earl of Marc and
Clermont, after whom there succeeded Lineally John his Son, and Franci^ and
Charles his Nephews, whom Francis the first, King of France did create the
first Duke of Vendosme. Charles was succeeded by his Son Antony, who was Duke
of Vendosme a Peer of France, and in the right of his wife Ieane Albreta, King
of Navarre, of whom came Henry Bu^bon, the fourth King of France of that name,
and the most potent King of Navarre, Prince of Bearne, Duke of Vendosme, etc.
There are also Beaufort and la Val.

THE DVKEDOME OF BITVRICVM.
THE Dukedom of Bituricum, or le Duche de Berry, which follows in our
Method, on the North looks toward Solonia the lower part of Belsia, from
which it is parted by the flowing streams of Caru, The Situation.
on the East it looks toward the Hurepensians, Nivernensians, and Borbontans,
being bounderd here with a little Rivalet called la Fay: on the South is
Lemovicum, where the River Croure flows; on the West are the Picts and
Turonians, from whom it is parted by a little River, commonly called Clery. The
fertility.
It is fruitful in Corn, Wine, and other things necessary for man's life. It
chiefly abounds with Cattle, which the Inhabitants do disperse through all
France. Here the Biturigians were seated formerly, who as Strabo, Ptolemie, and
others do write were called Cubi. For the Biturigians a people of France were
heretofore twofold, distinguished by their surnames, as the Bitu^iges Cubi,
whose Metropolis was Avaricum in the first Aquitania, and the Vibiscian or
Viviscian Bituriges, whose chief City was Burdigala, in the second Aquitania.
Both of them were free Cities under the Romans, as Pliny witnesses. The
Register of the Provinces calls it the City of the Bituricians or
Berotigians in the first Aquitania or Sexta Vienne sis. John Calamaeus writes
much concerning the appellation and name of this Country, who contains the
lustorie of the Biturigians in six Books.

When Hugo ^apetus governed France, Gotefridus was Praesident for the King over
the Biturigians. From whom that Harpin was descended, The (...) government.
who bought of King Henry the first the County of the Biturigians. He not long
after preparing to go to the wars of Palestine, or the holy land with other
Princes, sold it to Philip the first, who united it again to the Crown. Some
years afterward John Valesius did obtain this County, now made a Dukedom,
of his Father John Valesius King of France: who dying without any issue Male,
the Dukedom returned to the Kingdom. It was afterward assigned to John the
son of Charles the 6. who had a plentiful offspring and Progeny. He dying at
Apais, left his brother Charles to be his successor, who being inaugurated King
of France, and despising the marirage of Henry King of England, with Katherine
his Cousin German, when the English had took away the greatest part of his
Kingdom, he was called in scorn King of the Biturigians. After Charles the
Father the son Charles the 7. succeeded, Brother to Ludorick the 11. King of
THE DVKEDOME OF BITVRICVM.
BITURIGUM Ducatus.
map of the Duchy of Berry France. After him Margaret, Sister to King Francis
being first married to Charles Duke of Alencon, afterward to Henry Albretanus
King of Navarre, received the Dukedom of the Biturigians of her Brother to her
own use. And lastly Margaret, the Daughter of the same King Francis, did
receave the Dukedom of Biturigum from her Brother Henry the second, when he
married Emanuel Phi^ibert, Princ^ of the Allobrogians. Caesar Antonius, and
others do call the chief City thereof Avaricum, which now in French is
called Bourges, Amm^anus and others call it Bituriga. It is also called
Biturica, Bituri^ae, The City Bituriga, and the City Biturica. Some would have
it called Avaricum from the River Eura, which washes it. It is seated in a
very pleasant soil, abounding not only with all kind of Corn and Grain,
but also with excellent Wine, Cattle, Foul, and all sorts of fruits. It is
enamold with four Rivers, Anfron and Aurette flowing on one side, Yure and
Molon on the other side. It is uncertain who built it, as it also of other
Towns. The ancient City was otherwise seated than it is now. For it lay
toward the Marshes, the Walls whereof may be yet seen, being still whole,
and sollidly built, as all the works of the ancient Romans were. They begin
at the great Tower, and so run along by S. Stephens Church, S. John's street,
and the Gordian Gate, even to the New Gate called heretofore S. Andrews Gate,
from thence by the Street of the Amphitheater, commonly called des Arene^, they
stretch themselves to the Gate Turonensis, and from thence fetching a compass
toward S. Paul's Gate, they come by degrees back again to the aforesaid Tower.
After Charles the Great and others did so amplify and enlarge the Territories
of this City, that now it may compare with the greatest and strongest Cities of
France: being long fair, and spacious. It is fortified with 80. high strong
Towers. The chief of them is that which I said was called the great Tower, in
French la Gr^sse Tour, in regard of the unusual thickness thereof, which
^hi^^p the second, King of France, Anno 1190. did strengthen with lesse^
Towers, and with a Wall, and deep Ditches. It is round, and very high. They say
there was another Tower like it which is now ruinated, and that from these two
Towers the Biturigians were so called Bituris. And Calamaus does commend this
Verse written by an ancient Grammarian: Turribus a binis, inde vocor Bituris.
From two Towers which the Wall do fence,
A Biturian I am called from thence.


Here are seventeene Collegiat Churches as they call them, and seventeene
Parish Churches; This City has an Archbishopric, and a flourishing
University, to which there is none equal in France, being Mother and Nurse of
most learned men. The study of the Law is in greatest estimation there, of
which there are excellent Professors. As Avaricum is the chief Tribunal of
the whole Dukedom, where the Monarch of the Biturigians sits as President,
and is commonly called le Bailly de Berry. Hither are all appeals brought both
from the City Praetor, and from all Magistrates of other places in the
Territory of Bituricum. But the Prefect of Bituricum has under him the
Metropolis it self Avaricum and 5. Dioeceses Yss^udum, Dum le Roy* Vi^son,
Mehun, Con^ressault. There are reckoned with the Metropolis, the County of
Sancerre, and S. Aignan, the Barony of Mountfaulcon, and almost. Some suppose
that Sancerra was so called from Ceres, who was there reverenced and worshipped:
as it were the Chapel of Ceres. The more learned Latin Writers leaving this
Etymology do call it Xantodorum. It has the Title of a County, which in the
year 1015. it exchanged with Bellovacum, and in the year 1573. it endured a
hard Siege, that they were enforced to eat Dogs, Cats, Horses, Dormice,
Mice, Moles, and after they had eaten Horns, skins, and the like, they were
compelled to eat their own excrements, and man's flesh These Cast^llania are
subject to it Sanceges, Beaufeu, Chapelle d'Anguillon, le Chastel de Boncard,
^alonges, ^arenay, Verdigny, Menesme, Charentomry, Brie and others* S. A^gnan
is so called from the Bishop S. Anianus. The Barony of Mountfaulcon, which
signifies in Latin Montem Faulconis or the Mountain of the Faulcon, does
contain the Signiories of Baugy and Gion, also la Fane, Lyvr^n, ^ony,
Villab^n, Seury, Marcilly, Marnay, Farges, Av^r, Saligny, Per^igny, ^^u,
Lassax, Boisbos^n, Nuissement, Villiers, Compoy. Lastly, the Castellania are
Ays d Anguillon, Sury en Vaux S. Soulange, S. Palais, la Salle du Roy, Bueil,
Quintilly P^morigny, Francheville, la Chapelle, Nancay, Dry, Levreux,
Beaulicu, Brecy, Beugy. S. Fleurant, Neufvi sur, Baranion, Morthonnier.
Maymaignes, Maubranches, S. Vrsin, Tillay, Brilliers, Vatan, S. Satur, Lury
Estrechies, Maulpas, Villeneusve, S. Crapaix. Ascilly, Iussy le Chauld^^er, la
Corn, les Ch^^zes, Vaulvrilles, les Cloy^s, Bonge. So much concerning the
Metropolis and the large Jurisdiction thereof, the other Dioeceses are
Yssouldun a Royal City and a Bayliwick, which has under it the Baronies of
Chasteauroux, Gracay, Ceracoy, S. Severe, Lynieres, to which is joined the
Castelania of Rizay: also Argenton, in which are the Marshalship of Ravennes,
and the Praefectureship of Servignet. The Castelania are Bourssac, Chasteau
Meillant, Mareul, Nef si S. Sepulcher, ^ully, Puuldy: Massy, Cahors, Perouse,
Chastellet, Masseuvre, Augurandae, S. Chartier, le Palleteau, Bomm^eres, Much,
Fully, Voullon, la Ferte, N^hant, Ville Dieu, Chastre, and Charroux. There is
also Dunum Regium, or Dun le Roy, under which are these Castelaniae, besides
others, Pra dict ^a^^aut a Baronnie: Chasteauneuf, near the River Caris, S.
Julian. Vierzon, a royal City and a Dioecese having these Signiories under it,
Champ^e, M^tte d' A^sy, Saragosse, Brivay, Merry. Mehun has under it the
Castellania Love and Foici. Concourfault or Concressault has under it Vailly,
Argeny, Clemon, Beaujeu. This Country is watered with the Rivers Ligeri,
Souldra, Aurrona, Che^re, Theone, ^^dro, Creusa, The Rivers.
and some other smaller Rivulets. Here are no Mountains of any note. The
Country is interlaced here and there with Woods, the chief whereof are Si^va
Roberti, and Lacenna Sylva, or Robert^ Wood, The Woods.
and the Wood Lacenna. I come to the public and private works. At Avar^^um
besides the 34. Churches aforesaid. There are four Monasteries of Mendicant
Friars: two Abbeys for men, the one dedicated to S. Sulpitius, The public
works.
being strong, rich, and standing without the Walls, the other within the City,
dedicated to D. Ambrosius, and well endowed: and three Nunneries. Not long
since a godly Magistrate thereof did build an Hospital for the relief of
poor and decreped people. Of all the fair Aedifices here, which are many, the
chief is the stately and sumptuous House of James Cordus, who lived in Charles
the 7. time. There are also the Almanes Houses, who were formerly the Kings
Treasurers, before the Faires, to which a great concourse of Strangers were
wont to resort* were kept at Lions. Here are infinite ruins both within and
without the Walls of old Aedifices which were built with curious workmanship:
and many are daily dug forth especially out of the Sand-pits, as they call
them, where sometime stood the Amphitheater. The Archbishop of Bourges, has
these Suffragan Bishops under him: the Bishop of Clermont: of Rhodes: of
Lymoges: of Mende: of Alby: of Cahors: of Castres: of Tulles: and of S. Flour:
but the Bishop of Puy is exempted.

THE DVKEDOME OF BVRBON^
THE Country and Dukedom of Burbon, or le Pays and Duche de Burbonneis, was so
called from the Dukes of Burbon, The Situation
who were Governors thereof. On the West it is neighboured with the
Biturigians, and Lemonicians, on the North with the Nivernianis: On the East
lies Burgundy, on the South are the Lugdunians. The Soil for the most part
is all pasture ground, and has no Corn but in some few places. The fertility*
But there are very good Wines, and great plenty of Corn. Those people whom
Caesar Lib. 1. de Bello Gallico calls Boij, were supposed to have dwelt here
formerly, and he calls their Town Lib. 7. Gergovia, where he also
mentions Boia, which doubtless was the Boians Town. Their strength was so
great that joining themselves with the Cenomanians and Insubrians, they plucked
down the pride and arrogance of the Thuscians* possessed their dominions, and
seated themselves in that part of Italy which is now called Romania. The
Romans did call it Gallia Togata, because the Frenchmen who were subject to
the Romans, dwelt there. The Sugusians also did inhabit all that part which is
called le Pays de Fores. All this Territory, as many other bordering
Countries, was heretofore subject to the Kings of Aquitaine. Afterward it had
Dukes; The ancient government,
who from a Town of no mean note were called Dukes of Burbon. The last of
them was Arcibaldus, who had one only daughter and heir, called Agnes. She
marrying John Duke of Bugundie, gave her daughter Beatrix, which she had by
him, the Dukedom of Burbon for her dowry, having married her to Robert the Son
of Ludovick the ninth, yet with this caution, that it should be called after
his wives name, and the house of the Burbons, that so the title thereof might
remain to posterity. Which being done. Robert the son of Ludorick the
ninth, who was canonized for a Saint, did propagate and enlarge the name of the
Borbons. For his sons were Ludorick surnamed the great, who succeeded his
Father, John Clar^m^nt Lord of the Town of the Fane of Iustine in Campania:
Peter Archdeacon of Paris, and two daughters. This Ludorick Philip Valesius the
sixth created the first Duke of Burbon, in the year 1339. or thereabout, who
had by his wife Mary the daughter of John Earl of Hannonia, Peter the first
who succeeded him, and James the Father of the Earls of March and Vendosme,
Philip Lord of Bello^^^, Mary, and Beatrix. This Peter was created the second
Duke of Burbon, and Lord of Molin. He was slain in a Battle fought between
the Picts, and the English. He had by Isabell, the daughter of Charles, Earl
of Valence. Ludorick the 2. who succeeded his Father: James the Lord of March,
and seven daughters. Ludorick surnamed the good married Anna. the daughter of
Peral^us the Dolphine of Avercia, who was called Duke S^mus, and of Ione
Forres^aria, who brought him John who succeeded his Father, Ludovick, and James
Lord of Pransium. John the first of that name marrying Mary the daughter of
John, Duke of the Biturigians, was Duke of Burbon and Avernia, Earl of
Claromont, M^mpensper, Forest, and Lord of Bellyocum and the Castle of Chinon.
From him issued Charles, who succeeded his Father, Iudorick Earl of Montpenser
(from whom the Dukes came of Montpenser) and James. Charles took the part of
King Charles the 7. and Philip the good, Duke of Burgundy, with whom at last
by the meditation and persuasion of his wife Agnes a Burgundian, sister to
Philip, he made a peace with him. Agnes brought him John who succeeded after
him, Ludovick, Peter, who was afterward a Duke, Charles a Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Lions, Lud^^ick Bishop of Le^dium, James and five daughters, John
the second was Duke of Borbon and Avernia, Earl of Claromont, of Forest, the
Island and March, Lord of Belliocum and of the Castle of Chinon, a ^eere and
Constable of the Kingdom of France. He married thrice, but dyed without
issue. Peter the 2. succeeded his brother John, who was high Chamberlain of
the Kingdom of France, and he had by Anne daughter of King Ludorick the 11.
one only daughter called Susan, who succeeded her Father. She marrying
Charles Burbon, Earl of Montpenser (the son of Gilbert Burbon, Nephew to
John Ludorick the first aforesaid, Duke of Burbon, Earl of Montpenser, and
Dolphine of Avernia) by her marriage made her Husband Duke of Burbon. This was
that Charles who being Constable of France, revolting from his Prince Francis
King of France, took part and sided with the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
besieged Rome where being shot with a bullet in the year 1527. the day before
the Nones of May* he dyed, having obtained no victory nor left no children.
After the death of his wife Susan, the King getting Burbon to himself, the
Dukes of Vend^sme kept only their arms, and their bare title by the right of
affinity. The Earls of Flanders did first lineally descend from the family
of the Burbons: and many great Kings and Princes have sought to be linkt in
affinity with this royal and Princely house. Moreover the French Geogrophars
do make two parts of the Dukedom of Burbon, the lower and the higher. The
lower contains diverse Cities, and two Countries. Concerning the Cities. The
Metropolis of the whole Dukedom is Molirum (or Malins) a Town by the River
which Caesar calls Elaver, now Al^ie^: it was the ancient Seat of Dukes:
afterward it was a house of pleasure, and a pleasant retyring place for the
Kings of France. Some think that that which Caesar calls Gergobina was a Town
among the Celta, whom Caesar in the Helvetian War placed there. The Marshall
of Burbon has his Presidiall Seat here, which was erected by King Francis the
first of that name. Molins has a very fair Castle, and a curious Garden
adjoining to it, in which there are great store of Oranges and Citernes. In the
Castle Xystum you may see the lively Pictures of the Dukes of Burbon, and their
Genealogies. Here is also a fair Fountain. THE DVKEDOME OF BVRBON.
BORBONIUM Ducatus
map of Bourbon The other Cities and Towns are Burbon, famous for antiquity,
and which heretofore did name the whole Province. Caesar in his 7. Book
calls it Boia. This City is situated between the Rivers Elaveres and Caris,
commonly called Cher, well known and famous in the time of Charles the great.
It has a strong Castle and Baths: also L'Archimont, Montmerant. And Cosne
surnamed en Burbonnois near the River Lotre, having a Castle, and in regard
that the Territory is fit for Pasturage it exceeds other parts: also
Montlusson, and S. Porcin, whose Fields do bring forth excellent Wines, (yet
some do ascribe it to ^vernia) also Cusset; Chancelle; Charroux; Vernueil,
famous for Wines: also Varennes a famous Town by the River Elaveres; Gannat
confining upon Avernia; also Le Mont aux Moines; Souvigni le Comte, ou aux
M^ines; la Palisse, having a stately Castle: also Erisson, Sancoings, the Fane
of S. Peter, commonly called S. Pierre le Monstier, which is not very ancient.
It has a President, under whom are the Baylies of the same Town; and the
Towns which are commonly called Douziois, Xainco^ ^usset, and others, one part
whereof are seated in Avernia, and anoth^^ (...) Nervernesium: there is also
Ainayla Chasteau, so named from the Ca^ S. Amand, and others. So much
concerning the Cities and Towns. The Counties are two, which are commonly
called Beaujolois and F^^est. The former Bello Iolesius contains all that
lies between the River Ligeris and Araris, being situated toward the East
between the Forestians and Burgundians: being the Patrimony of the ancient
Burbons. The chief City is called in French Beaujea. The other is named not
from the Woods and Forests as the word does seem to intimate, but from the
Forensians, for so I name those people: on the North lies Burbon, on the West
Avernia, on the South the Lugdunians confine upon it: on the East the
Bello-Jolesians. Heretofore it had Earls, from whose Stock did arise the noble
of Bello-Iolesius. A certain Earl of Forest and Bello-Iolesius is celebrated
by French Historians, who had three Sons, Arthauldus Earl of Lugdunum,
Stephen Earl of Forest, and Emfrid Earl of Bello-Iolesius. When thus the
Counties of Forest and Bello-Iolesius had been for a long time distracted,
they were united again by the death of Guica^d, Earl of Bello-Iolesius, who
was Master of the horse in the time of Philip the 2. King of France, for his
Sister Isabel, Countess of Bello-Iolesius was married to Reginaldus, Earl of
Fortest, who was descended of the stock of Arthauld aforesaid, as she from
the offspring of Stephan, who was brother to Arthauld as is mentioned before.
From this marriage there proceeded Guido, who was heir to the County of
Forest, and Lugovick, who was Lord of Bello-Iolesius. After whom there is no
certainety delivered. Henry the third King of France, before he came to the
Monarchy of France, possessed the Dukedomes of Burbon and Avernia, the County
of Forest together with the Dukedom of Andigavia.

It contains forty walled Towns, and about as many fair Villages. The
chief Town of the Forrensians Roana, or Roanne, near the River Ligeris,
which has a Bridge over it, which stands in the way to Lions, and also a
Castle. The second Town of note is Forum Segusian rum, for so it was
heretofore called which is now commonly called Feurs: Ptolomy calls it Phoros of
the Segusians: and the Itinerary Tables corruptly call it Forum Segustivarum.
And from this Forum, the Country corruptly is commonly called Le Layis de
Forest, when it should be rather called, de Fores. This is now a Town of
commerce and traffic for the whole Province. The other Towns are
Mombrisonium, or Montbrison, being a Bayliwicke and subject to the Lugdunians,
also the Fane of S. Stephan, and S. Estierne de Furan, where armor and Iron
bars are made, which are transported from thence into all parts of France.
The artificers Art is much furthered by nature of the water, which does give
an excellent temper to Iron, and also the coals which are dug there: there
is also the Fane of S. Galmarus, or S. Galmier, or Guermier, in the Suburbs
whereof, there is an Alome Fountain, which is commonly called Font-Foule: also
the Fane of S. Germane, or S. Germain Laval, which has abundance of wine
growing about it: also the Fane of D. Bovet, or S. Bovet le Castle, in which
the best tongs are made: also the Fane of D. Rembertus, or S. Rembert, having
the first Bridge that is over Ligeris. The Country of Burbon is watered with
two great Rivers, namely Ligeris and Elavera, being a River of Arvernia.
Ligeris commonly called Loire rises up in Avernia, in a place which in French
is called La Fort de Loire. Elaver, commonly called Allie^, rises four Miles
above the Town Clarumont, beneath Brionda near Gergovia, and flows not
far from a place which in French is called Vsco, where there is a famous mine
of gold, and of the stone Lazulus. It is as big as the River Liguris, and by
so much more full of fish. Concerning the Manners of the Burbons, those which
border on Avernia are of the same disposition with them, namely witty and
crafty, very laborious, careful to get, and for the most part they are
litigious, and violent men, and ill to be dealt withal. Those that dwell
farther off are courteous and affable, subtle and well experienced, frugall
and careful housekeepers, greedy of gain, and yet very bountiful and kind
toward strangers. The Forensians also are subtle, acute, and witty, wisely
provident and careful in their own affairs, loving gain, and to that end
they travel into remote and far distant Countries to Merchandise and
traffic with them. But they are merciful and kind to their own Countrymen
if they come to necessity and want in foreign Countries. Much wariness and
wisdom is to be used, in despatching any business with a Forensian. Forest
does send her works in Iron and Brass through the whole world, especially the
Fane of S. Stephen, where there are very many Artificers, and as good as any in
France. And there are many Merchants of this Country very rich, having great
estates in other parts out of France.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ARCHBISHOPRIC AND COUNTY OF BVRDEGALIA.
BURDIGALIA having an Archbishopric and County belonging to it, and the head
and Metropolis of Gutenna, is an ancient and famous City, which Strabo and
Pliny have mentioned, and Strabo Lib. 4. Geogr. writes thus: Garumna being
enlarged with the receipt of three Rivers does flow by the Biturigians, whom
they call the Viviscians and Santones, being both Countries of France. It has
Burdigalia a Town of Traffic, seated by a certain great Lake, which is made
by the eruptions and breaking out of the River. Concerning the name there are
diverse opinions. For some say it was called Aquita from the abundance of
waters, whence also others do derive the name of the Province of Aquitane,
from Bourda and Iala, two Rivulets, the one whereof is near to Burdigala, the
other 4000. miles off, others bring other dertvations. But I believe that the
name was derived from Burgo, and Isidorus Originum lib. 15. cap. 1. seems to
be of the same opinion: when he says, That Burdigala was so called, because it
contained a Colony of the French Burgians, others read it the French
Biturigians. And Syncerus is of the same mind in his Burdigala. And these
people, as it is aforesaid, were called Viviscians, to distinguish them from
the Cubian Biturigians near the River Ligeris, which Ausonius a Poet of
Bordeaux testifies in his Verses, wherein he sings thus: Haec ego Vivisca
ducens ab origin gentem.
These things I, who by my Country am
Descended from the old Viviscian.


And this ancient Inscription does confirm it.

AVGUSTO SACRUM
ET GENIO CIVITATIS
BIT. VIV.
Which besides famous Joseph Scaliger, Elias Vinetus in his most learned
Annotations to Ausonius, and Indo^us Syncerus in his Itinerarie added to his
Book of Burdigala, do mention. This City when it came into the hands, was not
only freely permitted to use their own Laws, as Strabo and Pliny affirm;
but they adorned it also with fair Aedifices THE ARCHBISHOPRIC AND COUNTY OF
BVRDIGALA.
BOVRDELOIS PAIS DE MEDOC ET LA PREVOSTE DE BORN
map of Bordeaux and magnificent Monuments and pieces of Building, of which
there do yet remain some vast ruins For in the year 1557. when it was
strengthened with some new Fortifications, some ruins of Baths were found near
to Jupiters Gate were found and discoverd. There are also two fair Aedifices
which for the most part are in repair and whole: namely, one which they call
the Palace of Safety, and another which is commonly named the Palace of
Galienus. The former stood heretofore out of the City near Garumna, by the
Ditch which fortified the North side of the City (as Lurbeus writ^^h in his
Chronicle, whose words I do here set down) but at length it was included
within the City when the City was enlarged on that side. There is a
Quadrangular strait sided Standard being 87. foot long, and 63. broad, having
8. Pillars in length, and 6. in breadth, so that it had in the whole compass
of it 24. Pillars, of which there are 18. yet standing adorned with some Images
and Statues. There is a Vault under it built after an old fashion, in which
Wine is laid. It is doubtful how it was used heretofore, and some believe that
it was a Temple consecrated to the Turelary God, which appears by the name
thereof, concerning which see Merula in his Cosmographie. The common people do
call it Pilas from the Pillars thereof. Lastly, there are some small ruins of
a magnificent Amphitheater, which were and are without the City. It was
encompassed (as Vinetus says) with 6. walls. And between the outermost which
was higher than the rest, and the innermost which was lower than all the rest
there was 68. feet distance. The length of the Yard, which had Doors on every
side was 224. foot, and the breadth 140. foot: for it was their custom to
build such Aedifices in an Ovall Figure. Also the ancient Walls are worthy of
consideration, which are in the middle of the City, and were in good repair in
Ausonius time, which he thus mentions.

The Walls are square having Towers thereon so high,
That the tops thereof do reach unto the sky.
After those times it suffered many calamities, being first washed by the
Gothe, and then burnt by the Sarazens and Normans. But afterward it was
re-edified and enlarged, so that now it contains 450. Acres of ground, so
that it is as big as a third part of Paris. For the Roman Empire declining,
the Goths obtained it in the 400. year from the building of the City, who
being expelled, and Alari^us being slain in Picaady, and those which remained,
cut off in the Arrian Fields which were so named from that slaughter near to
Burdig^^^a, it returned again to the Frenchmen. But when the Frenchmen grew
slothful and careless, the Aquitanians about the year 727. shaking off their
subjection to the French did create Eud^ Duke thereof. The Son of this Eudo
was Carfrus, who being forsaken by his own men, was slain in the year 767.
and was buried without the City in a Moorish place, near the Castle Farus,
where now the Capuchines have built themselves a Religious house. Afterward
Hunold whom the Aquitanians had made Duke, being vanquished and droven out by
Charles the Great, this Province was restored to the French, and to keep it
the better in obedience, there were Earls placed in diverse parts of Aquitaine,
and especially at Bourdeaus there was left Sigumus the Father of Huon of
Bourdeaus, and after these other Earls and Dukes did govern the people under
the King of France. D. Martiall^ was the first that converted those of
Bourdeaus to the Christian faith, who as it is reported built a Temple there,
and dedicated it to S. Andrew the Apostle, afterward it became the Seat of an
Archbishop, on which these Bishoprics do depend, Santonensis, Pictaviensis,
Lussonensis, Mallacensis, Petragoricensis, Serlacensit, Condomiensis,
Agimensis. And as this City is large, so it is beautified with diverse Churches,
for there are two Collegiate Churches, one of which is Metropolitan, 12. Parish
Churches, 8. Frieries, one Nunnery, and a College of Jesuits. There is a
fair Churchyard of S. Severine without Jupiters Gate near the Amphitheater
which is worthy to be seen, both because it is more ancient then the rest, in
which S. Amandus, and S Severinus were buried, and diverse other Monuments are
showed, and also because there hollow stones laid on Sepulchers, which are
full of water or empty, according to the increase or decrease of the Moon.
Many Knights are here interred who were slain in the time of Charles the great
by the treachery of Ganelen. The University is an Ornament unto it, the
Professors whereof do instruct Youth in all Arts and Sciences. In which both
heretofore and of late Tiberius Victor and Minervius a Rhetorician whom D.
Ieromimus mentions in his Chronicle, and makes another Quintilian. And
Attius Celphidius, whom Ammianus Marcellinus calls a vehement Orator, were
Latin and Greek Professors. And also Pomponius Maximus Hirculanus, and many
others, of whom Ausonius makes a Catalogue with several Eulogies. The most
noted in our age were, Andr. Goveanus, Ioannes Gel^da, M. Ant. Muretus, Ioannes
Costanus, Georg. Buchanan, Nicolaus Grachius, Withelmus Guerentaeus, and of
late Elias Vinetus, a learned man, and a light to his Country. This University
had many privileges, honors, and liberties granted unto it by the Princes of
Aquitaine, the Kings of France, and the Popes of Rome: and at last it was
beautified by the Aquitaine College, from whence many learned men as Lights of
France have successively come forth. But let us speak somewhat of the
Parliament, which is the ancientest seat of Justice in France, whither the
Burdigalians, the Valatensians, the Aginnensians, the Condomiensians, the
Armeniacensians, the Cardurcians, the Len^ovicensians, the Petrocorensians, the
Angelismensians, the Santons, and Ruxellensians, have recourse by way of suite.
But afterward the Provinces of Armenium, of Santome, of Ruxelles, and the
greatest part of Cadurcium did withdraw themselves and came to the Parliament
of Paris and Tolouse. But when King Ludovick had granted Aquitania (which was
now circumscribed with new bounds) to his Brother Charles to hold of him by
Fealty, the Parliament was translated to the Picts, but after Charles his
decease in the year 1472. and all Aquitaine returning to Ludovick, it was
brought back again, and not long after Charles the 8. by his Edict dared in
the (...) it to consist of three Pre^^dents and ^^. Counselors. (...) in the
year 1519. in the month of o^ May added to the (...) D. ^ie of new
Counselors, to judge of criminal matters, which they call ^ornell. But when
by sedition the Parliament in the year 1^4^. was cha^g^d again. King Henry
the 2. restored the former ample dignity of the Senate to Bu^digala, and
received the Citizens i^ to ^avour. Here the Prefect of the Province of
Aqui^aine has his (...) who is called the Marshall and also the Admiral.
There is also in the same City a College of Q^estors or Auditors of accounts.
The government of the Commonwealth of Bordeaux as it is at this day began in
the reign of Henry King of England who in the year 117^. granted that the
Citizens should freely decree a Prince of the Senate whom they call the Mayor
of the City, but at first the Maior^ held their office continually, and ^id
yearly choose a Substitute out of the sworn men, whom in his absence was to be
Governor of the College of sworn men. Henry the 2. did change this custom*
so that the Majors office should not be perpetual, but for two years. After
him the sworn men as they call them should succeed: Who being fifty at the
beginning were reduced to 24 and in the year 1378. they were contracted to 12.
according to the number of the parts of the City. But at last they came to be
six, and those to rule two years: so that three were changed every year, and
they continued in their Mairoalty for two whole years. To this College of the
Mayor and the swornemen* there were added 30. chosened Citizens to assist them
in counsel and above three hundred more were added, if a matter of consequence
were handled. It has a fruitful Soil for Wines, which is transported from
thence into other parrs of Europe, the praise whereof is celebrated by the
ancients, as also Pliny and Colum^lla, and it has abundance of all other
necessaries. Besides it has convenient Rivers, the greatest whereof are
Garumna, and Dordona. There are many Towns subject to Burdeaus, as these near
to the Sea Espar^um or Caput S. Mariae, in which place Ptolemy seateth
Nevioparrum, which is now not to be known: also the Fane of Ma^arium* La^m^nt,
Carbonaria, also Liburrium, which is a pretty small Town, s^arc^la^ the mouth
of D^rdona, and others. But it is most famous, because Iu^^nius was borne here,
who celebrateth the praise of his Country in these verses.

My too long silence I do now condemn,
That thee O Country famed for witty men,
And for thy pleasant Rivers, and thy Wine,
And Senate, art not here amongst the prime
Mentiond by me, as if thou were a small
City, and did deserve no praise at all.
Burdigala is my native Country where
The mild air makes the earth much fruit to bear,
The Spring is long, the Winter short below,
The leavy Mountains shadowed Rivers flow,
Whose hasty course do imitate the Seas.
Then the ways within and houses you may please
To admire, and that the streets do still retain,
Though they are large, and broad their former name.
And yet through the City a fresh stream does glide,
Which when the Ocean fills with his tide,
You shall behold when as the Sea does come,
How by the Ships which ride there it does run.
THE COUNTY OF PERTICA.
THE Country of Pertica confineth on the Carnutensians, and depends also on
their diocese, and has been a long time a famous County. First it came by
marriage to the family of the Druides, and afterward to the Alenconians. For
Robert a Frensh man Earl of the Druides, married the widow of Rotrocus Earl
of Pertica, who was slain at the seige of the Castle of Rotomagum. After him
Robert Alenconius the son of Charles, and brother to Phillip Valesius, who
died without issue, being slain in the Battle of Cr^ssy in the year 1346.
was Earl of Per^^ca. It is divided into two parts, the lower which is called
Pe^^tica Goveti, is as it were inserted into Carnutum, the head Town whereof
is Nog^ntum of Rotrocus, which in the year 1428. was taken by the Earl rf
Salisbury an Englsh man, and all that were found in it were hanged. But
afterward in the year 1449. Charles the 7. recoverd it again. This Town is
called N^gentum of Rot^o^ from the Earl thereof above mentioned, who marched
in the year 1120. with his English troops into Syria, against ^ulco Earl of
the Andians, and King of Jerusalem, and Yvo Carnutensis does name it in his
Epistle to Pope Pascall, thereby to difference it from the other No^entum.
Sigebert about the year 1170. does mention Godefride Earl of Pert^ce, who by
rebellion lost his Earldom. There are also other Towns besides Nogentum: as
Basochium, Govetum, Alugium, m^ns Mirallij, Brevium, Anthovium, Maulbesium, the
Town of red Maillard, and Condatum seated by the River Huis^e. The higher part
of Perti^a is called the County, and it has the Town Mortenium, with a Castle
seated on a Hill, in which the Prefect whom they call the Bailey has his
residence, also the Towns Peniletum, and Belesmia, a Town with a Castle.
Whence the ancient and famous families of the Belemies is descended, out of
which came Robert ^elemy, who sided with Robertus* intending to make war
against his brother, King of England, concerning whom see Thomas Walsingam in
his description or pattern of Neustriae: on the frontiers thereof toward
Normandy are Vernolium, and Memertium toward Cen^mania. Some would seat the
Vnelly here, a people once of France, whom Caesar mentions Lib. 3. de bello
Gallico in these words. While these things were done at Venice, Q. Titurius
Sapinus came with his army which Caesar had given him, into the Country of thf
Vnelly, Viridovix was Captain thereof, and did govern all those Cities which
had revolted, out of which he levied a great army. And a little before at the
end of the second Book: at the same time came P. Crassus, whom he had sent
with one Legion to the Venetians, the Vnelli, the Osismi, the Curiosilitae, the
S^suriij, the Aulerij, the THE COVNTIE of PERTICA.
PERCHENSIS Comitatus
LA PERCH COMTE
map of Perch (France) Rhedones* which are maritine Cities near to the Oc^^^
etc. Bla^^us Vignerius in his Frensh translation for Vnelli does put, (...) the
and ^uparche, and Renal Chopinus. Concerning the Municipiall Laws of the
Audians does in like manner calling them ceux de per^he, which he ranslateth
the Vn^li. But when Caesar makes them to be near unto the Armorican Cities
(which is a Maritaine Nation) some think that this name belongs to the
Lavallij, but I leave these things to more curious inquisiters. In this Country
the learned and Noble Poet Ana^reon was borne, who was worthily called the
Remigium Bellaqutum of his age* who in his Pastoralls did lively express and
paint forth that elegant fiction of the Arcadia of Zamazaus, which exceeds
all the rest. His Poem concerning Gemmes and precious stones, does deserve the
lawreth wreath, to which ^onsa^d the Prince of French Poets has alluded, in an
Epitaph which be made on him, which is to be read at Paris, which I have
rudely here translated into Latin.

BEILAQUIO artifices quid splendida saxa paratis?
Ex gemmu tutulum condidit ipse sibi.
Artificers why do you now provide?
Fair shining stones that may Anacreon hide,
For he a Tomb of precious stones composed,
Wherein his precious body is enclosed.
THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.
THE Province of Turene in regard of the incomparable pleasantness of the
place, and the abundance of all kind of fruits, is worthily called the Garden
of France. Which the Princes thereof have always much delighted in and
honored it, both as I said for the convenience of the situation, and for the
overflowing plenty of all things necessary. The Country is large, and has
round about it the Bellovacians, the Andegavians, the Pictavians, and the
Biturigians: it has many fair Cities and Towns, it makes also a part of the
Parliament of Paris as they call it, and it is honored with a Seat of
Judgment. The Metropolis and Mother City thereof is Turon, commonly called
Tours, being seated at the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Ligeris and
Carus. Ptolemy calls it Caes^rodunum, concerning the name and antiquity whereof
there are many reports, but not credible, and therefore we omit them. Let it
suffice that the great Roman Emperor ^ulius ^aesar does reckon the Turones
among the chief people of France, who joined themselves to the Romans, and in
his 2. Book de bello Gallico, about the end thereof are these words; He having
brought his Legions to Winter at Carnutes, Andes, and Turones, which were
Cities near unto these places, where he waged war, went into Italy, as also
Lib. 7. He speedily joyneth to himself the Senous, the Parisians, the
Pictones, the Cadurcians, the Turones, the Aulercians, and others which dwell
near the Sea. Also Lucan mentions them in this Verse.

Iustabiles Turones circumsita costra coercent.
Round pitched Tents do keep in there,
The Turones who unconstant were.
It is a neat City, having long clean streets, and very fair houses. It had
heretofore diverse Bishops famous for Sanctity and Learning, as Ma^tinus,
Bricius, Perpetuus, Volusianas, and others, and almost all the Bishops of
Britain, of the Andians, and Cemonians noted by others, are Suffragans unto
him. The chief Seat of Justice when the Parisians rebelled, was translated
hither by King Henry the third. Traffic in Silks, and also Cloth is much
used in Toures, both which do enrich the Merchants. And the Inhabitants have
revenues out of their Lands, on which they live gallantly. The City (...)
adorned with fair magnificent Temples, among which is that which was dedicated
to D. Gratian, built by the English with a Clock-dyall on it. And another
consecrated to D. Martinus, in which his bones and ashes do rest, which the
By-dwellers do honor with religions worship. Here Gregory who from his
Country was called Iu^orersis was borne who flourished about the year of
Christ 600. whose Writings for the History of those times are much esteemed by
posterity. It contains the ashes of that great Poet P. Ronsard, who they call
the French Homer, and ^inaa^. It was sometimes governed by Fa^les, afterward by
the Dukes of Britain, but when John his Nephew Arthu^ being slain, possessed
the County* the Province was confiscate to the King by the sentence of the
highest Senate of France. After which the Kings of France did make it a
Dukedom, and gave it for a time to the Minorite Friars. Here four chief
French Counsels were kept. Here is also a Money Mint famous for the antiquity
thereof. It is governed by an ordinary Magistrate* and has two Prefects*
besides a Mayor and Auditors, to maintain the rights, privildges, and
liberties of the Inhabitants. There is also a Court of the Quaestors, Auditors,
and Receivers of the public customs and impositions. But to conclude, we will
set down an elegant description of this place, being taken out of Brittons
Philipeides.

Thence to the City of Turone they go,
Round about which two shining streams do flow,
Here the River Ligaris, there Caurus, and
It in the middle between both does stand:
Well seated, and fair streams do it adorn
Being full of Trees, and having store of Corn,
Proud of her Citizens, and Clergy, who
Are very powerful, besides she can show
Great store of people, and much wealth beside,
And is with Groves and Vines much beautified.
THE DVKEDOME OF TVRONE.
Touraine
TVRONENSIS Ducatus
map of Touraine (France)

THE COUNTY OF PICTAVIA.
PICTONIUM, or Pictavia* which follows* commonly called Poict^u, The Situation
looks Southward toward the Engolismes and Santonians, on the West it has
the Ocean: on the North it points toward the Britain and the Andegavians,
the rest is enclosed with the Tu^o^toas* The (...)
Bituricians and Lemovicians. It is a very fertile Country both for Fruit,
Cattle, Wool, and Hemp^, having abundance o^ Wine and Corn: The (...)
and great plenty of Foul and wild ^^asts so that here is much Hawking and
Hunting. The Goths did honor thi^ Province with the title of a Kingdom, whom
Clodovaeus King of France drove hence, and also out of all Aquitaine. The
Emperor Lu^ (...) gave the Kingdom of Aquitaine to his Son Pipin; who^
Son P^ and Charity when Charle^ the Bold their Uncle* had can out of
Aquitaine and sh^t them up in Monasteries, he himself invaded the
Pri^cipality, and gave it to his Cousin ^^nulph, and having abro^ate of the
(...) of a Kingdom ^he made it a Dukedom. After (...) th^^e succeeded in
order William (...) the first and second. William 2. and 3. (...)* William 4.
and 5. his only Daughter and H^^re (...) was married to Lud^vick the ^. King
of France who repudiating (...) for the suspicion of adultery and tread by
Henry Duke of No (...) who was Successor to Step^^n King of England. His Son
(...) did (...) after Henry as heirs to the Kingdom of (...) Fathers
possessions in France. But when Arthur the (...) who was elder Brother to King
John) did stand (...) preferring his own Title before him, being (...) by
(...) Augustus King of France to take away ^t^a^ay from his Uncle (...) and
having attempted it by force (...) his Army w^ (...) and ^cattered by (...) who
came suddenly upon him* (...) brought to Rot^mgu^^^^^ where (...) and
rashness. Hereupon King (...) by ^enstance the Mother of Arthur before King
(...) condemned: and his good and also (...) were (...) as the Lord in
^e^farme: which afterward in Succ^ (...) gave to his Son Alphonsius the* who
(...) without (...) it came to King Philip the third and co^^ipued (...)
Posterity until (...) of P^i^^^ (...) it (...) ^over^ by ^a^ard the third King
of England, and wholly possed b^ him with all Aqata^^ (...) established between
him and (...) King of France Afterward (...) made the Dukedom of (...)
principality* and (...) Son who by imposing (...) THE COVNTIE OF PICTAVIA.
POICTOU
map of Poitou (France) heavy a tax on the Aquitanians lost a great part
thereof by their revolting from him to Charles the fifth King of France, whose
Nephew Charles the 7. did drive the English out of Aquitaine in the year 1453.
and left it to his Son King Ludovick the 11. He bestowed it on his Brother
Charles* after whose decease, King Ludovick did pass it over unto his Son
King Charles the 8. and from that time, Aquitaine, of of which Pictavia is a
great part, did remain in the King of Fances power. Caesar, Pliny, and Strabo
do report that the ancient Inhabitants thereof were the Pictones: Ptolemy calls
them the Pictones, and Anemianus Marcellinus the Pictavi. Ausonius calls it
Pictonicam Regionem, or the Country of the Picts. In the Register Book of
Provinces in in the Aquitaine, cap. 11. or Vienna, cap. 7. it is called
Civitatem Pictavorum vel Pictavonum, the City of the Pictavians or
Pictanonians, now it is called le Pays de Poictou. I join with Pliny the
people Agasinates with the Pictones. It is likely that some memory does remain
of them in the Town Aigounois, not far from the Temple of S. Maxentius,
which is a Town near the River Severus. They are far wide, who do confound
the Aginnates with the Agesinates, seeing they are 5. days journey distant one
from another. I will write something concerning the diverse Principalities which
are reckoned with Pictonia, The City Pictavia.
but first I will speak something of the Metropolis and royal City thereof.
And that is Pictavia. For so the Latins enstile it, which Ptolemy called
Angustoriton, and Autonius Augustoritum. Gregorius Turone^sis calls it the
City Pictavia. It is seated in a pleasant place, somewhat steep with Hills,
except in one part, which they call in their Country speech Tranchaea, which is
seated on plain ground: it is the fairest City of all France except Paris.
The River Clauius does encompasse and intile the most part of it. Here is an
Unirersitie famous for the studdie of the Civil Law, and is second unto that
at Paris. Charles the seventh King of France did iustitute it in the year
1421. Of which Scaliger thus in his description of Cities.

If study from the mind, strength from the body come
In both which kinds France has much honor won,
Then let this Country studies only love,
While others warlike matters do approve.
So while other Countries like the body are,
Pictavium is like to the soul most rare.
The Theaters, Galienes Palace, and the Aquaeducts of Conduits which are now
called les ducts, do show the antiquity thereof being certain tokens of the
Roman Empire in these parts. Some think it was built by the Agathirsians and
Gelonians, the Successors of the Sons of Hercules (whom the Poets do call
Pict^) for they being expelled their Country for stirring up Domestic
sedition, came into England, and from thence being increased in number and
multitude they passed over again into France, where they were called Picts and
built this City. Others write differently, when it is evident both in
Pomponius, Mela, and Pliny, that there were Pictones long before they came out
of England. This City is famoused by a Bishops Seat, which D. Hilarious was
sometime Bishop of a Prelate of singular learning and piety, and one that was
an invincible Antagonist against the Arrian faction, and did write those 12.
famous Books of the Holy Trinity, wherein he showed much wit and eloquence.

The Court of Pictavia is governd by a President and two Substitutes, the one
whereof does judge of civil matters, the other of criminal. Many Towns of
this Province have recourse to this Court: The Towns.
as besides Pictavia it self aforesaid, there are also Niort which has a
Castle: here the Pictones do keep great Faires thrice in a year: also
F^ntenayle Conte, it has also a Castle: the Rivulet Vendaeus (or Vendee) does
flow by the walls of this Town, which grows afterward so big, that it
does overflowe the whole Territory of Fonten^ and the neighboring parts
thereunto: also the Town Lusign^ where there is an ancient Castle which is
commonly called Mulus^e. Al^o Montmorillon, Chastelleraud, la Basse March,
Dorai, S. ^ent, and others: to which is added ^irray a Marshalship, and having
a strong Castle. There is also in the Principality of Pictonia, that I may
come now to that part (besides Talm^nt, so called as it were ^al^ndu Monde,
Calcanus Mundi, or the heel of the world as some would have it) ^upes su^er
Ioa^na or Roche sur-Iohn, who was of the Royal family of Burbon. Our
Grandfathers did know Ludov^ck Burbon, the Son of John Earl of Vendosme,
when he was Prince of Roche sur-Ioh, Earl of Montpenser, and also his son
Charles Castellum Heraldi, or ^ast^lberault near Vigenn^; is dignified with a
Dukedom. The Viecountships are ^ev^rs. By the River Tovius, also Brosse,
Bridieres, Roche-Chonart. There are many Towns which are Baronies and
Signiories, which I will deliver as they come in view: first Manlers, where
there is good fishing for Salmones, and a little King of fish, which is an
enemy to the ^uny, but especially there is good fishing for Whales and Codfish,
which being dried and hardened in the wind, and cold are usually transported
into other Countries: also the Towns ^artena^, S. Ma^ent, Melle, Chizay,
Ch^uvigny, Luss^c, Bressu^^e, Charron, Ch^steneraye, S. M^sni^, S. Gillis,
Chasteaumur, les Sables d' Aulonn^, S. ^e mine, Montaigu^ a Town with a Castle
famous for Saltpi^s: Also M^^^bau, l'a Motte, S. Beraye, Vouvant, S. Hilaire,
Mortemer, Luzaz, S. Savin, l' Istle ^^urdun, S. Benoist du Sault, Bourg^neuff,
M^loil, Merxant, Brige, Vou^e, Villefa^gnax, and others. And it is gathered o^
of Antinius his Itinerary that Limonum was in Pictavia, because B^^^gila is
called Augu^^odurum. Some think it to be the same with (...), or Poicters.
We dare affirm nothing. In the third C^^entarie of A. Hirttus there is
mention of Limonum. The Rivers ^ha^ water this Country are Clanius, Vigenna,
now Vienne, The Rivers.
or Vendaeus and others, which are very full of fish. Here we needs must
speak of (...) Amphitheater, in Pictavia, The public works.
standing near to the Town Donaeu^^* in the workmanship whereof Art does
strive to immitate nature: to it is made hollow and cut out in the Mountain,
having no external (...), stone, or wood in it. In Iustus Lipsius in his Book
of the Amphitheaters which out of Rome cap. 6. there is a large description of
his ^^^^taine and Amphitheater, according to the relation of Levinus
Kesmakerus, sometime Consul of Zirickzaeus, and governor of Zeland at the
first beginning of this war, who adds that the Village Town Lonaeus was
heretofore far larger, as may be seen by the workmanship thereof, not like
to Village Towns, and by the ruins of the public ways and streets, which
lay toward the Bridge, commonly called Pont du Sey, part of which way may be
seen yet in diverse places. But the greatest part is ruinated, and the stones
of the aedifices are consumed and carried away. About half a Mile from the
City Pictavia, in the high way to Biturigum, there is a great fouresquare
stone, underproped with five other stones, and from thence called la Pierre
Leuree. Of which there is this Distich.

Hic lapis ingentum superat gravitate Colossum
Ponderis, and grandi Sydera mole petit.
This stone exceeds a great Colossus weight,
And even to the stars does penetrate.
The State Ecclesiastic has three Bishoprics, which are under the
Archbishop of Tolouse: as the Bishopric of Poictiers, in which there are 27,
Abbeys: the Bishopric of Lucon or Lussen, in which are 10. Abbeys: and the
Bishop of Maillezay, in which are 4. Abbeys. I come now to their manners. The
Husband men have a peculiar speech of their own: and he is held wise that
does not trust them. A kind of men who because they are prohibited to hunt wild
beasts, do pursue contentions: They are litigious and cunning in stirring up
debate and strife. Their manners.
The Citizens are unlike them in nature and disposition, being courteous,
bountiful, liberal, candide, and hating impostures and deceits, lovers of
learning, and learned men, of which there are many here. The Nobility are
provident, and more bold and daring then strong.

CADVRCIVM, LE PAYS DE QVERCI. The Ecclesiastic State.
Cadurcium does contain two Bishoprics, namely, of Cahors, and Montalban,
which are subject to the Archbishop of Tolouse.

CADVRICVM, commonly called le Pays de Querci, or as others pronounce it Crecy,
The Situation.
is encompassed with the Petrocorians, the Nitiobrigians, the Rutenians, the
Avernians and Lemovicians. The Country of Cadurcium though it be indented with
Mountains, The fertility.
yet it excels both for beauty, richness, and fertility, and it wants
nothing necessary for the sustenance of life. The Cardurcians did formerly
inhabit it: whom, besides Pliny Lib. 4. Cap. 19. Caesar does mention with many
other people of France, who calls them the Eleutheri, or Flute^ri, that is
Freemen. For so the word is to be taken, and we are not to assent to them, who
would from thence deduce a new kind of people. Cadurcium has two Diocaesses,
Doveoni Cadurecorum, and Mo^talbarum D^veoma, well known to Ptolemie, The
Cities.
which some badly interpret Du^^na. It is commonly called Canors, near the
River Lothus. Some learned men do call it Divona. Truly howsoever it is
written Joseph Scaliger in his letters to Merula thinks it to be the
Metropolis of the Cadurcians, and also Vinetus writing to Ausionius and others.
Iustus Lipsius in his golden Book concerning Amphitheaters, supposes that
Doveona is a Town, commonly called Dowe, about half a days journey distant
from Ligeris, on that side where the way lies from Andegavia to Pictavia. And
so the name does intimate, but then D^veona according to the opinion of
Ptolomie, cannot be the Metropolis or mother City of the Cadurcians, which is
60. leagues from that place. Besides that which Antonius calls Auned^nacum,
and Peutingers Tables Avedonacum, in the way between Burd^gala and
August^dunum, cannot be the same with Ptolomies Doveona, which is commonly
called Cahors. For Aunedonacum and Mediolanium of the Santonians, are 16. Miles
asunder: but between D^veona and Mediolanium, called in the Country speech
Cahors and Sa^^^^s, there are about 40. leagues, which make almost an hundred
Miles. Besides the Metropolis of the Cadurcians stands so far Eastward,
that it cannot be in the way to Burdigala. Let us therefore conjecture with
Merula, that Aunedonacum is that Town commonly called Aulnay, being distant
Northward from the Mediolanum of the Santones, somewhat more than six leagues.
Aus^nius does design and show the Metropolis of the Cadurcians, Lib.
Professorum, at the 18. verse, concerning Ex superius a Rhetorician of Tolouse.

Decedens placid^s mores tranquillaque vitae
Tempora praedives fimsti sede Cadu^ca.
Thou dying rich, at Cadurcum did end
Thy life, which thou so quietly did spend.
In this City there is a University and a Marshalship. The Cathedral Church
is dedicated to S. Stephen. The Bishops hereof are Earls, so that at the
Bishop is both a spiritual and secular Lord, so that while he solemnly
celebrateth the Mass, he has sword, gloves, and other ornaments of that
kind by him upon the Altar, and boots on his legs, which he wears in a
Pontifical manner by special privilege. Pope John the two and twentieth of
that name was borne here, who held that seat 19. years and 4. Months. Also
Clemens Maretus one of the chief modern french Poets was borne at Dorcona.
The other diocasse is Montalbanum, now called Montalban, or S. Theodar^ de
Montalban. The City is situate and built on the bending side of a ^^ll, having
a Castle near the River Tarnis, commonly called Ta^n having a Bridge over it,
the middle part whereof is in the Country of Langed^ck. Near the Bridge of
this City, there are arched vaults under the Earth. The Churches are wasted by
wars. Mon^lla^ was a common receptacle of the fugitives of the reformed
religion so that it endurd greater miseries in the first civil war, than
other Towns of Aquitame: insomuch that it was besieged three (...) it ^leaven
Months space, and that which was worst of all, they did (...) only contend
with the enemy without, but also they had (...) within their walls. And it was
so hotly assaulted by the (...) that after the King had granted them peace,
for more the^ a Month it was still closely straitely besieiged. And though it
were violently assailed by the neighbors round about it, yet it vallainly
resisted their force, and did frustrate and shun all their deceitful
stratagemes, to the great admiration of all men that an unfortified City, and
unfurnished of Soldiers, should delude the attempt of their enemies. The first
siege was laid against it by Monluccius 23. May in the year 1563, who came
with a thousand horse and five thousand foot, to besiege the City: but after
some light skirmishes, having destroyed the Corn he departed. For a sudden
fear without any cause did so invade the besiegers, that withal speed, and
much perplexednesse of mind, they raised the siege and went away. And this was
the event of the first siege, in which thirty only of the besiegers were
slain. Three months afterward Monluccius returned again, and having joined
Buria in confaederacy with him, he laid siege to it the second time. They had
9. troops of common Soldiers, and a great company of Gentlemen Voluntaries,
and of Muskatier^ horsemen and fooremen they had a Stewards. Nine CADVRCIVM.
CADURCIUM
map of Quercy (France) bands of Spanish Soldiers, in which there were twelve
hundred Soldiers: five battering pieces of ordinance, three greater and five
lesser culueringes, which they planted against the wall. At the first meeting
they had a little skirmish, in which Monluccius lost many men, and on the
Towns side there were 12. slain, and many wounded on both sides. The two next
days following there were in like manner some light skirmishes, in which the
besiegers had still the worst. In the mean while Durassius going to Aurelias
with a strong army, by chance marched that way, and sent to Monluvius, to
desire him to appointe the day and place to join battle in. But then
Monluccius had no mind to fight, who looked for a better opportunity, which he
afterward obtained, and gave the Durassians a great overthrowe. But lying there
in vain, the City being defended with such strong forces, he raised his
siege, in which he lost 60. Soldiers, and the Town thirty. Then Durassius
proceeded in his former journey, but when he departed, the garrison of the
City was much leaned and diminisht, so that by his coming, the City received
more loss then good. For two foreine Cohorts followed Durassius, so that the
Citizens were left destitute of all help. But as the favor and aid of men
did decrease, so the Citizens courage did increase. For they took an oath
altogether, that they would suffer all extremities in the defense of their
Country, rather than open the gates of their City, to their malicious enemies.
Monluccius being certified by one of the Captains of the army, called
Fontgravius, both of their want of munition, and the small number of the
besieged, marches thither in all have, and the enemies in the third watch of
the night did assault the Walls in three places with Scaling ladders, and
Musket shot. In the mean time while the Citizens ran to defend that part of
the Wall, a strong band of Soldiers well armed without making any noise, came
to the Fortress of the Ialobites, thinking so to come upon the watch unawares,
because the Citizens were busy in fight elsewhere. But they in the watch Tower
having discovered them before they could approach to the Walls, cried out that
they were discovered, they clapped sealing ladders to the Walls, and made a
breach in them with an iron Ram, which 12. men drove against the Walls, and
set up two Colors or Bonners on the Bulwark, with the sound of Drum,
Trumpets, crying out to their companions that followed, that the City was
taken, but yet the Townsmen encountered them so bravely, that they were
enforced to sound a retreat with the loss 200. men, and to leave their Ranime
and scaling Ladder, there being but one slain of the besieged. But seeing that
cunning stratagems did not prevail, they determined to besiege the City the
third time. First Terrida came and brought 21. Cohorts with him two wall pieces
of Ordnance, and 7 Colverins: which being planted against diverse parts of the
Wall did batter it shroudly* but all in vain, seeing that men, women and
children run cheerfully to repair the breaches, and brought earth and other
Materials to mend them, which succeeded so well, that although the enemy had
made 500. shot against the walls, yet there were but 5. men slain. But when
the Besiegers saw that their Ordnance did no good, and the Citizens diligence
did frustrate their attempts, they turned their assault into a Siege, and so
built Towns and Fortresses round about the City, and placed a Garrison in
the^^, that ^o man might go out of the City, or come in, and so to cut off all
ay^e or succor from them* that so either famine or length of the siege might
enforce them to yield. After this they had many other light skirmishes, in
which the besieged had always the better. The siege ends with conditions of
peace, which yet were not declared to the Citizens until the 15. of April,
although they were published at Orleance and Paris the 26. of March. In all the
Sieges there were slain on the besiegers side ^00. men, and 60. of the
besieged. But of this enough. The other Towns of Cadu^cium are
Castel-Sarrazin, near the River Tarnis, the water whereof is of a red color
because it passes through a clayie earth: there is also M^n^e^ where M. Arnald
Sorbinus was borne, a great man and Chaplain to the King: also Moissac
situated in a fair, pleasant, and delightful soil, having great store of
Vineyards. It is a Town of traffic and commerce, especially for Corn, Wine,
Oil, Saffron, Wool, Salt, Fish, and other commodities. King Clodoveus did
here found and build the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul. There is also the
Monastery of S. Benedict, in which the body of S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage
was buried. Not far from Moissac is Lausette situate on a Rock, where there
are the fairest and best Cellers or Storehouses in all Gutenna. There are also
the Towns which are commonly called Burelle, Nazareth, S^villac, Gourdon, and
Martel. Near the Town Martel on the Frontiers of Cadurcium, as our Author
notes Lib. 8. de bello Gallieo, is Vxellodunum; which is also called Vssoldun
and la Pue^h d'Vs^ldum, that is, Podium Vxelloduni, or the Gallerie of
Vxellodunum, because it is situate on a very high steep place. And so much
concerning Cadurcium, let us pass to Lotharingia.

BRESSIA, OF THE SEGVSIANS.
BRESSIA is a Country lying under the Alps in Sabaudia, where Caesar
heretofore placed the Segusians according to Villonovanus; although Ptolomy
does make Lions a City of the Segusians. At the least these people were next to
the Aedus, which he affirms lib. 7. de bello Gallico in these words. His
constitutis rebus, or Aeduis, Segusianisque, qui sunt finitimi ci l'revincioe
x. millia perditum imperat^ These things being thus settled he levieth 10000.
Foot out of the Aeduans and Segusians, which are Provinces near unto him.
Also Pentingers Chart does hereabouts place Segusione in the Alps. Ammianus,
who lived in the time of ^ulian the Apostate, in the 15. Chapter of his History
makes mention of the Town Segovium, situated at the foot of the Alps.
Bressia therefore is situate between the Rivers Rhodanus and Araris, now
called Saona, and Marcellinus Sacona, at the beginning of the Alps in a
fruitful place, so that it may compare with any Country of France, for plenty
of Wine, Corn, and all kinds of fruits, and for Rivers, Cattle, and Woods.
It is neighboured with the Burgundians, and was sometime subject to the Princes
thereof, afterward it was a part of the Kingdom of Arelatum, which being
divided into diverse parts, was afterward governed by Earls, one of which
Vlrick Earl of Bresse and Baugenciak lived about the year 1300. who much
enlarged his Territories, and left one only Daughter and Heir Sibyll of
Bressia who was married to Amades the fourth, the 8. Earl of Sabaudia, who
brought her Husband beside a large Inheritance, the County of Bressia, which
being afterward united to Subaudia, remained in that Family 300. years even
until our age, when Henry the fourth, King of France for his virtue surnamed
the Great, understanding that the Saluffians a people of France were possessed
and overcome by Sabaudus by treachery and deceit, and that Henry the third was
almost oppressed by his rebelling Subjects, and was engaged in a dangerous
War, he thought it fit to recover that part of France, and seeing the Duke
of Sabaudia did delay the restitution thereof by making many exceptions and
deceiving promises, which by reason he could not do, he thought it meet by
force of Arms to regaine that which was lost, and having levied an Army he
took Bressia, by the help and assistance of the Marshall Byroone, and brought
the Duke to that strait, and was content to end the matter by exchange, and
that the King for the Salussians taken from him, should have the Bressians, the
Brengeans, the Virroneans, and generally all that belonged to France on the
other side of Rhodanus, so that all that Country which looked toward France from
the issuing of that River out of the Lemanick Lake, should be afterward united
to the Kingdom of France. And so the Duke should wholly deliver into the Kings
hands the BRESSIA^
BRESSE
map of Bresse (France) strong Castle of the Town, with all the Warlike
furniture thereof, by which Bressia and all that Province were as it were
fetterd and manacled, so that France was secured from any future attempt from
those parts. And so Sabaudus learnt with his own loss how dangerous a thing
it is, to use violence with those that are stronger than our selves, since such
rashness redounds to his harm that attempts it, and most commonly he is
compelled to restore again unto them with interest that which he had so gotten.

THE PROVINCE AND CITY OF LIONS.
THE Court of Lions is the last and remotest of all the Presidiall Courts which
depend on the chief Senate of Paris. But Lions is the chief and principal
City of Gallia Celtica, which from thence is called Lions, being a strong
Fortress of France, being the Primate Seat of all France in spiritual
matters, and being the Shop for Tra^ing and commerce for the whole World. The
Bressians confine o^ it on the North, on the East the Sabaudians, on the South
the Al^o^^o^ians and the Narbonians along the River Rhodanus; and on the West
the Avernians. It is situate in the most beautiful and convenientest soil of
al Europ, for there is no place which has two riches fruitfuller Nurses, than
the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar are unto this Country, in whose bosom the horn
of plenty, filled with the Gods bounty does rest, and is largely powered forth
upon it, so that it always enjoys a continual plenty. The ancients called
it Lugdunum, as if you should say the happy or blessed Mountain. Titus Livius
calls it an Island, Lib. Hist. 21. In these words the next day Amiball
marching on the contrary bank of Rodanus, went up into the Mediterranean
parts of France: not because it was a straiter way to the Alps, but the more
he went from the Sea, the more he should be sure not to meet with the
Romans: with whom he did not purpose to sight before he came into Italy. He
came with the fourth part of his Camp to the Island, where the Rivers Arar and
Rhodanus running out of diverse parts of the Alps, and having encompassed some
part of the Country, do meet together, from whence the Country in the middle
is called the Island; which words may seem to be translated out of a credible
Writer who lived about the same time, and was familiarly acquainted with
Scipio, but that he adds that this Island being populous, and abounding with
all things necessary, was (...), that is, abounding with people, and well
stored with food. Plutarch in the life of Ainnbal does deliver the like, but
more plainly, and calls it Li^ns, whose words according to the Translation
of Acciarolus. He removed his Tents, and marching by the bank of Rhodanus up
against the stream, in few days he came to that place which the French men
call the Island, which the Rivers Rhodanus and A^ar flowing out of diver
Mountains do encircle, where there is the City of Lions the most famous City
of all France, which long time afterward was built by Plancus Mu^^atius. Some
call it the City of Sequanians, and Maxima Sequanorum, which appears by an
ancient Inscription on S. Peter's Church, which is this.

JOVI OPT. MAX.
Q. ADGINNIUS URBICI FILL.
MARTINUS SEQ. SACERDOS
ROMAE ET AUG.
AD ARAM AD CONFLUENTES
ARARIS ET RHODANI
FLAMEN. II. VIR IN CIVITATE
SEQUANORUM.
And Seneca does celebrate the praise of this place in his Verses concerning
the death of Claudian.

I saw a Hill that hangs over two streams,
Which Phoebus rising glideth wi^h his beams.
Where the great River Rhodanus does flow,
And Arar doubtful whether he should go.
Through quiet Foords his course along does guide,
Washing the Banks as he along does glide.
But when the Romans had subjected all France, in the reign of Augustus. L.
Mun. Plan^us, who in the year V. C. 765. had been Consul with C. ^ilius, and
after he had obtained the dignity of a censer had triumphed over the Rhetians,
did reedifie it, and built it almost all new, and removed it to a hill, and so
bringing colonies from the City of Rome, he enlarged it, and then it was
called Colonia Lugdunum, or the Colonie of Lions, which Pliny also shows Lib.
4. Cap. 18. when he says: Segusiant liberi, in quarum agro Colonia Lugdunorum.
The Segutians are free, whose Country is the Colonie of Lions. In this City as
guetonius witnesses was Claudius the Roman Emperor borne; who as also the
succeeding Roman emperors did much enlarge and beautify this City, which at
this day infinite monuments of antiquity do sufficiently declare. Besides
they made the Inhabitants Citizens of R^me, and did give them many honors,
privileges, and liberties. And here they established the first Money Minre in
all France, and erected and built many famous Schools, which flourished for a
long time by the frequent coming of the French and Itatalian youth thither,
and were famous for eloquent men, even to S. I^r^m^s time. This City first
received the Christian Religion, kept it, and observed it, and had many
Mareyrs* among which were ^h^tinus, ^^eneus, and other Doctors and Bishops of
Lions. so that this Church was the primate of all France. The Cathedral Church
heretofore consecrated to S. Stephan the first Martyr, was afterward dedicated
to S. John Baptist, so that it is inferior unto none, either in dignity or
antiquity, nay it may compare with any other Church in Europe, for the
fairness and beauty thereof, it has also stately precious Pillars, which
were brought out of S. Augustines Church, and the THE PROVINCE AND CITY OF
LIONS.
LYONNOIS Forest et Beaujolois
map of Lyonnais (France) Walls are hanged with tapestrie wrought with curious
Art. But one of the chiefest ornaments thereof, is the Clock wrought with
cunning workmanship, which shows in a wonderful manner the hours, days,
months, and several seasons of the year, and also the course of the Sun
and the Moon. The Archbishop has infinite privileges above others, which if
any one desire to know in particular, he shall find it in Paridires the French
writers Book, concerning Lions. But it is worthy of observation^, that the
Deane of this College is a Duke, and every one of the Cannons is an Earl, and
some believe that a certain King of Burgundi did grant them these titles, some
with more likely hood do think that they obtained them themselves, by
purchasing some part of the County of For^^^^ which is now a County. Many
Princes have desired to be Cannon* thereof, as the Kings of France, the Dukes
of Sabaudia, and Burgundi^, the Princes of Barrens and Vienna. There are many
other Churches. Colleges, Monasteries, and Chappells in the City, which for
br^vitie sake I omit. In this City both Provincial, National, and General
counsels have been kept, in which heretofore the holy Bishops Nicetius
Priscus and others were Presidents, as also I^nocent the 4 Pope of Rome, in the
time of the Emperor Frederick the cleaventh. But that we may not be more
prolixe and tedious in these things than the present brevitie of the matter
requires, we will hasten to the secular government, but first by the way we
will show, that heretofore the Rulers of Provinces and Cities did give
judgment in the Princes name by whom they were instituted, and did take upon
them and resign the government acording as they pleased: and lastly the
Posterity of Chares the great clothed those naked dignities with the titles
of Dukes and Earls, and made them hereditarie. Such as were the Earls of
Lions, before the City and Province were governed by Prelates, namely as they
are found in ancient writings, Odo, in the time of Charles the bald; Gerard in
the time of R^m^gius the Archbishop, William, under Charles the Simptean: C.
913. and a little before lived Artaldies Earl of Lions, whose house as it is
supposed, remains yet in the City. After this the County was translated to
the Church, by whom it was governed until the year of C. 1292. at what time
Philip surnamed the fair King of France laid hands on it, and took it into
his protection, until Ludovick Huttin did at length unite it to the Kingdom
of France, which history Paradine does largely prosecute ^ab. 2. Cap. 64. For
those of Lions did constantly defend their liberty, which they had enjoyed
from the time of the Romans, which Pliny mentions, and also Paulus I. C. in
his Books of Distributions, which the Praelates endeavored to take from them.
But albeit this City and Province does enjoy so many and so great commodities
and privileges as aforesaid, yet sometime it endured much misery. For after
it was reedified by Numatius one of the Plancian family, in the reign of
Nero, the most part of it was burnt, and Verus being Emperor, much Christian
blood was shed in the City. Afterward it felt the fury of Sep. Severus, who
exposed it as a booty to his Soldiers, and in King Phillips time it was burnt
through a dangerous sedition which arose in the City, and thereupon i^ lost
that liberty which it had preserved so many ages, and having endurd many
miseries, it lay dead a while buried as it were in the ruin thereof. But at
last by the liberality and favor of the Kings, and vigilancie and industry
of the Inhabitants, Lions grew to be as famous in our age as it was formerly.
The Magistracy of the City does consist of twelve Consuls, as Campegius
relates, who do govern^ the Commonwealth, six of them are yearly chosen
before Christmas, and six of those formerly chosen are in office, for the
year following, and they are confirmed by name in S. Nicetius Church, on the
12. of the Kalends of January. And in the Town Hall which was formerly the
Archpraesident house, they meet together to consult of public affairs. But
the Roans house is designed to be the Court or Praesidiall seat of Justice,
on which depends the Court of Justice at Lions, also the Merchants Court in
the same place. The Praetors Court of Matisconia, Forest, Bellijocum. Here
besides the Kings Judges substitutes, Henry the second King of France did
establish S. Senators with a Clarke or Notarie. In this City beside^ the
ancient Schools which I have mentioned, there is an Universitie which has
flourished from the year of C. 1328. famous for the Professors of the Common
Law. There are great Faires kept here, to which at certain times of the year
a great company of people do resort. It has strong Fortresses to resist the
assaults of the enemy, for S. John's Bulwark is the chifest in all Europe, so
that on the top thereof 3000. Soldiers may be trained and set in Battle array.
King Charles the 11. Anno 1564. built a Castle there which was thought
impregnable, to suppress the assaults of enemies, and the attempts of the
seditious Citizens. And this is worthy of observation, that as often as you
dig there somewhat deep into the Earth, some Relics and Monuments of
antiquity, as Stones, Marbles, Coins, Lamps, Vines, and ruins of Aquaducts or
Conduits, Bathes, Theaters, and such like Aedifices are found there, so that it
is credible that many of such kind of Relics are found and discoverd here,
than in all the rest of France.

LANGVEDOC A PART OF AQVITAINE.
THE Occitane Country of France, commonly called Languedec, is a part of
Aquitane, and is so named as some conceive from the Goths the Possessions
thereof, as if you should say Land-Got. That is, the Goths Province: Some
derive it from the word Lingua a tongue and the word O^, I suppose that these
conjectures are more vain than Sicilian toys, and are but mere vulgar
trifles. The ancients took it for the Province of Narbon, near the Pyrenaean
Mountains. Strabo calls it Tectosages, the Metropolis whereof Tolouse is
accounted one of the chief Cities of France, having an Archprelate, a Senate,
and a University. Some derive the name thereof from those which fled from T^oy.
Caesa mentions it in his first Book of Commentaries, where he speaks thus:
It was told Caesar, that the Helvetians purposed to travel through the Sequans
and Aeduans Country, unto the borders of the Santones, which are not far from
Tolouse, which is a City in Province: and also Lib. 3. concerning P. Crassus:
Moreover valiant men being levied out of Tolouse, Carcasson, and Narbon, which
are Cities of France near to Province, etc. Ammianus Marcellinus gives it the
prerogative above all the neighbor Cities. Neither can we omit that worthy
Elogie of the ancient magnificence and power thereof, written by Aus^nius a
most famous Poet, and a Consul of Rome in praise of his Nurse and
Foster-mother in these Verses: Non unquam altricem nostri reticebo TOLOSAM,
Coctilibus muris quam circuit ambitus ingens.
Perque latus pul^ro perlabitur amne Garumna
Innumeris cultam populis, cenfinia propter
Nirgida Pyrenes, and Pinea Gabennarum,
Inter AQUITANAS gentes, and nomen Iberum.
Quae modo quadruplices ex se cum effuderit urbes,
Non ulla exhaustae sentit dispendia plebis:
Quos genuit cunctos gremio complexa colonas.
My Nurse Tolasaes praises I will sound,
Which with a Brick wall is encompas'd round,
And fair Garumna runs by her side,
And many people do in her reside.
Cause the Pyrenean Ningide confines
Upon it, and the Pinean Gabinines,
Between the Country of fair AQUITAINE,
And Iberus which now is called SPAINE^
LANGVEDOC A ^T OF AQVITAINE.
LA PARTY Septentrionale du LANGUEDOC
map of Languedoc (France)
And having yielded people unto four*
Large Cities out of her abundant score.
Yet in her no want of people does appear,
Which done within her bosom nourisht were.


Whence the Vi^i-G^th^, having drove^ out the Romane^ from thence, did make
this City the royal Seat of the Kingdom, until they were quite expulsed by
the French in the reign of (...) the first Christian King, at what time all
that Province was subjected to France. Concerning the State Ecclesiastic* the
Tolousians were instructed in the Christian faith by Ma^tiall, who was their
first Prelate, after whom succeeded Saturninus, Honoratus, Silvius, Hilarious,
Ex^per^u^, and many others* even to Lud^v^^ St^ulus the Son of Charles (...)
King of Sicily* in whose time this Bishopric was translated (...) to an
Archbishopric: under whom are these Suffragan Bishop^^ the bishop of M^nta
ban. (...) of S. (...) created by Pope (...) the ^2. An has this City is larg^
and popul^u^ to it has many (...) built Churches, and also Colled^^s (...)
Mo^^^^^ries. The chief Church belonging to the Bishop (...) cr^ted to S. (...)
It has also an University famous for (...) and for the great number of
Students which study there. Here ^omerly Playe^ i^ ho^our of (...) the Goddess
o^ Flowers were ^^brated* of which there do yet remain some to^^^s. But the
Fami^^ of the E^^^ ^ingling with the Royal Stock* this Country wa^ ^^ted to
the Kingdom of (...). It will be h^^^ convenient to nominate some of them: a^
namely (...) others ^^metus reckon^t^ the Earls of (...) the (...) France, who
enjoyed that dignity unto (...) The^^^ly, who after the decease of his Brother
^^phonsus, did unite (...) County unto his Kingdom. There are also among
others these Towns in Languedoc, Narbon, Mons ^essusanus, Carcassona,
Nemansus, Vzes.

THE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.
ON the South Province is near to the Delphinate, and on the North it has the
Bressians, who are parted from it by the River Rhodanus flowing between them,
on the West is the County of Venusinum: and lastly on the East the Pedemontian
and Sabaudians do encompasse it. Caesar by one common name calls those of
the Delphinate, and the Sabaudians, Allobrogians, who were then confederate
with the Romans: The Country is now divided into the higher part, the chief
City whereof is Ebrodunum; and the lower part in which the prime Cities are
Gratian^polis and Vienna. Those of the Delphinate who dwelt beyond Rhodanus,
were hertofore a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and then of Orleans, and
afterward of Burgundy, the head City whereof was then Arelate, which afterward
from that City was called the Kingdom of Arelatum, but when that Kingdom came
to the Emperor Conradus the 2. after the decease of Rodolfus the first, the
last King thereof, there arose one Guigno, a man of base birth, who was called
afterward the fat Earl Grinmand, he through his own industry and the
confusion of the times obtained most of the chiefest Cities of this Country, so
that at last he possessed Gratianopolis and made himself Lord of the whole
Province, which to honor his Son who had married Delphina the Daughter of
the Earl of Albon and Vienna, he called it the Delphinate. After this the
Province of the Delphinate became subject to Provinces who ruled it, until the
time of Philip Valerius King of France, who annexed it to his Crown about the
year of Christ 1348. which was the cause that Humbert Delphine of Vienna
having lost his eldest Son in the Battle of Cressey, and his younger Son
dying by sickness, when he was provoked to war and set upon by Amades the
6. of that name, he determined to put himself into the Kings protection, and
to leave him Heir to his Dominions, on this condition, that from thenceforth
the eldest Sons of the Kings of France, during their Fathers life time,
should bear the Arms and Title of the Delphinate. And so this Country came
into the Kings hands, who thought fit to annex so noble a Prince neighboring
on Italy for ever to his Kingdom. The Delphinate therefore being one of the
chief Countries of France, is divided as I said before into the higher and
lower part, and has many fair Cities and Towns in it. In the higher there
are Ebrodunum, which has a Prelate, also Valence, Dium, and S. Paul's Church:
In the lower is Vienna, which was formerly the Metropolis and Mother City of
the whole Delphinate, which is now Gratianopolis, there are also Romanium,
Brianconium, Mons-Limartium upon Rhodanus, a Town much frequented by
Merchants, where there are also many Monuments of Antiquity, also S. Antonies
Church, Valerians Church, and the Monastery. Gratianopolis was so called from
the Emperor Gratian, who reedified it, and beautified it with many Buildings,
now it has a Parliament, and a President, with Senators, and other Officers
belonging thereunto, and it has a Prelate, who is one of the chief men of the
Province, under the Metropolitan of Vienna. But Vienna venerable for Antiquity
has a long time had a Metropolitan Bishop. Valence is converted and raised to
a Dukedom, and has a Bishop and a University, in which the Roman Laws are
read and declared, in which James Cuyacius taught, who was the Prince of all
those Lawyers which flourished in former times, whose name shall live as long
as Laws continue in the world. Here are found Roman Inscriptions, and other
ancient Roman Monuments. King Francis intended to have newly fortified
Gratianopolis against the invasion of enemies, but he left it undone.

THE DELPHINATE OF FRANCE.
DAVPHINE Par IEAN de BEINS
map of Dauphine (France)

THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHARINGIA. THE SOVTHERNE PART whereof is painted forth in
this Table.
The Country whence so called.
AFter Pictavia according to my method the Dukedom of Lothari^gia, follows.
Lothoringia according to the Latins was so called from Lotarius the Son or
Nephew of the Emperor Ludovick King of France. Truly Ludovick Pius had four
Son, who warring like Parracides against their Father, and having shut him up
into a Monastery among the Sues^ons they divided his Principalities amongst
themselves; and so made it a Tetrarchie. Afterward by the meditation of the
Nobles of the Empire, the matter came to that pass, that Lotar^us the eldest
Son should enjoy the Title of the Empire, with Italy, Gallia Narb^nensis, and
those Territories, which were called by the name of Lotharingia: and that
Ludovick should possess Germany; Charles should have France from the River
Mosa to the Ocean: and lastly Pipin, or his Son should have Aquitaine.
Lotarius had besides Ludovick who succeeded him in the Empire, a Son named
Lotarius, King of Lotaringia. And as the Germans as first called it
Lotar-rijck, or Lot-reych, that is, the Kingdom of Lotarius, so the Latins
afterward called it L^tharingia. The Inhabitants, and the other French do call
it Loraine, as it were Lotregne. The Germans call it Lottring.
The French Writers do report, that the bounds of Lotaringia were heretofore
larger, and that it was heretofore called Austrasia, or Austria, or Oost-reych
(having Westrasia or Westria, now called West-reych, and corruptly Neustria, a
Western Kingdom) lying over against it, and that being divided into the
higher and the lower: and contained between the Rivers Rhene, Scaldis, and
Mosa; the lower part has diverse names, and is subject to diverse Princes: and
that the higher part which is called Mossellanica and Tullingia, is all except
some parts thereof under ones command: so that on the East of Lotaringia there
lies Alsatia, The Situation
and Westrasia: on the South Burgundy; on the West Campania, on the North it is
bounded with the Wood Arduenna (the Leuceburgians, Treverians, and other people
bordering thereon) which were heretofore the chiefest parts of Lotharingia.
Lotaringia, although it be full of high Mountains and thick Woods, yet it
needs not the supplies of foreign Countries, The fruitfulness.
for it has good store of Corn and Wine. It has diverse kind of Mettalls, as
Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin, and Lead: It has also Pearls, for which there
THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.
LOTHARINGIA
map of the Duchy of Lorraine is excellent fishing at the foot of V^gesus.
There are also certain Stones found, which the Inhabitants in regard of their
^^lac color do call Lazuli, and do make great benefit of them. There is also
a certain substance, of which they make Looking-glasses* the like whereof is not
found in other Provinces of ^ur^^^. Here are also Cal^i^^nes of great bigness*
so that great cups are made of small pieces thereof. It produces diverse kinds
of living Creatures: The variety of li^^^g creatures.

The ancient government.


especially excellent Horses* like to Neapolitan and Turkish Horses. Lotaringia
was heretofore a Kingdom, as appears in the French Writers. But there are
not mentioned above two or three Kings thereof. For C^ar^^s the Bald presently
after the decease of his Uncle Lotarius, invaded his Territories* and joined
them to his Principalities. And not long after it was made a Dukedom. The
first Dukes are scattringly mentioned by Historians and diverse Writers. In the
reign of Henry the 4. ^^t^fridus held Lotari^gia* he, who afterward having
sold his Dukedom ^^u^^gn^ together with his Brothers Baldwin and Eustathius
made a memorable expedition to the Holy Land, and carried his conquering Army
through Asia and Syria even to the City of Jerusalem, and was created King of
Jerusalem. After him succeeded Baldwin, and after Baldwin Eustathius.
Afterward King Henry the fifth gave the Dukedom to William Earl of ^^vani^*
after whom Theodore, Theo^^^^* Frederick* and others were created Princes of
Lotari^gia, whom from the ^^^^edome was passed to Frederick Earl of
Vadimomium, from whom the Dukes of Lotaringia are descended. Mercator does
plainly d^scr^be be it in two Tables* in one whereof he painteth out the
Northern part* in the other the Southern part. Heretofore the Med^^ma^^ices
and Leu^^ did inhabit L^taringia. Lib. 4. Tacitus, Pliny, Strab^* and Ptolemy
do call them Med^^ma^^ices: and Caesar also Lib. ^. calls them Med^^matri^^*
whose Metropolis is called D^vodurum* and ^ow M^tz. In the Register Book of
the Provinces of Belgia it is called ^v^^as Med^^^a^ri^um* or le Eves^he de
Metz, le Pays M^ssin. Cae^^^ (...). Lu* an lib. 1. and Pli^y do call the
Leu^t^^beri: Ptolemy also calls them Leu^^* and makes their Metropolis to be
^u^^um. And so (...)* called in the Register Book of the Provinces of Belgia,
Civitas L^rum* that is Tullum, or l^ Evesche de ^^ul: also Antoninus his
Itinera^e does acknowledge Tullum or Leu^^^. Some also do refer that which
Caesar calls Tulinges to Lotaringia. The Metropolis of Lotaringia is
Nan^^^um, commonly called Nan^y: it is no great Town, but yet it has a fair
and commodious Seat* in a plain place, the form of it being four square, in
the which there is the magnificent Palace of the Duke^ of Lot^aringia. The
River Murtu flows by the walls of Nan^y which three miles of a little beyond
the Castle of Candeus enters into Mos^lla. Peter Divaeus and others do think
that that which i^ now called Nan^^um* wa^ that which was called Nasi^n, and
which Ptl^my call N^s^um. Antoninus in his Itinerarie places it between
D^v^durum which is in the way from Duro^ortorum. But he that consider that
journey more nearly, he shall easily find that Antoni^u^ (...) Nasium cannot
be seated in that place, where Nanceum is now: so ^ha^ that Nasium i^ not that
which we call now Nan^cium but a Town (...) miles distant from it not far
from the River Mosa in the Barroducan Province, which is commonly called Nas,
as appears by the Inscription of stone dug up there. It is manifest by the
rubbidge and ruins thereof that this Nasium was sometime a very large City:
which also Blemens Trelaeus Mosellanus witnesses in Ortelius. The next Town
of note to Nanceium is Fanum St. Nicholai, commonly called S. Nicolas, being
two miles distant from thence near the River^ Murta, seated in a plain and
fertile place. This Town by the recourse of Strangers unto it, is so much
enlarged, and is grown so big, that now if it were Walled, it would not
seem a Village Town, but rather one of the fairest Cities of all Lotharingia,
for it has such neat Buildings, well contrived Streets, and such a multitude
of Inhabitants, that it is complete in all things: but it is especially
commended for the trade of Merchandise, and manufactures of all kinds. It has
many wealthy Merchants who are richer than their neighbors. I omit other
Towns of lesser note, lest I should be tedious to the Reader. A mile distant
from Nancium is Fruart: three miles off is Ormes: and a little more than three
miles off is Bayon and Luneville: four miles off is le Pont a Monson, and
Gerbevillar: five miles off is Charms: six miles off is Castenoy, M^rhanges
and Vaucol^ur; a little more than six miles is Maxen soubs Bresse: seven miles
off is Dompaire, Deneuvre, Hodon Chasteau* eight miles off is Ramberville,
Raon, Bellemont, Neuss-Chasteau, Mugstat, Marchain-Ville: nine miles off is
Espinal, Bruyeres, Darney: ten miles off is Orm^nt, Walderfing, Beaurams:
thirteen miles off is Vaigny: fourteen miles off is l' Estray. The Town
called in French Vaudem^nt, is five miles from Nancy. Chaligny on the right
side of Mosella is half a league from Nancy. Also Amance seven miles from the
City Medi^matricum toward the South: which the Latin Writers call Almentia:
It was the ancient Chancery of Lotharingia, as the Court-rolls do witness,
which Rosierus produces. Also Richecourt not far from the Lake, which is
commonly called la Guard lac, out of which a River flows, which between S.
Nicolas Church and the Town Rosieres does mingle it self with the River
Murta. Also Remiremont the left side of Mosella, making an Island there, is
seated on the most Southern part of Lotahringia: Aimoinus the Monk places
here the Castle Rumaricum: in Regino it is corruptly read Adromarici, or Ad
R^marici, the word being divided. Spigelius calls it in the Germane speech
Rimelsberg. Not far from thence are Valleys which are commonly called l'
Estraye, and Vag^y. La Mothe is seated by the River which by and by does
discharge it self into Mosa. There is the Territory called le Sanctoy. There
ore also the Towns Kirchingan and Blankenburg. Blankenburg, which the French
call Blanc-mont, is a pretty, fair, and pleasant Town. There is an ancient,
spacious, and magnificent Castle, unto which the Dukes new Palace, being a
curious structure is joined. The Inhabitants give themselves to Husbandry. The
Barony of N^menium is on the right side of the River Sella, three miles from
the City Mediomatricum, Southward. The Lordships or Signiories in it are Marsal
on the left side of the River Sella not far from the Lake Linderus, in which
there is an Island having a Town in it called Techemful. Remer^ville is three
miles from Nancy. S. Bellemont is as far from Mota. Rambert-Ville is on the
right side of the River Morton, not far from the Springhead, where there is
the wood Morton. Rosieres is by the River Murta, near St. Nicolas Church, two
miles from Nancy. Homburg is more than a league distant from the Town
Sarbruch, by the River, which presently afterward runs into Saravus.
Mariem^nt so called from the Mount on which the Town is seated, is a mile off
from the Lake Linder, Southward, S^ndacourt being in the midway between
Vandimont and Motta, in a Country commonly called Sanctoy, being a City of the
Mediomatricans, and heretofore together with Tullus and others an Imperial
City, Henry the second, King of France did reduce it into his power. It is now
commonly called Metz, and modern Writers do call it Me^e, and Gregorius
T^^orensis and others do call it Vrbs Metensis. The Ancients did call it
Divodurum Mediomatricum. And in the Itinerarie Table Divo Durimedio Matricorum:
Ptolemy calls it Divodurum: and Tacitus lib. 4. and A^toninus do call it
Dividorum. I purpose not to inser^ diverse trifling conjectures concerning the
new name. It was heretoforeth Seat of the Kingdom of Lotharingia. Concerning
which Peter Divaeus has written elegantly in his Itinerarie. The City Metz is
situated on a large Plain, which the River Mosella deviding it self into
diverse Channels does water, and part of it flows gently by the walls on the
left hand, and part of it goes under the wall to serve the Cities use, and so
it runs generally, even to the nether side of the walls, where having
received the River Sella, which washes the right side of the City, it runs
again in one Channel. But the City is very pleasantly and delightfully
situated, for having a plain level lying round about it, yet the plot of
ground where it stands rises up a little, whereby we may observe in what
manner the ancients did build their Cities. For they go up many steps before
they can come into the Cathedral Church, near which there is a Market place
on the highest part of the ground, which by degrees bends down toward the
Walls, yet one part of the descent thereof is took away, by two streets paved
with stones, which do cross by one another. The Citizens are called
Mediomatrices in an inscription which is at Moguntio near S. Alban. That Town
which is called in French Toul, was heretofore called Tullum: Ptolemie calls it
Tullon a Town of the Lucians: Antonius, Tullus: The Itinerarie Tables do now
call Tullium. That which is called Verdun* the Latins do now call Virdunum
and Verdunum: Antonius calls it Verodunum. And in the Register Book of the
Provinces, it is called Civitas ^erdune^sium, or l' Euesch^ de Verdun. And the
three Cities aforesaid have Counties belonging to them.

THE DVKEDOME OF LOTARINGIA. The Southern part.
OUR order and Method does now require, that we should reckon up the chief
Rivers of Lotaringia, but first we will speak concerning the Lakes. It has
many Pooles and Lakes which are full of fish: Among which there is one that is
14. Miles in compass, in which there are great Carpes of three foot long,
which are so pleasant in taste, that they far exceed the Carpes in other
Countries for sweetness. The Duke of Lotaringia receaveth 16000. Franks every
third year, for fish taken in this Lake. It is watered with these famous
Rivers, Mosa, Mosella, Saravo, Voloia, Mortana, Mu^ta, Sella, Hidia, and
others. Concerning Mosa it appertains to lower Germany. The other Rivers do
properly belong to this Dukedom: the better part of Mosella and Saravus, the
rest wholly. Mosella rises in the Mountain Vog^sus, not far from the
Springhead of Araris, a little above the Town which is commonly called Bussan,
and so gliding down from Vulturnum to the West* having viewed those Towns
which are called in French l' Estrate, Remiremont, Espinal, Charms, Baton, it
bends his course from the East westward, and runs strait forward to
Tullum, an Episcopal City, whence running again Eastward, it bends
Northward even to Fruardum, and having visited the Mediomatricians, the
Treverians, and other people it runs into the River of Rhene. That which the
Germans call Mosel: the French call Moselle. It is thought that Rhenanus,
Ptolemie Lib. 11. Cap. 9. and others did call it Obri^gos. But John Herold
notes that Obringen so called by Ptolemie is not a River, but a part of Land
near the River* Rh^me, which is now called Ober Rhingham: also Clemens
Trolaeus Mosellanus witnesses as Abraham Ortelius writes, that a certain
Country of ^and near Mosella is yet called Obrincum. Ausonius Eidyll 3. does
celebrate the praise of Mosella in learned verses, both for the clearenesse of
the water, and easy sailing thereon: and for the Towns and Palaces which
beautified the banks thereof: and also for the fish therein, as the Mullet,
the Trout, the Barbell, the Salmon, the ^amprey, the Perch, the Tench, the
Bleake, and the Gudgeon, of which i^ has great store, and lastly for the
Rivers which run into it, as Pronaea, Nemesa, ^ura, Gelbi, Erubro, Lesura,
Drahona, Salmona, Saranus, and Alisontia. L. Vetus in the Reign of Domitius
Nero the Emperor, attempted to join Mosella and Araris, by making a channel
be^weene them, that the armies being conveyed out of Italy by Sea, and
afterward on the Rivers Rhodanus and Arar by that channel, and so passing by
the River Mosella into the Rhene, might at last be brought again to the Ocean:
that so the jouney might be more easy, and the western and northern shoares
between them might be made navigable, as Cornelius Tacitus writes Lib. 18. Of
which Ausonius: Te foutes vivique lacus, te caerula noscent
Flumina: te veteres pagorum gloria, luci:
Te Druna, te sparsis incerta Druentia ripis,
Alpinique colent Fluvij, dupitemque per Vrbem
Qui meat, and dextrae Rhodanus dat nomina ripa,
Te stagnis ego caruleis, magnumque sonoris
Amnibus, aquorea te commendabo Garumnae.
The Fountains, Lakes, and blew streams shall know thee,
And woods which of Villages the glory be.
Thee, Druna, thee Druentia that does glide
With winding course between his bancks so wide
And all the Rivers on the Alpine hill
Shall thee adore and reverence thee still.
And Rhodanus that does through the City flow,
Naming the right hand banck as it does go,
With the blew Lakes, and streams that greatest are,
And Sea-like Garumne I will thee compare.


Saravus rising not far from the Salmensians, is the greatest of all those
Rivers which run into Mosella, it is navigable, and famous for the receipt of
other Rivers, and after it has viewed the Cities and Towns, which are
commonly called Sar-Burg, Fenestrange, Sar-Vberden, Sar-Abben, Guemund,
Sar-Pruck, Walderfing, Sar-Brug, and others, at length it meets with Mosella
near the walls of Augusta of the Treverians, not far from Kontherbruck,
Ausonius mentions it in praising Mosella. It retains that name still. For
the Inhabitants call it Sar. And the ancients did call it Sarta, as appears
by an inscription which was brought to Trevers from a Town seated by that
River, which is now called Sarpruck, that is Sarrae Pons, or Sarra Brigde.

CAES TO. EXER. IMP. P. P.
S.C. Au. TREVE. INGR.
ESSUM. H. CASTRA. SARRAE
FLU. PRO. MIL. CUSTODIA
BIENN. POTITUS. EST.
V^loia is a River that has pearls in it, which near the Town Charmeni
runs into Mosella. Mortana near a Town of the same name mingleth it self
with the River Murta. Murta or Meurta having received many Rivers into it,
comes to Mosella in a plain place among the Meadows, and accompanies him
for a long way together, keeping an equal course with him, having but a little
THE DVKEDOME OF LOTHORINGIA.
Lotharingia Meridiona.
map of the Duchy of Lorraine ground between their channells, until at length
a little above the Castle Candejus, which on the right hand is seated on a
Rock, by a Town of the same name, it makes a sharp angle with the Channel of
Mosella, and mingleth his waters there with. The River Sella also joyneth it
self with it, near to the City Mediomatricum, which rises out of the Lake
Linder, which is rich in Salt, and fishing And the two Nigidas meeting together
at the Town Northenium, does discharge it self into Saravus, 2. Miles below
Bosnois-Villa, an Abbey so called. There is in the Vale of Deodatum a Fountain,
which has a sovereign quality given it by nature to heal many diseases.
There are also saltpits, in which there is very fine Salt, being sweet in
taste, and whiter then Scythian Snow, out of which saltpits the Duke of
Lotaringia receaveth yearly an 100000. Francks. This Province is environd with
very high Mountains, The Mountains.
which do far excel the Pyreraean Mountains for their abundance of all
sorts of Metals, but especially Silver Mines, which yield so much Silver, that
he receives a great revenneue out of it. Also the Mountain Vogesus in the
Valley Liberia does yield pure silver, but not so great a quantity. Moreover
Lotaringia has many thick woods, The Woods.
some of which we will set down according as they are called in French, as
Warned-Walt, de Be^noit, le bois de Mortaigne, Boseyne, Bois de Mordon, le
Ban-bois, le Bois de la Voyge, de Heyde, and others. Concerning the public
works, there is at the Town S. Nicolas 2. Miles distant from Nancey, near
the River Murta, The (...).
a great Church not very ancient, but curiously built, and very light. The
Pillars which bear up the roof of it are very great, and yet their height
make them appear to be so slender, as if they were unfit to sustain so great
a work. It has two Towers, on one of which Charles Cardinal of Lotaringia,
Bishop of Metz's, and Prior of this Church, has set on the top thereof an
Emblematicall divise, which is a Spire of a Steeple wrapped about with Ivy, with
this Motto or Inscription, Te stante virebo: Thee standing, I shall flourish.
Near the Town W^sserbillich where the River Suras mingleth his waters with
M^sella, there is another Town commonly called Igel, where on a high place
stands that venerable Monumet of Antiquity. which is more famous than any
beyond the Alps, and which the Ital^ans themselves may admire: it is a pile of
stone, which is built on (...) Bais^s or foundation of 22. foot over, and so
rises by deg^^^s until it be about 74. foot high, being engraven round
about with diverse Images, on the top thereof there is a piece of an Eagle,
sitting on a Globe, with his wing spread abroad, and it seems that there was
a Veil before his breast. There is at Nancy S. Georges Church, in which there
is the Monument of Charles the Bold, Duke of Bargundie, being slain in a
battle by the Helvetians and Lotaringians on the Nones of January, Anno 1477.
whose ashes and bones, ^ois^tus, the Crier of the order of the golden Fleece,
by the command of the Emperor Charles the fifth, his Nephews son, did
solemnly carry from thence to Luceburg 1550: and afterward by the command of
Mary Queen of Hungari, they were carried to Bruges. There are also in the same
Georges Church, the Tombs of diverse Dukes of Lotaringia, which have no
inscriptions: as also in other Churches. The most of the late Dukes do lie in
S. Francises Church. There is the stately Monument of Renatus, who obtained a
Victory against Charles Duke of Burgundy. There do lie also in the same
place Duke Antony, and his son Francis, and Claudea Valesia, wife to Duke
Catolus, and Daughter to Henry the second King of France. There is an Armory in
Na^cy, furnished with all kind of warlike Engines. There is also a Church in
the City of Metzs consecrated to S. Stephen, and others, concerning which
Dinaeus says. The Church is named from S. Stephen, the Patron of the City,
being a most fair and renowned work, as any which we saw in all our journey,
and which is a rariety, it was compleately finished in all parts It is said
that there was in it a wooden Crucifixe, covered all over with golden plates,
we saw a red colored Cesterne of Porphyry of a great capacity, being above
10. foot long, in which they keep their holy water. There are also many other
sumptuous Temples in this City, and there were many in the Suburbs thereof, as
the S. Anulphis Church, which is famous in regard that the Emperor Ludovick
Pius, and his son Charles, and some of King Pipins daughters were buried
here. But the wars have wasted these things, so that now there is no part of
Suburbs remaining, so that beyond the Walls there is nothing but field-ground.
Not far from Metz, near the Town Iovy, there are some tokens in the River
Mosella of an ancient Aquaeduct or Watercourse. Concerning which Dinaeus thus
in his Itinerarie. In this journey there is a Town commonly called Iovy,
between the foot of the Mountains and Mosella, where it seems that there
was an Aquaeduct or conveyance of water all the way between both the
Mountains, as appears by the ruins yet remaining. There are yet many of the
arches, which are of white stone cut like unto brikes: and there are some
arches of the same work on the other bank. The Inhabitants do affirm that
there is in this place a Fountain ignorantly thinking that these Arches did
serve for the Bridge, and they said that there were other lesser arches on the
top of this Mountain, which did run out toward the City Metz, which is a
Mile off. It is about 60. foot high, near the bank, whence we may conjecture
what a great work it was, and how high the Arches were, which stood in the
Channel of the River, of which there is nothing now remaining. The Inhabitants
do report that the upper part of the Arches is plain being daubed over with
red colored Mortar, and that in the middle of it not many years since there
was a little house, open on both sides, which we suppose was that part of the
house, which should have covered the Conduit Pipe. Henry the second, King of
France (as we said before) did subject the City of Medrio maticum to him,
which was sometime an Imperial City. A Magistrate sent from the King sits
as President in the Senate of the City. The Tribunal in the City of
Mediomatricum has three Bishops belonging to it, who are under the
Metropolitian of Trevers, as the Bishop of Metz, of Tullum, of Verdunum, so
called from their several Seats.

THE DVKEDOME OF BVRGVNDIE^
The Country whence so called.
LET so much according to our Method suffice concerning Lotharingia. The
Dukedom of Burgundy follows or lower Burgundy. The name of Burgundy
comes from the Burgundians, who being a people of Germany, descended of the
Vandalls, and so called from the word Burgis, that is from the Towns of
Garrison, being disturbed by the Almaines (who violently seated themselves in
their Country which is now called the Palatinate) under the conduct of
Theodisius the son of Arcadius the younger, they drove out the Sequeans and
Aedians, and possessed themselves of this part of ancient France, The Dukedom of
Burgundy
with the Nuithons, whom Tacitus mentions. Peter Sancto-Iulianus deriveth the
Etymology of Burgundy from a certain place commonly called Burg-ogne. in the
Country of Langrenia. It was heretofore a Kingdom about the year 1034. and
afterward it was divided into a Dukedom and County: the former toward the
East called the lower and royal Burgundy, the latter toward the East called
the higher and Imperial Burgundy. We will entreat of the Dukedom in this
Description, and of the County in the next. The Dukedom is encompas'd on the
East side, The Situation
with the Counties of Sabaudia and Burgundy, having the River Rhodanus flowing
between them: on the South is the Territory of Lions; on the West the fair
fields of the Nevernians and Borbonians, on the North lies Campania. It is a
Champion Country, and inferior unto none for fertility and fruitfullnesse,
The Fertility.
for here is plenteous stoare of Wine and Corn, so that Bacchus and Ceres
seem to contend, who should exceed the other in bestowing their gifts most
liberally upon this Country. Richard Earl of Augustodunum a stout man, The
Ancient government.
and well experienced in warlike matters, was created Duke of all Burgundy
beyond Araris, by Odon King of France, who was afterward Duke of Burgundy 32.
years. He left Burgundy to his Son Rudolphus, who was afterward chosen King
of France, and Hugo Niger his Brother succeeded him in his Dukedom. After him
succeeded Odo his Brother, or his Son, (for I find Authors of both opinions.
After whom followed Henry his Brother, who dying without Issue. Robert King of
France, got the Dukedom of Burgundy, Henry having left it him (as they say) by
his last Will and Testament. After him succeeded his Son Robert, and after
Robert, Hugo his Nephew. After him followed Otho; and after Otho, Hugo the
third And after Hugo the ^^ Odo the Son. After whom there followed in order
Odo the thi^^ Hugo the fourth, Robert the third, Hugo the fifth, Eudo, and
Philip who THE DVKEDOM OF BVRGVNDIE.
BURGUNDIAE Duca.
map of the Duchy of Burgundy (Bourgogne) dying without Issue John King of
France followed after him, after whom succeeded Philip his Son surnamed the
Bold to whom his Father gave the Dukedom of Burgundy. John surnamed the Stout
succeeded his Father Philip, and after him Philip the Good or Gentle, his
Son. And after succeeded Charles who in regard of his service in diverse
Wars, was surnamed The Warrior. After whose decease Ludovick the 11.
possessed all this Country. The Metropolis or chief City of the Dukedom is
Divienum which Gregory Turorensis calls Divionum, The Citles.
and the French Dijon. Divionis is thought to be the Builder there, but we
rather suppose that Aurelianus the Emperor was the re-edifier thereof, and the
enlarger of the Precincts. Some think it was so called ab Divis, or from the
Gods who were much reverenced there. It is the fairest City in Burgundy. It is
situate on a most pleasant Plain, and the two Rivers Suzione and Os^ara
(called in French Suson and l'Ou he) do wash the walls on either side: the
former (...) usually overflow the City making dangerous exundations; the la^ is
very full of fish, and flows in a quieter Channel, and yield* many
commodities. The walls are built as high as is convenient to defense: being
lately fortified with Towers and Bulwarks. There is a Seat of Justice there,
and a Parliament: out of who^e bosom, the Laws of the Country are as it were
fetched. He that ^s chose^ to be Mayor of this Town. is compeld though
against his will to take a burden on him rather than an honor, and to ^ake his
oath in the Temple of the blessed Virgin, which the Kings Proctor repeateth
unto him, namely that he will be faithful unto the King, and that he will
defend the Laws, Liberties, and Privileges of the City, against the King
himself, and all others, as often as occasion shall require. On the Mountains
near the City there do grow excellent Vines. Moreover the Episcopal Cities
are Augustodunum and Cabillinum. both venerable for antiquity. The former was
called Augustodunum, from Augustus, (whether Octavianus or some other it is not
greatly to be stood upon: for those that derive it from Auge the wife of Ap^ll^
do but relate Fables) who re-edified it when it was ruinated by the wars
which Caesar maintained against France. It is now called ^ustu^. It was
heretofore a very fair City, but now it is not so beautif^^. Here are many
ruins of Theaters, Aqueducts, Pillars, and Pyrani^^^ to be seen: and there
are daily old Coins, and other ancient 2Monuments dug up, it has also now
many fair Churches and p^^ like Structures in it. It is seated at the foot of
those Mountains which are commonly called les Monts de Civis, near the River
Arro^sius. So much concerning Augustodunum,: there follows Caball^num, or
Caballtonum, Aeduorum: commonly called Challon sur Saone. It is not known who
built it. This City is situate on the right hand bank of Araris: the Fields
are fruitful, and the air wholesome. It is very commodious for transporting
Merchandise down the River Araris, whence Caesar chose this place to make
provisionin, and to convey it from hence to his Army which lay in diverse parts.
This sometime was the royal Seat of Guntchrannus. Afterward Lotartus the
Son of Ludovicus Pius did burn it all down, so that there remained no
appearance of a City. But in regard of the convenience of the place it was
afterward reedified, and at this time it is a rich Town of trading. So much
concerning the Metropolis, and the Episcopal Cities: there follows now some
Towns of lesse^ noate which are in this Dukedom. In the midde way between
C^hallimon and Ma^s^^n. there is a Town commonly called To^nu^; S^a^tia^us and
Antoninus call it Tinurtium. It is situate in a fertile soil, being every
where encompas'd with the River Ara^^s. The Hills in the Country of
Suburbicarta do bring forth excellent Wine. And in the midway between the
City ^atisc^n, and Carbillo^, is the Town Cursellum, which belongs to the
King as (...) thinks, which Ammianus calls Se^usium. Being situate at the
foot of the Mountain Iura, and though it be now very ruinous, yet it is
venerable for antiquity. On the East it has high Mountains, and clear
Rivers, whose waters are very sweet to drink, from whence a wholesome
Fountain, springing out of the high sandy Rock is conveyed into the Town by
wooden Pipes. On the West a Plain spreads sorth it self. Three leagues
from the City ^abello^ Northward is Belna, commonly called Beaulne, near the
River which the Inhabitants call ^eu^-sotze. Some would have it to be that
which Caesar and Strabo call Bibract^^. Others are of another opinion. This
Town is situated in a Fennish place, which as Paradine writes can easily make
a Lake about the City, for a mile round about, to keep off the enemies. All
the City is encompassed with strong walls, and has Bulwarks, which can resist
the force of Ordnance. The Country of Belnia is rich, and of a good soil. It
has the best Vines in all the world, which make the best Wine. In the same
Country is Cistertium called so from the Cisternes, built at Duke Odoes charge
in a great Wood, under the Priory whereof there are above a thousand and eighty
Frieries, and as many Nunneries, of the same Order, which from hence is called
the Cistertian Order. Semurium, commonly called in French Semur, is situate in
the middle of the Territory, which is commonly called Auxo^s, a fair Town. In
the midway between Divion and Beln^^ is Nuithen^um, commonly called Nuys.
This Town was always famous for making of good Swords. That Town which is
now called Aval^n, Antoninus calls Aballon, where he calls it also the 16.
Legi^n. That which in French is called Sanl^^n, Antoninus calls Sid^lu^um,
who places there the 18. Legion. That which is called Flavigni, half a League
Eastward from Semurin, it is thought was formerly called Fl^via ^^u^rum. There
are also other Towns of Burgundy, which for brevity sake I omit to describe:
as are Ausone, having a Castle which is the Eastern Key of the Dukedom, the
River Araris gliding by the walls thereof, also the Towns Noiers, Ravieres,
(...), Chastillon, S. ^eigne, Seloigne, Crev^ut, Viteau, Verdun, Ar^^^ (...)
which Antoninus calls ^ronoderun. There are three o^ Episcopal Cities
accounted to be in the Dukedom of Burgundy (...) ^usser^e and M^s^on. The
first whereof is a Dukedom, (...) (hereof called Du^he de Nive^nois) is very
large, and is (...) Navigable Rivers, ^^auna, Elavere, L^geris. There are 12.
walled Towns therein, the Metropolis where of is Niversium, having
Jurisdiction over thirty Castelships as they call them. That which Caesar calls
Noviodunum, is a Town strongly walled, and well fortified with Towns and
deep Ditches. Among the chief Towns of the Dukedom of Nevers are Dezisa,
which Antoninus calls Decisa and Decetia: also Clamecyum, Dousyum, Milinium,
Angilbertsum, Corbignium, St. Leonards Church, Luyzium, Premecyum, and others.
Anserre follows: which Antoninus calls Antissiodorum, and places here the 22.
Legion. Ammianus calls it Antosiodorum, or l'Evesche d'Auxerre. The Territory
of this City, commonly called le Pays d'Auxerrois, is famous for wine, called
after the name thereof. The City which is now called Mascon, Caesar calls
Matiscona: and the Itinerarie Tables Matisco, and the Register Books of the
Province of France, and Antoninus do call it Matisconense Castrum, who places
there the 10. Legion, and in an ancient Roll it is called Mastico, as Philip
Bug^onius notes, who writ a History of this City. Paul Diaconus calls it
Machaon Villa. Gregory Turonensis, and others do call it Matissana, being like
to Caballinum, both for situation, manners, and Arts. It lies by the River
Araris, which has a fair Bridge over it, lying strait forward and Eastward,
and the other side are like unto a Bow. In Burgundy and the Counties thereof
are these Counties, Dijon, Austun, Tonnerre, Chalon sur Saone, Masco^* S.
Martin, Nevers, Langres, Ausserre, S. Iangou, Charolois, Cha^gut, or Chagni;
Monliet or Montit, Auxone Rogeniont, Mussy, Brestemont, Sees, M^m^^s, Seregnon,
Gilly, Valenion, Tirecourt, Chevigni, Aine-ville, Espirey, or (...) Tarvant,
Brasey or Brass, Rochefort, A^ncourt, or Agincourt, Vitean. To which also are
added Arley, Rigny, Chiligny, Mommartiu, Laugey, Beauchamp C^u^hes. There are
the Bishoprics of Augustodunum, or Heduensis of Austum, of Mascon, of Chalon,
and of Langres, which are subject to the Archbishop of Lions. This Dukedom
has these Rivers Suzi^n, Oscarus, Araris, Icauna, Ligeris, Elaveres, and
others.

THE COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
THE County of Burgundy follows, or Burgundy the higher, in French it is
called Franche Gonte, that is the free County, for the Province is governed by
the Earl thereof, and is free as they say from all tributes and exactions. It
belongs to the Emperor, The Situation
and is under the protection of the Burnensian Heluetians. On the North
Lotaringia and high Germany do confine upon it, on the West the Dukedom of
Burgundi, on the East the Helvetians, on the South the Allobrogians and
Segusians. The length is 90. Miles, the breadth 60. The Fertility.
It is a very fruitful Country, replenished with all things necessary for
man's life, and the soil is fit for tillage, for planting of Trees, and
Vineyards, and for feeding of Cattle. There is every where great store of
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, Beans, and other Pulse. And no less abundance of
Trees. The Contrie especially the middle part has hills which do bring forth
and yield most excellent Wines. The Arbosians, and the Vadamians have
Winevessells so great that they seem to be as big as a house. Near the
Palace of the ancient Kings of Burgundy, which the Inhabitants call now
Chambrette au Roy, they dig out of the earth a kind of plaster, like Lime.
The variety of living Creatures
There is also in the Country of Dolania Marble dug forth, which the
Greeks did call Alablaster, of which they made Tombs and Monuments for great
men: and another black kind of Marble enameld with purple spots. There are also
diverse kinds of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and Cattle. All do
approve of the traveling Horses of G^a^nell, and the fierce Dogs that are in
this Country. Many things are delivered concerning the ancient Earls of
Burgundy. The ancient Government
Eudo was the first Earl and Palatine of Burgundy, after whom succeeded his
Nephew Philip; who dying without issue, John King of France gave the Dukedom
of Burgundy to his son Philip, who was surnamed the bold, but Margaret his
Nephew succeeding after Philip, got the Dukedom of Burgundy, after whom
succeeded Ludovick Malanus her Son, and after him Margaret Malwa her Daughter,
whom Philip Duke of Burgundy surnamed the bold married. After him there
succeeded in order John his son surnamed the stout, Philip Bonus, or the
good, Charles the Warrior, and Mary married to Maximilian of Austria, Philip
of Austria the Emperor Charles the 5. etc. Philip King of Spain. This County
is divided into 3. Diaeceses or Praefectureships, which are commonly called
Bayliwicks: the higher and the lower, and Dal^n^. The first is ^^^ulium, the
second Polichum, the third Dola. But D^^a has a strong Cas^ell, and is the
Metropolis or chief City of the whole County, and the fairest of all the
other Cities, it is situated by the River Dubis, which devideth it self here
into two arms. Some suppose it to be that which Ptolemie calls Ded^^tion Lib.
11. Cap. 9. a City of the Sequanes, very fair and beautiful. Here is a neat
spacious Market place, almost four square, but that it is a little longer than
broad. On the West side is the Court and the Prison. The chief Church which is
very fair and admirably carved, is consecrated to the Virgin Mary. There are
also many other Cities as Vesontio commonly called Besancon, an Imperial
City, called heretofore Chrysopolis: it is seated in a commodious and fertile
Territory. The River Alduasdabis does run through most part of it, and does
encircle most of it, but the River does not wash the other part, near the Gate
in the way to Dola. There is also Nozerethum, or Noseroy, which was formerly
called Nuccillum from the Nut trees growing there, but Ludovick Cabillonensis
returning from the wars of Jerusalem, did wall it about and called it
Nazarethum. This Earl has a Castle which is called the leaden Castle, because
it is covered with lead. There is also Sali^a, a fair City, and famous
through the whole world, denominated and so called from the salt Fountains,
and the salt which is usually made there, which being very white is transported
into other Countries, and the County has a great revenneue out of it. We omit
for brevitie sake the description of other Countries: The Lakes.
Burgundy has great and wonderful Lakes: One of the chiefest whereof is that
which is called the Wherlepoole: which is a wonderful work of nature. For
there is mud above the water which is so hardened, that it seems firm land:
yet Horses and Carts cannot pass over it, but only footmen. In raynie
cloudy weather it does not rise, except it be against fair Weather, and then
it swells up presently, and waters the Columban Plain. Moreover between
Nozer^thum and Ripar^a there is another Lake in Bonualli, which is full of
Pikes, Pearches, and other fish, which every 7. year for some weeks hides it
self, and after rises up again, which is very miraculous, and most
incredible. The Southern part of this County has many Lakes. There is the
Lake called in French Malete^^, both the greater and the lesser, also Narlay of
an incredible depth: also V^rn^^, the two Chamblici, Frogeay, Ro^chault, and
others. Many Rivers do divide it, ^^e Rivers.
as Dubis, Longnonius, Danus, Lpuus: all Dub^^ does appertain to this County,
Ptolomie calls it Doubis, and Caesar Al^uab^^, if ^^l^ius Vrsinus conjecture
rightly: in other Books it is corruptly read Alduasdubis and Alduasdolis,
commonly Doux. It rises out of the Mountain Iura, a little above the pleasant
Villago Mota. Moreover Dubis taking his course from the South Northward,
glideth by the Lake Pontium, and so with many windings runs by Pontarlum,
M^^tua, and Vafrum, and so to the Church of S. Hyppolitus, and from thence
bending Westward, it goes to the Town Chastelot, and so flowing by Vesuntio,
and making an Island near Dola, after many winding turnings and having received
many Rivers, it mingleth his waters with Aratis near Virdurum. Longronius also
wholly belongs to the higher Burgundy, commonly called Lougnon. Davum
springs out of the high Monntaine, which hangs over a great and famous THE
COVNTIE OF BVRGVNDIE.
BURGUNDIA COMITATUS
map of the County of Burgundy (Bourgogne) Town called Syrodu^: there are also
Lupus or ^upa, commonly called Love, The ancient government.
Araru, and others. Concerning the Politic state of this free Country, when
the Provincial assemblies are held, the three states do meet, being summoned
in the Earls name by the Prince of the Arausians, and the Lords of Noz^reth
and Arbe. The three States do consist of the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
Citizens. The Earls of the higher Diaecese are the Earl of M^nt^ellia^t, the
Earl of Roche and Varax, of Montrivel, or Thalamer and Vaulgrenans, of Vergey,
of Rey, Liston^is. The Abbates are of Croissant, of Charity, of Bitaine, of
Corneul, of Tulley, of Clarfont, of Lux^ul, of Bellevoulx, of Grace-Dieu, of
Charleu, of three Kings, or Trium Regum. The Priors are of Vau^luse, of
Lantenans, of Cusance, of Marteret, of Iussey, of Portsus Sa^sne, of M^ntreul
near Sagona* of S. Marcelli. The Canonici are of Calem st^er, and others of
other places. The Cities are Gray, Vesoul, Montho^son, ^ussey, Palma, Portsus,
Saone, Cromary Mont-Iustin, Faul^ogney. The Lords are: of M^mmorot, and S.
Loup. of S. Martin, of Taulens, of Villeneufoe, of Rupi, of Montgevelle
Chastillon and Belv^we, of Conflandey, of Monb^llon, of Velleson, of Dicey, of
Vgny and Chemyly, of Oizelet: of Cic^n, of Tra^ves, of Rainconnieres, of
Costeb^une, of Sombern^m, of Vallefaut, of Bermont, of Av^lley, of Mugnay, of
Vereur, of Toura^ze, of Cite^, of Provanchieres, of Grand-mont, of Velle
Chev^elous, of Vosey, of Dampie^re, of Frotey, of Breutal, of Matey, of
Noironde, of Tromarey, of Mill^^^^ of Mailler^n^ourt, of Myon, of Benaenge, of
Vellerot le boz, of Clear, of Betoncourt, of Mortaillotte, of Amondans, of
Fraisne, of Chavirey, of Mon^^ of Mons S. Legier, of Cuvry, of Montereul, of
Sorans and Lambry: and many others. The Earls of lower Burgundy, are of
Ruffey, of S. A^bin: and the Barron of Chevreaulx: The Abbots are of S.
Eug^ndi, of ^^aume, of Calerne, of M^nt S. Marie, of Mont-Benoist, of Bayllen,
of Rau^res: the Priors are, of Mainnaul, of Vaucluse, of Bonlieu, of Mente, of
L^slesaulnier, of Arbois, of Mote, of Syredus, of Vallis supra Polichinum, of
Mortan. The Canons are, of S. Mauritius, of S. Anatolius, of S. Mi^^el all in
Salina: also of Arbosium, of Polichnium, of Nozeret, and of other Cities. The
Cities are Salina, Arbois, Poligny, Pontarlien, Noze^^ Castrum Caroli,
Monmoro^t, Orgelot. The Lords are of Conlongni^ and Andelest, of Courla^u and
le Pin, of S. Amor, of Argento, of Laub^^^^ of Poupet, of S. Sorlin, of Darna
and Tramelay, of Borsia, of Cressia, of P^tigny, of Chambery, of Montena, of
Vecles, of Rosait, of Marigna, of B^a^fort, of Nasey, of Aigle, of Courboson,
of Vertamboz, of Largilla, of Mau^^^ of Estoille, of Chasnet, of Aresche, of
Coges, of Bar and Iousseaul, of Aug^ of Muy^e, of Charrin, of Charlin, of
Chaumes, of Bretterieres, of Fomen^ of Cogna, of Chaulx, of Montnet, of Vadans
Villette, of Arbois, of Aig^^^erre, of Chastelvillaine. of S. Julian, of
Descrilles, of Verges, of Champ^g^ of Beaulchemin, of Villeneusve les Orgellet,
of Chastres, of Ioulx. of Vin^^^ of Vismeaulx, and many others. In the Diecesse
of Dola there are the Lords of Givrey, of Longepierre and Rahon, and of
Clervaulx. The V^^bo^s of Billon, of S. Vin^ius of S. Paulus Bisantius, of
Acey. The Prior^ are of Loye, of Leval, of D^mparis, of Iouhe, of Monterot, of
Mote, of (...) of M^stier in Se^u^^a. The Cannons are of Dola, of Bisantinum,
and ^^thers in other places. The Cities are Dola, Quirgeium, (...) Losa,
Ro^^eford, Vercelle. The Lords are of Vaul^^ey: of Rainnes, of (...) of
M^n^fori, of Mont-Ri^hard, of Fertaus, of Maillet, of Bermont, of ^^ron, of
Ver^hamps, of D^ssans, of P^rt, of Chasteau, of Roillault, of Abbaus, and
Marchault, of Reculet, of Chartraus, of Mont-gros-pain, of Mutigney, of
Chassey, of Paressey, of Choisey, of S. Iley, of Faye, of Parrel, of Chemin, of
^alus, of ^hampdivers and Rastonnie^es, of Rainche-court, of Paintre, of
Montrambart, of Salans, of Goussans, of Chavirey, of Ancier, and others. There
is great store of Nobility (as we see) in this Country. And there are four
families which are either descended from the Kings and Princes of Burgundy, or
are allied to them by affinity, namely the Noble Lord of Vienna: of Vergy, who
is called the stout; of Chalon who is called the rich, and Prince of the
Arausians, and of Neuf Chastel, who has a great estate of Lands. But all
appeals are brought out of the three Dieceses, or Bayliwicks, to Dola, to the
high Parliament of this County. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke, the
Archbishop of Bisuntine, under whom are three Bishops, the Bishops of Basil in
Germany, of Lausanum in Helvetia, and of Bellicensis in Sabaudia, is the
chief for Ecclesiastical government, and the Prince of the Empire. The
Archbishop of Bisuntium, and the City Besoncon, which is a free imperial
City, and heretofore the greatest Town of the Province of the Sequans, and
the Presidents seat, are parts of the Empire of the fifth circle. The thenth
Circle of the Empire is the Burgundian, because it consists of the house of
Burgundy, and does contain the chief Princes of the Low Countries, which
are the Duke of Burgundy, H. Bergen and Waelhem, Count Egmond and Iselstein,
Count Nassau in Breda, and Count Bergen.

THE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.
MAny do make great inquisition concerning the name of Sabaudia. Whence so
called.
Some do derive it a Sabatijs Vadis, or the Sabatian Fords. Pliny calls it
Sabatium Vadum, a City of Liguria, which Pomponius Mela calls Sabbatia,
Ptolemy Sabbata, and Strabo Zabbatoon Ouada. Others call it Sabaudia, as it
were Sabbat^rum Auwe, that is the Field, or Meddow of the Sabbatians, whom
Volaterranus calls Sabbaudians. Some call it Saulvote, as it were a way
through Flints, Briars, and rugged places. Some call it Saulve-Voie, that is,
the Safe way, which was once very dangerous and full of Thieves as fabulous
Writers do report. Sabaudia is often named in the Register Book among the
Provinces of Gallia Narbonensis. And former Writers do mention it, sometimes
calling it Sabaudia, The ancient
and sometimes Sapaudia. On the North and West it is bounded with the County of
Br^ssanium (which the Duke of Sabaudia passed over to the King of France in
Exchange, for the Marquiship of Salutium) and with Helvetia, and the Lake
Lemane, which lies between them: on the East with Valesia and Piemont, and
the Mountains which run between them: and on the South is the Delphinate.
In the Valleys and Champion places, the soil is pleasant and fruitful,
especially toward the Nouth, by the Lake Leman, where it brings forth
excellent Wine, which is called Ripalium, from the bank of the Lake. There are
excellent Pastures for feeding all sorts of Cattle, especially near S.
Bernards Mount. All this tract of ground which contains Sabaudia, the
Delphinate, and other confining Provinces, were heretofore a Kingdom, as it
appear in Livie, lib. 21. where we read that two Brothers who contended for
the Kingdom of the Allobrogum did choose Hanniball to Arbitrate between them.
That part of the Kingdom of which we entreat, namely, Sabaudia, had afterward
diverse Lords and Princes, it is now governed by Dukes: whose bounds were
shorter formerly. For then they were only called Earls of Maurien^ia: the
first whereof was Bertholdus, who being enforced to change his own Country,
went into that part of Burgundy, which the Allobrogians call the County of
Maurienna: which County he obtained for some service done to the Empire, which
his Son Humbert the first, having more fully received of the Emperor Henry
the third did pass over to his Son Amades the first and Humbert the second,
his Nephew, who by the successive right of Adetheida, the Wife of Humbert the
first, were also Marquesses of Segusium, and had Tarantasia joined to their
Territories. The Son THE DVKEDOME OF SABAVDIA.
SABAUDIA DUCATUS LA SAVOIE
map of Savoie (France) of Humbert the second, was Amades the second, the first
Earl of Sabaudia, and Marquess of the Taurinians and Segusians. After him
there followed in a right line Humbert the third, Thomas, who got by war the
Principality of Piemont, also Amedes the third, who got into his own
possession the Country of Chablasium and Vallis Augustae Petra, having no Heir
Males to inherit them, and also Boniface, who dying without issue, his Unckles
succeeded after him, Peter, who much enlarged his Principality, having taken
all the Towns near to the Lake Leman, and Philip, formerly Archbishop of
Lions, who for want of issue did pass over the better part of his Inheritance
to Amedes the fifth, his Brother Thomases Son, who was surnamed the Great.
After him succeeded his Sons Edward who had no Heir Male, and Amedes the
fifth. After whom succeeded Amedes the 6. who founded the Order of the Knights
of the Post: also Amedes the 7. and Amedes the 8, whom the Emperor iSgismund
did create the first Duke of Sabaudia, in the year 1416. whom after a
voluntary resignation of his Principalities unto his Son Ludovick, became a
Monk, and the Fathers of the Counsel of Basil, made him Pope after Eugenius
the 4. and called him Pope Felix the fifth. Nine years afterward he yielded up
that dignity to Nicolas the fifth, being content to be a Cardinal only. He dyed
in the year 1452. at Ripalis, near the Lake Leman. Moreover there were 8.
more Amadesses.

The Metropolis of Sabaudia is Chamberiacum, commonly called Chamberi, which
the Ancients did call Camerinum, as Paradine notes in his Sabaudia. Pinetus
thinks that the Ancients did call it Forum Voconij, which Pliny mentions,
lib. 3. cap. 4. and Antoninus in his Itinerarie. So that it cannot be that they
should count Forum Vocorium among those Towns, which are in the Province near
unto the Mediterranian Sea. Also Peutingers Itinerarie Table does place there
Forum Voconij, not far from the French shore, between Forum Iu^ij, now
called Fricul, and Mataron. Varerius vainly trifleth in his Chorographie of
Portugal, who makes Forum Voconij, to be Forum Vocontij, as if it were the
Metropolis of the Vocontians, when the chief City of that Country is Augusta
Dia Vocentiorum, now called Die. Caenalis also and Castilion do think that
Chamberry is Cinarum, which Cicero mentions in his Epistles. Moreover
Chamberry has a Castle, and the Dukes of Sabaudia have a House there, who have
established here a Seat of Justice for the whole Country, and a Parliament.
The parts of Sabaudia are the Counties following. I will add something
concerning the Lordships. Fossigni is near the Lake Leman. In it they say is
Ripalia, allusively Ripam Alos, or the Sea-banke, (for some of the Inhabitants
do call the Leman Lake the Sea, and truly it rages oftentimes like the Sea)
it is commonly called Ripaille. It is a pleasant place, and famous because
Amedes the 8. the first Duke of Sabaudia, did there live a Monk, having
formerly resigned up his Principalities, and was chosen and consecrated Pope by
the Fathers of the Counsel of Basil after Eugenius the fourth, the 9. before
the Kalends of September, in the year 1440. and was called Faelix the 5. he
lived a while, and built some small Aedifices, which I saw in the year 1585. He
dyed there in the year 1452. in the month of January, having three years
before for quiet sake passed over the Papal dignity to Nicolas, he being
content to be a Cardinal only. Elenor Daughter to the Lord of Fossignij
married Peter the sixth Earl of Sabaudia. And also Mary the Daughter of Amedes
the fourth, the 8. Earl of Sabaudia, of the Brabantine family, was married to
the Duke of this Country. Amedes the third got the Principality of Chablasius,
which is near to Fossigni Eastward, commonly called Chablois, and joined them
to his Dominions, seeing there were no lawful Heirs Male to inherit it. Some
do reckon the Towns of Tononium, Evianum, Guingaunum, and others, which I am
afraid to write, as having no warrant for it. Concerning the Lordship commonly
called Val d'Osta, we will speak in a more convenient place in the Description
of Italy, where we will entreat of Piemont.

The chief Mountains are the Alps, which now as it were a wall do separate
Italy from France, and Germany. Festus thinks that the Alps were so called
from their whiteness, and the most do affirm that the Alps are the highest
Mountains in Europe. And many names of the Alps are found in ancient
Monuments, which do show that there were many parts of the Alps, but we will
by the way touch only those parts, which for the most part do lie in and
about Sabaudia, as the Sabbatian Alps, from whence it is thought that Sabaudia
is denominated, which begin near to Samona, near a place called Vay, which
the ancients call Vada Sablatia, from whence they bend like a Bow toward
Monegne, which was heretofore called Portus Herculis Monaeci, and from thence
they do stretch out toward the River Var or Varo, which parts France from
Italy. There are also the Sea Alps, but these we pass over as we go toward
Province, as also the Penine Alps. The Cotrian Alps follow, which begin at a
place called Saulteron, where there are two ways, both which do incline
toward the Marquiship of Salutium. In these Alps there is the Mountain Agno,
and the Mountain Viso, which the ancients did call the Mountain Vesulus,
through which there is a hollow passage from France into Italy, after this
passage there are two ways, the one whereof leads toward Verguel, the other
toward Rauel, which are Fortresses to the Marquiship of Salutium. And between
this Mountain and the hollow-way three Fountains do spring up, and flow-into
one Channel do make the famous River of Po. In this Country is the Hill of
the Cross, and the Mountain Genebre or Genevre, there Mountains end near
Luze, where the River Doria separateth them from the Grecian Alps. The
Grecian Alps do follow, the name whereof is derived from Hercules the Son
of Amphytrio a Grecian, who travaild over these Mountains out of Italy into
France. In that part of these Mountains which is toward France the
Ceentronians were seated, who are now called Tarantasy, by whom the way to
Chamberry lies. There are also between these Mountains the Veragra, who
contain the lower Valesians, and the Countries Gauot and Focigny: and the way
of these Mountains is called, the Mountain of S. Bernard. There are many
others besides, which for brevity sake we omit. The nature and quality of these
Mountains is miraculous; for he that passes over them meets still with new
variety of ways, because now the way is wide, and by and by it grows strait,
now the Mountains seem to touch the air, and by and by do descend again,
there is a Plain, and here a Vale enclosed with high Hills: nevertheless the
Valleys in many places do bring forth good Corn, on the Mountains also
there is much Grass for Pasturing of Cattle: and in some places there is
Wine. There are also diverse Mines, and some kinds of living Creatures, which
are not found any where else, and many other rarities, which for brevity sake
we omit. Besides Rhodanus these Rivers do water Sabaudia, Araru* Isura, Doria,
Arva, Danius, and others. There are also the Lakes Leman, de Nicy, de Bourget,
etc.

HELVETIA* WITH THE NEIGHBOVRING CONFEDERATE COUNTRIES.
NEXT to Lions Mercator places that Country, which the Romans called
Helvetia. Now it is called, The Names. Whence derived
or the greatest part of it, Suicia or Suitia, from the Vitians a people of
Saxony, who being thrown out of their habitations for their often violating
of the faith, Charles the great seated them on the Alps, as in like manner he
convay'd some thousands of the Nordalbingians into Flanders and Brabont. Or
else it was so called from the Suecians, who in the reign of King Sigebert did
remove out of Suecia into Helvetia, being compelled to leave their former
Habitations, either by the inundations of waters, or by populousness of the
Inhabitants, or lastly it is so called from the Town Suitium: it i^ commonly
Switscherland. It is called the Land of Confederates, and in their own speech
Eydignoschaft, from the League and confederacy, which is between the
Helvetians. These Eutropius did sometime call Quadians. Moreover Helvetia is
situate between the Mountain Iura, the Lake Leman, Italy, and the Rhene, and
it has on the East the Country of ^irolum: on the South the Cottian Alps,
Lombardie, the Dukedom of Mediolanum, and Piemont: on the lowest Sabaudia and
Bu^gu^gie: on the North the River Rhene. Helvetia is 240. Miles long, as Caesar
says Lib. 1. de bello Gallico: and 80. Miles broad, which Caesar makes
somewhat larger. The Country has a wholesome air, The fertility*
and though it have many high rugged Mountains, yet it is so well husbanded by
the Inhabitants, that it is no where barren: but that it produces nor only
things necessary to sustain life, but also many delicacies. It brings forth
abundance of Corn, although in many places, unless the gleabe land be burnt,
it is in vain to sow it, but the labor and industry of the Husbandman does
help this inconvenience. It produces in many places exellent wine, which does
f^rre exceed Rhenish wine, both in state and quantity. Besides there are fat
Meddowes, in which many flocks and herds do graze, to the great commodity
of the Inhabitants. This Country also do^^ breed great store of wild Beasts,
as Bears, Hearts, Does, Goats, The variety of living creatures.
L^^^ards, ^oares, and others, so that the Inhabitants have great (...) of ^ame
to Hunt, there are also Foul which they take in great ab^^dance. Helvetia is a
free Anarchie, and subject to no Prince, since (...) that the Helvetians being
encited and stirred up by the un^^^ (...) and u^just government of the Rulers
there, did enter into (...) with the V^rian Nobility, and so shaked off the
yoke of (...) and ^ot their own liberty. The first that began this
confederacy were the Urians, the Silvanians, and the Suitensians, in their
own Towns. By whose example not long after, the other Cities being still
provoked by the great men* their neighbors did the like, and entering into
League with them, they grew as strong as their neighbor, and being
strengthened with auxilian forces they became a terror to their enemies. The
Country of Helvetia is divided into four parts, which by a German word they
call Gone, which signifies a Country or Village, and they are these Zuri^hgow,
Wiffispurgerg^w, Argow and Turgow, but the Commonwealth of Helvetia does
consist of thee parts. In the first part there are 13. Villages, which the
Italians call Cantones, and the Germans Ort. These Cantones have this
privilege above the other confederates, that they in public meetings do
deliberate and consult of all matters appertaining to the Commonwealth of
Helvetia, and do give their voices, and are sharers in all commodities or
losses belonging to the City, and do equally govern the Prefectureships
which they have gotten, and have an equal part in any public booty: namely
^igu^um joined it self with the 3. confederate Towns, Anno 1351. And Berna in
the year 1355. Lucerna was joined to the 3. first Towns by a perpetual
league in the year 13.2. Vria, Vren: Suitia, Switz: Vnder-Walden, did first
enter into confederacy among themselves Anno 1308. Tugium and Zug were added to
the 6. Towns, in the year 1362. Glarona also and ^ugtum entered into the same
league. Basiles, Anno 1301. entered it to confederacy with the 10. Towns. Also
Frubu gum and Salodu^um, by common consent were received into the number of the
Cantones, in the year 1481. and so the City of Helvetia did consist of 10.
Vi^ages or Contones. Schasshusen in the year 1600. was received into the
number of the Cantones or Villages. And Abbatiscella in the year 1502. The
Country belonging to this Town is divided unto 12. parts which they call
there Roden, 6. whereof are joined to the Canton, which are called the
innermost parts, and 6. are called the outward parts. And there are 12 Senators
chosen out of every one of these several parts, who are to consult of all
affairs of the Country, and they are in all 144. Senators. The second part of
the confederates, are Abbas and the Town S. Galli, which was joined in league
with the 4. Towns of the Helvetians in the year 1455. And afterward Anno
1455. they were joined in pepetuall league with the 6. Towns, Tigurum, Ber^a,
Lucerna, Suitia, Tugio, and Glorona. The People Granbondter of the Rhetorians
made a perpetual league with the 7. old Towns, in the year 1497. And the
Curiensians, whose society was called the house of God, did join in
confederacy with them Anno 1418. The 3. Society, which was called the Society
of the 10. Judgments, did not join themselves with the Helvetians, but
because it is confederate with the 11. former Cantons, therefore it continues
in amity and faithful society with the Helvetians. Sedunum and Valetia did
enter into perpetual league with the Bernatians, Anno 1475. And afterward when
there arose a controversy concerning Religion, Hadrian Bishop of Sedunum and
70. Towns of the Valesians entered into confederacy Anno 1533. at Friburg, with
HELVETIA^
HELVETIA
map of Helvetia (Switzerland) these 7. Towns of Friburg, Vria, Lucerna,
Suitia, V^der^aldia, ^ugium Friburgum, Saladorum, all adhering to the Church of
Rome. Rotweil first entered into confederacy with the Helvetians Anno 1463.
for 15. years, which being many times renewed, at last in the year 1519. it
was perpetually established between them. Mulhusen was joined in confederacy
with the Helvetians Anno 1468. Bienna Biel joined it self in confederacy with
the Bernatians, in the years, 1303. 1306. 1352. and 1367. Geneva did bargain
for the right of a City, with the Bernatians Anno 1536. but yet it was joined
to the Common City of the Cantons. The 3. are the Prefectureships gotten by
force of arms or voluntary yielding. Turgea or Turgow was subjected to the
Helvetians in the year 1460. which is governed by 7. ancient Towns. Aquensis
Baden was subdued in the year 1415. and is governed by 8. of the chief
Towns. Rhegusti which was gotten Anno 1491. was governed by 20. of the chief
Towns. Saru^ctum or Sarunga^s Anno 1483. was sold by George Earl or Werenberg
to the 7. chief Towns, by which it is also governed. The free Provinces taken
Anno 1415. are governed by these 5. ancient Cantons or Towns, Lugan^m,
Lucarnum, Mendresium, and Vallis Madia, these 4. Prefectureships were given by
Maxamilian Sforza, Duke of Mediolanum to the Helvetians Anno 1513. and are
governed by all the Cantones except Abbatisella, Biltionum and Bellizona: the
government hereof was afterward granted unto 3. chief Cantons, Anno 1513.
Valesia which is contained also in this Chart, does contain 3. people* and 3.
confederacies. The two former are the Viberians and Sedunians, who are called
by one general name, the free higher Valesians, and they are divided into 10.
tythings which they call Decimas or Desenas, the Veragrians who are called the
lower Valesians are governed by the higher, yet the chief of them all is the
Bishop of Sedunum, who has the chief authority both in Ecclesiastical and
civil matters, and is called the Earl or Prefect of Valesia. Here is the
County of Werdenberg and the Barrony af Saxony. This Province has many great
Lakes: the chief whereof are the Lakes of Luc^rnerze: of Zuricherzee: of
Walenzee: of Nuwenburgerzee: and the greatest of al is the Lake of Bodenzee,
which Solinus and Pliny call Brigantium, Ammianus Marcellinus calls it
Brigantium, from Brigcontium a little ancient Town. The length thereof is 24.
Miles, and the breadth at least 12. Miles. We have here set down Ammianus his
words, because they contain a lively description of this Lake, and of the
Cataracts of Rhene. The River Rhene runs with a violent course through the
windings of the high Mountains, which nere the Alepontius does fall down like
the Cataracts of Nilus, the torrent at his first arising does rush down, and
keep his course with the supply only of his own proper waters, but now being
strengthened with the melted snow, it wears his banks wider, it runs into
the round great Lake, which the Inhabitants of Rhene do call Brigantium, it is
inaccessible by reason of the thick Woods, except where the Almaine has made
it Habitable, contrary to the nature of the place, and the intemperatenesse of
the Climate. So that the River breaking into this Lake with a foaming entrance,
and passing through the still waters thereof, does run through the middle of
it, as it were a contrary element unto it, without augmenting or diminishing
his own waters, it comes forth again retayning the same name and strength
which it had before. And which is a wonder, the Lake is not moved with the
violent course of the water, nor the hasty River is not stayed with the muddy
filth of the Lake, as if they could not be mingled together: and if it were not
seen to run through the Lake, it could not be discerned by the forcible
course thereof. The Rivers.
Moreover the Rivers which water Helvetia, are Rhene, Rhodarus, Adua, Ticinus,
Limagus, Byrsa, Langarus, Sara, Taurus commonly called Dur, Aenus, Arola, and
many others. It were needless to reckon the Mountains, seeing the names of
the Rhetian Mountains are known to all men. But least I should seem too
defective herein. I will mention some of them. The Mountain of Gothardus is
now called the high Alps, after which the Penine Alps do follow: near to
the Salassians there are the Co^tian Alps and the Mountain St^^ius. Also the
greater and lessers Mountains of S. ^ernard. The Grae^ian Alps belong to the
Lepontians: the Mountain Adulas which the Germans call the Mountain der
Vegel, touches the Misacians. The Julian Alps, and the Mountain Permurna are
in the Engadinians Country. From hence are the Mountains Val^rius and
Brantius, near the Vendanians: Rhetico is a Mountain among the Rhucantians.
The Mountain Iurassus hangs over the Lake Ieman. The Mountains called
Abnobae are in the confines of the Tulingians. And these are the most famous
Mountains of this Country. But we will speak more largely concerning the
Alps in the description of Italy. There are innumerable Woods, which are but
parts of the Wood Hiercynia, which begins here, although they are called by
several names as the Brigantine Wood, the Wood Ryhnwalde, Bonwald^, and
others. The Helvetian Commonwealth is a mixed government of the Nobles and the
people. For some of these People, of whom the whole City does consist, do use
a Democraticall government, where all things are managed by the council of the
Commons, as in those Cantons which have no Towns, as the Uranians, the
Suitians, the ^uderwaldians, the Glarovensians, and the Abbatiscellanians: and
in the same manner are the Tuginians, although they have a Town; the other
Cantons are governed by the Nobles, as all the other Cities of Helvetia, as
Tigurum, Berna, Lucerna, etc. But seeing the people have the chief power, and
do choose the Magistrates, these Commonwealths are mixed, and some parts are
more Aristocraticall, and some parts more popular.

ZVRICHGOVV, AND THE PROVINCE OF BASIL.
I Have spoken in general concerning Helvetia; the parts do follow. Which
Mercator in the three following Chartes does lively describe. In the first are
those two Provinces which are called in their speech Zurichgow and Basil; in
the second Wistispurgergow; and in the third Argow is delineated, of all which
I will make a Chorographicall Description, together with the Lake Leman. As
concerning the former Province which is painted forth in the first Charte, it
is called in their own speech Zurichgow, The fertility.
and Caesar calls it Tigurinus Pagus. The soil of this Country, and
especially by the chief City Tigurum is very fruitful, and brings forth
great store of Wine and Corn; yet the Wine for the most part is tart and
sharp, neither can it come to perfest ripeness and maturity, because the Alps
are so nigh unto it. But the Wine ripeneth and grows more pleasant after it
has been kept some years in the Vessel. The chief City of this Province is
called in Latin Tigrum, and of late Thurogum* and in their own speech Zurich.
The City Zurich.
It is an ancient City and pleasantly seated, at the end of the great Lake,
which sends forth the River Lindmagum, commonly called Limmat, which not
far from Glarona it receives again, and devideth the City into two Cities,
the greater and the lesser, which are joined together with three fair Bridges,
on which the Citizens do often walk. It hach a very great Corne-market, in
which great store of Corn is sold weekly. The Lake Tigurine does furnish the
City with great store of Fish. There is also a Market for all kind of
Provision, and the Lake is convenienter for carrying it to diverse places. But
albeit Tigurum was the fifth that joined it self to the Helvetian confederacy,
yet nevertheless it is held to be the chief City both for beauty and
strength, and still it has the pre-eminence given it in public Assemblies, in
Embassages, and other public actions: it has had many brave famous men: as
Conradus Pelican, who was very skillful in the Hebrew, Chaldean, and Arabic
tongues: also Theodore Bibliandrus: Conradus G^sner, that most excellent
Historian, and many other excellent men The Canton Tigurum has without the
City greater and lesser Prefectureships. The greater are nine, Ryburg a County:
the Prefectureship of Groeningia: also Regensp^^g, Vadisvillana, Wadis^hwyl:
Lauffa near the Catracts of Rheneor, Lauffen: Andelfignen: Grifensce, and
Egitsow a free Province, the lesser are 22. the Towns Vitodurum, Winterhur,
and S^eina, do belong to the Tigurinians, yet they have Magistrates of their
own, but they are governed by the Tigurinian Edicts, and do serve them in
their wars, but they bear their own Colors in the Field. The Canton
Tugium, commonly ZVRICHGOVV.
ZURICHOU
map of Zurich called Zugis reckoned to be in this Province, The Town ^urg^um.

The Situation.


a Town with a Country of the same name, lying Northward near Su^^ia* it is
situate between a Middow, and a Hill planted with Vines, near the fishfull
Lake, which is called from the City, the Tugine Lake, which streatcheth
Southward toward the Town Arte^se. It has a soil fit for Pasturage* and it
yields great store of Wine and Corn. The first Inhabitants thereof are said
to be the ^uginians, but Strabo Lib 7. calls them the Toygenians, who entering
into a league with the Tigurians and Cimbrians, did oppose themselves against
the Romans. See Plutarch in the life of Marius and Eutropius, Lib. 5. Tugium
was sometime governed by the Nobles, but afterward it came to be under the
power of the Austrians: Those, in the Helvetian war did keep a continual
Garrison there, unto the great molestation of the Suitians and Tigurians. So
that in the year 1352. the Tigurinians with four other Cantons, made an
expedition against Tugium. But the Garrison, not trusting to the Fortification
of the Town, forsook it before the Helvetians coming, but yet the Citizens
to show their fidelity to the Austrians, did hold out the Siege for 15. days.
At last they yielded it to the Helvetians, and took an oath of them on this
condition, that if the Duke of Austria within such a limited time brought an
Army to free them from this Siege, they should be free from the oath which they
had taken to the Helvetians, and might yield themselves up unto him. But when
they saw there was no hope of the Duke of Austria's coming, they joined
themselves in confederacy with the Helvetians. The Canton of Tugium has two
parts, and four hundreds in them, out of every hundred, eleaven Senators are
chosen to govern the Country. The Town it self stands for two hundreds,
the Country next unto it has three, as Montanus, Vallis Eg^ria, or Aquae
Regiae, and the Parish of Bara. But the Towns of Tugi^^um by Prefects resident
in the City does govern these places: the Town Cham, Andrews Village,
Hunelbergo, Wa^^h^ville, Steinhuse, S. Wolfargo. So much concerning the first
Province of this Card, the other follows* namely Basil* so called from the
famous City Basilea. It is called also ^ung^nia, which name we may easily
conjecture was derived from the Seqnanes, which Rhenanus also approves in his
third Book of Germany. The Country is fruitful, and brings forth good Wine
and Corn, so that it supplieth the Neighbor Countries that want Corn. There
are also fair Pastures for Cattle. Those whom Ptolemy calls Rauricians and
Caesar Rauracians (as Scudus witnesses) did heretofore inhabit this Country,
who as he reports taking example by the Helvetians, did burn up all their
Towns, Villages, and Houses. Basil is now the chief City of the Country. Some
would have it so called from a Basilisk found here, but their opinion is
absurd. Others from Basilema the Mother of Julian the Emperor. Rhenanus would
have it called Basilea because it was a royal passage. And he adds, it is
likely that there was a passage in this place, while Augusta was yet standing,
because here in regard of the Valley through which the Torrent flows out of
the Lake Byrsa, the bank is lower, and thereby more easily to pass, but near
Augusta it is more steep. But Munsterus does reject this conjecture, by the
authority of Marcellinus, who calls that City by a Greek word Basileian,
that is a Kingdom, as it were Regnopolis, or the Royal City. This City is
watered with the River Rhene, which devides it about the middle of it, where it
is united and joined together again with a Bridge. The River Rhene is very
commodious to the City, because it is Navigable, and brings up many great
Vessels to it. Two hundred years since it was much shaken with Earthquakes,
but it was afterward re-edified, and Pope Pius in the year 1460. did adorn it
with an University, which he endowed with all the Privileges, Statutes, and
Immunities which the Universities of Bononia, Coline, Heidelberg, Erdford,
Lipsick, and Vienna do enjoy* Basil has these Prefectureships, Faren-Sperg
Castle; Rinfeld seated on a high Mountain: the Town Wallenburg: H^mburg,
Munchenslei^, ^amstein, the County of Toggius, where I suppose is Tognyl, which
is subject to the Abbot of S. Gallus, when the Citizens of Toggius belong to
Suitia and Glaronia: also the County of Rapperswijl, which I suppose should be
the County of Straesberg: and the Barony of Kil^h^erg. The other Towns of
Tuginum and Tigurinum are in the Table of Argow. The Towns in the Country of
Abbatium, which are neither mentioned in Suevia, nor in all Germany, are these,
Reichenouw, Schaffusen, Kreutslinge, Pfeffers, or as I suppose Pfefficon. This
Country is watered with many Rivers and little streams, all which the River
Rhene at last receives. Among which are the Rivers Rhene, Byrsa, and Wiesa.
Byrsa flows out of the Mountain Iura through many Valleys even to Basil^a,
carrying down with it many Boat-loads of Wood. On the other side the River
Wiesa does part it from the Black wood, and much Timber for Building is brought
down this River, and afterward it fills many Cisternes, and serves many
Houses in the lesser Basil with water. For it drives a Mill which saweth Trees
into Bards and square Studdes, it grindeth Corn, and Grindstones to sharpen
Carpenters tools, it serves to draw Iron into thin Plates, and for many other
uses, besides it has excellent fish, especially Trouts. And though it be less
than the River Byrsa over against it, yet it is fuller of Fish than it, and
serves for more uses, although Byrsa does drive many Mills and is very
commodious for ^^ner-men, who have Houses by this River, or rather near the
little (...) which parts from it, and runs even to the walls of the
greater Basil. There are also here Tolde^us, Largus, and other Rivers* (...) of
this enough. It remains that we should add something ^^ncerning the
government of the Commonwealth in these Provi^^^s. All that are admitted to
public Counsel, are chosen equally ^ut of the several Cantons, as well out
of the Tugurians, as Basilians. But there are two public Counsels which have
chiefest authority in these Cities. The greater when many meet together in
behalf of the Commons, and this for the most part is called when there are
some serious weighty affairs, which appertain to the Commonwealth. the
lesser is that which looks daily to the government of the Commonwealth, and
determines matters of controversy between the Citizens. The greater Counsel
of Tigurum does consist of 200. men, that of Basil of 244. The less Counsel
of Tigurum has 50. men chosen out of every Tribe, and Basil it has 60. For
12. are elected out of every Tribe to make up the greater Counsel, besides at
Tigurum there are 18. chosen out of the Nobles. To the lesser Counsel of
Tiguri the several Tribes do send three men, at Basil four men, and to these
are added two Counsels in every City, who are the chief Heads of the City; and
moreover at Basil there are so many Tribunes, whom they call the Heads of the
Counsel in like manner as they do the Consuls: besides at Tigurum there are
6. chosen out of the Nobility to make up the lesser Counsel, when there are
but 3. chosen out of the other Tribes, and moreover 6. others are chosen by
free Suffrages, out of any Tribe which the Magistrate shall think fit. The
lesser Counsel is divided into the old and the new: they call those the old
Senate who have borne office half a year: the other although they are called
when the Senate is held, yet they are not always called, and there are some
matters which the new Senate does only dispatch. The greater Counsel also at
Basil is divided in the same manner, and of 12. men chosen out of the Tribes,
6. are joined or added to the new Senate, and so many to the old. The lesser
Counsel does meet for the most part thrice, and sometimes 4. times every
week. There is one Consul belonging to the Senates, whom in their speech they
call Burgermeister, that is, the Master of the Citizens, and the greater
Counsel does choose him. The Tribunes are next to the Consuls in power, whom
the Tigurinians call Oberistemeister, and those of Basil call Zunff^meister,
there are 3. of them at Tigurum, and two only at Basil, who together with the
two Consuls are called the four Heads of the City. But thus much shall
suffice. He that desires to know more let him have recourse to Josias Simler,
who discourses copiously and learnedly concerning these matters, out of whom
we have taken that which we have written here.

VVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.
THERE follows in our Author the Aventian Canton^ commonly called
Wiflispurgergow. It is so named from the Town Wiflispurg, which heretofore in
^ulius Caesar's time was the head City of Helvetia, and was called Aventi^um.
The Country is contained within the bounds of abaudia, although it be subject
to the Bernatians and Friburgensians, as also the Country seated over against
it, and beyond the Lake of B^el or Neoburg. It is sufficiently stored with Wine
and Corn. But in this Table the whole Cantons of Berne and Friburg are
contained. In the former the chief City is Berna. It is not very ancient,
but if you consider the excellent Situation, the manners and civilitie, the
Laws and Statu^es, and the power and virtue thereof, it is not inferior unto
any City. Concerning the building whereof we read thus. Berchtaldus Duke of
Zert^gia the 4. of that name, built in his time 2. Friburgis, that is free
Castells, namely one in Brisgoi^, and the other in Vchtlandia. And to the end
that his subjects might dwell more safely in Vchtland, he purposed to build
another City near his Castle, which was called Nide^k, in a Peninsula which
was called Saccus, which was at that time a Wood of Oaks. And upon a certain
time when the same Berchtoldus was Hunting, he said to his fellows; we will
call this City, which we purpose to build in this convenient place, after the
name of that beast which we shall first meet and after take. And so it
happened that they took a Bear, which the Germans call Bern. And where (as
we said) there grew many Oaks in that place, in which the City was to be
builded, yet all the trees were cut down to build houses: whence the workmen
would commonly say when they cut down the trees: Holtz lassdich hauwen gern:
die stat muss he^ssen Bern: i. e* Arbores sinite ut secemini libenter: Quon^^m
Cevitas ista vocabitur Bern: that is, ye Trees suffer your selves to be cut
down willingly; Because this City shall be called Bern. This City is
situated as it were in a Peninsula, which the navigable River Arola makes. For
on the South side of the City, this River flows in a low place, from the
West Eastward, and then winding back again it runs Westward, as far a as
Cannon can shoot, which is the whole length of the City, so that the River is
to the City as it were a ditch flowing with fresh water, but that on the West
for the length of a Crosse-Bow shot, the foundation of the City joyneth to the
Continent, which Isthmus if it were dug through, the City Bern would be an
Island. On the South and North it has the water running beneath it for a
prospect; on the East there is a gentle ascent unto the highest part of the
City. The adjacent soil lying round about it ^^^^ry fruitful, but has no
Wine, yet not far of the Bernatians do make very good Wine out of their own
Vineyards. There do grow also Vines on one side of the City, but they are of
no account, and do yield but little Wine. But Berchtoldus the 4. the builder
of this City yed, before he had finished it, leaving the perfecting of this
work to his son Berchtoldus the 5. and the last Duke of Zeringia. He had by
his wife the daughter of the Earl of Kiburg two sons, whom the Nobles of the
Country made away by poison, for this cause chiefly, because they supposed
that Berchtoldus out of hatred and emulation toward them, had finished the
building of the City, that so he might keep them under the yoke of servitude.
Berna has under it both Germane and French Prefectureships, among which is
Lausanna an Episcopal City. It has a strange situation, being seated on two
opposite Hills, and a Vale lying between them. The Cathedral Church, and the
Canons houses do stand on the North Hill, and from the Southern Hill over
against it, there is a great descent even to the Lake. The Court of Judgment
is in the Vale. After the death of ^harles Duke of Burgundy, Lausanna being
redeemed by the Princes of S. ^audia* the Citizens of Lausanna in the mean
time did enter into great familiarity with the Bernatians, even to the year one
thousand five hundred 36 at what time Lausanna came to be under the Dominion of
the Bernatians. But yet the Citizens do enjoy all their former Rights and
Privileges. There are 31. Germane Towns* 4. whereof belong to the City, which
as many Standard-bearers of the City do govern, and under their Colors all
the Prefectureships do march to Battle in the wars. Namely Haselis Vallis,
Has^i: the Town Onders^a or Vinderseu^en: Simmia Vallis superior: Simia vallis
inferior; ^rutingen, Sana, Aelen, Thun, Louppen, Signow, Drachselwald, the Vale
of the River Emm, Sicon^swald, Burgdorff, B^ereneck, Landshu^t, Arberg, Nidow,
E^lach, Bippium, Wangen, Arwargen, Arburg, Biberstein, Schen^kenbergh,
Lentzburg. Also three free Towns in the Verbigenian Canton are subject to the
Bermans: Zof fingen, Araw, and Bru^k: Also there are 9. Monasterie^ endowed
with Lands, 6. whereof are under a civil Jurisdiction. There are also 8.
French Cantons and Towns, as Aventicum W^flispurg: Minnidunum, Mouilden:
Yuerden, Morges, Novidunum, Ny^^, Oron, Zilia with Vibiscum or Viv^y: also
Mercator reckons up three Monasteries belonging to the Bernatians: which are
M^rten, Schwartzenburg, Granson, Chalan or Cherlin, over which the Bernatians
and Friburgians in their several courses do appoint and constitute Governors
for 5. year, so that if the Governor be chosen out of one City, they may
appeal to the other, which may examine and take account of their government.
Friburg is a Town of the Nicetonians situate in Vchtland by the River Sana, it
was built by Berchtoldus the fourth, Duke of Zeringia some years before Berne.
For in the reign of Lotharius, in the year 1527. William Earl of Vchtland
dyed, as Nauclerus writes, at what time the Emperor gave Vchtland to the
Prince of Zeringia: who dying in the year 1552. his Son Berchtoldus Duke of
Zeringia, the fifth of that name succeeded after him. He founded and built both
the Friburgs, Brisgoia, and Vchtland, (as we said before) in the year after
Christ's birth 1252. and endowed them VVIFLISPVRGERGOVV.
DAS WIFLISPURGERGOU
map with large Privileges. As also the succeeding Emperors did show no less
favor to both those Towns, than if they had been Parts and Members of their
Empire. Afterward in the year of our Lord 1218. Berchtoldus Duke of Zeringia
dying, Friburg in Vchtland with all the privileges thereof, came into the
hands of the Earls of Kibu^g, in the year of Christ 1260. Eburhardus Earl of
Hasburg, governed this City. He in the year 1270. sold his right to this City
for a great sum of money to King Rudolphus. Hence Aeneas Sylvius calls
Fribu^g the noble House of Austria. At last the Inhabitants being wearied with
these frequent changes, for a great sum of money bought their liberty of the
House of Austria. So that it is now under the Jurisdiction of Helvetia. And on
the wall of Friburg there is such an Epitaph found: Dum, bis sexce^tis ter
senis jungitur annus,
In Friburg moritur, Berchtoldus Dux Alemannus.
Unto six hundred and eighteen
If thou do add a year,
Then Berchtold Duke of Almaine
In Friburg dyed here.


The Town it self is wonderfully well seated, for part of it stands on a
Mountain, and part of it in a Vale, and the River ^an^ does flow about the
Mountain at the bottom of the City. The Judgment Hall is situated on a high
Rock, where there was formerly a Castle, from which in process of time the
City grew large, both above and beneath. Two opposite Mountains do bear the
Walls, although on the Eastern Mountain there are almost no houses, but
Munition and fortifications. Wheresoever you go in the City, you must either
ascend or descend. The Country round about it brings for^h all things
necessary, except Wine, of which they have none but that which is imported and
brought in. And so much concerning the Cities of this tract, now we will add
something concerning the Civil government of these Cities. The manner of the
Common wealth in these Cities, is the same with that which is in the Cities of
Helvetia which are not divided into certain Tribes, out of which the
Magistrates are equally chosen. But in these Cities they call the chief
Magistrate and Head of the public Counsel, Ein Schuldthessen. This Germane
word is used in the Laws of the Longobardians, and it is written Schuldahis,
but the Etymology of the word seems to be derived from Debito a debt, for so
Schuld signifies, and from commanding, because the Schuldahis does command the
Debtors to satisfy his Creditors. This Schuldahis has great authority and
power in these Cities. Here are also two public Counsels, the greater and the
less. The greater Counsel of Berne and ^igurum, is called the Counsel of two
hundred men, although there are more than two hundred in it. But the lesser
Counsel of Berne consists of six and twenty men. The manner of choosing the
Senate at Berne is thus: The four Standard Bearer of the City do choose out of
the Citizens sixteen honest sufficient men to join with themselves: and those
twenty men, together with the Consul do choose the greater Senate: and
afterward also the less: But the Consuls who have the chief dignity, are
chosen out of either Counsel by common Suffrages and voices. In like manner
the greater Counsel at Friburg consists of two hundred men, and the less of
four and twenty. The lesser Senate does look to the affairs of the City, and
does hear the Subjects appeals, except it be those Sabaudian Countries which
were last taken in war, but those matters which appertain to the whole
Commonwealth, and are of greatest moment, are referred to the two hundred men,
or the greater Counsel. The Consul who is President in both Counsels, is
chosen by the people. The Earls in this part are Nuenberg, Ni^dow, Arberg, and
the Barony of Balm.

THE CHOROGRAPHICALL DEscription of the Lake Lemann, and the adjacent places.
By James Goulart.
IN this Table you may at the first view behold the Lake Lemann, in the
confines of the Dukedom of Sabaudia, the County of Burgundy, the Baronnie or
Lordship of Helvetia, and the Bishopric of Valesia. About the Lake there are
many Regions, Praefectureships, Baronnies, Jurisdictions, Highways, Rivers,
Mountains, Cities, Towns, Castells, and Fortresses. The People on this side
the Alps, which inhabit Sabaudia, do speak French, who heretofore, as
Julius Caesar witnesses, in the beginning of his Commentaries, were called
Allobrogians, from Allobroges, a King of France, who flourished about the year,
2433. And afterward, as the most famous Prelate Fauchetis witnesses, they were
called Bagaudae, and at length Sabaudians, in French Savoysiens, and in the
Sabaudian speech Savoyarde. Earls have hitherto governed this Country, from
the year of our Lord 1126. and from the year. 420, to this time it has bin
under the government of Dukes. It is reported that this Country was at first a
long time inhabited by a company of thieves. But now intimes of peace, the
ways there are safe and secure. The inhabitants do complain of the temper of
the air, sometimes for cold, and sometimes for heat. And yet the Lake, and
the River Rhodanus, are almost never frozen over. Moreover the heat is not so
violent, as in the Delphinate, nor the cold so sharp as in the low Countries,
where Rivers are usually frozen over. The soil is fit for tillage and
fruitful; for it has abundance of Grapes, Wheat, Pease, Rapes,
Cauly-flowres, French-beanes, Melons, Leekes, Onions, Lentills: Also Barley,
Hay, Oats, and other grains. These fruits are common here, Nuttes, Apples,
Pears, of diverse sorts, sweet and sour cherries, black and white
Mulberries, Chestnuts, Almonds, but Figs are more rare. There is also great
variety of Foul, Fish, and Beasts. The Vvandalian Helvetians, who inhabit
Lausanna and other places nere unto, are under the government of the most
illustrious Lords of Berne: Under whom certain praefects for five years
space, do hold the Helm of the Commonwealth. According to ancient Chronicles,
Arpentinus, Hercules Centenarius, laid the foundation of Lausanna in the year
of the world 2790, from whom Carprentres the ancient name thereof was derived,
which was changed when the City was translated unto the Mountain, in the
time of Martin Bishop of Lausanna, in the year of our Lord 593. The City of
Nevidunum, heretofore commonly called Benevis, being desolate and ruinate
before the coming of Julius Caesar, was restored and reedified in the time of
the Emperor Flavius Vespasian, by a Centurion of his, dwelling in it, called
Nyon. Cassonex was built in the year of our Lord 442. And Abona was built in
the year 456, and some years afterward. Geneva a free Imperial City, in
which white and black money is coined; was at first called Geneura, as some
suppose, because it is seated on a hill, amongst Juniper trees, which seat
Lemannus gave it (the Father of the Almaines or Germans) the Nephew of Priam,
the son of Paris, in the year of the world 2994. Afterward it was called
Aurelia, by Aurelianus the Emperor, because he was the repairer of this
City, which in the time of Heliogabalus, was burnt down to the ground.
Julius Caesar and the Latins call it Geneva, and the Poets for their verse
sake call it Gebenna, and also by the Registers. The Germans call it Genf.
the Frenchmen Geneve, to which Vengee is a fit Anagram, for it has been
oftentimes miraculously preserved from enemies and Traitors, and especially on
the 12, or 22 of December in the year 1602. The Castle Morgiarum was built,
by the Emperor Clottarius, in the year of our Lord 1135. Aquianum, commonly
called Ev^^n, was built by Peter brother and Deputy, to Amades Earl of
Sabaudia, in the year 1237. But this Lake of Geneva on that side which lies
toward Helvetia, is sixteen miles long, and on that side which lies toward
Sabaudia, it is 12 miles long, and it is four miles broad. It has at least
sixteen Ports or Havens. The Ports.
Out of the Port Morgiensis and Rotulensis, commonly called Roll, the best
wine is brought to Geneva: and out of the Port of the Promontory, commonly
called Pormentou, and the Port of Nero, commonly called Nerny, great store of
wood and coal is brought to Geneva. Rivers.
The River Rhodanus, flowing into L^mann, from the first rising thereof, even
to his entrance into the Lake, is not navigable for ships, neither from the
Helvetian bridge in the Suburbs of Geneva, even to the next town called
S^ssel, which is seven miles distant from the City. The same River in a
certain place, five miles distant from the City, falls into a deep pit
under ground. Iurassus is such a long Mountain, that the Germans did
heretofore call the inhabitants thereof Longimans. The Mountains.
For from the top of them you may behold the Churches of Geneva and Basil,
being four or five days journey distant one from another: Also there is a
wonderful rock full of holes, which Sebastian Munster describes in his
Cosmographie. Also the virgins Castles built by Julius Caesar. Also the Town
of Saint Claudus, because lame people came thither from remote parts for
religion sake. Also a snowie fountain in Summer time: also a natural Pit,
that is as broad as any Theater, and as deep as a Church, and as dark as a
Cave, being continually full of snow, Ice and Crystal. Not far from the Lake
Lemann, on that part which lies toward Sabaudia, there are Mountains which in
the midst of Summer, are covered with snow. There is a certain Mountain a
mile distant, from the City Geneva, upon which some, THE LAKE LEMANN.
Lacus Lema^nus
Lac de Geneve
map not without horror ascend by steps cut out of the rock, which are very
narrow, and almost innumerable: And some setting their foot upon the last
step, when they beheld the deep praecipice beneath them, have gone back
again. There is also another Mountain not far from Aquila, a town toward
Valesia, of whose wonderful effects, we may read the whole story in the
memorable Histories of our time, in the Chapter of Earthquakes, lately set
forth in French at Paris. The Mountain of S. Sergius, is the most fruitful
of all the Chablacian Mountains, among which there is one other very
fruitful. The other do bear nothing but wood and shrubbes, and pasturage
for Kine, which in the Summer time do fatt themselves on the plains of the
Mountains, and do give good store of milk. But who can reckon the memorable
chances or events happening there in the time of Wars? Or how great and
fearful is the Praecipice of the Mountain Mustracensis, from which every
year many horses laden, and Merchants do fall headlong. Concerning the
rocks, which are sharp like teeth or swords, we must write in a more accurate
style, or else be silent: Concerning the foot of the Mountains of Aquiane, it
is known that they are unknown by reason of the depth of the Lake, from the
bottom whereof they do arise. The W^^ds.
The most of the woods they do yield Chestnuts, both to the poor and rich, and
Acornes for Hogs and Swine, also firewood, The public works
and cart-timber, and plough-timber, for husbandmen. In these places there are
few or no Churches, which have relics of Saints in them, because Idolatry is
banished from hence. But there are many sumptuous and magnificent Temples,
especially that at Lausanna, being built within of black Marble; and the
ancient Temple at Geneva being full of Iron work, being twice or thrice
endangered by thunder, so that the leaden cross of it was burnt, and the high
Tower fell down; which was built before the coming of Charles the great. Add
to these the Temple of V^viacum, seated among the Vineyards, out of the walls
of the City, and the Temple of Morgium, lately beutified. But all the Images
are defaced. Geneva has an hospital for Orphans, and for the sick, but both
of them are included in the Hospital for strangers, in which there dwells a
Catechizer and a Schoolmasters, who do take pains in comforting the sick,
and reading prayers to them; it has also a Physician and an Apothecary
belonging thereto. The Court. The Senators
The Municipall Court in Geneva, in which every day five and twenty wise and
pious Senators do meet together to consult of affairs, belonging to the
Common wealth, and in which also the written records and books are kept, is
watched every night by the Citizens. On one side of the Gate there is placed a
magnificent seat of judgment, commonly called the Tribunal. On the other
side of the Gate there is a notable monument of time, occasion, and the means
of the renovation of this state. And near the Court there is an Armory well
furnished. There are also in and about this City many high bulwarks
fortified with shot. There have been and are many Castles in this Country, one
of which is called S. Catherines Castle, in which those warlike engines or
instruments were laid up, which were provided for the seige of Geneva, and
brought thither in the year 1590. It was taken by King Henry the fourth, who
commanded it to be rac'd Anno. Dom. 1601. The other Castle, which the Genevians
built over against it, for peace sake and for sparing of charges, they suffered
to fall to ruin. The third Castle commonly called Ripa^lle, by the aid of the
French Cohorts came to be under the power of the Genevians, Anno 1589, and is
now desolate, as also the fourth, which belonged to Versonius, when the
Genevians took it. There are some Towers cunningly and ingeniously raised, one
of which is called Turris Magistra, or the Mistress Tower, which defends Geneva,
on that side which is next the Lake and Sabaudia; the other is called the Tower
of the Island, or Caesar's Tower, which is seated on a high Island for the
defense of the Bridge, which heretofore appertained to the Heluetians, and as it
is reported it was built by the same Emperor. The Laws and Statutes.
The Statutes and Laws of the Common wealth, and College of Geneva, may be
read in a printed book. Here is a great number of noble families. The noble
familes.
As concerning men famous for wit, and the profession of Arts, and sciences;
there have been many who have gotten much same by their divine, and
Philosophical works. As Peter Viretus Verbigenensis, Gulielmus Farellus, The
learned men.
Ioannes Calvinus, Antonius Sadeel, Petrus Cevalerius, Nicolas Colladonus,
Cornelius Bertramus, Alberius, Alizetus, Sequierius, Bucanus, all of which in
the former age were a long time diligent Preachers and professors, at Geneva,
Lausanna, Morgium, and Albona: after whom there succeeded these famous writers,
Theodorus Beza Veselius, Simon Goulartius Silvanectinus, Antonius Faius,
Ioannes Lacomotus, James Lectius a Senator; Ioannes Deodatis of Geneva,
professor of Divinity, and the Hebrew tongue, Isaac Casaabon, the Kings
Professor for the Greek tongue, and Gasparus Laurentius, professor of the same
Language. The Libraries.
Moreover the public Library at Geneva is adorned with many excellent
manuscripts. And that at Lausanna, is furnished with many excellent works of
the Fathers, and other Divines. Concerning the common people, they are full of
Civilitie, and they receive and entertain strangers, very lovingly and
honorably: Their manners.
and it transporteth and sends into other Countries, great Troutes, Their
trading.
fat Capons, good Cheese, gold, wire, and fishing lines, besides other
commodities.

ARGOW.
ARgonia, commonly called Argow, was a part of the Kingdom of Transtura, which
comprehended all the Countries lying from the Mountain Iura, even to the
Alps; of which heretofore the Heluetians, the Ranracians, and part of the
Allobrogians, and now the Dukedom of Sa^aud^a, V^landia (...), Suntgovia,
Cremerlandia, and the Praefectureship of (...), or the Cantons of Heluetia, do
now hold. But in this Table, the Towns Lucerna, Vren, Switz, Vnder^ald, and
Glarona, are contained: Lucerna is a City of Helvetia which M^y^rus calls
Lacocerna, it is situated upon the River Rusa, where it breaks out of a great
Lake, by which there is a passage by (...) to three Towns, unto the foot of
the high Mountain which they commonly call Fractum and Pilati Montera, that
is, the broken Mountain or Pilats Mountain. The Lake is very convenient for
the City, because there is a way by it into Italy, by the Lepe^^^^ Al^e^;
which they call now the Mountain of Saint Goth^rd: from hence commodities are
carried to the Alps, and from thence by Packe-horses into Italy; and again,
Italian commodities are brought down the Lake, and the River ^asa to the
Rh^n^, and so unto the Ocean. Besides, the Lucernatians do make more profit by
the Lake, than of the adjacent soil lying about it, although they have
excellent Meddowes for the pasturing and feeding of Cattle. It is a very
pleasant City, and rich, being the common Mart Town of the Su^t^nsians, the
Vrantans, and the Transiluanians. The original of this City is uncertain: it
is reported that there were Castles on both sides of the River, which were
built by the Almaines, but there are Citizens houses in their places. It was
so called from a Lamp or light which was hung out there, as a Sea mark for
the direction of Mariners, and it is credible and likely that the ancient
Tower served for this purpose, which at the higher bridge is now named from the
waters; The like is at Tigur^^n, which is called from the Sea waves We^^nberga:
the ancients did call these kind of Towers Watch-towers. Their own Annalls
do report, that the Lucernatians did go to war with Charles the Great,
against the Narazins, and that he gave them some privileges, and taught them
the use of Horns, with which in these times, they do sound a retreat in the
wars. The College of the Cannonists, had heretofore the greatest power,
which afterward came to be under the authority of the Abbot of Murbacum by the
donation and grant of King Pipin. Afterward A^bertus, Emperor of Austria,
bought Lucerna of the Abbot of M^^bacum. But not long after the Lucernatians
oppressed by the heavy burdens laid upon them by the Aus^rian governors,
being desirous of peace and liberty, made a league with them Anno 1323. There
were two Praefectureships of Lucerna, which Mercator reckons, in ARGOW.
ARGOU
map which the Praefects dwell in one place, which are as I suppose Wiken,
Sempach. But the latter Prefect has no power over the town, but is only
overseeer of the Lake and the fishing therein: the Senators in the City do
govern the other Towns, which are: Willisow, Entlibuchia Vallis, Rotenburg or
Rott, or some place near unto it: also Habspurg, Berona, with the neighbor
Country called Chelamt, that is, the Praefectureship of Michael; also
Merischwanden, Waggis, Ebicona, Krientz: also the two Cities, Surseium and
Sempachium, which are under the Lucernatians protection, yet they have a
Counsel of their own, which does judge both civil, and criminal causes: but
the chief man of the Surscian Counsel is called Sculthes, who gives an oath
to the Lucernatians: but the chief of the Sempachian Counsel is chosen out of
the Senate of Lucerna, but yet out of the number of the Citizens of
Semphachium. The next is the Town of the Vrians or Urania. In Julius Caesar's
time, the Romans did call the inhabitants thereof Taurisci, and the name of
Vrians, by which they are now called, is thought to be derived from the
Vranians, whom the ancients did call Tauriscians, as also they now call the
Siebentalensians, Taurians, after the German manner. Moreover, the arms of
this Country is a black Bulls heads in a yellow field. The Vrians Canton is
divided into ten parts, which they call Gnossaminem, that is, to shares, or
participations, because those Senators only, which are elected out of them,
are capable of public offices, and are called to the annual meetings. The
next is the Canton of the Suitians: Suitia or Suicia, is a Town which
communicates his name to all Helvetia, The Town Suitia
for they first built it, who fled hither out of the Kingdom of Suecia to
seek themselves new habitations. There is one of the three Cantons, who joined
themselves in confederacy against the insolency of the nobility, and it
brought forth many stout and able men for service, who were often a terror to
their enemies. All the Country does live upon the fruits which the earth
brings forth. From this Town or Canton, strangers and forrainers do call
the Helvetians Suitzers, because they fought first for liberty in their
Country, or because they contended long with the Eremitans, and were the first
of the 3 Towns of the Austrians, that was enforced to break into the Country,
and was the chiefest in power of all the three Cantons, and the other Cantons
were comprehended under their name, as being of most noate, and from the name
was afterward communicated, to all the confederates: or lastly because the
Vrians, Silvanians, and Suitensians, began the confederacy in their Town. The
Country of the Suitzers is divided into five parts, which they call Quartas,
retaining still the name of the new division, The town Vnderwaldia.
in this new and sixtfold division. There is also the Canton of lower Silvania,
which is commonly called Vnderwaldia. This is a free Canton, being mutually
joined in confederacy with Suitia and Urania, in the year of our Lord 1315. It
is environd round about with the Alps; it has pleasant pastures, for breeding
and feeding of Cattle, by which the inhabitants of Syluania do reap much
profit. But the Vrians, the Suitensians, the Silvanians or Vnderwaldians,
although by some covenants they were subject to the Abbeys of certain
Monasteries, yet they had liberties of their own, and received Praefects from
the Empire, which they call Vo^tos, by a Greek word, as heretofore the
Praefects of the Romans. For their office was the same with the Burgraues in
these Countries. For they had power to give judgment of life and death. I
conjecture that the other form of government remained from the ancient
Monarchy of the Romans, in which the Paefects did not live as they listed,
neither did create magistrates out of their own number, but they received them
from the Senate or the Emperor. But the Canton of Vnderwaldia, is divided by
the wood Kernwald into two parts, namely the higher and the lower, yet all the
Country nevertheless is comprehended, under the name of Vnderwaldia. There
remains Glarona, Glarona.
commonly called Glaris, a Country of the Helvetian confederacy, near the
River Limagus, not very large, being three Germane miles long, and takes its
name from the special Town in this Country, being three parts of it
encompassed with the high Alps; on the South and North it joyneth to the
Rhetians, on the West to the Vrians, and Suitians, on the North to a Country
called Castra Rhetica or the Rhetian Tents, where the River Limagus enters
into the Vale. The ancient government.
The jurisdiction of this Country, and the revennewes thereof, was given in
the time of S. Fridoline by a certain Earl to the Monastery of Seekingense,
namely in the time of Clodovius the first Christian King of France, in the
year of our Lord 500, who was the first King of France, that reigned and
governed Rhetia, Almania, and Helvetia. This Land afterward obtained her
liberty, and her own jurisdiction, and did join it self in confederacy with
the Helvetians, in the year of our Lord 1252. The Inhabitants do now live
upon milk, Cheese, butter, and flesh. Among the straites of the Mountains
there is little ground sowed, and few Vines are planted. They have Orchards
full of fruit, and flourishing Meddowes. Wine and corn are brought in from
other parts. The Lakes afford fish; The Lakes,
and the woody Mountains do furnish them with foul and flesh, of wild
beasts. Henry Glareanus, and Aegidius Yscudus, two learned men were borne in
this Country. To these is joined the County of Hamburg, and the Baronie of
Humbert and Ringenbereg. But Glarona is distributed into 15. parts, which they
call Tagwan. Werdenbergen does command the Country, which they bought, Anno
1517. They and the Su^tians do by turns send praefects to Vzenacum, or
V^sn^^, and into the Rhetian Tents at Wesome. But so much hitherto, let us now
add something in general concerning this part of Helvetia, and here the Lakes
are first to be considered, among which is the miraculous Lake, called Pilates
Lake, which is situated on the broken Mountain as they call it, not far from
Lucerna, almost on the top of the Mountain it stands solitarily, being
encompassed on every side with Woods, so that none can stir or provoke it.
For they report, that if any thing be purposely cast into it, it will stir up
a great tempest, and make it overflow, as many have found by experience: but
those things that fall in by accident, do occasion no danger at all. It is a
place fearful to behold, and the water stands still in the channel of it,
neither has it any vent, neither does it receive any River into it, neither is
it increased by snow or rain water. It is scarsely moved with the wind, but
the waters thereof are always black, and strangers are not permitted to come
unto it, least they should rashly cast any thing thereinto, whereby the
neighboring Country may be endangered. Among the other Rivers which do water
this Country, The Rivers.
there is one called Lamagus, which rises in Glarina, and in the middle of the
Country, it receives Sermphius another River which runs out of another
Valley. Afterward beneath Vrna (which is the name of two Towns) above the
Laterician bridge (for so they call it) having borrowed some water out of the
Lake Vesenius, it parts and divides Marcha (which was heretofore the bounds
between the Helvetians, and the Rhetians, for so the Helvetians call a bound)
and the Tents of the Rhetians. Afterward entering into the Lake Tigurinum, at
the mouth thereof it divides Tigurum a large City of the Helvetians: and from
thence it slideth to those waters which the Graecians, call Bathes, which are
so famous for their hot waters. And not far from thence it mingleth it self
with the two Rivers, Vrsa and Arola. The River Vrsa, which by transposition of
the two former letters, they commonly call Rusa, arises on the top of the
Alps, which are now called Saint Gotharas Alps, and so runs strait
Northward, when on the other side T^einus, arising out of the same Mountain
runs by the Lepontians Southward, first through Vrsula or Vrsella a Rhetian
Valley, and afterward it comes to Vria of the Tauriscians, the remainder of
the French Nation, where it mingleth it self with the Lake, where it waters
the Vrians, the Suizians, the Silvanians, and Lucerinians, four Cities of the
Wood, for so they call them now. Afterward having received the Rivers of
Tuginum, it glideth by Bremgarte, and M^ll^ge, (which are Towns of Helvetia)
and so beneath Bruges mingleth it self with Arola. And at their consluence, or
meeting together, three Rivers of Helvetia, Limagus, Vrsa, and Arola, do
discharge themselves into the Rhene. But let so much suffice concerning
Helvetia, and the parts thereof, we pass to the Low Countries, or lower
Germany.

THE RHETIANS now called the GRISONES.
THe Rhetians are accounted an ancient people by the consent of all men. For
some ages before Christ's birth the Tuscians being beaten by the French out of
their own habitations, under the conduct of their Captain Rhetus, seated
themselves in an Alpine Country, which was called from their Captain, Rhetia,
and they themselves Rhetians. But whereas this Country was heretofore very
large, and that the name of the Rhetians, for warlike matters grew famous
amongst their neighbors, so that they were a terror unto many which Ovid
declares in this verse: Rhaetica nunc praebent Thracia ij; arma metum.
The Thracian arms, now every where,
And the Rhaetian do put us in fear.


At length being conquered by the Romans, they made two Provinces of it,
namely the first, and the second Rhetia: which did not only contain the
Alpine Countries, but a great part of Suevia and Bavaria. Now by this name we
understand those people, whom they call Grisones, for their grisely habit which
was made of their own Country cloth; but the Germains at this day do call
them Grauwbuntner, who do inhabit the ancient Alpine Rhaetia, near to the
Spring-heads of the River Rhene and Oenus, who are perpetually joined together
by a threesold tie of amity, and confaederacie. The first confaederacie, which
is called the higher, has eighteen assemblies in it, among which the chief
heretofore were, Disentinus the Abbot, the Barons of Rhetia, and the Earls of
Mis^uicium; but those families are long since worn out and extinguished.
Although they that now possess the Castle of Rhaetia, do challenge that
title, from the Plantinian family. The several conventions or assemblies,
have one chief annual Magistrate, whom they call Ammanus; he together with the
Judges chosen by the same assembly, judges of controversies, does lay mulcts
and fines upon offenders. The second confaederacy is called the house of God,
or der Gotthuss bunt, in regard of the Bishopric and College of Curiense; it
has 21. conventions or partnerships in it, which are sometimes contracted into
eleaven greater. The City Curia is the head of this confaederacie, and has a
special Commonwealth; not unlike unto Tigurinum. After them the chief
partnerships, are Ingadinus, and Bregalianus, in whose Territories are the
heads of the Rivers Athesis and Oenus. The third confaederacie has 10
Jurisdictions, the first whereof is Davosian, so called from the Town
Davosium, in which is the Court for this confaederacie, and the Assizes for all
the jurisdictions are held. The second is the Belfortian jurisdiction, the
third the Barponensian, the fourth the Praelonganian, the fifth of S. Peter,
the sixth the Coenobrensian in the Rhetian Valley, the seventh the
Castellanean, the eighth the Aceriensian, the ninth the Malantiensian, the 10
the Maievill^nsian. But these 3 confaederacies have 50 jurisdictions, of which
one Commonwealth is framed: For albeit the most of them have meetings of their
own, and also Magistrates, Laws or rather customs, and power to judge of
civil and criminal matters, yet the Senate of the three confaederacies has
the greatest power and authority. And sometimes they have entered into other
confaederacies, notwithstanding this perpetual confaederacie. In the year
1419. the Bishop and the Curiensian College made a league with the Tigurinians
for 51. years, having formerly entered into society with the Glaronians. The
Rhaetians also of the higher confaederacie, did a long time join themselves
with the Vrians; and the confaederates of the house of God, did join
themselves in perpetual league, with the 7 Cantons (as they call them) of the
Helvetians. He that desires to know more concerning these matters, let him
have recourse to Sprecherus his Rhaetia, and Egidius Scudius his Rhaetia, and
Simlers Helvetia. I will only add, that the length of Rhaetia at this day, if
it be taken from the South, unto the North, is about 15 Rhaetian or German
miles, accounting 8000 paces to every mile; the breadth of it from the East to
the West, is thirteen miles, or there abouts.

THE RHETIANS Now called the GRISONES.
RHAETIA Karte vand' Grisons end veltolina
map

A DESCRIPTION of the Low COUNTRIES.
BEing now to describe that part of France which belongs to the King of
Spain, I will follow that order which I have observed in the description of
France.

The Index of the Tables of the Low Countries.
1. The Low Countries in general. 2. Flanders. 3. -- The Eastern part. 4.
Brabant. 5. Holland. 6. Zeland. 7. Gelderland. 8. Zutphania. 9. Vltrajcitum.
10. Mechlinia. 11. Gro^ni^ga. 12. Transisulania. 13. Artesia. 14. Hannoma. 15.
Namurcum. 16. Lutzenburg 17. Limburgh.
I Have hitherto faithfully described the Kingdom of France, now I come to the
Low Countries, being my dearest and Native Country. And first to begin with the
name. Some would have this part of Europe, the which is now called the Lower
Germany, to be called Belgium by Caesar, in which he writes that he billited
three Legions, and Hircius four. But Marlianus and Glaroanus do take it for a
City not for a Country. But Vegetius will hardly believe that one City can
contain five Legions. And Caesar himself shows in his fourth book, that
many Cities were comprehended within Belgium, where he says that they did
inhabit the Sea cost of Britain, who passed over out of Belgium, to get some
prey and booty, who were all called after the names of those Cities, from
whence they came. But yet he does not understand by Belgium all Gallia Belgica.
For in the same book, he does distinguish the Nervians, the Morimans, and
Essuans, who are people of Belgica, from Belgicum. Therefore it seems by
Ortelius that he calls a part of Belgica Belgium, and that part most likely
which is toward the North, which does contain Holland, Zeland, Flanders,
Gelderland, and Cleveland. Some call that Belgica which Caesar makes the third
part of France: which name some do derive from a famous City in this
Country, others from Belgius, a certain Captain of the Belgians, and others
from other occasions. Hadrian Iunius, supposes that it was called THE
DESCRIPTION OF THE LOVV COVNTERIES.
INFERIOR GERMANIA
map Belgium from the fierceness of the Nation, being named Belgae as it were
Velgae, that is, fierce and violent; or else they were called Belgae by
changing of the second vowell into the first, as it were Balgas, from their
hotnesse and pronenesse to fight: for Balgen signifies to fight. But the
Country which we now entreat of, is but the half part of Belgia. It is called
now Lower Germany; Germany, because it differs little in speech, manners,
laws, and customs, from the Almaines, and the other Germans. It is called
the lower, because it is nearer the Sea than the other part of Germany, and in
respect of the higher Germany, the fields and grounds do lie lower. It is
commonly called the Netherland, the French call it Le Pais Bas. It is called
also almost throughout all Europe by the figure Synecdoche, that is, by taking
a part of the whole, Flanders, either in regard of the power and beauty of that
Country above the rest, or for the chief and famous Mart Towns, or the
ancient Faires kept at Bruges; or lastly because it is better known, and is
nearer to France, England, Spain, and Italy. And so much concerning the name,
the situation and quantity follows. The bounds of Lower Germany or Belgium
(for these words I will use promiscuously) are on the North the Ocean: on the
South Lotaringia, Campania, and Piccardie: on the East the Rivers Rhene and
Mosa; on the West the Sea. These Princes are neighbors unto it, the Earl of
East Friseland, the Bishop of Munster, the Duke of Cleveland, the Bishop of
Colen and Trevers, and the King of France. This is the situation: the quality
of the soil follows, which arises from the Climate. Low Germany is under
the middle of the seventh and all the eight climate, between the degrees of
longitude 22 and an half, and 30, and between the degrees of Latitude 48, and
a half, and fifty three and a half. The longest day in Summer toward the
middle of the Climate is 16 hours long, and at the beginning of the ninth
climate, it is 16, hours long, and three quarters. It contains all the
Parallels, which are between 16 and 21, the Air in the Low Countries is
moist, yet wholesome to the inhabitants. The summers are delightful, pleasant,
and temperatly hot: they have not too much heat, nor no great store of flies
and gnatts, nor sildome any thunder, or earthquakes. The winters are long and
windy, and when it is a North or East wind, it occasions sudden frosts: but
when the wind is in the South or West, the air is more mild, and the cold is
turned into rain. The soil for the most part is sandy and gravelly, as a
great part of Flanders, and almost all Brabant, it is reasonable fertile in
producing corn, and other fruits, and some places are very fertile, as
Zeland, Flanders, Hann^nia, Artesia, Gelderland. And it has abundance of
Corn, Barley, Rye, Hemp, and Cotton. It produces also all kinds of fruits
in great plenty, as Apples, Pears, Prunes, Cherries, Mulberies, Peaches,
Apricockes, Filberts, Medlars, and in some places Chestnuts. And here is
abundance of Madder gathered for Dyers, and a great gain is made of it, by
transporting it into other Countries. There are no metal Mines of any great
note: As concerning the trees; they do yield a pleasant prospect, standing
thick and very orderly, and being laden with fruit, and besides they serve
for firewood and timber for building of houses, being very high and wondrous
thick, and there are great store of them here. There are few Bay-trees, and
Cypress trees. There are also great store of Teile trees commonly called
Lindon, which are like to Elmes in shape, and leaves, but they be bigger and
do sooner come forward. For in 16, or 18, years they will be as big as a man's
middle. They use them also in building: and they make coals of them which are
better to make gunpowder than Willow coals. Between the Bark and the wood
there is a kind of down like Cotton, of which they make roapes and cordage.
But many beasts will not eat the leaves thereof though they be new budded
forth. As Virgill shows in this verse: Nec Tiliae leves, nec torno rasile
Bruxum;
Neither the light teale Tree
Nor Box that cannot turned be.
And Ovid. Nec Tiliae leves, nec Fagus, and innuba Quercus,
Not the light Tealetree, nor Beech which spreads,
Nor the Oak that never weddes.


It has also great plenty of Ew trees which is a poisonous tree, but excellent
Bows are made of them. Of the juice thereof a poison is made, with which
Caesar reports that Cattivalcus king of the Eburonians did make away
himself. There is also another kind of tree which is not found any where else,
which is like a white Poplar, the inhabitants do call it in the plural number
Abeelen. There is great store of them in Brabant, which serve for diverse uses,
especially at Bruxels. The Low Countriemen may praise the goodness of their
soil for bringing up of Cattle. For Oxen, horses, sheep, and great herds of
cattle are bred there. And especially great, strong horses fit for service in
the wars. There are also the best Oxen, especially in Holland and Friesland,
where an Ox often waigheth a thousand and two hundred pound weight. Ludovicke
Guicciardine an Italian, unto whom our Country is much beholding for making an
accurate and true description thereof, says that the Earl of Mechlin had an
Ox given him which weighed two thousand, five hundred, and eight and twenty
pound, which he caused afterward to be painted in his Palace. The Kine have
loose great Vdders, and full of milk. For in some parts of Holland in Summer
time, they will give four and forty Pints of milk. I pass by many other
things, least I should be tedious. For hunting they have abundance of Does,
Hearts, Goats, Boares, Badgers, Hares, and Conies, and other games besides. And
for Hawking they have Hernes, Kites, Vultures, Partridges, Phesants, Turtle
Doves, Starlings, Thrushes, Storkes, Duckes, Geese, Woodcockes, or Snipes,
which Nemesianus describes thus.

Praeda est facilis and amaena Scolopax
Corpore non Paphijs avibus majore videbis,
Illa sub aggeribus primis, qua proluit humor
Pascitur, exiguos sectans obsonia vermes
At non illa oculis, quibus est obtusior, et si
Sint nimium grandes, sed acutus naribus instat
Impresso in terram rostri mucrone, sequaces
Vermiculos trahit, atque gulae dat praemia vili.
The Woodcocke is easy to ensnare,
Their bodies no bigger than Doves are;
And by some watery ditches side
Feeding on worms he does abide:
Not by his eyes though they be great,
But by his bill he finds his meat,
Thrusting his bill into the ground,
Where when he a worm has found,
He draws him forth, and so does live
By that food which the earth does give.
They have also Affricke Hens, and great plenty of other Hens. But enough of
these things, let us now proceed to other matters; It is worth your knowledge
to know how the Provinces of the low Countries were united, and grew to be one
body, and how it fell to Charles the fifth and his son Philip. Ludovicke
Malanus Earl and Lord of Flanders, Nivernia, Rastella, Salina, Antuerp, and
Mechlin, and after his Mothers death, Earl of Burgundy and Artesia, married
Margaret, daughter to John Duke of Brabant, by which marriage he came to be
Duke of Brabant, Limburg, and Lotaringia. By his wife he had one only
daughter, who was the inheritrix to her fathers Lands, who in the year 1369.
at Gandave married Philip Valesius Duke of Burgundy, who for his singular
Valor, was surnamed the Bold. He lived 70 years, and dyed at Halla near to
Bruxells, in the year of Christ, 1404. He left these children behind him,
John, Antony, and Philip Valesius: Catharine, Mary, and Margaret. All of them
did increase their Patrimony by marriage. Catharine married Lupoldus Duke of
Austria: Mary married Amedees Duke of Sabaudia: Margaret married the Earl of
Holland, and Hannonia, Antonius Vaselius was made by his father Duke of
Brabant, Lotaringia, and Limburg, he married Elizabeth Duchess of Lutzenburg,
by whom he had these sons, John who married Iacoba Countess of Holland, and
Philip, both Dukes of Brabant. Antonius, and his younger brother Philip
Valesius, were slain in the French wars near Teroana in the year 1415.
Antonius his sons, dying afterward without issue, left their Uncle John
Valesius, their heir, and John Valesius, who was called the Undaunted, being
the elder brother, succeeded his father in the year 1404, and obtaining by his
brothers and Nephews death many large possessions, was miserably and unjustly
put to death, in the year 1419, by Charles the Dolphin, for the Duke of
Orleance, with whom he always lived in continual enmity and hostility. He
left these children, Philip, Margaret, Isabell, and Catharine. Philip surnamed
the good or godly succeeded his Father, in the three and twentyeth year of his
age, in the Dukedom of Burgundy, the County of Flanders, Burgundy, Artesia,
in the Marquiship of the Empire, of Salina, and Mechlin. He at Atrebatum made a
league with Charles the 7 and with the Duke of Orleance, and freed him out of
prison, having been five and twenty years prisoner in England, and paid his
ransom, and gave him his sister Mary to wife. He after the death of
Theodericke, Earl of Murcium was made heir of this County: and after the
death of Philip, he had the Dukedom of Brabant, Lotaringia, and Limburg: and
after the death of Iacoba, he had the Counties of Hannonia, Holland, Zeland,
and Friesland: And also the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, came to him by his wife
Elizabeth, the widow of his Uncle Antonius: so that it came to pass, that the
large and rich Provinces of both Burgundies, of Brabant, of Limburg, of
Lutzenburg, of Flanders, of Artesia, of Hannonia, of Holland, of Zeland, of
Namurcium, of Friesland, of Mechlin, and the Marquiship of the Empire were all
subject to Phillip the good. He had to wife Isabell, daughter to the King of
Portugal: he lived seaventy two years, and dyed in the year 1457, leaving
one son called Charles the Bold, to be heir unto so many Provinces, who did
not only keep his fathers Empire, but also enlarged it, by joining unto it
Gelderland, Zutphania, and the Iuliacensian Dukedom. And this is that Charles
who was the Grandfather of Charles the fifth, who was borne in the year 1500
of Ioane the daughter of Ferdinand King of Arragon, the wife of Philip of
Austria: which Phillip was the son of Maximilian of Austria, by his mother
Mary the daughter of Charles the bold; under whom, these Provinces which before
had many Lords, being united, grew to be one body, and now they are commonly
called the Low Countries. Long since the Low Countrymen were accounted brave
soldiers. And Caesar Lib. 1. Commentaries, concerning the French war, does
call them the valiantest of all the Gaulls. For he writes thus. The valiantest
of all the Gauls are the Low Countriemen, because they care not for trimnesse
of attire, and merchants have not frequent recourse unto them, and therefore
those commodities are not brought to them which do effeminate the mind; and
they are near to the Germans, who live beyond the Rhene, with whom they wage
continual war; by which reason also the Helvetians do exceed the other
Frenchmen for valor, because they have daily skirmishes and fights with the
Germans, when either they drive them forth out of their borders, or they do
make inroades into their Territories. And hence we may collect their strength
and courage in defending their liberties, that in the time of C. Caesar, they
endeavored to shake off the Roman yoke of subjection. And so they mustred
and joined armies to contend with them. The Bellovacians set forth 6000
soldiers, the Suessones 5000, and the Nervians (who were then so wild and
uncivil, that they would not suffer Merchants at that time to bring them wine
or other commodities) did set forth 5000. The Atrebatians and Ambianians did
set forth 10000, the Morineans five and twenty thousand. The Menapians 60,
thousand. The Caletians 10 thousand; the Velocassians and Veromanduans, did set
forth 10 thousand a piece: the Advaticians 18, thousand: the Condrusians,
Eburonians, and Caemanians, 40 thousand. So that the whole sum of choice
Soldiers was 273 thousand, as Orosius witnesses: or as Caesar himself
delivers, their number was 368 thousand, whereby it appears that the Low
Country men were always noble Soldiers. And Caesar in the second of his
Commentaries says, that it was they alone who in our fathers time did vex all
France, and did keep out the Teutomanes and Cimbrians, out of their
Territories; whereby it came to pass, that the memory of their atchiuements,
did make them valiant and full of courage in Military affairs. And foreign
armies have found it in our age, who being fresh soldiers and joining battle
with the old soldiers, they found that the Citizens, Countrymen, and Seamen,
were al stout of courage. There are 17 Provinces in the low Countries, all of
which the Emperor Charles the fifth did possess: in which there are 4
Dukedomes, the Dukedom of Brabant and Limburg, which together with the County
of Dale and the Lordships of Valckenburg, and Rode le Duc, is joined to
Brabant, and it depends on the Chancerie of Brabant: also the Dukedomes of
Lutzenburg and Gelderland. There are 7 Counties, Flanders, Artesia, Hannonia,
Holland, Zeland, Namurcium and Zutphania: also the Marquiship of the holy
empire, which has four principal Cities, Nivella, Lovanium, Bruxelis, and
the Metropolis Antwerpe; it is now a part of Brabant. There are five Lordships,
or Signiories, of West-Friesland, of Mechlin, of Vltrajectum, of
Trans-Isaliana, and Groneland. There are many Cities, in the Low Countries,
which are well fortified, the number whereof as also of the Towns and villages
you may find in Mercator. But the chief Cities are Lovaine, Bruxells,
Antuerpe, Silva Ducis, Gandavum, Bruges, Hipra, Mechlinia, Cameracum,
Atrebatum, Tornacum, Valencena, Insulae, Dort, Harlem, Amsterdam, Lugdunum
Battavorum, Namurcum, Neomagum, Trajectum and others. There is a great company
of Lakes, Pooles, and Marshies, in the Low Countries, which do not only hold
great store of fish, but do also fortify those Countries, against the
invasion of enemies. Few Rivers do rise in this Country, but many Rivers,
which have their spring head farther off, do glide through it, and do much
enrich it. The chiefest are Rhene, Mosa, Scaldis, Amisis: the lesser are
Mosella, Lisa, Aa, Sambra, Dela, and many others. We will speak of Rhene and
Amasis in Germany, and we have spoken of Mosella in Germany, now we will
describe the rest. Mosa does flow out of the Mountain Vogesus, which is
situate on the borders of the Lingonians, not far from the Fountains of
Araris and Matrona, and so running Northward it glideth by the Church of Saint
Theobald, or Saint Tibaut, where it begins to be navigable: from thence it
slideth to Virdunum, and from thence bending toward Caecia, it runs strait
forward to Mosa and Maseriacum. From thence turning Northward, it visits
Carolomont, Boviniacum, Dinantum, and Namurcum; and there growing wider by the
receipt of the River Sabis, it turns it self Westward, and so having viewed
Hoium, and Leodium, and glided by Trajectum, and Stochemum, it passes by
Ruremunda and Venloium: where turning Westward it warreth Cuicka, Ravestienum
and Megena: afterward being received into the Rhene, near the Town of
Herwerd, and so afterward mingleth it self with Vahalus, and straiteway they
part again, yet still keeping their own names: and so they fall in two
divided streams, into the River Loveste^num: where they do encircle the
Bomelian Island, and so join together again, and losing their ancient name
they are called by the name of Merova: and so gliding by Worcomium and
Gorcomium, they come at last unto Dort, and there making the Island of
Iselmond, it is called Mosa, and so retayning still the same name, having
glided by Roterdame and Vlaerdinga, it enters into the Sea, about the Brill
with such a violent current, that for a long way together it preserves his
water fresh and sweet. And Sturgions delighting in this sweet fresh water are
allured to come up the River, and so are easily taken; which does not happen to
other Rivers, because they entering the Sea with a quiet gentle stream, their
water presently becomes salt, as Seyne, Iberus Thames, and many other great
Rivers. On the contrary, Eridanus, Tiber, Rhodanus, Garumna, and other Rivers
which run into the Sea with greater violence, do in like manner as Mosa
allure and entice the Sturgeons to come up into them, but not in so great
Plenty. Besides, the Sturgions which are taken in the Rivers Mosa and Rhene,
are greater and more pleasant in taste than those in the Mediterranean Sea.
They are of a silver shining color, of a great bigness. There are some taken
which do weigh above 400 pound. Guicciardine does report, that he saw in the
Market at Antwerp a Sturgeon of 420 pound weight, and that it was above 12
feet of Antwerp long: and on another day in the morning he saw 70. Sturgeons
together, the least of which was above five foot long. This fish is first
seen in Holland, Zeland, and Friesland, in the Month of April, and it is
found three months together or longer, during which time great store of them
are taken. And from hence transported into other Countries, especially into
England, being salted up, and so kept from putrefying; and also at other times,
all the year through, they take lesser sturgeon, which are delicate in taste.
Out of this, being enticed by the freshwater, they come up into the mouth of
the River Mosa, in which there are very fat Salmones, Trouts, which are taken
here all the year long, also Lampreys, Mulletts, Congers, and other kinds of
excellent fish, which here for brevitie sake I omit. But this is wonderful,
that those fish are bad if they be taken in the Sea, but very good and fat,
when they enter into fresh water. Besides, this River does naturally breed
besides other fish, Trouts, Lampries, some greater and some les, but more
delicate in taste. Schaldis which Ptolemie calls Thahuda, the Low countriemen
Schelt, the French Escault, does rise in Veromanduum, near Saint Martines
Abbey, as they call it, where it gently slideth between Castellet, and
Beau-revior, two French Fortifications, and so runs to Cameracum: thence
going toward the Country of Hannonia, it watreth the noble City of Valence:
and afterward growing navigable, having received the River Hania, it glideth by
the Condatum; and afterward being enlarged by the receipt of the River Scarpa,
it vieweth S. Amandum, and so bending Northward toward Tornacum, it glideth by
Aldenarda, and the famous City Gandauum, where it receives the Rivers L^sa,
and L^via, and other streams. From thence with many windings and Maeander-like
turnings it runs forward to Teneremunda: and there having received the River
Tenera, flowing on the right hand, it goes toward Rupelmunda: and there it
receives Rupela, and a little after D^la: and being now grown bigger, it by
and by washes the walls of Antwerp, and makes a fair Haven or Harbor for
ships before the Town: afterward having run a little further, it parts
it self into two channells, and so divides Brabant and Flanders from Zeland:
for on the left hand, it windeth and bends Southward, and so runs by the
shores and borders of Flanders, and is called by another name de Hont, from the
barking noise thereof; from whence it passes by Zuytbeveland and Walachria
into the Western Ocean: on the right hand leaving Brabant, it keeps one
continual course in his old channel, by the Island of Scaldia, and so with a
violent current runs into the Sea. Moreover the tide follows up into this
River, even to Gandauum, which is thirty miles from the mouth of it, if you
count them by the winding course of the banks. There do come up into this
River Sturgeons, Salmones, Troutes, great Lampreys, Turbotts, Congers, Cuckoo
fishes Mullets, Crabs, Lobsters, Sardins, and many most delicate fish, which
come up out of the Sea into Scaldis, and do there feed, and cast their
spawne; so that for two or three months, between the Spring and the Summer,
besides the greater fish, there is taken so great a number of small Fry, that
many men do live by them. Also many Sea Dogfishes, and Porpoises do come up
this River, which two land of fishes do not cast forth any spawne, but do
bring forth their young ones perfectly formed. The Dogfishes do bring forth
their young on the Land, and do suckle them with their dugges, until they are
grown to a good bigness. Moreover, this River without the help of the Sea,
does yield diverse kinds of fish all the year long, of which these are the
chief: Pikes, Barbells, Tenches, Carpes and Breames of an unusual bigness,
so that they do sometimes, weigh 20 pound, also Gudgeons, and many other
kinds of fish both great and small. Also diverse kinds of Eeles, and Crabbes,
and in the mouth of the River, there are some Oysters, which come thither out
of the Sea. And therefore this River for multitude of fish and variety, is not
inferior not only to any River of France, but also of all Europe. Aa rises
near Teroana, and so bending toward Caesia, it slideth by the Church of Saint
Audomare, and so coming to Griveling (near which in the year 1558 that
famous battle was fought between the Burgundians and the French) it does
discharge it self into the British Sea. Lisa commonly called de Leye, rises
in Artesia, in the Town Lisburg, which takes his name from this River, near
Teroana: and having viewed Aria, Armenteria, Wervicum, and Meenen, and from
thence cutting through the middle of Cortracum and Gandauum, it mingleth it
self with Scaldis: it has abundance of very good fish. Sambra commonly called
Sambre, which Caesar calls Sabris, does rise in Hannonia, near the Town
Novion; and so having viewed the Towns, which are commonly called Landrecy,
Sassene, Barlaymont, Mabeuge, Merne, and Cassele: at last it glideth by
Namarcum, and so discharges it self into Mosa, and is full of delicate fish.
Dela rises in Brabant, near the Village Town Tila, and so bending Northward
it runs to Waveta; and afterward it flows by Louanium which is three miles
distant from thence, and so keeping on his course for three miles, and
afterward bending Westward, it embraces Mechlinia with many spreading arms,
and afterward four miles from Rup^limunda, being now grown very big it
falls into Scaldis. The River La Seine, as it seems, was so named from the
Senones a people of Britain, when they came into these Countries to vex and
disturb the French. It rises near the Town Soigni in Hannonia, and so
runs to Halla, and having glided by Bruxells, it flows by Viluorda: and
afterward bending toward Caecia, it leaves Mechlin on the right hand, and
having gone a little further it powers it self into the River Dela. Diza
rises near the little Town called Per: and so turning Northward it waters
Eindovia, and so keeping his former course it comes to Silva Ducis, beneath
which it powers it self into Mosa. Demera does slow forth near the
Tungrians, in the Dioecese of the Leodiensians, and so running Westward it
waters Bilsenum, 'Hasselt, and Die, and from thence gliding by Sichenum and
Arschotum, it powers it self into Dela. Netha rises near the Town Rhetum,
and flows by the Town Herentalls, and from thence keeping a direct course,
it runs to the Signiorie of Grobendoncke, and having received the little
River Aade, it passes by Lira, and so watreth Dusten and Walem, and a little
further it mingleth it self with Dela. Rueur, or Rhoer, which Tacitus calls
Adrana, as Ritheimerus writes, does rise near the Town Bullinge, and cutting
through Caesia it glideth by Dura and Iuliacum, and at length near Ruremunda
which it names, it falls into Mosa. There are also other lesser Rivers,
which for brevitie sake I forbear to describe. And I pass over also the
Torrents, and greater Rivers, least I should be tedious to the Reader; which
do not only yield great store of fish, but are also an ornament and
fortification to the Country, and are very convenient for the passing of
commodities to and fro. And the Country people by the help of these Rivers
making Sluices and Dams to stay the water, do afterward dig channells for
some miles together, and after letting the water into them do make them
navigable: so that there is no City which has not great Barks, which come
up unto it. But this Country has but few fountains, or Springs of water,
except in the Mountainous places. And thus having showed the Rivers that are in
the Low Countries, it remains that we should speak somewhat concerning the
Ocean: seeing in regard it is so near unto it, it may be counted not only a
member of this Province, but the chief head thereof. I say therefore that the
Ocean is wide and large, and in rough weather, it is fearful and terribly
furious: for some times when tempests happen, the waves go so high, that it
does overflow and drown whole Countries: and especially it breaks oftentimes
in about the coast of Zeland: but the inhabitants do cast up trenches and
banks, which do prevent the danger which might ensue thereby: unless when a
western wind does contend and blow against the spring tide. The winds which
do most trouble the sea, and thereby do endanger the Country, are the
Northwest, the West and the South winds. Also it is much troubled at the New
Moon or Full-moone, and the two Aequinoctialls, at which time (as Cornelius
Tacitus witnesses) the Sea does swell very much. For every new Moon, and full
Moon, we see that there are still the greatest tides and greatest tempests.
These tides do produce some good, and some evil effects. As for the former,
it purges the water (as common experience does teach us) and will not suffer
it to corrupt: and also it makes ships sail more speedily. For as Vegesius
says, Lib. 4. concerning Military matters, Cap. 42. Haec reciprocantis meatus
ambiguitas cursum Navium secunda adjuvat, retardat adversa: that is, Those
tides if they be with a ship, do hasten her course, but being against her do
foreslow and stay her course. The other evil effects, are the inundations, and
violent irruptions of the Sea: For the Ocean does sometimes come up into the
land with such violence, that it drives back great Rivers, and does overflow
spacious fields, as we said before. Pomponius Mela does write as much, and the
miserable experience of many ages does confirm it. But so much concerning
these things. And now having spoken of the Detriment and loss, which some
Countries of this Province do receive by the Ocean, when it is rough and
troubled, we must speak somewhat of the commodities, which the whole Province
does reap by it, when it is quiet and peaceable, which commodities are so many
and so great, that if they should want them, the Country could not sustain the
half part of the inhabitants. And hence it comes to pass, that this Province
is as it were the Haven and Mart of all Europe, so that there is an infinite
multitude of Merchants and Factors, and as it were a confused Chaos of
inhabitants and forreiners. Besides, the Ocean brings many commodities to
this Country, as Herring fishing, and other fishings, which serve not only to
satisfy the voluptuous desires of the rich, but also to sustain the poor:
and the inhabitants do not only get their food, but all their wealth by it.
For the overplus of that which they take, does furnish a great part of France,
Spain, Germany, England, and other Countries: yea great store of barreld
salt-fish is sent even into Italy, especially Salmones and Herrings. Now there
are three kinds of fish which they salt, namely Herrings, Codfish, and
Salmones. But first we will speak of their Herring fishing of which they make
a great commodity. Herrings are found in no River, nor in the Mediterranean
Sea, nor the Spanish nor any other Sea, but only in this Northern Ocean:
their bigness, form, and goodness is sufficiently known. And when they go
out of the Northern Sea, which is always in the Spring time, as if they
fleeted from their own native quarters, and went to seek shady places, they
come in such great shoales, that no Nets can hold them, but that they break
through them, and do even darken the face of the Sea. And many broad bottomed
vessels, which they call Busses, are set out from Holland, Friesland, France,
Britain, and Scotland; and do all to avoid contention, fish in several
parts, and quarters, either about England, or the Coasts of Scotland, and the
Orcades. These fishes are unbowelled alive if it may be (for as soon as they
are out of the Sea waters they are dead) by one who has good wages for doing
it; and then another salts them, and so they are presently barrelled up, and
afterward sold; afterward the Herring men and Coupers do salt them anew, and
take out the Pilchers which have no Milts nor Rows, they are barrell'd up
again with new pickle: afterward they are surveyed by men sworn for that
purpose, and so sealed up, in like manner as Diana's Priest did seal up red
Vermilion, as Galen witnesses. And these are the first kind of Herrings which
with Plautus we may call salt or pickled Herrings: the other sort are those
which are lightly salted; and so dried in the smoke, being as yellow as gold,
whence they call them Soretum, because they call a red color in their language
Sorus. This Herrng fishing is very commodious and advantageous to the
Commonwealth of Holland and Zeland, seeing not only one City, but many
Cities do wholly depend and live on it, and the City and Country get their
food by it, pay their debts, maintain families, and do get wealth by it.
There is another special kind of fish which they use to salt, called in Latin
As^llus Major, or Cod-fish, thereby to difference it from that which is
commonly ealled Caballian. It is a great fish, so that some of them are
threescore pound weight. It is taken at many times of the year, but especially
in Lent time, and chiefly in the Friesland Sea, and great store of it is
usually salted up, whereby the whole country reapeth yearly great profit. The
third kind of salt fish is Salmon: being very good when it is fresh as well as
salted. Holland and Zeland have store of this kind of fish, in all months, but
most plenty in April, May, and June: of which there is such great store
salted up, that the gain which is made of them amounts to 200000 crowns.
But of these things enough, let us proceed to the rest. The Low Countries are
plain and level: there are few Hills in it, and fewer Mountains, unless it
be in Lutzenburg, Namurcum, and some parts of Hannonia, where they are very
thick, and there are many also in Leodium. It is every where beautified with
Forests and Woods, which both grace the Country, and afford much pleasure in
hunting. The Forest of Arden, in Julius Caesar's time, as he himself writes,
was the greatest of all France, running between the Treverians, from the River
Rhene to the Nervians, and the Rhenicans, being above fifty miles long. And now
at this time no wood in all France can be compared with it: but now there is a
great part of it converted into arrable ground, so that it is far lesser than
it was: and that part which remains has many glades made in it, which the
husband men do till, and call it by another name, but the greatest part of it
is from Theonis Villa even to Leodium, which is thirty miles in length. In the
middle of it is the City of S. Hubert, which as Gemma Frisius witnesses,
lies under 26 degrees of Longitude and forty minutes: and 50 degrees of
Latitude, and 4. minutes. This Wood has all kinds of pleasant trees, which
are very high, and broad-spreading, which afford both pleasure and profit.
Strabo calls it Arduenna, the Inhabitants Arddenna; Rhenanus, Luitticherwald,
which signifies the Leodiensian Wood. Mormavia, or Morman, is a fair wood in
Hannonia, which begins near to Quesnoy, and so runs out Southward toward
the Veromanduans: and has many Towns in it, and Villages, and many clear
springs and pleasant Fountains. Here is great store of Charecoale made: whence
some supposed that it is a Part of the wood Carbonaria, but some affirm that
the wood Carboina did lie more Eastward between the Rivers Mosa, and Sabis;
and that the pleasant wood Archia is a part of it, in which there is a Town of
the same name, fortified with a strong Castle, and there the Lords of
Berlaymont, were wont to reside: There is also in Hannonia the pleasant wood of
Saint Amand, which is also called the Ramensian wood, because it is near unto
it. It begins on the edge of Flanders near the town of Saint Amand, whence
it receives his name, and so runs forth Eastward toward the Valesians, with
a great breadth. The Ramensian wood belongs to the Lord of Emerie, who is the
chief ranger of Hannonia, which title belongs unto him only. Silva
Faignensis, or le bois de Faigne, begins in Hannonia near Avenna, and
reaches even to Masieris, which is sixteen miles, though heretofore it were
far larger. It seems that it was so called from the Fawnes and Satires,
whom perhaps the Poets did therefore feign to have horns, and Goats feet,
because the first inhabitants of this Wood were so rude and savage, that they
were like beasts. The Soniensian wood is three or four flight shots off from
Bruxells, and it runs Southward toward Brenna, even to Alleuda, and the
Castle of Brenna, for three miles in length. It is a great spacious Wood, so
that it is seven miles compass round about: and there are very may Cities,
Towes, Abbeys, and Monasteries in it, so that in Summer time many of the
Nobles, and wealthier Citizens do go thither with their whole families for
recreation sake, and tarry three or four weeks. Saventerloo is enclosed with
Lovanium, Bruxells, and Vilvordia. It is a pleasant wood, and receives his
name from Saventria, a Town lying near unto it. Also Grootenhout is a Wood in
Brabant, which stands not far from Turneholt, in which the River Ada
rises, which does afterward discharge it self into the River Natha. It is a
great Wood, in which Queen Mary, to whom Turnholt did belong, was wont to hunt
much. There is also Marlaigne, a Wood in Namurcum, which begins near the
City Namurcum* and runs Southward toward Phillipolis: and so reaches even
to Mosa. Niepa is a chief Wood in Flanders, not far from the confines of
Artesia, it is two miles distant from the River Lisa, from the Castle of the
Morineans and Baliolum: it is a pleasant, spacious and ancient Wood, having a
strong Castle in it. Also Nonnen is situate in Flanders, and extending it self
Northward in a great breadth, it does contain many Villages and some Abbeys.
Poodsbergia is a great wood, between Flanders and Hannonia, not far from
Gerardimontium and Lessina, and is pleasant in regard of the roundnes of it.
Gulielmi Silva, or Williams Wood is situate in Artesia, nere Rentiacum where
the Emperor joined battle with the King of France, in the year 1554.
Engelerwallia, is a pleasant wood in Gelderland nere Arnhemum. The 7 woods, are
7 great woods, which are nere unto the Transilanians, from whence one part of
Fiesland is denominated, which is now called Sevenwolden, that is to say, 7
Woods: every one of them is very spacious and has many fair towns in them.
But so much concerning the woods. I come now to the public works. There are in
these Countries innumerable magnificent Temples, and Churches, many Abbeys,
infinite numbers of Monasteries, and Friaries, many Hospitalls for strangers,
for the sick, for the poor and for Orphans. Truly in Antwerp only there are 42
such like buildings: the chief of which is the Cathedral Church of S. Mary,
which is very spacious, having a Tower Steeple, which is 400 and 20 foot high,
being built of white Marble, from the top whereof you may view the City, the
River covered with ships, and the Country round about which is full of Towns
and Cities. What should I describe the other Temples, Monasteries, and such
like places, of which there are great store both here and in other Cities and
Towns? What should I reckon up the sumptuous Palaces belonging to Dukes,
Earls, and Noblemen? Or what should I mention the other public or private
buildings? for if I should endeavor to reckon them up, I should sooner want
time than matter; wherefore it is better to be silent, than to speak too
sparingly. The politic state of these Countries both in general and special
is threefold: the first is the Ecclesiastic state, in which the Abbots are the
chief, the second is of the Nobility, as the Duks, Earls, Marcgraves,
Princes, Barrons, and great Lords. The third is of the Cities, which the
chief Cities of every Country do represent. These states the Prince calls
together, when they are to consult concerning matters appertaining to the
Prince, or to the Principality, or to the preservation or utility of the
Country. The Ecclesiasticke state is thus; there are four Bishops in the Low
Countries, the Camaracensian, the Tornaycensian, and the Atrebatensian* these
three are under the Archbishop of Rhemes, and the Vltrajectine who is under
the Archbishop of Colen. I proceed to the Universities, which are 4, the
University of Lovaine, and Doway, of Leyden, and Flankford. Lovaine is famous
for the many Colleges, Students, and learned men; the chief Colleges are
Lilium, Castrense, the College of Porus and Falcon, in which Philosophy is
read. The Buslidian College has three languages taught in it, namely, Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew. This University, at the request of the Nobles of Brabant,
was first instituted and adorned with Privileges by John the 4, Duke of
Brabant, in the year 1426. Martinus the fifth being Pope. The other were
erected in our memory. Out of which as it were out of the Trojan horse
innumerable learned men have proceeded, and do daily come from thence. For in
the Low Countries there are learned men, skillful in all faculties and
sciences: and as heretofore, so now it produces famous Scholars; whom it
would be too tedious to reckon up. Here are diverse Libraries in sundry places,
which are replenished with excellent rare Books. Among which that at Leyden is
the chief. The inhabitants are fair, quiet, not choleric, nor ambitious,
nor proud: not much given to venerie; civil, plain, courteous, affable,
ingenious and ready, witty, and sometimes talkative: laborious, industrious,
faithful, grateful toward those that have done them a courtesy, capable of
all Arts and Sciences, stout in defending their liberties, and Privileges even
to death. And this may truly be spoken in the general praise of them, that
the Low Country men are frugall house keepers and thrifty husbands: who
following the example of the Ant, do lay up before winter, that which cannot
then be gotten; and do buy fish and flesh, which they either pickle up, or do
dry it in the smoke. For every house, according to the number of their
family, does kill in Autumn an whole Ox, or provideth half an one, beside a
Hog, which they salt up, and then it will serve them to spend a good part of
the year, until the Spring return again. Yet many of them are very
covetous, and desirous of wealth. The Women are beautiful, well behaved and
courteous. For according to their Country fashion, they are used from their
childhood to converse familiarly with every one: and therefore they are very
ready both in action or speech or any matter: neither does this freedom or
liberty make them less honest. Neither do they only walk alone through the
City, but they will go for fellowship to the next Towns, without any the
least suspicion of dishonestie. They are very continent, and apt and ready in
their affairs. And they are not only careful of household matters, of which
their husbands take no care, but they also use Merchandise, and dispatch and
confer of businesses belonging unto men: and that with so great dexterity and
diligence, that in many of the Provinces, as in Holland and Zeland, the men do
commit all their affairs unto them. And by this manner of living, joined with
the innate desire which women have to rule, they become for the most part too
Imperious and proud. It is the fashion both among Princes, and men of inferior
rank, as also among other Nations, on this side the Alps, to give the first
born their Parents names, although they be yet living. And the Noble of what
quality and condition soever they are, do more esteem of their eldest
daughter, than the rest of the younger, although they have all an equal dowry:
so that they marry the rest to those unto whom they denied her in marriage,
reserving her for a better husband. And they are to be praised, because they
easily contract marriages with forrainers, if occasion so require, and are not
bound to match them in their own Country, which is a matter very profitable
and commodious: for these alliances by marriage are very advantageous to
themselves and the Commonwealth. Moreover it is accounted undecent and absurd,
for young men to marry old women, or on the contrary for old men to marry young
maids: as also for a noble personage to marry an ignoble person, or a master
to marry his Maid, and a Mistress her servant. But the Low Country men are
chiefly given to Mechanicke Arts, but not of the base and servile sort, but
the more nobler, as weaving, clothing, and making of hangings, and tapestry,
which serve not only for the use of their own country: but are also
transported into France, Spain, Germany, and other parts of Europe, and also
into Asia and Affricke. For Pictures, there is no Nation that does excel it,
nor none does excel in Music, or for variety of Languages. John Eickius a
Lowcountryman, did first show the way how to mingle colors with oil. And
every one in Flanders, Brabant, or Zeland, can speak not only their own
Country speech which is Low Dutch, but also French. The Sea men, Merchants, and
Scholars, can speak also Italian, Spanish, and Greek for the most part: and
some can understand Hebrew, the Chaldean, and Arabicke language. The
Lowcountrie men are also skillful Seamen. I come to their food, the
Lowcountrymen do use Wheat, Rye, Oats, and Barley: they esteem of no pulse
but Beans, and Pease: they have few Vetches and no Millet at all. For the
great strong winds do lay it, and spoil it. The Common people maintain
their families soberly and frugally. Their drink is for the most part Beer,
which is made of Malt, into which they afterward put some ground Barley, and
Hops. And this is a very good and wholesome drink for those that are used to
it; they do also drink much milk. The rich have wine. They eat commonly Rye
bread. They are wont also upon Festival days, especially those which bear
their own name, to make great feasts, and to invite their Parents, Kinsemen,
and friends unto them, and to banquet sumptuously with them, and to show
themselves generous and magnificent. They keep their houses very neat and
clean, being furnished with all kinds of necessary household stuff. And truly
it is a fair sight to see what store of housholdstuffe they have, and how well
ordered it is, and how clean it is kept; in which, without doubt it does
excel all the Nations of the World. But the Low Countriemen are too much given
to the Vice of drinking, in which they take great delight, so that oftentimes
they never give over drinking day nor night; and thereby besides other
inconveniences, they do much wrong their bodies and wits: and without doubt it
is oftentimes the cause of their untimely death, according to that of
Propertius: Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas.
Wine makes beauty fade,
And strength by Wine is decayed.


And they themselves do know it, and confess it, and condemn themselves for
it: but in vain; for the evil custom does prevail over them. Albeit they
may be partly excused. For seeing the air is always moist and melancholy:
they have no other means whereby to cure their hateful, and unwholesome
Melancholy: which Horace seems to intimate, saying: Vino pellite curas, that
is; With wine drive cares away,
Which haunt us every day.


But it were to be wished that they would observe that noble saying of Terence:
Ne quid nimis: Do nothing too much, which now the civiller sort do begin to
observe. The inhabitants do go in good apparel, and are well complexioned.
Lastly, they use much trading and traffic, in which they are very skillful.
And all the Low Countries for the most part does subsist by Merchandising and
Maechanicke Arts.

THE COVNTIE OF FLANDERS.
FLanders although it be not of any great antiquity, yet no reason can be
given for the name of it. The Country whence so called.
Some derive it from a City of that name situated there where Ardenburg is
now; Others derive it from Flandbertus, the son of Blesinda, who was sister
to Clodion King of France: Flandbertus lived in the year of Christ 445. Some
suppose that this Country was so named from Flandrina the wife of Lydericke
the first Earl thereof. Some derive it a flatu and fluctibus, that is, from
the wind and waves, which in regard of the near Vicinitie of the Ocean do
beat upon this Country. So that even to the year 1340. it was a caution used
in selling or conveying of land, that if the Sea broake into it within ten
years afterward, the contract and bargain should be then void and of none
effect: The bounds of it now are on the South Artesia, with Hannonia, and part
of Picardie: on the East Hannonia and Brabant: on the North the Ocean, with
Honta or the mouth of Scaldis, which parts Flanders from Zeland: The
Situation.
on the West the British Ocean or German Sea. It is three days journey in
length, namely from Scaldis on the other side of Antwerp, even to the new
ditch, which is 30 miles. The breadth of it is twenty miles. The air of the
Country is temperate: the soil fertile, The temper of the air.
especially that part which is near the Ocean, and France. There are fair
Meddowes, which may appear from hence, The fruitfulness of the soil.
in regard that Horse-riders do yearly bring Colts out of other neghbour
Countries into Franders: which through the goodness of the pasture, and
sweetness of the air, being lean before, do quickly grow fat and plumpe.
It breeds also diverse sorts of tame Cattle; The variety of living creatures.
very pleasant and delicate in taste, and also an incredible sort of wild
beasts. There are also diverse kinds of fowls, as Pheasants, Partridges,
Peacockes, Hernes, and Storkes. The inhabitants of this Country were heretofore
so addicted to war, that they never scarsely lived quietly or peaceably: so
that their armies have invaded Syria, and the holy Land, and Jerusalem. The
names of the Cities.
There are 30 walled Cities in Flanders. Gandauum, Bruges, Ypra, Insula,
Duacum, Tornacum, Cortracum, Aldenarda, Alostum, Hulsta, Teneramunda,
Birsletum, Newporte, Sluse, Dunkerck, Graveling, Burburg, Dammum, Dixmuda,
Furna, Ardenburgum, Ninova, Berga, Gerardmontium, Cast^llum, Donza, Orchianum,
Lanoyum, Axella, and Ostend. Besides these, there are also free Towns, which
are not inferior unto Cities neither for nobility, or Privileges, nor
magnificent structures, or populousness: as Bella, Poperinga, Hondtscota,
Eccloa, Gistella, Middleburrough, and twenty others. There are in all 1556
villages so that it is a usual Proverb, that Flanders does exceed all the
Countries in the world, and when the Spaniards came into this province with
King Phillip, they thought that all Flanders was but one City. It is now
divided into three parts, the Dutch, the French, and the Imperial part. The
chief is Gandavum which was built by C. Julius Caesar, when he stayed in
Morinium: it is called in Dutch Gendt, the Italians call it Guanto, the French
Gand. It is situate four miles from the Sea, and is watered with four
pleasant Rivers. For Scaldis comes to it out of Hannonia, Lisa out of
Artesia, Livia out of the Haven or Sluice, and Moero from the Ambactae. It is
ten miles distant from Antwerpe, and as many from Bruxells, Mechlin, and
Middleburrough. The compass of it within the walls is, 45640 Roman feet,
that is seven Italian miles. It has 26. Islands, and two hundred and eight
Bridges, and four water mills. And an infinite number of handmills. And an
hundred wind mills. It has five and fifty Churches, and five Abbeys. The
Citizens of this City are famous for Nobility, wealth, and courage. Here the
Emperor Charles the fifth was borne. It also brought forth these learned men,
Iudocus Badius, Johannes Cornarius, Laevinus Brechtus, and the other, Lavinus
Torrentius, Baldvinus Ronsaeus, Vtenhovious, and many others. There are two and
fifty kinds of trades in this City. And seven and twenty sorts of Weavers,
which were first instituted by the Earl Baldwin, the son of Arnold the
Great, in the year 865. Brugae, or Brugges, takes its name either from the
many bridges belonging to it, or from the bridge Brug-stocke, near Oldenburg,
and Ardenburg; out of the ruins of which City eight hundred years before,
the Castle of Brugges was first built; it is situated three miles from the
Sea, in a plain place. The compass of it within the wall 26600 Roman feet,
that is, four Italian Miles and an half. It is the pleasantest City not
only in all Flanders, but also in all the Low Countries: it has threescore
Churches, the chief and fairest whereof, is Saint Domatians Church, which was
heretofore consecrated to the blessed Virgin; it was built by Lidericke the
first, Earl of Flanders, in the year 621. There are threescore and eight
kinds of trades in it. Ypra is so called from the little River Ypra that
flows by it, commonly called Yperen; it was built in the year 1060. The
foundation of this City is said to be of Lead, and that in regard of the many
leaden pipes, which do convey water through the whole City. And these are
the chief Cities. The Havens follow: Sluice is named from the Catarracts or
falling of waters, which the Flandrians do call Sluys, it is a Sea Town: it
has a great Haven, wherein fifty ships may conveniently ride. Over against it
is the Isle Cadsant, where George Cassander was borne. Ostend is situated near
the Ocean, being famous for that grievous seige, which the Arch Duke Albert
laid against it, which it valiantly sustained and held out three years, and
some months, with great loss of men on both sides. Nieuport is three miles
from Ostend, being a Sea City, where Iodocus Clichtoveus THE COVNTRIE OF
FLANDERS.
FLANDRIA
map was borne, near unto which is the Abbey of S. Bernard, in which
heretofore there was the most famous, and best furnished Library in all the
Low Countries. Dunkerke was built it the year 1166. by Baldwin the son of
Arnold, and Earl of Flanders. It has a very short Haven, which troubles all
the neighboring Seas. This City belongs to the King of Navarre. I pass
over the other Cities of Dutch Flanders. In French Flanders there is the Isle
so called from the ancient seat thereof; it was once environed with Lakes and
Marshes: it is a famous City, both for populousness, wealth, and good laws,
and strongest except Antwerpe, and Amsterdam. Douay is situated by the River
Scarpia, here Robert Gaguinus was borne: It has an University, which was
built not many years ago by Philip the second King of Spain. Also Orchies is
in this tract of ground, and Lannoyum famous for the Lords thereof, and by
Francis Raphelengius Citizen thereof; there is also Espinoyum, Armentiers and
Tornacum, or Tournay. In the Imperial part of Flanders there is Alostum, which
is a fair City and well fortified by the River Tenera, and adorned with the
title of a County. It has 170 Villages under it: 2 Principalities, the
Steenhusensian and the Gavarensian, and many Baronies: there is also the
Territory of Wassia, in which there are four Towns: Hulsta, Axela, Bochoute
and Assenede Rupelmonda is a Castle by the River Rupella, which we cannot omit
in this place, in memory of our Gerard Mercator, a most famous Mathematitian,
and Cosmographer, and the Ptolemie of our age. The Rivers are Scaldis, The
Rivers.
Lisa, Tenera, Livia, Ypra, Aa, Scarpa, Rupela, and others: there are few
Mountains, Mountains. Woods.
but there are many Woods and those very profitable, the chief whereof are
Niepensian, and the Nonnensian. The Politic state of Flanders consists of
three members. The Government.
The first are the Ecclesiastical Prelates, as namely seven Abbots of the
order of Saint Benedict: as the Abbots of Saint Peter, and Saint Ba^f^, S.
Winnocke in Bergen, Saint Andries, Saint Peter, of Ename, of Murchiemie. Five
Abbots of the order of Saint Bernard: of Dunen, of Boudeloo, of Do, of
Ciammerez, of Marchiemie: and the Prior of Waerchot. Three Abbots of the order
of the Praemonstratensians: S. Nicolas in Vuerne, of Drogon, of S. Cornelis in
Nienove. Seven Abbots of regular Cannons: the Abbots of Eechoute, of
Soctendale, Warneston, Sunnebecke, Cisoing, Falempium. Seven Provosts of the
same order of S. Marten in Ipera, Wormesele, of Watene, of Loo, of Eversa, and
Petendale. The second member is of the Nobility, in which are five Viccounts.
The Viecount Gendt, of Yperen, of Vuerne, of Bergen, of Haerlebecke. Three
Principalities: of Steenhuse, of Gavere, of Eshinoy. Four Barons, 2 in the
Counties of Cysoing and Heyne: 2 in the Lordship of Pamaele and Boelare. The
Military Tribunes are of Banderheereen, in the Teutonicke County, also the
Lord of Nevele, of Dixmunde, of Beneren, of Praet near Brugges: of Haerskerke,
of Watene, of Hevergem, of Wasteine, of Cacct^n, of Ingelmunster, of Pouke, of
Gruithuse, of Male, of Maldegem, of Ostcamp, of Winendale, of Colscamp, of
Ghistele, of Sevecote, of Roussclare, of Waestene, of Hondscote, and also of
Cassel, of Norturie, of Haveskerck, of Halewyn. In the French County are the
Lords of Lille, of Waurin, and of Comene. In the Lordshippe of Flanders there
are the Lords of Rhode, of Gavero, of Sotteghem, of Gontero, of Scorisse, of
Poitz, of Liekerck, of Lumbeke, of Rotselar in Meerbeke: Also of Wedergraet in
Neyghem, and of Steenehuse. The third member does consist of the special
Cities. In the Dutch Flanders, four special Cities do make up this member,
Gandavum, after which Burgraviatus Gandensis, Oudenarde and Biervliet. In the
Signiorie there are some certain Fee Farms of the Empire, as Ambachten, dat
Landt vanWaes, 't Graefschap van Aelst, and other free Lordships, as Bornhem,
Dendermonde, Geerdsberge. Bruges by whom are censt both for arms and
Subsidies, namely the whole Franconate ('t Vrie) and the walled and not walled
Towns, therein contained. Ypra, under which both for matters of arm and
subsidies, are Yperen-Ambacht, Bellen-Ambacht, and Cassel-Ambacht: the Champion
Franconate (Het plat te Vrie) under which Vuern-Ambacht, Bergen-Ambacht and
Brouchorg-Ambacht. In the French part are three principal Cities, Lille,
(Ryssel) Douay, Orchies. The Lordship of Tournay and the state adjoined to
Flanders, does consist of three members: the Clergy, the Nobility, and six
supreme Justices. Flanders has one Bishop of Tournay, who is subject to the
Archbishop of Rhemes, which is nevertheless divided into 4 Episcopal
Dioecesses. Under the Bishop of Trajectum, there are five towns that do
homage thereunto, Hulst, The Ecclesiasticke state.
Axele, Assenede, Bochoute. Under the Bishop of Tournay, are Gandavum,
Cortracum, Aldenarda, with their Castells: the territories of Waes, Bruges, the
Franconate and the Island, with their Castells. The Atrebatensian Bishopric
does comprehend Ducacum, and Orchianum. Under the Bishop of Cameracum, is the
Lordship of Flanders beyond Scaldis Southward. The Tarvanensian Bishopric
has these Castelships under it; Ypra, Cassel, Vverne, Bergen, Brouchorg,
Belle. In Dutch Flanders there are 14 principal Courts, Viesburg, Gandaui,
Burgus Brugis, Sala Yprae, Castellum Cortraci, Curia in Harlebeck, in Tielt,
Domus in Diense, Curia in Bergen, in Bruchorg, in Cassel and in Celle. In
French Flanders there are three Court Leetes, Sala in Lille, Castellum in
Douay, Curia in Orchies. In the Lordship of Flanders there are five Court
Leetes, Tribunal in Aelst, Dominus in Vendermonde, Praetorium Wasiae, and
Castrum Beneren. All these Courts and Jurisdictions aforesaid to appeal do the
Princes Provincial Council, which is at Gandavum, and from thence to the
Parliament at Mechlin. But of this enough, I pass to Brabant.

THE EASTERN part of FLANDERS.
BEfore I come to Brabant, I will briefly describe that which this table does
exhibit, which the Printer pleased to insert, for the benefit of the Reader.
In it that part of Flanders is described, in which in our memory many worthy
acts have been achieved, as it shall appear by that which follows. But that
we may orderly describe this Tract, Wassia* with the 4 official Towns.
in the first place we meet with Wassia, commonly called 't Landt van Waes,
which is a rich fertile territory, having four Towns which do homage unto
it, two whereof are walled, as Hulsta, and Axella: two unwalled, as Bouchouten
and Assenetum. Hulsta, or Hulustum, is the chiefest of them, being a neat
City, and well fortified. It endured a grievous seige for some months in the
year 1595. But at length after many assaults, and underminings, and the loss
of many thousand men, it was yielded up to the Archduke Albertus. Axela is a
pretty town, being four miles and half from Hulsta, and four from Gandavum.
In the third place is Bouchouten, which is two miles distant from Axela. The
fourth is Assenede which is two miles distant from the aforesaid Axela. And
these four Cities have many towns under them, as Watervliet and Bouchoute,
in which two armies were sometime Billited; the states army under the conduct
of Grave Morris in the former: in the other the King of Spaines General, M.
Ambrosius Spinola. Moreover there are in this tract many Castells and
Fortresses, which may be seen in this table, among which are those which are
commonly called Philippinen, Patientie, Ysendijcke, S. Philip, S. Cateline,
Coxie, and others, the chiefest whereof and the best fortified is Ysendijcke.
This with the three other following Castells Duke Mauritius in the year 1604
enforced to surrender themselves. In the Country of Ysendijcka, is Birsletum
or Bieruliet situate in an Island of the same name. Birfler.
There lived in this City William Beuckelens, who they report did first
pickle and barrel up salt Herrings, and did transport them to foreign parts,
which was a happy invention, whereby the Low Countriemen got much wealth, in
regard that foreign Nations did greatly esteem of salt Herrings both for
use, and delicacy. It was hereto a Town of Note, having a convenient Haven.
But as all mortal things are frail and transitory, and THE EASTERN PART OF
FLANDERS.
FLANDRIA SEPTENTRIONALIS
map subject to corruption* so we see that flourishing Towns do decay, so
that nothing remains as it were but their bare Carcasses: and now it is only
a Fortress. There follows Sluice with the Island of Gadsanto. Sluice is a
neat Town in Dutch Flanders, which was heretofore called Lammerzuliet, as it
appears by public letters: which was heretofore very rich, it is five miles
from Middleburrough, and three from Bruges; where by an artificial Aquaeduct,
or great channel, all the water in the Country, is collected and gathered
into one place, and so brought to the City by navigable channells: and so
gathering it together again into one pond as it were, at the Town called
Damme, they bring it from thence to the cataracts or fall thereof which they
call the Sluyse: at the mouth or issue whereof, there is a famous Haven which
sometime did enrich Sluice, when the Hanse-merchants dwelled there as well as at
Bruges. It is able to receive an hundred ships, as also the Annalls of
Flanders do testify, that in the year 1468. a little before Christmas, there
arrived in this Harbor at one time an hundred and fifty ships of great
burden, which was a joyful sight to the Townsmen. On the side of the Town
there is an ancient Castle. In which the Duke of Bouillon, and the Admiral of
the Seas, (the first being taken at Hisdinum, the latter at Saint ^uintins
City,) were both kept prisoners. This Castle although it be now disjoined
from the Town, yet it was formerly joined thereunto, by many edifices, which
the Brugians did purposely pull down. For the Town of Sluice wearied with
their own dissentions and their wars against the Brugians, and lastly the
Prince having sold it unto them, they came to be under their jurisdiction.
Sluice is now a strong fortified City, being entrenched with walls, and a
double ditch. Grave Maurice, in the year 1604. did beseige it the Month of
May, and 3 months after his coming thither he compelled them to yield for
want of food. Nere the Haven of Sluice on the six and twentieth of May in the
year 1603 there was a Sea fight of 8 Galleys of Frederick Spinolacs, with
three ships and eleaven Galleys belonging to the States of the confaederate
Provinces, which lay at the mouth of the Haven of Sluice. In which fight the
Admiral Spinola was slain, and a thousand and 400 men were killed and
drowned. The Zelanders lost James the master of a ship, the son of Michael,
and his Mate. There were in the Haven of Sluice 2 Block-houses, the one in the
very mouth of the Haven commonly called de Hase schantse, the other is seated
not far from the Town commonly called Beck-of: the former whereof was
yielded to Grave Maurice, and the latter taken by force. Over against this
City is a small Island which the inhabitants call Cadsant, in which there is
a Town of the same name. It was heretofore much larger, having a City in ^t,
and many pleasant and rich towns. Near unto which at several times there
have been many sea fights: when either the Britains, the Batavians, or any
other enemies to Flanders did arrive here. But this Island is more than half
worn away by the tempestuous Seas, and by the tides and ebs thereof. In this
Island there are two Fortresses the one whereof Grave Maurice took being
unprovided, the other commonly called ter Hofstede yielded unto him. A mile
hence from Sluice is Ardenburg, which was heretofore called Rodenburg, Ardenbug.
and was heretofore the Metropolis of Flanders, containing Tourout and Ostburg,
and Bruges, (which were not then walled,) and all the Sea coast even to
Bononia. But now it is all wasted. It has a Church consecrated to the Virgin
Mary, which is the fairest and most sumptuous in all Flanders. There is also
Middleburrough, Middleburrough.
being two miles and an half distant from Bruges, being now walled and ditched
about. Mauritius in the same year took these Towns. There is also Damme two
miles from Sluice, which is a very rich Town, being very populous, and full of
Merchants, and a great Haven for wines, Damme.
being a key of the Sea, in regard that it did shut and open the Ocean, both to
those of Bruges, and to all Merchants. But now by the incursions of the French,
and the civil dissentions of the Gandavians and Brugians, and having lost the
recourse of Merchants, it is now but like a Town or Village, and the Haven is
a dug Channel, being only navigable at a full tide, three Flanders miles,
even to Sluice. Bruges follows, which we described before, with the Territory
of the Francones or Freemen, because they did shake off the Brugeans Yoke, and
freed themselves from it: and contains all that ground which lies eight
miles round about Bruges, and is commonly called 't Landt Vanden Vryen; it has
jurisdiction over many free Towns. And these do make the fourth member of
Flanders. Lastly this Table contains Ostend, which was formerly a poor
fisher Town, wanting munition, but in the year 1572 it was walled about.
Ostend.
It has a convenient Haven. There came hither eight great Whales in the year
1404, every one of them being 4 foot long. Also in the year 1426, there was a
great Sea Hog taken, being like unto a Land-Hogge but that it was greater.
But in the year 1099. and in the year 1200, in the Archduke Alberts time, the
Flandrians to restrain the incursions of the enemy, did ditch it round about,
and yet they could not hinder their inroades, although it were entrenched with
17 Baracadoes and Bulwarks, as the Bulwark or Fort of S. Catherine, of
Isabell, of Albert, of Clara; wherefore the Flandrians were very desirous to
beseige this City, which they attempted on the 5 of July the year 1601. The
beginning of the seige was very terrible, and continued so to the end thereof,
as it is well known; yea it was such a long and grievous seige, as there was
never the like in the memory of man, so that during the time of this seige,
there were slain on both sides about 110000 men. There was a Table book found
about a certain commissary of Spain being dead, in which the number of men
that were slain, were set down, and the number of women and children by
themselves: of which this was the total sum: Tribunes or Praefects of the
Soldiers, commonly called Marshalls of the field 9. of Colonells 15. of
Sergeants 29. Captains 165. Ancients 322. Lieutenants 200 and 1, masters of
the Horse 101. Common-souldier 54663. Mariners 611, children and Women 119. The
total sum of all was ^2126. It would be tedious to mention all their
trenches and Fortresses, all their engines and warlike Instruments, and other
matters. Moreover, there was a battle fought between Ostend and Newport, on
the second of July in the year 1600, between the Archduke Albert, and Grave
Maurice, in which there were slain on both sides seven thousand foot and
horsemen. The battle continued doubtful for three hours together. But at
length Grave Maurice got the victory, and overthrew the Spaniard. The Archduke
Albert lost in that fight 6000 men; there were taken besides a great number of
common Soldiers, the Admiral of Arragon, and with him many of the Nobles, and
there were 105 Banners taken from the enemies foot troops, and four from his
horse troops. Yet it was a bloody victory to Grave Maurice, for there were a
thousand slain on his side. A mile distant from Ostend is Aldenburg. It has
only one gate, Aldenburg.
being an ancient City, and heretofore a famous Mart town. The other
matters which are contained in this table are unfolded in the next description.
And therefore I pass to Brabant.

THE DVKEDOME OF BRABANT.
BRabant for the most part does contain the Country of the Advatians,
Ambivaritians, and Tungrians: The Country whence so called.
but it is uncertain at what time this Country was called Brabant, some
deriving it from Brennus a Frenchman; some from a City of that name, of which
there is no mention neither in the Country nor in histories: some derive it
from Bratuspandium a town of the Bellovacians, which Caesar mentions Lib. 2.
Some do mention a Captain called Salvius Brabon, an Arcadian, who came with
Caesar into the Low Countries, whose wife Suana was Caesar's Nephew. Some also
think that it was called Barbantia, from Gotefridus Barbatus Earl of Lovaine,
and afterward Brabant. I had this name of late, which is manifest, but the
original thereof is unknown. The length of Brabant from Gemblours, The
Situation*
even to the holy Mountain of S. Gertrud, is about 22 miles. The breadth from
Helmontium to Bergae, is 20 Miles. And the compass of it is 80 miles. It has
on the North the River Mosa, which parts Gelderland, from Holland. On the
South Hannonia, the County of Namurcum, and the Leodiensian Bishopric, which
confineth on it on the East. On the West is the River Scaldis, with the
country Alost. The temper of the air.

The fruitfulness of the soil.


It has a wholesome air, and a fertile soil, abounding with all sorts of
fruits, but yet the country of Kempen, is barren by reason of the sands;
which part yet is not altogether unfruitful. There are 26 Cities in this
Dukedom. As Lovanium, or Loven, which is an ancient City, and the first
seat of the Grudians, in which the Duke does bind himself by taking the
Sacrament. It is a pleasant City, and now somewhat enlarged, the compass of
it within the walls is four miles. It is watered with the River Dela.
Brussells is a fair great City, fortified with a double wall, and situate in
a fertile soil, abounding with all things. It is a wonderful thing that this
City could yield plenty of provision to serve the Dukes Court, the strangers,
and foreign Princes which lay there with their whole train. There is also
Antwerpe which they commonly call Antwerpen, the French call it Anvers, the
Italians Anversa, the Germans Antorff. Peter Appian thinks that it is the
same with that which Ptolemie and Caesar, do call Atuacutum. It is supposed
that this City was so called from the casting forth of hands. For a certain
Giant called Druo who dwelt in these parts before C. Caesar's coming, when any
travelers came by, if they did not pay him the half of their commodities, he
caused their right hands to be cut off, and to be cast into the River: which
appears by the arms of this City, and certain great bones of this Giant
Druo, which are kept until this day; some say he was called Antigonus. But
these things are fabulous. But it is more likely that the inhabitants called it
so from the heap or rifing of Earth near Scaldis, which the Lowcountrimen do
call Antwerpen; for by making banckes on both sides they straightened the River,
and made the channel deeper. It is situate by the deepest part of the River,
under the 26 degrees of Longitude, and 42 minutes. And 51 of Latitude and fifty
eight minutes. It is 4 miles distant from the Sea, and as many from Mechlin, 7
miles from Lovaine: 10 miles from Gandavum, 15 miles from Bruges, 8 miles from
Brussells, threescore miles from London: 29 from the Agrippine Colonie, 60
miles from Franckford. It was thrice walled. First with a narrower wall, Anno
1221: afterward with a larger wall Anno 1314, which year there was a great
famine, and the next a great pestilence. Lastly, the suburbs were enlarged
toward the North, Anno 1543. The compass of it without the walls is 4 miles,
and eight hundred and twelve paces. There are eight ditches which are brought
into the City out of the River, and are able to receive many great ships.
It is a great City for traffic. Guicciardine gives an estimate, that the
yearly trading in this City does amount to above twelve thousand Crowns,
which was less than it came to when the City of Antwerpe flourished. And
therefore Julius Scaliger does worthily praise it thus: Oppida quot spectant
oculo me torvasinistro,
Tot nos invidiae pallida tela petunt.
Lugdunum omnigenum est, operosa Lutetia, Roma
Ingens, ro^ Venetum vasta, Tolosa potens.
Omnimodae merces, arts priscaeque novaeque,
Quorum insunt alijs singula, cuncta mihi.
Look how many Towns do lie on our left side,
Even by so many Towns we are envide.
Leyden and Paris painful are, Rome great,
Venice is rich, Tolouse in power complete.
All wares, and strange inventions that there be,
In several Cities, are all found in me.


There are two and forty religious houses in Antwerp, also Churches,
Monasteries, and Hospitalls. The chief Cathedral Church is dedicated to the
blessed Virgin Marie. It is a fair and sumptuous work, and has a famous
Tower steeple, which is all built of free stone curiously carved, and is four
hundred and twenty Antwerp feet, that is, two hundred Florentine Else in
height, so that it is very beautiful to behold, and yields a fair prospect:
for from it you may behold not only all the City, and the pleasant fields
and gardens lying round about it, but also you may clearly discern some
Cities that are afar off, as Mechlin, Bruxells, Lovaine, Gandavum, and
moreover THE DVKDOME OF BRABANT.
BRABANTIA
map you may see to the end of the River, and discover the Sea, and the Zeland
Islands. In this Tower there are threescore and eight Bells, some greater some
lesser, some of which like musical Instruments will yield an harmonious sound
of four or five parts. The greatest of them, which is of a wonderful great
weight, was named by the Emperor Charles the fifth, which is not rung but upon
some extraordinary occasion. There are four and twenty Cannons bebelonging to
that Church, over whom there is a Deane, and a Bishop, who was first instituted
in the year 1567. This Church is kept very bravely, and the revenues belonging
to it are great, and the Privileges and immunities belonging to the Priests.
Buscoducum or Silva Ducis, which is called in Dutch's Hertogenbosch, and in
French Bolduc, is so called from the Woods: it is a fair pleasant City,
strongly fortified, being seated by the River Disa, being a mile from Mosa, and
twelve from Antwerpe. And these are the four chief Cities, the first three
whereof together with Nivella, do make the Marquiship of the sacred Empire.
Some reckon Mechlin to be in Brabant, yet indeed it is parted from it, being a
fair, and neat City: having an Archbishopricke, and a fair Council, unto
which the last appeal in Belgia, may be made. Moreover there are these Cities
in Brabant, Tra^ectum near Mosa, commonly called Maestricht, Lira, Vilvord^,
Gemblacum, or Gemblours, Ioudoigne, Hannut, Landen, Halen, Le^^wen, Schienen,
Herentals, Eindoven, Helmont, Grave. There are also many free Towns unwalled,
as Oostenrije, Oorschot, Turnhout, Duffel, Waelem, Merchtem, Asche, Vveren,
Duisburch, Hulpen, Waure, Breine, Genape, Ghecle, Arendone, Dormal and Isca.
There are also 700 Villages. There are refered to Brabant the Lordship of
Ravestein, the Dukedom of Limburg, with the Lordship of Dale and Vacklenburg.
The Lakes and Rivers are very commodious and profitable to Brabant. The chief
Rivers are Mosa and Scaldis, and there are also other lesser Rivers. This
Country has many Woods, the chief whereof are five, Somensis, Saventerloo,
Grootenhout, Grootenheist and Meerdal. Here are many public works both
sacred and profane. The chief whereof is the Church at Lovaine, consecrated
to Saint Peter, being very fair and sumptuous. The Churches at Bruxells are
very sumptuous, being beautified with fair and rich ornaments. Also Antwerpe,
has many Churches, of which S. Mary's Church is the fairest and largest. I
pass by other Churches, which are innumerable in other places. There are also
many profane works: as Palaces, noblemens houses, Castells, Towers, and the
like. Moreover the Politic state of Brabant has three members: the Clergy,
which are the Abbots, Afflighemensis, Grimbergensis, Tongerloo, Grunendalensis,
of S. Gertrud at Lovaine, of Saint Bernard, of Vileer, of Dielegem, Parckensis
near Lovanium, Vlierlikensis near Lovanium. The great Prior of the order of
S. Augustine in Leeuwee, the Prior of Gemblours. The Nobles, which are, the
Abbot of Gemblacum an Earl, the Duke Arscotensis, the Marquess of Bergen
near the little River Some: The Barons, Diestensis, of Braeda, Boxtelensis,
Gaesbeeckensis, of Wesemacl,, Petersem, Perweys, Hoochstratensis now an Earl,
of Renes: the Lords Aschensis, Merchtensis, Vuerne, Gheel, Lummen, Thurnout,
Oosterwi^e, S. Oedenroy, Walem, Duffel. The four principal Cities are
Lovaine, Bruxells, Antwerpe, Buscoducum. Concerning the state Ecclesiasticke it
is partly under the Leodiensian Bishop, and partly under the Camaracensian
Bishop: the Leodiensian keeps his Ecclesiastical Court at Lovaine. The
Camaracensian at Bruxells: Lovaine has a famous Academie or University: of
which we will speak more largely in the general description of the Low
Countries. The Babanters, are merry, jesting, and full of comicall conceits, as
Lemnius witnesses. Besides Brabant, there are contained in this Table, the
Dukedom of Iuliacum and Cliveland. The Politic state whereof we will
describe out of Mercator. The politic state of Iuliacum does consist likewise
of three members, which are the Clergy, as namely the Abbots, the Colleges
and Monasteries: the Nobility, the Citizens. There are 24 Lordships in this
Country Caster, Brugge, Born, Boisseler, Euskirchen, Munstereyfell, Moniou,
Eschwiler, Grevenbroich, Wassinberg, Geilenkirchen, Hensbergh, Durem, Thonberg,
Berchem, Heimbach, Wilhemstein, Gladbach, Millen, Rangenrayd, Norvenich, the
Counties of Nuenar, Iuliacum, and Nideken. In like manner Cliveland does
contain three orders, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Cities. But the
governor of the Province of Cleveland has these eight Cittties under him.
Cliva the Metropolis, Calcaria, Sonsbeke, where he has his residence, also
Santen, Buric, Vdem, Griet, Griethusen. Here are 14 Lordships, Cranenburg,
Duffel, Gennep, Goch, Orsoy, Huessen, near Arnhem, Lymers, Emmeric, Hetter,
Aspel, Ringenburg, Bisselic, Dinslaken, in which are five Cities, Dinslaken,
Wesel, Duysburg, Schermbeke, Holte. The Lordship of Ravesteyn is joined and
annexed to the Court of Cliveland.

THE COVNTIE OF HOLLAND.
SOme derive the name of Holland from the many Woods and Forests therein, The
Country whence so called.
for we call a Wood Holt or Hout, and Hollant signifies a woody Country, for
they report that heretofore all Holland was full of woods and bushes. Some
suppose it was so called from the hollownesse thereof, as if it were Hol^landt.
For the whole Country is Moorish, and loose under foot. Some suppose it was
called from the Hay made there in Hollandia, as it were Hoylandia. But learned
Iunius is of another opinion, that Holland and Zeland, are Colonies of the
Gothish, and Danish Nations; and that the Danes and Normanes forsaking the
Island of Oland and Zeland, did transmigrate into these places, and named them
after their own Country Holland and Zeland, as Virgill reports of Hellenus,
the son of Priame, who built a little Town in Epire called Troy, with a
Castle, and made the resemblance of the gate, Scaea, and called the River
Zanthus by a Troyan name: as the Europaeans did erect and make a new Spain and
new France in the Indies. The Situation.
The British Sea does encompasse it on the West, on the North the Cimbrian Sea
beats on the shoares thereof, on the East side it opens a large Bay toward
Friesland, on the North-East lies Trans-Isalana and Velavia, on the South is
Trajectum. The compass of it is nine miles, it is very narrow, so that a man
may travel over it from one side to another in four hours space, and in some
places it is not above a mile over. This Country has fruitful fields, which
do yield excellent good Corn, The fruitfulness of the soil.
but in regard the Country is very small and populous, therefore it cannot
maintain so great a multitude of inhabitants. But there are very fertile
meddowes, in which infinite herds of Oxen do graze: and very fair milch
Kine. It is certain that in some parts of Holland the Kine in Summer time, do
yield unto the Paile four and forty quartes of milk. The variety of living
creatures.
Also John Beningus a counselor of the Court of Holland, as Guicciardine
reports, does find by certain observation and computation, that Assendelph
only and four neighboring Towns have as much milk from their Kine, as there
is Rhenish wine sent out of high Germany to Dordretch. Out of this great plenty
of milk they make butter, which is an excellent dainty dish, not only for
barbarous Nations, as Pliny would have it, but also for Kings and Princes. They
make Cheeses also which are not inferior unto those of Parma and Placentia.
The chief are the Tessalican, and Gravesandican Cheeses, the next to them are
the Edammensian, which are best when they are old: It breeds THE COVNTIE OF
HOLLAND.
HOLLANDIA
map also excellent horses. On the sandy hills there are an infinite number of
Conies. Also great store of Hearts, Does, Hares; and in the Hagiensian wood
there are herds of Goats, and great store of foul especially Duckes. Also
Geese, and in harvest time Woodcockes which we call Snipes. There are excellent
turfes, which being dug out of the earth, and drawn out of the water, and
so dried in the wind and sun, The ancient Government
do make very good fuel. There were heretofore Kings of Holland, of which
Suetonius makes mention in Caligula, cap. 44* But in the year of Christ 868
Charles the bald, King of France, reduced it into a County, and Theodore being
descended of the royal stock, was governor thereof. After Theodore the
father there succeeded Theodore, the son, and after him Arnold, and after
Arnold Theodoricke, and others after him, of whom you may have a Catalogue,
(...)
in Munster and others. They were heretofore very famous for matters of war,
so that the Batavians were joined in fraternity and amity with the Roman
Empire. And hereby they got the goodwill of other Princes. Now we are to
describe the Cities: which are Dordretch, Harlem, Delpth, Leyden, Amsterdam,
Gouda, ^a^rd^^um, (...)
Muda, W^sopum, Edamam, Monachodamum, Purmerenda, ^lm^^^a, Eu^huysa, Horna,
etc. Dordretch is the chief City of Holland. The figure of it is long like a
Gallie, it is very rich and plentiful^, and a Granarie or Storehouse for corn
and all other provision. It has outlandish commodities brought up the River
unto it, and there laid in warehouses until they be sold: and are carried
from thence again in Hoyes. This Privilege of storing of goods they call a
staple. Harlem is a noble Town, both for the largeness of the City* the
fairness of the houses, and the pleasantness of the situation. It has the
fairest Church in all Holland, being built on strong Pillars by the marketh
place. The River Sparnus glideth by the City. It is thought it was built by
the Prisians, about the year 506. In this City the Art of Printing was
invented. Another honor of this City was the taking of Pelusium by a new
device, which they call Damiata, and in remembrance thereof, they have two
^acring bells of brass, which they call aerae Damiatae. Next follows Delpth
which is famous not for Apollo^s Tripos or Trevet, but for plenty of wine and
corn. For the best beer is brewed in this City except it be English beer.
It is so called from a Ditch, which the Batavians call Delph, which is brought
from Mosa even to the City. In the year a thousand five hundred 36, on the
Nones of May, the beauty of it was much blemished by fire, and the better part
of the City was burnt down* but afterward it was built up again more fair
than before. Leyden which Ptolomie calls Lugdunum Batavorum, is a City
situate at the middle of the mouth of the River Rhene. It sustained and held
out in the year 1574 a grievous seige, but at last it was freed, and the
enemies were enforced by the overflowing of the waters to raise their seige.
Amsterdam is the noblest Mart Town in all the world, it is so named from the
River Amstela, as the learned Poet Nicolas Cannius has noted, being a Citizen
of Amsterdam, in these verses.

Haec illa est Batavae non ultima gloria gentis,
Amnis cui nomen, cui cataracta dedit
Dicta prius Damum, rarisque habitata colonis,
Cum contenta casis rustica vita fuit.
Hinc Amsterdamum jam facta celebrior, atque
Fortunae crevit tempore nomen item.
Vrbs been not a prope, atque procul distantibus oris,
Dotibus innumeris suspicienda bonis.
Dives agri, dives pretiosae vestis and auri,
Vt pleno cornu copia larga beet.
Quod Tagus atque Hermus vehit and Pactolus, in unum
Vere huc congestum dixeris esse locum.
This City Hollands glory, whose name
From the River, and the falling waters came*
It was called Damum first, and inhabited
With Rural Cottages, which here were spread.
But growing famous, it was called Amsterdam,
And so increased in fortune and in name.
It is a City known both far and near
And is admired for many gifts are here.
It Is rich in soil, in garments, and in gold,
Plenty does bless her with gifts manifold,
What Pagus, Hermus, Pactolus does bear,
You may truly say, that it is stoard up here.
It consisted at the first of a few fishermens houses, and was under the
jurisdiction of the Lords of Amstelium. After Gilbert Amstelius, about two
hundred fourscore years since, fortified this City with Bulwarks, gates
and Towers; which being burnt by the envious neighbors, it was walled about in
the year 2482. And afterward, it was still enlarged, and belonged unto
Holland. But now it is a place of refuge not only for Holland but all the
neighbor countries, even to the Sarmatians, and Goths, and Cimbrians. For
there are in this City not only Italians, Spaniards, Portugalls, Britains,
Scots, French, Sarmatians, Cimbrians, Suevians, Norwegians, Livonians, and
Germains, but also East-Indians, Americans, Moors, and others out of all parts
of the world. Gouda is so named from the Cimbricke word ^^w, which signifies a
Ditch, and a Trench against it: it is situate near Isela, being a plentiful
City, and abounding with all things. There are also some free Towns, the
chief whereof is the Hage, in which the Council of the States, and Princes
do sit, and there is Court for deciding of suites, and controversies.
Concerning the Politic state of this Country, it does consist of three
orders, the first are the Knights called Ridderheren, the chief whereof are
the Earls Egmond and Ligne, under whom are these Dominions, Wassenar,
Valkenborch, and the Viccountship of the City of Leyden. I find also these
Counties in Holland, Maeslant, Texel, Goylandt, Kennemerlant, Steenberge. The
Lords and Barons, are Brederode, under whom is the Lordship of Vianen, and the
Barony of Lijfelt. I find also in the Chronicle of Holland, that these
Lordships are reckoned among the Baronies, Le^ke, Sevenbergen, Voorn,
Isselstein, Stryen, Teylingen, Puttem, Harlem, Leerdam, Asperen, Arckel,
Altena, Botterslo^^. The second order is the Lords, the chief whereof that are
wont to appear at Hage, are these, the Lords of Poelgeest, of Polanen, of
Lochorst, of Assendelfi, Warmont, Sparwoude, Matnes, Schooten, Noortwi^^.
Verdoes, or Does, Mine van Amstel, Spangen, Alkemade, Benthuysen, Keneborch,
Raaphorst, Sweten, Heemskericke, Ruven, Duyn, and Sprangen. Moreover there are
these Lordships in Holland, Ho^sden, Outhoesden, Papendrecht, Wijngarden,
Ghissenborch, Ameyde, Woerden, Waterlant, Schagen, Purmerende, Goude,
Naeldw^jc, Rijswijc, Schoonhoven, Wateringen, Soctermeer, Heemstede,
Heuhtwoude, Merwen, Haestrecht, Dalen, Spijc, Hardischsvelt, Bardtwijck, Wijck.
The third order are the six great Cities, which are called and summoned to
appear at the Hage, for all the rest: as Dordretch; this City has a Praetor
and a Magistrate, whom the Citizens obey, and a Bailey that governs the whole
Country round about, both in civil and criminal matters. Harlem has a
Praetor and a Magistrate within it self: and a Bailey for the Country, who has
jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters. Amsterdam has also with it self
a Praetor and a magistrate, and a Bailey for the Country to judge of civil and
criminal causes. Gouda has a Praetor and Major for the Citizens, and a
Baytiffe and a Governor of the Castle.

THE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.
ZEland signifies nothing else but a Sea-land, the name thereof being
compounded from Sea and Land. The Country whence so called.
For it is encompassed on every side with the Sea. Lemnius does collect out of
Tacitus, that it was not unknown unto the ancients, but not by that name by
which it is now called, but the people and inhabitants thereof, did vulgarly
call it Maet. For he names them Mattiacans when he says: Est in eodem
obsequio Mattiacorum gens Battavis similis, nisi quod ipso terrae suae solo ac
coelo acrius animantur: that is; The Nation of the Mattiacans, is also subject
unto them, and are like the Battavians, but that their soil and climate does
make them more courageous and lively. It was called Zeland from the Danes and
Normanes, who coming out of the Cimbrian Island in Denmark, which is called
Zeland, to seek new Countries; being pestered with multitudes of inhabitants,
they invaded the Coasts of Britain and France, and they called Walachria, and
the neighbor Islands Zeland, after the name of their own Island. These Islands
are situate between the mouths or outlets of the Rivers Mosa and Scaldis; on
the North they have Holland, The Situation.
on the East Brabant, on the South Flanders, on the West the German Ocean.
Zeland has somewhat an intemperate air, The temper of the air.
for in some parts it is very cold and sharp, and not so wholesome as the
neighbor Countries, especially in Summer, in regard of the Vapors arising
from the ditches and standing Pooles, and also because the Country is not
planted with trees. But yet it has this blessing, that it is not often
troubled with plagues or pestilent diseases, but when it has a plague it is
most violent, and it is long before the cessation of it. But it has a very
fat, and fruitful soil, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and fields which yield abundance of wheat, so that no Country has the like
for whiteness, and waightinesse, and many other fruits: also Coriander seed,
and Madder, which is good to dye cloth in grain, and make it hold color: and
also great store of fair Baytrees laden with Berryes: and also many wholesome
herbs both to eat, and to cure disseases withal. Here are also excellent
Meddow Pastures for fatting of Cattle, not only enclosed within hedges and
ditches, but also upon the very shore by the Sea side, in which many thousand
head of Cattle do graze, The variety of living creatures.
to the great gain and commodity of the owners, being not only of an
unusual bigness, but of a delicate and excellent taste, by reason of the
sweetness and goodness of the soil and grass, so that they are much
esteemed by forreiners. In the year 8^3, The ancient Government.
in the year of Charles the ^^lde; a principality was first erected among the
Battavians and Zelanders, and then they were called Counties, and the first
Earl thereof was Theodoricke the son of Sig^^bert, Prince of Aquitania, who
having been Earl thereof eight and thirty years, left his second son
Theodoricke, successor thereof* after whom these Countries by a long succession
of Earls, came and was devolved over to Phillip King of Spain. The Islands of
Zeland are seven, three beyond the mouth of Scaldis, toward Battavia and the
East, which are therefore called the East Islands, as Scaldia, Duvelandia and
Tolen. And 4 on this side toward the West, Walachria, Zuythevelandia,
Northevelandia, and Wolferdi^^. The greatest and chiefest I Will of them all
beyond Scaldis is Scaldia, the inhabitants do call it Landt van Schouwen: the
compass whereof is 7 miles, yet heretofore it was greater, and was divided
only by a little strait of the Sea from Northevelandia. The chief Cities in
it are Zirizaea, and Brouwershavia. Zirizaea is supposed to be the auncientest
City in Zeland, being built by one Siringues, about the year 869. It was a
long time a famous town of traffic, in regard of the commodiousnesse of the
Haven, and the resort of strangers unto it; but when the Haven was filled up
with sand, it grew out of esteem: yet there is hope that if a new Haven were
dug, it would be as famous as ever it was. In this City Levinus ^e^^nius,
a learned and famous Physician was borne and lived. Fishermen do inhabit
Brouwershavia, who live by the Sea. The second Island to Scaldia is Dwelandia,
so called from the great store of Doves, that are therein; and it is four
miles in compass. There are in it some Towns only and Villages, but no
City. In the year 1130 it was overflowed with the Sea, to the loss of many
people, but afterward the banckes being repaired, and the Sea kept out, that
loss was soon recompensed. The third Island is Tollen, which is near unto
Brabant, being only parted and divided from it by a strait narrow sea, in
which is Toletum; which the Low countriemen in regard of the custom and
tribute which is paid there, do call Tollen, being an ancient little Town:
and not far from thence is the Martinian bancke, commonly called S. Martines
Dijck, being a pleasant place, and planted round about with trees, in which
great store of foul, especially Hernes do breed. The chief Island on this
side Scaldis toward the West is Walachria, which the inhabitants call Bewester
Schelt, being so called from the first inhabitour, or from the Welsh or
Frenchmen. This Island lies on the East over against Brabant, on the South
against Flanders, on the North against Batavia, on the West against Britain,
This is the chief Island of all Zeland, being famous both for the situation
thereof, the wealth, populousness, and for the beauty of the towns and
traffic, being 10. miles in compass. The Cities in it are Middlebrough,
Veria, Flushing, Arnemuda. There are also many towns in it. Middlebrough is so
called from the situation thereof, for it is a town in the middle of the
Island. It is a fair City having many private and public edifices, being
excellently adorned with Bridges, Towers, and Fortresses, both for use and
beauty: and it is the chief City in all Zeland, being also a famous Town
of traffic. Here Paul of Middleburrough, THE COVNTIE OF ZELAND.
ZEELANDIA
map was borne, who was the chief Mathematician of his time: And also Nicolas
Everhard, who was first Paesident of the Court of Holland, and afterward of
Mechlin, in which office he dyed, in the year 1532. He had sons that were
singular learned men, Peter Everhard Doctor of Divinity, Nicolas Everhard
Praesident of the Court of Friesland, and afterward of Mechlin, Adrian, Marius,
and John a Poet. Veria or Campoveria, is so called from the passage over which
the Zelanders call Veer; It was first walled about in the year 1357. Afterward
it began to be a Mart town, for Scotch merchandise. Flushing has his name and
arms, from a Flaggon, which the Countrymen call even Flessche. It is a new
City, but powerful and commands the Sea, and it is full of excellent
shipmasters, and Pilots. Arnemuda is a free Town belonging to Middleburrough,
and a safe road for ships. The second Isle to Wallachria is Zuidbevelandia,
which some suppose was so called from the trembling and shaking of it; we
suppose that it was so called from the Bavarians, whose arms may be yet seen
in the Scutchions of the Island. It extends it self in a large and pleasant
tract toward the coast of Flanders and Brabant, albeit some few yers ago, a
great part of it being lost, it is now lesser by half than it was. There is a
pretty City that stands off the Land, called Romerswalia, that has no tilled
fields round about it, no^ no garden places, but the sea does wash it on every
side, so it subsisteth only by trading in salt. In this City the Earls of
Zeland take a solemn oath: which when Philip King of Spain, was to do
according to the usual custom, in the year 1549. Nicolas de Conflilte, in
whose house the Prince was entertained, caused these verses to be written over
his gate: Vidimus adsueto privatum lumine Solemn:
Pallida turbato vidimus astra die.
Vidimus undantis horrendos aequoris aestus,
Nos miseros Belgas quum obruit Oceanus.
Vidimus ast post quam te Gloria nostra Philippe,
Caesarea proles, Semideumque decus:
Cuncta refutamus transacti tristia saecli,
Quod praesens nostrum testificatur opus.
Sit licet exiguum, sit pro ratione voluntas,
Nil facit ad nostrum parva carina fretum.
We have seen when as the suns clear light did fail,
And in the day time seen the stars look pale.
We have seen the fearful sea tides rising so,
Till the Oceans did us Belgians overflow.
But Philip when thee, our glory, we espied,
Of Caesar's stock, and half a god beside,
We made up all our former rents again,
And this present work does testify the same:
Though it be small, yet to accept it please,
For no small ship can sail upon our Seas.


Moreover in the Western part of this Island the City Goesa is situated at
one of the mouths of Scaldis which they call Schenge. It is a City not very
large, but pleasant, and rich, being the only City in the Island: It has
very civil and courteous Citizens, and a prudent Senate. The third Island of
Zeland on this side Scaldis toward the West is, Northevelandia, in which is the
City Cortgreene, and very many Towns; but this City was all drowned with
water in the year 1532, but now it is a little reedified. The fourth Island is
Wolferdijc, as if you should say Wolfords ditch, it is very small having only
two Towns in it. There are ten Cities in Zeland, and more towns, they
being about an hundred and more. The inhabitants are witty, crafty, and
provident, and of a middle stature. But the Annalls do report that Withelme
Bonus, Earl of Holland, at the solemnity of the marriage of Charles the fair
King of France, did bring a woman of an unusual great stature, borne in
Zeland, in comparison of whom the greatest men did seem but boys: for she was
so strong that she would carry two hoggsheads full of wine in both hands, and
drink of them, which hogsheads did weigh four hundred Italian pounds; and she
would carry a beam or piece of timber up and down, which eight men could not
lift. They are very skifull in the Art of Navigation: Their Arts.
They boil black course salt which is brought out of the Western Countries,
in great large cauldrons, until they have made it as white as snow. They power
salt water on the rude Spanish and Armorican salt, and so boil it, and do
make of a hundred weight of Spanish salt, an hundred and five and forty weight
of pure salt. And they sell this salt, in France, Their Trafique.
England, Denmark, and other parts of Eurpe. Besides they reap much profit by
their corn and choice wheat, also by their Madder, Saltfish, and great plenty
of cattle, and especially sheep. They keep their houses very neat and well
furnished: they are provident and very painful in merchandising, and also
bountiful, and liberal to the poor. The politic state of Zeland was wont
to consist of three members, the one whereof was the Prelate, who stood for the
whole Clergy, which was the Abbot of S. Nicolas, in Middleburrough: and one
noble man, who was the Marquess Veria: and also of the generality of the
Cities, the chief whereof were those above mentioned, namely Middleburrough,
Zirizaea, Veria, Flushing, Tola, Martinsdijk, Romerswalia and Goesa. But let so
much suffice concerning Zeland.

THE DVKEDOME OF GELDERLAND, Containing the County of ZVTPHANIA, and the
Lordship of TRANSISILANIA.
(...)
GElderland was so called from the Castle of Gelre, which Wichard of Ponthe
together with his brother are reported to have built: though many do suppose
that it was so called from the Town Gelduba, which Tacitus mentions. Others
do bring other reasons for this name. It has on the North Friesland, (...)
and a Bay of the German Sea commonly called Zuyderze^; on the East the
Dukedom of Cleveland, on the South Iuliacum: and on the West Brabant and
Holland. The air of this Country, is pure and wholesome* the soil fruitful
and fit for tillage, and especially it has abundance of Corn; it has
fruitful meddowe^ which do breed up all sorts of Cattle; and great droves
of Cattle are brought out of the farthest part of Denmark to be fatted here;
for there are many fair and flourishing meddowes, especially about the banks
of Rhen^, Vahalis, and Mosa. At the first Gelderland was ruled and governed by
Praefects: and afterward by Princes. For Leopold, Nephew to Martin governor of
Austria, or Guidus as some report, was governor of these parts. After the time
of Charles the Great, the Lords of Ponthe governed it. Afterward Otto Nassovius
was Prince thereof in the year 1079. if we may credit Labius. After whom
followed Gerard, Henry, Otto, Reinald, who was in such great favor with the
Emperor, that at Frankfort, in the year 1339 on the foureteenth day of April
Ludovicke Caesar Augustus, did make him Duke of Gelderland. Edvard after many
battles took his brother Reinald, and kept him ten years in prison: William
succeeded after him, and after him his brother Reinald, and after Reinald
William Arculanus, he dyed without issue at Gorichem. His Sister married John
Egmundan, and after many changes the matter came to that pass, that in the
year 1412. Charles the son of Adolphus, being called by the States of
Gelderland out of Holland, did make William the son of John Duke of Cleveland
his heir, who against the will of the Emperor Charles the fifth, was for a
time governor of Gelderland, until GELDERLAND.
GELDRIA et Transisularia
map in the year 1543. being put out of a great part of Iuliacum, he came as
a suppliant, and yielded himself to the Emperor, being then in his tent at
Venlo^; on this condition, that he should resign up the possession of all
Gelderland, and release his subjects of their oath: yet notwithstanding Caesar
did give him back all the Territory of Iuliacum, excepting only two Towns,
Hensberg and Sittartum. And thus the Gelderlanders who were free at the first,
lived afterward under Princes, yet keeping their own laws and ordinances. But
now they are governed by the States, and do valiantly for their liberty
against the Spaniards. This Dukedom does contain two and twenty Cities, The
names of the Cities.
the chief whereof are Noviomagum, Ruremunda, Zutphania, and Arenacum, which
they call now Arnheimum. Noviomagum, or Nymegen, is an ancient City,
situated on the left hand bank of the River Vahalis, which is very deep in
that place: it seems that it was heretofore the Country of Batto, having the
Castle of Battenburg near it, and within the City the Mountain Hessies,
which some suppose was so called from Hessus the son of Batto. The City is
fortified by Art and Nature, bing very rich, and abounding with all things: on
that side which looks toward Cleveland, it is seated on a hills side, with an
old Castle, which some suppose was built by Julian; on which side the Country
opens and lays forth her beauty being full of woods, and springing
Fountains: the lower part of the City lies toward the Marshes, and the
other part of the soil is on continued hill. Ruremunda is seated by the mouth
of the River Rura, where it discharges it self into Mosa; it is a pleasant,
rich, and potent City, in the old Country of the Menapians. Zutphania on the
right hand bank of Isala, has a County belonging to it, of which we will
speak hereafter. That which Tacitus calls Arenacum, Posterity did call
Arnheimum, or the Eagles house: it is the chief City of Gelderland, where
the Counsel is kept, being near, plentiful, and well fortified: and situated
near the right hand mouth or outlet of the River Rhene. There are also these
lesser Cities Hattem, Elburg, Harderu^e, Wageninga, which Tacitus calls
Vada; Tiela, Bomelium, Bronchorstum, Doesburg, Do^tecomium, and many others.
Gelderland is watered with three famo^s Rivers, The Rivers.
namely Rhene, Mosa, and Vahalis. And besides these, there are some lesser
Rivers that glide through it, as Worm, Roer, Sua^m* old Isala, Berckel, Niers,
Regge, Aa, and Vidrus. On the North it looks toward a Bay of the Sea, which
they call now Zu^derze^: As we call that the Southern Bay which looks
Southward, where Holland lays forth her self, as having sufficient store to
trade with all the world. The ground is plain and low, and there are few
Mountains, and those are full of Woods and Forests. Concerning the politic
state of this Dukedom, it has 3 members, the Baronies of Veluwe, of Beture,
of Bomielweert, and Trielweert. Also the County of Zutphania, under which are
the Counties of Bronchorst, and Herebergensis. Also the higher Gelderland in
which are Ruremunda and Gelder. The Nobles are the Earls of Bronchorst and
Herenburg. The Lords are of Batenborch, of Groesbeeck, Mountfort, Well,
Watchtendonck, Grol, Anholt, Keppel, Bredefort. Buren is a County by it self
within Gelderland. There are also four chief Cities, as Neomagum, which is a
free City and the Metropolis of the whole Dukedom of Gelderland, which has
under it Batavium, or de Beteuwe, the Lower, and the higher; also Bomnerweert,
Tielweert, and Ma^swael, being a Territory between Vahalis, and Mosa. Also
Ruremunda, which is the chief City of higher Gelderland, which has under it
Venlo, Gelder, Vagedie, Strale, Wachtendonck, Erckelens, Moutfort, Echt,
Nieustat, Kessel, Midler, Grieckenbecke. Also Zutphania, under which are
Donsburg, etc. Arnheime, under which are, Wagheninge, Hattem, Harderwijck,
Elborch, and all Velavia. At Arnheime there is a Council kept, and the
Praesident of all Gelderland resideth there, before whom all trials are
brought, of the four aforesaid Cities, without any further appeal to be
made; and to them the trials are brought from other towns, and places which
are subject unto them. The Ecclesiastic state in this manner: Geldria was
subject to four Bishops, Neomagum, with the Territory belonging thereunto, was
subject to the Bishop of Colen; Ruremunda to the Bishop of Leodium, Zutphania
and the Territories thereof to the Bishop of Munster, and Arnheimum to the
Bishop of Trajectum. The inhabitants were warlike, and wonderfully given to
martial affairs: but now they are more addicted to studdies. Their manners
The most part do busy themselves in Merchandising and trading, Their
Trafique.
the rest do partly give themselves to Maechanick Arts and trades, and partly
to husbandry, and in regard of the fruitfulness of the soil, they do reap
much profit thereby. This Dukedom does contain besides many other Counties
and Barronies, the County of Zutphania. Zutphania. The Etymology of the name.
It was so named, if we many credit Goropius Becanus, from the condition of the
soil, namely from the Marshes which they commonly call Venen. The inhabitants
of these Countries as likewise their neighbors do still retain their
ancestors manners and disposition, for they are valiant and very ready in
war. Moreover many are of opinion, that the S. Cambrians did heretofore
possess Gelderland, and the chiefest part of the County of Zutphania, Their
ancient valor.
who were more fierce and desirous of war, than any other of the Germans,
whence it came to pass that they vexed France, with continual incursions. For
which cause when there was peace throughout all the world, yet Octauian
Augustus, could not for a long time shut up the gates of Ianus his Temple,
which they used to do in times of peace, because he understood that the
Sicambrians did still molest the Frenchmen. The ancient Government.
But Otho Nassovius, Duke of Gelderland, beside his son Gerard, who succeeded
him in the Dukedom of Gelderland, had by Sophia Daughter to the Earl of
Zutphania, a son called Gerlacum, who succeeded him in the County of
Zutphania. Who dying without issue, the County of Zutphania, was annexed to
Gelderland, and never afterward disjoined from it. It has a City of the same
name, which Iunius supposes to be the City Visepetum, being populous,
plentiful, well fortified with water, and seated on the right hand bank of
the River Isala. Also the River Berckel flows by it, and there mingles it
self with Isala. Moreover these Cities and Praefectureships following, are in
the County of Zutphania* the Cities are, Dousburg, Do^tecomium, Lochemum,
Grolla, Bredevorda, Broinkhorst, and the Praefectureships are those which are
named from the Cities. And over these there is one chief prefect, whom in
their own language they call the Drossart of the County of Zutphania. Here is
also the City Herebergensis, having a County belonging to it.

Trans Isalania whence so called.
It remains now that we should add somewhat concerning Trans Isalania, being
so called in regard it is situate on the other side of Isala. It looks on the
North toward West Friesland, on the South toward Gelderland: The (...)
on the East is Westphalia: on the West it has a large bay (which is now
called Zuyderzee) and the River Isala. It is a plain low Country, the soil
being very fruitful, especially for corn, The fruitfulness of the ^^^le.
and also it has pleasant meddowes. The Province of Trans Isalania for many
ages was subject to the bishop of Vltrajectum, until in the year 1528, by the
advice of Henry Palatine Bishop of Vltrajectum, it did submit her self to
Charles the 5. and his successors. In this Province there are 8 walled City,
namely Daventria, Campen S^ella, Steenw^^kum, Vollenhova, Hassela, O^tmarsia,
Oldesecla, Daventria, or Deventer abounds with all things, which is a rich
and well fortified City: The (...).
being seated on the right hand bancke of Isa^^. I pass by the rest. It has
also beside the River Isala, the Rivelet Vidrum and other lesser Rivers also:
And many pleasant woods, although they be small and of no noate. The pol^ticke
State of Trans* Isalania does consist of two orders, the Prince offices, and
the Nobility, as Alhemo, Ghoer, etc. and that in three parts of the Country,
Is^lland, Twent, and Drent. The chief Parliament is in Vollenhove, from whence
there is no appeal.

THE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.
SOme suppose that the Zutphanians were herefore called by the Romans
Vsipetes, which Iunius conjectureth in his Batavia. But Bertius thinks that
the posterity of the Tencterians did possess that Countery: but Cluverius does
always join these two people, the Tencterians and Vsipetians, as Caesar
witnesses: who being driven out of their Country by the Catt^, after they had
wandered three years together through many parts of Germany, afterward
passing over the Rhene, received a great over through by the Romans: the
remainder of them being by Sigamber, admitted within the confines of the
Country, they afterward lived there continually, as he delivers, Lib. 3. cap.
10. of his learned commentaries of ancient Germany. And also Becanus
Franci^or does affirm, that the Tencterians did obtain the seat of the
ancient Sygambrians. But it is likely that the limits thereof were heretofore
far larger, seeing they write that it reached unto Friesland, and to the sea.
But now they do possess more Towns and Villages, from the Drusian ditch, that
is, Yssela, even to the Westphalians. The chief City thereof is Zutphanium,
whence the Province is named, which seems to be so called from the Marshes,
as if it were Zuitveen, that is the Southern Marsh; being situate at the mouth
of the River Berekel, and on the right hand bancke of Yssela. It has been a
County from the year of Christ, 1107, at what time the Counties of
Gelderland, and Zutphania were united, by the marriage of Otto Nassovius, with
Sophia of Zutphania, the daughter of Wichmann. But now Zutphania with the
Territory thereof, is one of the 17 Provinces of the Low Countries, and
albeit, as Sandenus says, they were united together 500. years before, yet
they used their own laws, and rights different and distinct from Gelderland.
This City is populous, and plentiful, being seated on a Low ground, and
fortified with waters It was always governed by a learned Senate, skillful
both in the Common law, and their Country Law, to which the Judges of the
neighbor Towns, when they doubted of any matter which was brought before
them, were wont to refer the hearing, and to desire their opinion of it:
which when they had received, they esteemed as an Oracle, so that the ordinary
could not reverse or change any thing. There are four lesser walled towns in
this Country, which have v^yce, in the public assemblies, Do^sbur^,
Do^ticum, Lochemum, Gre^^a. But the free Territory is distinguished into four
Praefectureships, and as many Baronies. The Praefectureships are: Het Drosten
Ampt Van Zutphen, het Schotten Ampt Van Zutphen, Richter Ampt Van Doesborch,
Drosten Ampt van Bredefort. The Baronies are Bergha (which is also a County)
Bronckhorst, Bearwisch. And there is at this day a controversy between those
of Munster, as Sandenus witnesses, and the Lords of Anholt, whether Anholt do
belong to this Province. But that I may come to a conclusion, this City
endured much misery in the last wars; for it was taken and sacked by the
Spaniards, in the year of Christ 1572; and afterward it was taken by John
Bapt. Taxius, in the year 1583. At length in the year of Christ 1591. Grave
Maurice beseiged it for the States of the Low Countries, and freed it from
Spanish servitude, and joined it to the united Provinces.

THE COVNTIE OF ZVTPHANIA.
ZVTPHANIA COMITATVS
map

THE BISHOPRIC OF VLTRAIECTVM.
OLd Batavia was governed by Kings of their own, but the royal line being
extinct, it was divided into parts. The inhabitants of the River Isala, the
Bishops of Vltrajectum, the Earls of Holland, and the Duke of Gelderland, did
every one challenge a part to themselves. That part which belonged to the
Bishop of Vltrajectum, was called the Bishopric. The first Archbishop hereof
was D. Willibrordus a Saxon-Brittaine, who came to these coasts about the year
of our Lord 690, being sent into Friesland to convert Ratbodus and his subjects
to the Christian faith: who stubbornly resisting his godly and pious purpose,
he returned to Vltrajectum, where he brought the inhabitants to the Christian
religion, and reedified a Church built by Dagobert King of France. From thence
he went to Rome, and was created Archbishop of Vltrajectum, by Pope Sergius:
and after he returned to Vltrajectum, he caused a Church to be built in honor
of S. Martine Archbishop of Turone, and made it an Archbishopricke both for
himself and his posterity. After him there succeeded in the Archbishopricke
Divus Bonifacius, who together with 52 more suffered Martyrdom at Doccomum in
Friesland. But in regard of the grievous Norman persecution, the
Archbishopricke was translated to the Agrippine Colonie. But afterward it was
restored by King Pipin, and his son Charles the Great, who did not only
dignifie the City with the ancient honor of the Bishopric, and gave the
Bishop temporary power and means to defend himself against his enemies; which
temporary power was so large, that it did almost contain all Batavia. Truly
it is manifest that the Country of Trans-Isalana, and Groninga, were subject
to this Bishopric, even until the year 1527, when Henry Bavarus, being much
injured did commit himself to the Protection of the Emperor Charles the
fifth; and that he might recover his Ecclesiastical state, did pass over all
his temporal power unto him: of which when he had certified Margaret, who was
Governesse of the Low Countries at that time, it was agreed that the Earl of
Hoogstrat should come to Trajectum, on the 15 of November, where the Bishop of
Vltrajectum, did willingly and freely resign up to the Emperor Charles the
fifth, as Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Holland, and also to his lawful
Posterity, all his temporal state and jurisdiction in Vltrajectum and in
Trans-Isalania: which being done, the Bishop did free his subjects from their
oathe of alleagiance which they had taken a little before; THE BISHOPRIC OF
VLTRAIECTVM.
ULTRAIECTUM Dominium
map but on this condition, that they should take the same oath to be faithful
subjects to the Emperor, and his lawful heirs being Dukes of Brabant, and
Earls of Holland; reserving to himself and his successor the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, and revennewes only, with the Bishops Palace. Afterward the
Cities and Country of Vltrajectum, were united with the other Provinces, and
it was agreed, that the Country of Vltrajectum, should be so firmly united to
Holland, that they should be afterward ruled by one Governor, and that the
States of either Provinces, should be called together; and that it should be in
the Praefects power to change yearly the Magistrates of all the Cities in
either Province. And also that those who had been banished in Holland, should
not be received into Vltrajectum. And that all Tenures should run in these
words: That they should hold in Fee of the County of Holland and Vltrajectum.
But in the year 1580. after the decease of Frederick Bishop of Tautenburg, the
States did assume unto themselves the government of the City of Vltrajectum,
and afterward the Vltraject^nsians as confederates with the other States of the
united Provinces, did acknowledge no other Lord but the States. These things
being unfolded, let us come now to the City. This country is encompassed on
the North, West, and the South almost on every side with the County of
Holland: on the East it is bounded with the Dukedom of Gelderland. It has a
good fertile soil. Which as it is higher and dryer, so is it much more fit for
tillage. Here are five walled Cities, namely Vltrajectum, Batavadurum, Rhena,
Amersford, and Montfort. Vltrajectum which is the Metropolis of the Province
was so named, as Iunius Hadrian witnesses, from the Roman armies which lay
by Rhene. For in that place where the City now stands, the five and
thirtieth Legion was quartered, which was thus written by abbreviation, V.
Trig. L^g. Stat. that is, the station or quarter of the five and thirtieth
Legion: but those which were ignorant of the Latin tongue, reading those words
together which should have been divided, did pronounce it Vtriestat; for the
middle letters Leg. were left out. Afterward this word Vtriestat was changed
into Vtrecht. Neither is it a strange matter, seeing the City Cantstat in
Southland, did take his name from these words, Leg. Ant. Stat. that is, the
Station of the Antonian Legion. It is thought also that it was called Antonia
from Antoninus a Roman Senator, who having left Rome, in regard of Neroes
Tyranny; came into those coasts and built this City. And afterward the
Wiltians did depopulate and waste it, and built there a fair Castle, which
they called after their name Wiltenburg, which Castle Dagobert the son of
Clotarius did take by force of arms, and having fortified it more strongly
than it was before, called it Trajectum, because it is a passage for those that
travel that way, and there is a certain Toll paid there: Which appears by
these verses which are to be seen in S. Martines Church: Circumquaque fluens
Hollandia gurgite Rheni,
Cingitur, Oceani fluminibusque maris.
In qua cum muris urbs Antonina novellis
Tempore Neronis aedificata fuit.
Hanc devastavit fera flammea gens, and ibidem
Castrum Wiltorum conditur inde novum.
Turribus excelsis quod adhuc plebs Abroditorum,
Funditus evertens diruit usque solum.
Hinc Trajectense castrum cum moenibus altis
Conditur a Francis Christicolis: sed idem
Vulgus Danorum confregit humo tenus, omnes
Cum Clero cives insimulense necans.
Denique Baldricus Praesul nova moenia struxit,
Quae modo subsistunt auxiliante Deo.
Sic Hollandensi terrae veraciter omni
Trajectum constat urbs capitalis adhuc.
Holland is compassed in on every side
By the Rhene, and by the Ocean Sea so wide.
In which that City which they Antonia call
Was built in Neroes time with a new wall;
Which a fierce Nation did with fire soon wast,
And the Wiltian Castle was built there at last
With high built Towers; which the Abroditan
People did raze even to the ground again.
Then the Castle of Trajectum with a wall,
The Frenchmen builded, who were Christians all.
The Danes did cast it to the ground again,
When they the Clergy and Citizens had slain.
At last the Bishop Baldricke did command,
That new walls should be built, which yet do stand.
So that it seems, that still Trajectum is
Hollands chief City and Metropolis.


This Bishop Balderick, who (as these verss do mention) walled this City,
was surnamed Clivensis, and Charles the Bald, King of France, and Emperor of
Germany, gave him the Cities of Daventria, and Tiela, with all the Territories
thereunto adjoining, both for repairing the Cathedral Church, and for his
government in his Bishopric. It appears that this City was heretofore
called Antonia, not only by the aforesaid verses, but also by the testimony of
diverse writings, and by inscriptions upon coin and ancient stones, and
monuments found heretofore. Yet it is doubtful whether this name were derived
from Antoninus, the Roman Senator: for some do report that it was so called
from Marcus Antonius, who was at that time Caesar's ambassador in France, who
afterward together with Octavianus Augustus, and Marcus Lepidus, did assume
unto themselves the whole government of the Roman Commonwealth. Lastly, others
do allege, that it was so called from the Emperor Marcus Antoninus Pius, who
did reedifie it when it was decayed. Vltrajectum is situate by the old channel
of Rhene, which River before that it broke into ^^^ca, did run that way, and
from thence did hasten onward to the Ocean. And now the inhabitants by trenches
and ditches have brought the two Rivers, Wo^rda, and L^yda, unto the City,
that way which the River Rhene came heretofore. Moreover it is observeable,
that this City is so seated, that in one day you may go on foot to which
you please of fifty Towns which stand round about it, being no farther
distant from it than we said before* as appears also by the Geographicall
Table,) all of which before these troublesome times of war, did belong to the
King of Spain. Moreover any one that sets forth in the morning, from
Vltrajectum, may walk softly to any of those six and twenty Cities
aforesaid, and there refresh themselves and make merry, and at evening come
home. This is a great City, pleasant, and powerful, having many stately
public and private aedifices; it has a fair strong Castle, built by the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and called in their speech Vredenburch. The
Churches thereof are very magnificent, and especially these five which belonged
heretofore to so many ancient Colleges of Cannons: Namely our Saviors
Church* S. Martines Church, S. Peter's, S. John's, and S. Mary's. But the
sumptuous and fair Church of Saint Martine, does exceed all the rest, which
is a Bishops seat. The Bishop Adelboldus, caused this Church to be pulled
down, and afterward to be built up again more fairly; it was reedified in
the year 1023, and twelve Bishops did consecrate it in the presence of the
Emperor Henry the first, as these verses do declare: Tempore Francorum
Dagoberti Regis in isto
Praesenti fundo conditur ecce decens.
Primitus Ecclesia Sancti Thomae, prope Castrum
Trajectum, quam gens Frisica fregit atrox.
Sed prior Antistes Dominus Clemens, ob honorem
Sancti Martini, post renovavit eam
Desidis Henrici sub tempore Regis: at illam
Praesul Adelboldus fregit, ab inde novam
Ecclesiam fundans, Henrici tempore primi
Caesaris electi, quem duodena cohors
Pontificum pariter benedixit: denique Praesul
Henricus caepit hanc renovare suam
Ecclesiam, Regis Gulielmi tempore, qvi tum
Hollandensis erat inlytus ecce Comes.
When Dagobert was King of France, they did sound
Saint Thomas Church upon this present ground:
Even by the Castle of Trajectum placed,
But by the Friesland Nation it was raced.
Then the reverend Praelate Clemens called by name,
In honor of S. Martine built it up again,
Even in the time of Henry's slothful reign.
But Adelbolde pulled it down unto the ground
And afterward a new Church he did found
In the first Henry's time; which with great state,
Twelve Bishops solemnly did consecrate.
Lastly the Bishop Henery began
For to reedifie this Church again,
Even when King William this same land did guide,
Who was then Earl of Holland too beside.


This Saint Mary's Church is very fair and beautiful, and was built by the
Emperor Frederick, as a mulct and charge imposed on him by the Pope of Rome,
for wasting the famous City of Mediolanum, and destroying the Churches
therein. It was strange that at the laying of the foundation of this Church,
there was a quicksand found, on which they could not build, but that it would
still sincke; at length they cast Ox hides into it, which made the ground
sollid and firm, so that they built this Church on it, in remembrance whereof
these verses are extant in Vltrajectum: Accipe Posteritas quod post tua secula
narres;
Taurinis Cutibus fundo solidata columna est.


THE CITY AND PROVINCE OF MACHLIN.
MAchlin is situated almost in the middle of Brabant, and is as it were
enclosed within it, near the River Dilia, which cutteth through the middle of
it, being equally distant from Antwerp, Bruxells, and Lovanium, in a Champion
Country and fertile soil, having a light and sandy ground; the City is
very fair and conspicuous, both in regard of the pleasantness of the
situation, the cleanenesse and breadth of the streets, the largeness and
curiousness of the houses: some reckon it as a part of Brabant, but yet truly
it is a distinct country from it. There are diverse uncertain conjectures
concerning the original thereof, but this is manifest, that in one of the
letters Pattents of Pepin King of France, dated in the year 753, there is
mention made of it, and that it is there called M^slinas, as it were the line
of the Sea, because the Sea does flow and ebb before it; which Etymology
pleases some better, than to call it Machel from one Michael who possessed
these parts, as Orte^^us does deliver in his Itinerarie of the Low Countries.
Others do deduce the name from other derivations. But as we said, Machlin,
after the year 753, had Adon to be Earl thereof, which he held by fealty and
service. But who were his Praedecessors, or successors is not yet known. Long
time afterward there followed the Bertoldi, who denied fealty and homage to
Godfrey Barbatus, Duke of Brabant, which occasioned wars between them. After
the Berltoldi, Machlin had various fortunes, and diverse Lords; at length it
recovered liberty, and was not subject unto any in the year 1336. And
afterward it came to the Burgundian family in the year 138^. And lastly, unto
the Austrian family, in the year 1477. And it is now one of the 17 Provinces
of the Low countries, where the chief Counsel does sit, whither the last
appeal in the Low Countries is made; and instituted by Charles of Burgundy,
Prince of the Low Countries, and at length in our time it was made an
Archbishopricke, the chief Metropolitan seat, whereof is Saint Rumolds
Church. Besides, there is an Armorie in it, which in the year of Christ, 1546.
in the month of August, the Gunpowder being set on fire by lightning, was
burnt down, and the City much defaced thereby.

Here Nicasius of Woerden, a most learned Lawyer, although he THE CITY AND
Province of MACHLIN.
MECHLINIA DOMINIVM
map were blind, was borne; also Christopher Longolius, Rombert Dodonaus, the
Emperors Physician, and professor of Physic at Leyden: and also Philibert of
Bruxells an excellent Lawyer. It does also produce many excellent artificers
and workmen* especial stone-cutters, and carvers of Images. He that desires
to know more concerning this City, and the antiquity of this Province, let
him have recourse to John Bapt. Gremajus his large description of Machlin, and
he shall find very good satisfaction therein.

THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA.
GROENINGA Domin^i
GRoninga is the head City of the Province of Groninga, and the fairest
City in Friesland. Some think it to be that which Ptolemie calls Phileum.
They derive the name from Grano a certain Trojan or Friesland Prince, but Vbbo
Emmius, rejecting other opinions which are grounded on fabulous reports,
supposes that it was so called from the green Meddowes, and tufts of trees
therein. It is distinguished from the other parts of Friesland, in the middle
whereof this Province is seated, by the River Amasus, and the Lavician Bay; and
now since the year 1536, it is counted one of the seventeene Provinces, at
what time the Groningians did put themselves into the protection of Charles the
fifth. Heretofore this Lordship did do homage and fealty to the Bishop of
Vltrajectum, being given him by the Emperor Henry the third, and afterward by
the Emperor Maximilian the first, in the year 1494. And also he gave the
Government of Groninga, and all Friesland, to Albert Duke of Saxony: the
Groningians refusing the government of the Saxons, who having made many
treaties of peace but in vain; they committed themselves in the year 1506,
into the Protection of Edzard Earl of East Friesland, and afterward dismissing
Edzard, because he was not able to resist the Saxon, and the Emperor, they
took the oath of alleagiance to Charles Duke of Gelderland; so at length
George, the son of Albert Saxon, did surrender and yield up all Groninga and
West Friesland to the Emperor Charles the fifth, as to the chief Lord
thereof. This occasioned wars between the Austrians and the Gelderlanders,
whereby it came to pass, that the Groningians being wearied with continual
wars, did yield themselves in the year 1515 unto Caesar, as Prince of
Brabant and Holland. It is a pleasant Country and full of fair pasture
grounds, except toward Druenttum, where it is moorish. The City is strongly
fortified with ditches and trenches, being very wide and spacious, adorned with
many magnificent public and private buildings. The suburbs whereof some few
years ago was much enlarged, and the new City was joined to the old, and so
the City was more strongly fortified against the invasion of enemies than
before. There are twelve Churches in it, of which there are three Parish
Curches, as they call them, five belonging to Monasteries, and four belonging
to Guesthouses. The fairest and auncientest of all the Parish Churches is S.
Martines, having a high steeple, although the top thereof be somewhat decayed,
and heretofore it was devoted to heathen superstition. It was made a Bishops
seat in the year 1569, by Pope Paul the third, which John Carisius of
Vliraj^^^um, was the first and last that possessed it. This City is populous
and rich, and it has a large jurisdiction. Here Rodolphus Agricola the
learnedest man in those times was borne, whose books are still approved by the
learned. He dyed at Heidelberg in the year 1485, on whom Hermolaus Barbarus a
noble man of Venice bestowed this Epitaph: Invida ^lauserunt hoc marmore fata
Rudolphum
Agricolam Frisij spemque decusque soli;
Scilicet, hoc vivo meruit Germania laudis,
Quicquid habet Latium, Graecia quicquid habet.
The envious fates here have shut,
Within this Marble Tomb,
Rudolphus Agricola, by whose worth
Friesland much honor won.
For while he lived, Germany did inherrit
All praise which Greece and Italy could merit.


Also this City was the birth place of Wesselus Bassilius, a most excellent
Philosopher, who dyed in the year 1584; also Reinerus Predinius, Hieron.
Verutius, and many others were borne here. There is a great Free Town in this
Province called Damme which is but two miles distant from Groninga, and it has
145 villages; some whereof are fairer and greater than the rest. Concerning
other matters you shall find them accurately described by Vbbo Emmius.

THE LORDSHIP OF GRONINGA
map

THE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSELANIA.
THe Trans-Issilanians do inhabit that part which was the Seat of the
ancient Frenchmen; which the most learned Hadrian Iunius, does largely and
accurately declare. And the name of Frenchmen signifies as much; for the Low
country men being weary of servitude, when they increased in wealth, would
needs be called Franci, because they had gotten their liberty and enfranchised
themselves; whom Agathias a Greek writer, did place about Rhene, in these
words: The Frenchmen do dwell about Rhene, and do inhabit the adjacent
Countries round about, and they were next unto the Sicambrians; which
Claudianus and Sidonius Apollinaris do expressly show, as also Gregory
Turonensis, and Venantius Fortunatus. It is now called Trans-Issulana, because
it is situate beyond the River Isela. It was also the seat of the ancient
Salians, and also of the Tencterians, which are now thought to be the
Drentinians, and the Tubantum, which, as Iunius writes in his Batavia, were
the Tuentenians. This Country is now divided into three parts, that which is
near to Isala is called Salandia, that which is beyond V^t^h^^ is called
Druenta, that which is next to Westphalia, is called Twenta. But Druenta and
Twenta were conferred on the Bishop of old Trajectum, after the year of Christ
1046. Also Amelandia, Gora, Daventria, and also all Trans-Issulana, by the
donation and guilt of the Emperor, and so it continued for many years under
his governmen, even until the year 1528; when being wearied with war they
yielded themselves to the Emperor Charles the fifth, on certain conditions,
as Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Holland. Trans-Issula, has on the North West
Friesland, on the South the County of Zutphania, on the East Westphalia, and
on the West the River Isela. The Country is plain and fruitful, and full of
Corn. It contains eight walled Cities, which have their own privileges
and immunities, as Meppela, Geelmuda, Coevordia, Hardenberga, Omma, Almeloa,
Gora, Diepenhemium, Delda, and Enscheda. The States do consist of two members,
the first whereof are the officers and nobles, the latter are the Magistrates
of the three capital Cities. Daventria is seated by the River Issela, which
is the Metropolis of the Country, which is a large City, and beautified with
many public and private buildings, and fortified with walls, Towers, and
Bulwarks: heretofore it was a famous place of studdie, from whence came
Gerardus surnamed the Great, whose works are much esteemed by Divines; also
Alexander Heggius, who first revived the Greek tongue in Belgia, and may
worthily boast of his scholar Erasmus. In this City also there were borne
James of Daventria, THE LORDSHIP OF TRANS-ISSALANIA.
Ditio TRANSISULANA
map an excellent Geographer, Everard Bron^korst a Lawyer and Professor at
Leiden; also Ortui^us Gracius, Ioannes Dorrius, John S^nthemius, and Rodolphus
Pythopaeus, and others. It is now the chief City of the Ansuarians, whom
they commonly call A^se steden. Campi is on the left hand bancke of the River
Isela, not far from the mouth thereof, being four miles distant from
Daventria. This City is also very large, lying lengthwayes, and has fair
houses in it: here Albertus Pightus was bone, also John Campensis a Divine,
Harmanus Cruserus a Physician, and Theodore Peter were borne here. Heretofore
it was more famous for merchandising in regard of the depth of the Haven than
it is now. Swolla is a pleasant City, and fortified with a double ditch. It
has on one side the River Isela, on the other Vetchta, which are not far
from it. There are also other lesser walled towns: as Volenhovia by the Lake
Fl^vum, Steenvicum by the River Aa, and Hasseletum by the River Vidrum or
Ve^^ta. Also Oetmersia and Oldensalia, the last of which is an ancient Town
of the Salians, which Baldericke of Vltrajectum walled about, and did found
there a College of Cannons.

THE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.
ARtesia, contains a great part of those people which Caesar calls the
Atrebatians, from the chief City which he calls Atrebatum. But Mar^us
Niger does place here the Ambianians. And Ptolomie also does place Atrebatium
between the river S^an^, and Phrudium, which is now called la Sum. But the
new name of Artesia, is derived from the Metropolis called Arras, as it were
Aratesia by the figure Syncope, and it is commonly called Artois. The bounds
thereof are on the North Flanders, from which it is parted by the River Lisa,
and the New ditch: on the South and West it is bounded with Picardie, on the
East with Flanders and Cam^racum. The air is clear and swee^e, the Country
fruitful, and especially of corn, of which it has not only sufficient
plenty for it self, but also it furnishes Flanders, Brabant and other
Countries. It is the barn and Granarie for Antwerp and Mechlin. It has no
wine, rather by slothfulness of the inhabitants than the unfruitfulnesse of
the soil or climate. This Country heretofore belonged to Flanders: for
Charles the Bald gave it to Baldwin Arduennatus for a Dowry with his wife
Judith. Afterward Philip Alsasius when he married his Nephew Isabella, to
Philip son of Ludovicke the seventh, King of France, he gave her all West
Flanders for her dowry, that is, all that tract of ground, which lies from the
new Ditch even to Picardie. Afterward Philip in the year 1195 made it a
County, and gave it to his son Ludovicke, who was first Earl of Artesia,
afterward King of France, and the father of Ludovicke the holy. But in the
year 1382 Ludovicke Malanus, Earl of Flanders, after the decease of his
Mother, was made Earl of Artesia, and so both the Counties were united again.
But after the decease of Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, Ludovick the
eleventh King of France, did regaine Artesia, which afterward by an agreement
and covenant made between Charles the eighth King, and Maximilian the
Emperor, was passed over Anno 1492, to Ph^lip of Austria the son of Maximilian
the father of Charles the fifth. The chief Cities are Atrebatum, the Church
of S. Audomare, Bethunia, Aria, and Bapalma, the others are less. Atrebatum
commonly called Arras, or Atrecht, is situated near the River Scarpa: it is a
great Town well fortified with ditches, and Bulwarks; it does resemble two
Cities, one of which they call la Cite, which belongs to the Bishop, and the
other la V^lle which belongs to the Prince. The former part is lesser, but
very pleasant, and has a Cathedral Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Here
a certain kind of Manna was religiously kept as a relic which Saint Hierome
in his Epistles does report, did rain down in his time in this Country. This
part is larger and has fair houses and streets, and a great Market place:
besides, it has a Library in which are all kind of written manuscripts,
especially of Divine. Here Francis Baldvin, a famous Lawyer was borne, upon
whose Monument at Paris there is this inscription: Cujaci, Balduinus hic jacet.
Hoc tecum reputa and vale. Mortuis nobis juris prudentiam gravis corripi and
sopor. Franc. Bald, Iurise. ob. anno aet. 54. November 11. a partu Virgiuis
1563. Papirius Massonus Balduini auditor P; that is, Whose monument is this?
Baulduine lies here. Think on that and so farewell: Franc. Bald, a Lawyer,
dyed in the year of his age 54. on the 11. of November, and after the birth of
Christ 1563. Papirius Massonus an hearer of Baldvini did place this monument.
In this City the most learned and eloquent Charles Clusius was borne, who
after he had traveled through many Countries, he spent his old years in this
Athens, and Batavia, and there he finished those his famous works, which
deserve immortal fame. The City is populous enough, because there are some
merchants, and some trades men. The Church of S. Audomare was heretofore called
Sithin, as Meyerus witnesses, afterward it was called S. Omer, from S.
Audomar. This Audomar, was bishop of the Morineans about the year 1570, and
built a Monastery there near the River Aa. This City excels both for
beauty, and populousness of the Citizens. Some think it to be Itius Portus,
as we have said in the description of Bononia. Three miles hence near the
River Lisa there was also the ancient Metropolis of the Morineans called
Teroana, concerning which I have spoken in the same description. Bethunia also
is a fair Town in Atribatum, being a Granarie for wheat. It flourishes with
all kind of commodities, as corn and other things which are necessary to
sustain man's life, and fit to be transported. Aria is seated by the River
Lisa, which runs through the middle of it, it is two miles distant from
Teroana, being a fair Town and well fortified. It has an ancient Castle,
and neat buldings. There is also Hesdinunt, which is a strong fortress
against France, which Caesar after he had raced the Town which was of the same
name, builded by occasion of the war that was between the most powerful
Princes of Europe. It is conveniently seated on the bank of the River Canchia,
one mile nearer toward France, being four miles distant from Monstrolium, and
5 from S. Paul. It is watered also with another River, commonly called Blangis,
from the place where it springs. So that in regard of the convenient
situation thereof, it is accounted a strong Fortress, and in regard of the
laws and Privileges which ancient Hesdinum did enjoy, it was soon
replenished with inhabitants. Near to S. Omers there is a Lake, full of fish,
in which there are floating Islands, which with a rope tide to the trees
growing thereon, or with long poles may be should and drawn up and down: like
those which Pliny mentions to be in Lycia, called the Calaminae. Neither are
there small pieces of Land; for Oxen and other Cattle THE COVNTIE OF ARTESIA.
ARTESIA
map may feed and graze upon them. Under these Islands in the Winter and
Summer time great store of fish do hide themselves, to avoyde both the cold
and heat. The chief Rivers are Lisa, Scarpa, Aa, Canchia, and Anthia, besides
other navigable Rivers. There is also not far from Teroana a great Channel,
which they call the new ditch some think it was digd in the time of the Earl
Baldwin, either to hinder the enemies excursions, or to distinguish, and set
limits between the confines of Flanders and Artesia: others think it to be a
bay of the Sea. Virgill truly does acknowledge that the Morians were near
unto the Sea, when he calls them the farthest inhabitants. But now Teroana is
eight miles from the Sea. Besides, out of the bottom of the new ditch, there
are oftentimes pieces of Anchors drawn up, which is a certain argument that
the Sea was near unto it. It has also some woods, especially Westward and
Southward. The Politic state, of Artesia does consist of three orders: the
Clergy, the Nobles, and the special Cities: the first member is the clergy,
in which there are 2 Bishops, the Bishop of Atrebatum and S. Omers; 2 Provosts,
Bethuniensis and Ariensis. 20 Abbots to whom belong these Monasteries: of the
order of S. Benedict, 8, namely, Atrebatense, Aquicinctense Aus^in, S. Omers,
Blang^acense, Montense, Hamense or Hames, and Alsiacense: Of the order of S.
Augustine 7, as Auriacense, S. Eloy, of Choques, of Hennin, of Lietard, of
Rasell^ v^lla, of Mar^ul, Aquicurtense in Eaucourt. Of the Cistertian order
there are the Abbots of the Monasteries of Cherchamp, and Clommeres. Of the
Praemonstratensian order, Damartin, Santandreanum, Auguatianum. There are 10
Colleges of Cannons: Atreba^^^se, Audomarense, Bethuniense, Arience,
Hesdinense, Lensiense, Sanpaulitanum, ^alleriense, Falkoburgense, Douriense.
The second member is the Nobles, among whom there is one Prince of Espinoy: one
Marquess of Rentinium, 7 Earls, S. Pol, Falquenberch, Harliensis,
Busquetensis, Henniensis, Arquensis, and lastly Blangiacensis. But these two
last Earledomes did fall of late to the Abbey of Saint Bertin; and four chief
Earls are not called or summoned to this meeting, as Atrebatensis,
Audomarensis, Bapalmensis, and Lensiensis. The families of the Gentry counting
them by an Alphabeticall order are these: Aussi, Averdom, Aubigni, Aix,
Annequin, Anvezin, Aneroult, Avion, Allenes, Anvin, Bailleul, Beaufort,
Beaumez, Beauraines, Beausart, Bellone, Berles, Billy, Bofles, Boisleux,
Bonnieres, Boncourt, Boubers, Bours, Brias, Buissi, Caumont, Conroy, Contes,
Coupigny, Croisilles, Cunchy, Divion, Douvrin, Enne, Erin, Esquerdes, Estree,
Fosseux. Frevin, Fleshin, Gomiecount, Gouy, Greboval, Geulesin, Habarcque,
Hachicourt, Hamelaincourt, Helfault, Houchin, Houdin, la Viesville, la
Plancque, Liguereul, Licques, Longastre, Malanoy, Maisnil, Mammez, Marles, Mes
en Contire, Mingoual; Moiry, Nedoncelles, Neufville, Nojelle, Noircarmes,
Ococh, Olham, Oignies, Oresmaux, Plancques, Plovicke, Pronville, Querecques,
Ranchicourt, Ransart, Recouet, Rebecque, Regnauville, Rely, Rolancourt,
Rumenghien, Sains, S. Aldegonde, S. Venant, Sombrein, Sovastre, Tieuloie,
Tramerie, Vaulx, Villers, Vrolant, Wancourt, Warluzelle, Waurans, Willerval.
The third member is the especial Cities: 7 Royal Cities, as Atrebatum,
Saint Omers, Bethunia, Aria, Hesdinum, Lens, and Bapalina: private Lordships as
S. Pol, Perne, Lillers: and also these Towns which have the praerogative of
Cities, and called to the assembly of the States, and there be 28 of them,
Arques, Aubigny, Avesnes, Aussi, Benurains, Blangij, en Ternois, Busquoy,
Carwin, Caumont, Choques, Dourier, Franquenberghe, Fressin, Fleurbay, Frevene,
Frages, Gorgue, Hennin, Lietard, Huchin, Hosdaine, Labroy, Libourg, Oisy, Pas,
Richebourg, Tornehem, Ventie, Vitry. The Provincial Counsel is held at
Atrebatum, from whence all appeals are brought to the Parliament at Mechlin.
But the Bishop of Atrebatum has all power in spiritual matters, and is
subject to the Bishop of Rhemes.

This Table also contains true Picardie, and the Dukedom of Cambresi, which
is a Principallitie of the Empire, and is governed both in temporal and
spiritual matters by the Bishop of Cambresi. But yet sometimes in spiritual
matters it is subject to the Bishop of Rhemes, and in temporal matters it is
under the protection of the King of Spain. And so much may suffice concerning
Artesia: Let us proceed to Hannonia.

THE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA, unto which is joined the County of NAMVRCIVM.
The Country whence so called.
HAnnonia was heretofore the seat of the Nervians, the chief City whereof
is now called Tornacum, which Ptolemie, calls Baganon. This Country has
often changed her name: for at first it was called Pannonia, as Lessabaeus
witnesses, from the worship of Pan: afterward Saltu^ Carbonarius, and
afterward Lower Piccardie: and last of all Hannonia, from the River Hania,
which runs through the middle of the Country, which they call in their own
language Hanault or Henegow, from the same River, which the Frenchmed call
Hanie or Hene, and the ancient German word Gouw, which signifies a Country
or Village. The Situation.
It has on the North Brabant and Flanders, on the South Campania and
Piccardie, on the East Namurcium, and Leodium, with the aforesaid Brabant, on
the West Flanders and Artesia. The whole Country is 20 miles long, and 16
broad. The air is temperate, sweet, The temper of the air.
and clear: the soil is fertile, abounding with all kind of fruits, The
fruitfulness of the soil.
but especially has great store of excellent good Corn. It has many fair
meddowes, pastures, and Orchards in it. It has the best Iron and Lead:
besides, Mines of diverse kinds of Marble, and also of hard flints, which Ovid
calls Touchstone, and Lithanthracon, the Leodians, call it in their speech
Houlles. They take fire, and will burn like coals, and they are used to make
fires of them with some little wood amongst them. Here also those cleeres
sheets of glass are made, with which they glaze their Churches and houses to
keep out the weather, and these are better than those which are made in other
places. Also all kind of Glasse-ware is made here. This Province has had many
Lords, The ancient Government.
and at length it came from the family of the Montensians to the Earls of
Flanders, and at last it came to the Batavian family, afterward to the
Bavarian, and from thence to the Burgundian, and last of all to the Austrian
family. There are four and twenty Cities in Hannonia fortified with rampires
and ditches. The chief whereof are Montes, and Valencenae Montes, commonly
called Mons, is a City by the little River Tralla, which is yet capable of
great ships, being a fair City, well seated and fortified with walls, and
Rampires. There are many fountains in it: and it is wealthy by merchandise,
Manufactures, and husbandry. Valencenae, or Valencena, or as some would have
it, Valentiniani or Valencienne, from an Emperor of that name, is situate by
the River Scaldis; THE COVNTIE OF HANNONIA.
HA^NONIA
map in a pleasant plain, and safe from the enemy. There is in it an Armory
well furnished for war. Two Churches, one consecrated to the blessed Virgin,
of ancient building, the Pillars whereof are of marble and Porphyrie: the
other consecrated to Saint John, built latelier by Pepin, the father of Charles
the Great. There are many monasteries, especially the Monastery of
Franciscans, which is more famous than the rest, in which the Earls of
Hannonia and Lords of Valencena are buried. The Court thereof is large, having
a famous Dial, which was set up by William Bonus, Earl of Hannonia, Holland
and Zeland. There are also Condatum or Conde on the right hand bancke of
Scaldis, being two miles distant from Valencena; it is a fair Town: also
Landresium or Landresi, by the River Scambra, being famous for the seige which
Charles the fifth laid against it in the year 1543, which yet he could not
take by force: Also Avesne which is a City and Bulwark on the frontiers of
France; by the River Hepra: Chimacum or Chimay is a City by the River Blanca,
in the middle of a wood; in the late wars it was often set on fire and ^ac^d,
yet at length it was reedified again, so that it is now more beautiful than
before. It has a Palace with a garden, and an artificial and curious
Labyrinth therein. Plalla is near unto the confines of Brabant: Boucha^^e is a
free town, situate on the bancke of the River Scaldis, between Cameracum and
Valencena, it is famous for traffic and merchandising. Bellus Mons, or
Beaumont, is a little neat Town. Philippoli^, or Philippe ville, was so named
from King Philip, and Mariae-Burg from Mary Queen of Hungary; they are strong
places built to suppress the inroads of the French, Bavacum in French Bavis,
which some suppose to be that which Ptolem^ calls Baganum or Bagacum; some say
that Caesar calls it Belgium in his Commentaries, but they are refuted by
those, who bring more stronger arguments, to prove that it was placed in
Bellovacum, or some part of Picardie. There are also Maubeuge, Bins, Reux,
S^igny, B^ain le Conte, Engien, Lessine, Chevre, A^, S. Guillein, and Leuz^.
Moreover there are 250 Villages, the most of which are fair, pleasant and
rich. The Country is watered every where with Lakes, standing Pooles,
Fountains, and Rivers, with Rivers; as Scala^, Sambra, Tenera, Hania, and
others. It has pleasant woods and Forests; the chief whereof are Morman, and
S. Amandi. Moreover the Commonwealth of Valence is governed by such wise and
good laws, that the Norimbergians would institute and frame their
Commonwealth according thereunto, and sent some wise and prudent men thither
for this purpose, which the Romans also did in framing their Commonwealth
after Athens. And therefore it is no marvel if in so excellent a politic
government, there have been Citizens who have been famous through the whole
world for virtue; the chief whereof were the Emperor Henry the 7. the Duke of
Lutzenburg, Mary the only Daughter and heir of Charles the Bold, the
Grandmother of Charles the fifth; also John Froissard, a famous Historian, who
declares as much in the beginning of his work.

The Politic state of Hannonia does consist of five members, which are, first
the 12 Peers, namely Longueville, Lens, Filly, Chievre, Au^sne, Chimay,
Levreux, Barbanson, Baudour, Rebaux, Walecourt. 2. Ecclesiastical Pr^lates,
namely the Abbot and Earl of S. Waldrut. 26 Abbots, S. Guislaine, Marchennes,
Cambron, Hasnon, Marville, Anein, Haultmot, ^^essy, S. Denis, Vicogne,
^eullien, Crespin, B^nne Esperance, S. Iean, S. Aldegonde, Geilenghien,
Spinleu, Ath, Fontenelle, Beaumont, Denain, Quesnoy, Wat^^braine, Lolive,
B^lliay, Leture, besides the Colleges of Cannons. Thirdly Noble men, and one
principality of Chimay; 10 Counties, as La^ain, Beaumont Ostervant, the chief
City whereof is Bouchin, also Barbanson, Auesne, Barlaymont, Bossu, Montigni,
Reux, Terrache. 22 Baronies, as Engh^^n, Leuze, Havre, L^agne, A^^oing,
Vuerchin, Fontaine, Havaide, Kinrain, Barlaymont, Ville, Gomegnie, S.
Aldegonde, Se^zelle, Condet, Haurdain, Belleule, Fagneille, Bousie, Roesin,
Frusne, Harchies. One Marshall, one Steward, one great Ranger, one
Chamberlain. And four ordinary Officers.

The County of Namu^^^^m remains. It is seated between Brabant, Hannonia,
and the Dioecesse of Leodium: it is a small mountainous Territory, but
pleasant, having a sweet and temperate air. The soil is fruitful yielding
all things, The fruitfu^nesse of the soil.
which are necessary for the sustentation of man's life. It has also Mines of
Iron and Lead, and stone Quarries, out of which diverse kinds of stones are cut,
and especially black Marble, and stones like Jasper. And not long since those
stones were dug forth which were good to burn, we may call them
Iathantracas, of which we spoke in the aforesaid description. Moreover this
Country at first was governed by a Marquess: The aunci^^^ Go^ernment.
and afterward it changed often her Lord. Philip the brother of Balduin, Earl
of Flanders, was Marquess hereof in the year 1200. And Theodorus was Earl of
it: after whose decease, the whole Country came to Philip Bonus Duke of
Burgundy, as we have declared in the description of the Low Countries. There
are four walled Cities in this Country, Namurcum, Bovina, Carlomontium, and
Valen^our^ium. And 182 Villages. Namurcum or Namur is the chief City; whence
the name thereof is derived, is uncertain: some suppose from Nanus a God of
the Heathens, who being used formerly to deliver Oracles, yet at Christ's
coming grew dombe, and spoke no more. And therefore from this dumb and mute
god Nanus, it was called Namurcium: some think it was so called from a new wall
which was built there by the Roman^s. The City is situate between two
Mountains, on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, where it receives
Sambra. It is eight miles distant from Lovanium, 10 from Leodium, and as many
from Bruxells. It is rich and has many fair public and private buildings,
and it is fortified with a strong Castle. Four miles from Namurcium is
Bouvinae, a small town, which was often wasted by the wars, and last of all
it was for the most part ruinated by Henry the second, King of France, in the
year 1555. Afterward the Citizens did reedifie it. Charlemont was built by
Charles the fifth in the year 1555, against the Frenchmen who then possessed
Mar^enburg* Valencourtium is a town of good noate, being distant from Namurcium
7 miles. This Country has many Rivers which are full of fish: T^^ Riv^^
the chief whereof are Mosa and Sambra: it has also fair fresh springs. It
has also woods for pleasure and hunting, The W^ods.
The public works.
which are full of wild beasts. There are many Churches in this Country, and
famous Monasteries, which were built heretofore at the costs and charges of the
Earls of Namurcium, and endowed with great revennewes. Three miles from
Namurcium there is the rich Town Audennas, in which there is an ancient
Nunne^ie for noble women, built by Begga daughter of Pepin, from whom they were
first called Baggine Vestalls. The politic state of the County of Namurcium,
does consist of three members, which are the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
chief Cities. The Clergy are the Abbots of Floref, Granpre, Anden, Bonef,
Wassore, Hastieis. The Nobility are the Vicount Done, etc. The chief Cities
are Namur, Bovinae, Charlemont, Valencourt, or Walencourt. In the City of
Namurcum there is a Royal Counsel, from whence appeals are brought to the
Court of Mechlin. There is also a Bishops seat, whose Cathedral Church is
consecrate to S. Albine. The Citizens are used to arms and martial
discipline, they speak French, but corruptly. There are few merchants and
Tradesmen: but a great company of Nobles, but such as be either the Princes
Bastards, or coming of a base stock.

THE COVNTIE OF NAMVRCIVM.
POntus Huterus Lib. 2. cap. 3. concerning Belgia, writes that the County of
Namurcium was heretofore inhabited partly by the Advaticans, and partly by the
Eburonians. It is situate between Brabant, Hannonia, and the Dioecesse of
Leodium: being a small mountainous Territory, but very pleasant. It is populous
in inhabitants who are very much addicted to warfare: it has a sweet and
temperate air, and rivers full of fish, the chief whereof are Mosa and
Sambra: it has also clear Springs, and woods for delight of hunting, which
are full of wild beasts. It has also Mines of Iron and Lead, and stone
Quarries, in which diverse kinds of Stones are cut forth, and especially black
marble, and stones like Jasper: and of late they dug forth those stones
which are good to burn, which as soon as they have taken fire do kindle by
degrees, and are quenched with oil, but water makes them burn more hotter;
they are commonly called Leodian coals, the learned do call them
Lithanthracus. It is not manifest, when this Country was made a County. We
read of Marquesses and Earls, of Namurcium, from the year of Christ 277, but
in broken and interrupted succession; but concerning the Princes of this
Country, Gram^aius, well best inform us in his history of Namurcium. Namurcium
is 10 miles broad, and 12 miles long. There are four walled Cities in this
County, and 182 Villages. And many Noblemens Castells. Also many Abbeys. The
government of the Commonwealth belongs to three orders, namely the Clergy,
the Nobility; and the Burgesses of Cities. Namurcum, or Namucum, is the chief
City, but it is not known from whence the name thereof is derived, some
derive Namurcum from Nanus a Heathen god, famous for delivering of Oracles;
others from a new wall which the Normanes built. Huterus supposes it to be
that which Caesar calls Nemetoenna. This City is situated between two
Mountains, on the left hand bank of Mosa, where it receives the River
Sambra; being fortified both by Art and Nature. It is rich, and has many
fair, public, and private aedifices and buildings. In this City there is a
royal Counsel, from whence appeals are brought to the high Court at Mechlin.
It is also a Bishops seat, whose Cathedral Church is consecrated to S.
Albine. The Citizens speak French, but corruptly: there are a few Merchants
and Tradesmen in this City, but a great company of Nobles. Three miles from
Namurcum there is the rich town Audennas, in which there is an ancient
Nunnery of Noble women, built by Begga the daughter of Pipin, from whom they
were first called Baggine Vestalls. Also between Namurcum and Dinantum on the
mountain Palvagius, there are some ruins of the ancient City Caprimont,
which was wasted in the Leodiensian wars. Four miles from Namurcum is
Bovinae, a little Town by the River Mosella, which the Earl Henry walled anno
11^6. In the year 1554, in the time of the French war it was razed down to
ground. But afterward the Citizens did reedifie it. Walcuria, which the
Dutchmen call Waelhovan is situated 7 miles from Namurcum, on the banck of the
river Aurca, it was first a Castle, and afterward about the year 910 it was
walled about. Carlomont was built by Charles the fifth* Anno 1555 against the
Frenchmen, who then possessed Marieburg, it has an impregnable Castle, it is
situated on the left hand bancke of the River Mosa, three miles from Marieburg.

THE COVNTIE OF MAMVRCIVM
NAMURCUM Comitatus
map

THE DVKEDOMF OF LVTZENBVRG.
THe Dukedom of Lutzenburg is so named from the chief City, The Country
whence so called.
which (as some suppose) was so called from the River Elza, which Antoninus
calls Alesontia. From Elza came Elzenburch, and from thence Lutzenburg. Peter
Dinaeus does give another opinion concerning Lutzenburg in these words: It is
not to be doubted (says he) but that the Leutians did dwell next to the
Treverians, Mediomatricians, and Lingonians: their Towns Tullus and Nasium
celebrated by Ptolemie, do keep the names of Toul and Nancy; in their own
language I believe they were called, de Lutzen, and had a large command, so
that the name of the famous Town of Lutzenburg was derived from them, The
Situation*
as if you should say der Lutzenburg. The Leodians and Namurcians do bounder
this Duchy on the North, on the East Mosella with the Bishopric of Trevers;
on the West Mosa, with the wood Arden. The compass or circuit of the whole
Country is 70 miles. Although this Country be mountainous and woody, yet it
has a plenteous, and fruitful soil. It is divided into two parts, the one
whereof is called Famenna, and the other Arduenna, Famenna is more fruitful,
The fruitfulness of the soil.
and has greater store of corn and coin. Arduenna is more rugged, but
affords good hunting, and is full of diverse excellent kinds of wild beasts.
There is Iron Oar not far from Manderscheid, in the Lordships of Keyla,
Cronenberch, and Sleida, near to a vale called Hellenthal. In this place there
are made Anvills, Fornaces and Vices, which are sold through all parts of
Germany. The ancient Government.
It was but a County at the first, and so the Emperor Henry the seventh was
Earl of Lutzenburg, but not Duke. Afterward it was made a Dukedom, at it
continues at this day; which some do attribute to Wenceslaus, a King of the
Romans, and others to Charles the fourth. Conradus Vercetius does asc^^be it
to Henry the seventh, who was the first Roman Emperor of that house.
Ortelius writes that he found in ancient Manuscript, that Sigifride was the
first Earl of this County: and that he was the son of Tacuinus Duke of
Mosella. For heretofore Lutzenburg did belong to the Treverians. It has 20
Cities fortified with walls and Rampires, the names whereof are; Lutzenburg,
Arlunum, Rodemachera, Theonis villa, The names of the Cities.
Gravemacherum, Vianda, Bastonacum, Mommedium, Novum Castrum, Danvillerium,
Marvilla, Roccha, Durbis, S. Vitiurbs, Marza and Sala. There are also some
Cities whose Walls THE DVKEDOME OF LVTZENBVRG.
Trier et Lutzo^borg.
map are levelled with the ground. There are also the Castells of S. John and
Manders^he^d, which are as big as small Cities, and have Counties belonging
to them. The chief City is Lutzenburg, some call it Lu^emburg, and Luceburg;
Ptolomie calls it Augusta Romandiorum. Gu^^^^ar^^^ would have it called
Lutzenburg as it were Lucisburg, that is, the Castle of the Sun: as also
many other places in this tract may seem to have been named from the gods of
the Gentiles: as Arlu^ from the Altar of the Moon, Iucis from Jupiter, (...)
from Mars; but whether the name be rightly derived from hence, let another
judge. The City is situate most pleasantly, part of it on the side of a
Mountain, and part of it on plain ground: The River Elza does water, and
divides the higher and lower mountainous part of the City, from the lower
part. There are many fair aedifices and houses in it, which yet the wars
have somewhat defaced* and also a Church consecrate to S. Nicolas: and a
Monastery to S. Francis, in which John of Lutzenburg, King of Bohemia, the
son of the Emperor Henry the seventh, and father of Charles the fourth, was
buried. This City has been often defaced by the fury of Mars, who has no
agreement with the Muses, who love peace and tranquillity; yet it has bred many
famous learned men. And among many others, Nicolas Navis a man so learned and
skillful in the civil law, that he was Praesident of the Court at Lutzenburg
until he dyed: but he left a son of his own name, who being equal to his
father in virtue, was in such savor with the Emperor Charles the fifth, that
he made him Vicechancellour of the whole Empire, in which office he continued
until his death. Arlunum which is called in their language, is situate on the
top of a hill, being a very neat town, where the Moon was worshipped after
the manner of the heathens, and from thence it is supposed to have been so
named. Here many Monuments of antiquity are found, which the Earl Peter
Ernest caused to be brought home to his own house, which is in the suburbs of
the City of Lutzenburg. Bartholmew Latemus a very learned man, was borne in
this country: Which is watered with many rivers, The Rivers.
the chiefest of which is Mosella, of which I have spoke in Lotaringia: the
others are Chier, Mosa, B^moy, H^ul, Lech, Alsatus, Atardus, Sourus, Prum^us,
M^neus, Ghomeus, Orto, Albis, and besides many little Rivuletts. The Country is
raised on every side with Mountains, Mountains.
and interlaced with thick woods. But all of them are but boughs in respect
of the Forest of Arden in France. The politic state as in the other
Countries, Woods
does consist of three members; The Govern^ment.
first, the Clergy; secondly, the Nobles, in which are the Counts of V^anden,
of la Roch en Ardenne, Salme, Durby, March, S. Vit. S. Iansberg. There are
also many Baronies and Lordships. The third member is the principal Cities,
as Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theonis villa, otherwise called Dietenhove, and
Rodemacher^: The Court for the whole Province is kept in the City of
Lutzenburg, and the pleadings are in French or Dutch, according as the
Plantiffes are of several Countries. For Lutzenburg, Arlunum, Theonis Villa,
and Rodemachera, do speak Dutch, but Ivoys, Mammedy, Marville, and
Danvilliers do speak French, in regard whereof it is necessary that the
Judges and Advocates and the officers of the Court, should understand both
languages. From this Court appeals may be brought to Mechlin, where those
things which are written in Dutch are faithfully translated into French.

This Dukedom has two Marquiships under it, seven Counties, many Baronies,
and Lordships, and great store of Noble men, so that no Province does produce
so many. All of them do live magnificently, and are courteous, virtuous,
constant, and faithful to their Prince. Their exercise is Arms and hunting.
They live civilly and courteously together, visiting one another in mutual
kindnesses. They contract marriages with their neighbors, and in their matches
they do more respect honor and dignity than portion. If any one do commit an
enormity, he loses his credit, and is not admittted to converse with the
Nobles, and is thought to be unworthy of any public office, and his oath is
not esteemed in public trialls. If any controversy do arise amongst them,
they refer it to certain Arbitrators, who are to compound and end the
matter, so that they have no great use of Lawyers and Proctors: yet they are
too much given to wine. And the Country people do complain very much of their
hard usage and servitude, so that if a Countryman intend to put forth his
children, he cannot do it without his Lords leave, which is far different
from the liberty of the Low Countries. Arlunum, which we mentioned before, is
situate on the top of a Mountain, and is four miles distant from Lutzenburg,
and six from Mommedy. It was sometime a fair Town, but somewhat defaced by
the violence of wars. Rodemachera is three miles distant from Lutzenburg,
which though it be no great town, yet is very beautiful, and fortified with a
strong Castle. Theodonis-villa, which in Dutch is called Dietenhoue, is very
conveniently situated on the left hand bancke of the River Mosella: it is four
miles from Lutzenburg, having a fair bridge; it is a pleasant strong Town and
well fortified against the invasions of enemies. Regino affirms that Charles
the Great was used to hunt very much near unto this City. Gravemakerum and
Koninckmakerum are small little Towns near Mosella, being a mile distant one
from another, and 5 miles from Lutzenburg. Dieterichum is seated near the
little River Sure, and is five miles distant from Lutzenburg. Viretonum and
Echternatum are little small towns, and are both five miles distant from
Lutzenburg. Vianda stands by the side of a little Riu^let, seven miles from
Lutzenburg; it has a County belonging to it, and is subject to the Prince of
Orange. Bastona^um is near unto the Forest of Arden, being three miles from
the new Castle, and 17 from Lutzenburg. It is a little Town, but so famous
heretofore that it was called Paris en Ardenne, in regard of the markets for
Cattle and Corn, which were usually kept there, whither the Country round
about did bring all sorts of commodities to the great enriching of the Town.
Between this City and Arlunum, and S. Huberts Church, there are some
Villages in the middle of the wood, in which the women after the Spanish
fashion, when their husbands are carried forth to be buried and interred, do
run crying and weeping through the streets, tearing their hair and
scratching their faces, with their nails, in a mad and furious manner, which
custom does rather favor of Heatheanisme than Christianity. M^mmedium is
conveniently situated on a high mountain, at the foot whereof the River
Chirsus glideth along; it is nine miles distant from Lutzenburg, and four from
Danvillieres, being a fair fortified town. New-Castell is in Ardenne; it is 5
Miles distant from Ivosium, and nine from Lutzenburg; it is now a small Town,
and much decayed. Danvillieres is twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg; and
four from Verdunum, being in Lotharingia. Marville is divided into two parts,
the one whereof is subject to the Duke of Lutzenburg, and the other to the Duke
of Lotharingia; and therefore it is called the common Town; it stands by the
River Chirsus, and is 12 miles distant from Lutzenburg. Roche en Ardenne, or
the Rock in Ardenne, and Durbium are twelve miles distant from Lutzenburg,
being both pleasantly seated. S. Viti, is a very pleasant small town, and is
12 miles distant from the Metropolis, and belongs to the Prince of Orange.
Salma is a rich and populous City, having a County appendant unto it. Marcha
is a very ancient Town, and is 14 miles from Lutzenburg. We will not mention
for brevitie sake the Castells and famous Villages, in this Province, but will
only name three unwalled Cities. First Ivosium which is 12 miles from
Lutzenburg, and four from Mommedy, being heretofore a good strong Town, but at
last Henry the second, King of France, begirt it round with an Army in the
year 1552. and took it; but afterward a peace being made, it was restored
back again to Philip the second, King of Spain, but the walls were ruinated
as at Teroana, and a law was made that it should not be walled in again.
Chinium is 12. miles from Lutzenburg, which is unwalled, but by degrees it is
reedified. It has a County belonging to it, although it be subject to the
Archdukes, and has a large jurisdiction over some towns and Villages, neither
is it subject to the Dukedom of Lutzenburg, but is joined unto it. Twelve
miles from Lutzenburg, stands the Town la Ferte near the River Chirsus,
being heretofore a pleasant City, and now also it flourishes although it be
unwalled, and a great part of the Castle be fallen down, but so much
concerning these things. Let us pass to Limburg.

THE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG, with the Appendances thereunto.
THe Dukedom of Limburg which this Table does exhibit and present, The Country
whence so called.
being so called from Limburg the Metropolis thereof, is bounded on the West,
with Leodium and Trajectum, The Situation
which are two famous Cities by the River Mosa; on the North with the Dukedom
of Iul^acum: on the East with the Imperial City Aquisgranum, and the
Monastery of S. Cornelius: on the South with the Countries of Francimont and
Aqua Spadana. The temper of the air.
All this tract as it is pleasant in Summer, so in winter it is unpleasant, in
regard it is covered all that time with snow, which is so deep that it lies
in many places, a great part of Summer. The soil is fruitful, and has
abundant stoare, The fruitfulness of the soil.
of all things, except wine. For it bears excellent Barley and wheat, of
which they make very white bread. There are good pastures for feeding of
Cattle, and for making of Cheese. And it yields many wholesome Herbs both
for Sallets, and Physic. There is also great stoare of Sulphur, through the
hollow crannyes whereof it is likely that the hot fountains at Aqua Spadana
(so famous for many ages) do run. As of late there is found in those parts a
Mine of Lead and Tin; and it is probable that a Vein of gold and silver may
be found hereafter in those places. Moreover between Walhormus and Montzius,
there is a Mine found of that ash color stone, of which brass is made, which
is also medicinal, which Plinye calls Cadmia, and the brazen stone, being not
much unlike the stone Pyritos. The words of Pliny, Lib. 34. cap. 1. are these.
Fit and aes e Lapide aeroso, quem vocant Cadmiam. That is, And there is brass
made of a brazen stone, which they call Cadmia. The Germans call it Covaltum:
and the Shops call it Climia and Cathimia. It seems that the like stone was
found in the I Will of Cyprus: but on this side the Alps there is none sound but
this in Limburg. The ancient Government.
The Country of Limburg was heretofore a County, but it was made a Dukedom
in the year 1172, by the Emperor Frederick surnamed Barbarossa: and the
Princes of this Country were heretofore also Duks of Lotaringia. At length
Henry the last Duke of Limburg dying without issue, John the first of that name
Duke of Brabant, did succeed him in the year 1293. He albeit he had lawfully
before bought this Dukedom, yet he got and purchased it by the sword, and
overthrew Raymund Earl of Gelderland who then possessed it: in which battle
the Earl of Gelderland, and the Bishop of Gelderland were taken: There were
slain Henry Prince of Luxenburg, and his three brothers who did join
themselves with the Earl of Gelderland. Duke John having gotten this Victory,
did race and demolish the Castle commonly called Woronc, and leveld it with
the ground: and so from that time the Dukedom of Limburg came to be governed
by the Dukes of Brabant. Out of this Dukedom and from the Prince thereof which
came of the Lotharingian family, the first King of Portugal was descended,
namely Henry Duke of Lotharingia, and Earl of Limburg, a man of a great
courage, and ready in matter of arms, as the Annalls of Spain, do more fully
and plainly deliver, and we our selves have mentioned it before in the
description of Portugal. The Metropolis or mother City of the whole Dukedom
is Limburg, being situated on a high rock, and fortified with a rugged deep
valley: it is inaccessible rather by the natural situation of the place than
by human industry: unless it be on the South, where the ground rising
somewhat higher, descends by degrees from the City, until it opens into
a fair plain. In the lower part of this City on the Northside there is a
Castle built of pure Marble being a kind of Common Jasper, of which this
Country yields great store; both near the Town of Hevermont and also in
other places. It is no wonder that the City was seated on so high a rock,
especially if you behold the suburbs thereof, which were heretofore twice as
big as the City. Whereby it came to pass that the Castle was built in the
middle, that so it might command the City and the suburbs, But Gastonius
Spinola, Earl of Bruacum, is now governor of this Dukedom and of all the
Country beyond Mosa; and to prevent all violent attempts, has made two new
Gates in this City to repress the violence and treachery of enemies. The
City is watered with the River Wesius, which is full of excellent Trouts,
that are as big as any Salmons, and great store of Crab-fishes, which the
aforesaid River or Rivulet (for sometimes the Channel is very small) does
feed fat, while they live between stones and clefts of rocks. John Fleming a
Citizen of Antwerpe, a learned man and a famous Poet, was borne in this City,
and Remaclius Fuscht^^ a great Scholar, who published many books, and diverse
works, was borne here also. The Townsemen for the most part do follow
clothing, and do make every year great store of cloth, and do transport it
into diverse parts of the Low Countries. Near the City there is much Iron
made, in a furnace and workehouse ordained for the same purpose, so that 6000
Caroli do not defray the yearly charge thereof. But the City has no
beautiful buildings in it. For it is but small, and has only two Gates, and
the ascent unto it is very steep. It has one Church consecrated to S. George,
which has a provost. This City was yielded to John of Austria, when he
brought his army thither, a certain Captain having betrayed the Castle of
Hende unto him before. He that was governor of the place, desired the States
to furnish him with provision and munition, as soon as he heard that John of
Austria was coming with an army to beseige the City: and promised the
States that if he were furnished with the aforesaid munition, he would easily
suppress the enemies violence. All things were sent which he desired, but he
did not perform that which he boasted he would THE DVKEDOME OF LIMBVRG.
LIMBURGENSIS DVCATUS NOVA DESCRIPTIO
Auct. AEGIDIO MART.
map do: for at the enemies first approach he came to a parley, and yielded it
up unto him without any resistance. Not far from Limburg, yet out of the
Territory thereof, Northward the Spaw Fountains do break forth, which are
so famous and well known. Moreover between Walhormus, and Montzius there are
certain hills commonly called Kelmbergen, in regard of the great store of that
metal and stone above mentioned; which is dug out of them: in defense
whereof, the aforesaid Earl has built a Castle. But some few years since
the Batavians burnt it, through the Soldiers negligence. The great wood
commonly called Fangne, lies near unto the City of Limburg, in which there
is excellent hunting. And so much concerning the City it self, and the
Dukedom of Limburg: There are three other Cities which have counties
belonging to them, which are reckoned as appendances to the Dukedom of
Limburg: which are these, Valkenburg, Dalthemium, and Rolducum, of which we
will now speak in order. Valkenburg, in French Fauquemont, is a neat Town,
having jurisdiction over a large Territory, and some Towns, being three long
miles from Aquisgrave, and two little miles from Vltrajectum. It is a fruitful
Country, both for corn, and pasturage: not far from which is the Monastery of
S. Gerla* being a fair ancient building. Moreover the County of Valkenburg
was in the possession of John the third of that name Duke of Brabant; who took
it by force of arms from Raynout, Lord of Valkenburg: who being a troublesome
man, and having injured the Trajectenses at the River Mosa, was overcome and
taken prisoner by the aforesaid Duke. Dalthemium is a little Town, with a
small Castle belonging to it. It is three long miles from Aquisgranum, and two
from Leodium. It is honored with the title of a County, and has some
Villages and lands beyond Mosa, which are within the jurisdiction thereof.
Henry the second, Duke of Brabant, did possess it, and did join it to his
own Territories. The famous Abbey of the Valley of God belongs to Dalthemium,
the Abbot whereof is the chief man of that Country, and besides this, there
is the Abbey of the holy Cross. Rolducum is an old Town with an ancient
Castle. It is a mile distant from Valkenburg, and it is the fourth Lordship
beyond Mosa, and it has a Tribunal or Court of Justice, but the Senate of
Brabant have the oversight of it. Here I cannot pass by the village commonly
called Carpen, between Iuliacum and the Colonie, being two long miles from the
Rhene. It is as big as a little Town, and has a Collegiate Church as they
call it, and has Faires and Markets, whither all sorts of commodities are
brought, and a great confluence of people do resort unto it: it has also a
Castle well fortified. William Nassavius Prince of Orange, passing over the
Rhene took it in the year 1568, and fortified it with a Garrison. All these
parts being gathered together do make a great Lordship, which was used to be
governed by a peculiar Lord, but the Dukes of Limburg have now subjected it to
themselves, although it have a Prefect beside, who lies there with a strong
Garrison. This Country has three other Rivulets besides Mosa, which at length
become Rivers: namely Beruinum which waters Dalthemium, Geuda which runs
by Valckenburg, and Worma which glideth by Rodulcum. Moreover as well the
Dukedom of Limburg, as the other States and Lordships aforesaid, do consist
of three members, namely the Clergy, the Nobles, and the Judges. The Dukedom
of Limburg does contain five members or divisions, which they call Ban^as,
Hervium, Spremontium, Balenium, Walhornum, and Montzium: the two former whereof
are governed by Majors, and the three latter by magistrates called Drossards.
And so much concerning the Dukedom of Limburg, and the appendances thereunto,
I pass to the rest.

A PROFITABLE instruction concerning the Tables of GERMANY.
FOrasmuch as the Roman Empire is in the power of the Germans, and very
politickely divided into parts, I think it a matter worth my labor to set
before your eyes the order and disposition of those parts, as they are
described in a writing called Matricula Imperij: and afterward to show you in
Tables the several members of this Empire, that the studious Reader may find
in what Country they are situated. But I have gotten two Coppies of this
Matricula, the one written; the other printed at Venice in Italian, being both
much corrupted. And I know that the Empire is now divided in another manner.
Therefore let no man blame me, or be of^ended, if he find some parts that are
reckoned as belonging to the Empire, do not belong thereunto, for it is not my
intention to speak expressly of all the several parts of this Empire,
neither was it possible for me to do, out of such corrupt Coppies; especially
seeing that I know that a great part of the Empire, came into the hands of
private Princes, either by Exchange, or Morgage, or gifts, for their good
service in defense of the Empire, or for some other causes. Neither is it my
part to prosecute those things which belong to Politicians, and not
Geographers, but only I sought that out of this Coppie of Matricula, I might
show the elegant disposition and division of the Empire of Germany, and might
declare how the studdies of Geographie, and Policy do mutually illustrate one
another. This is therefore the order of the Empire.

The Emperor is the head of the Empire.
And he has three States under him, who meet together to consult and conclude
of all the affairs of the Empire, namely the seven Electors, who were first
instituted about the year of our Lord 1273 by Pope Gregory the tenth, and
were confirmed by the Emperou^ Charles the fifth, as Onuphrius shows in
Comitijs Imperatorijs, and John A^ventine Lib. 5. of his history of Bavaria.
These have power to elect and choose the Emperor. The second State is the
Ecclesiastical and saecular Princes. The third is the free Cities.

GERMANY.
GERMANIA
map

The first member therefore of the Empire is the seven Electors.
THe Archbishop of Moguntinum, Arch-chancellor of the Roman Empire through
Germany. The Archbishop of Trevers, Arch-chancellor of the Roman Empire
through France, and the Kingdom of Arelatum. The Archbishop of Collen,
Archchancellor of the Roman Empire through Italy. The King of Bohemia chief
pantler of the Roman Empire. The Count Palatine of Rhene, the chief
cupbearer of the Roman Empire. The Duke of Saxony, chief Marshall of the
Roman Empire. The Marquess of Brandenburg, chief Chamberlain of the
Roman Empire.
The second member is the Princes and Nobles.
I will set down the common names of places as they are in the Tables, and the
number of the Circles in which they are afterward mentioned, that so they may
be more easily found in the Tables.

The Biships of Magdeburg 9 Saltzburg 2 B^s^n^on 5 Bremon 9 Halb^rstat in the
ninth Circle. ^erden 7 Munster 7 Osonbrug 7 ^^ssaw 2 Frisingen 2 Kempse Gur^k
or Gorit^ 3 Seckaw 3 Havandt 5 Basel 5 Sitten or Wallis 5 Regensburg 2 Maissen
8 Naumburg 8 Minden 7 Lubeck 8.9 Vtricht 7 Camin 8 Swerin 9 Geneve 5 Camerick 7
Verdun 5 Losan 5 Metz 5 Toul 5 Luyck 5 Trent 7 Brixen 3 M^rspurg 3 Labach 8
Vienna 3 Brandenburg 8 Ratzenburg 9 Schl^swick 9 Havelburg 8
The secular Princes and Nobles are:
The Duke of Bavaria 2 The Arch Duke of Austria 3 The Duke of Saxony 8 The
Duke of Burgundy 10 The Palatine of Bavaria 2 The Duke of Cleveland 7 The
Marquess of Brandenburg 8.1 The Duke of Lunenburg 9 The Duke of Pomeren 9 The
Duke of Mekelenburg 9 D. Lawenburg 9 D. Holsten 9 D. Lotringen. 5 The Landgrave
of Hessen 5 D. Wirtenberg 5 D. Zweibrug 4 D. Spanheym 5 The Marquess of Baden
4.5.7 The Landgrave of Lutchtenburg. 2 The Prince of Anhalt 8 The Earl of
Hennenberg 1 The Burgrave of Meissen.
The French Princes are.
Duke Meiss or Massa D. Savoy D. Chalon
The Clergy are
The Prior and Abbot of Fuld. 5 Pr. Ab. Hiersfeldt 5 Pr. Ab. Kemten 4 Ab.
Retchenaw 4 Pr. Praepos. Wissenburg 5 Pr. Ab. S. Galli 4 Pr. Ab. Salfeldt 8 Pr.
Praepos. Elwangen Teutsch ordens Master 3 Iohans ordens Master 5 Ab.
Waingarten 4 Ab. Salmanswercher 4 Ab. Krutzlingen. 4 P. Ab. Murpach. 5 Ab.
Walkenriedt 8 Ab. Schuttem. 4 Ab. Weissenow or Minderaw. 4 Ab. S. Blasi. 4 Ab.
Maulprun. 4 Pr. Ab. Corbey 7 Ab Schussenriedt 4 Ab. Rittershausen 8 Ab. Steinam
Reyn 4 Pr. Ab. Scarfhauson; 4 Ab. Kempeseck 2 Ab. Waldsachsen 2 Ab. Finsidoln 4
Ab, Rokenburg. 4 Ab. Ochsenhausen 4 Praepos, Seltz. 6 Ab. S. Gilgen 1 Ab.
Nuenburch Ab. S. Maximinus near Triers 6 Ab. Heneldshansen Ab. S. Iohans zu
Curtel Ab. Gengenbach 4 Ab. Koningsbrun 4 Ab. Rodt, otherwise Roden 2 Ab.
Markthal 4 Ab. Rockerhausen Ab. S. Peter in Schworztwald. 4 Praepos. Odenheim 5
Pr. Ab. Stablo. 7 Ab. Disidiense 4 Ab. Berkenhausen Ab. Elchingen 4 Ab.
Hentzlingen Ab. Vrssevis Ab. Planckenburg Ab. Yssin Ab. Pfessers 4 Ab. S. John
in Thurtal. 4 Ab. Peterhausen 4 Ab. Pruim, 5 Praepos. Camberg. 1 Ab. Reishaim 2
Ab. S. Heimeram at Ratisbon 2 Praepos. Berchtolsgadon 2 Ab. S. Gegory at
Munster 5 A. Muncherode 4 Ab. S. Cornelis at Munster 7 Ab. Werden. 7 Ab.
Aursperg. 4 Ab. Yrse. 4 Ab. Brun. 4 Ab. Echtermaken 7 Ab. Hervorden 7
The Abbatesses.
Of Quedelnburch 8 Essen. 7 Alt Munster to Regensburg 2 Pr. Ober Munster to
Regensburg. 2 Kauffingen 5 Lindaw. 4 Pr. Gernrode. 8 Buchaw. 4 Rotenmunster 4
H^ppach. 4 Gutenzel 4 Beundt. 4 Baley Coblentz. 6 Baley Elsas 4 Baley Osterich
3 Baley In der Etsch. 3
The Earls Barons and Lords.
The Earl of Helfenstein 4 Earl Kirchberg 4 H. Tussen 4 Ea^ Wisenstaig 4 E.
Lauffen. 4 E. Montfort. 4 E. Furstenberg 4 ^. Z^mmeren 4 B. Gund^^singen 4 H.
Stutgart 4 H. Iustingen 4 H. S^he^stingen M^^^^ke. Eberstein 4 B. Geroit Zeck 4
B. Ober Hewn 4 F. Otingen 4 B. Rapoltstain 5 H. R^poltzkir^ken 5 B. Starssen
2.4 H. Hohen Rechperg 5 H. Berletzicke H. Hohen Konigsperg H. Hohenfeldt and
Tipoltzkirch E. Sultz. 4 F. Hogen Zollem 4 H. Braides. B. Sonnenberg. 4 E.
Castle 1 E. Vertheim 1 E. Rheineck. 1 E. Hohenloe. 1 H. Reichelsperg 1 H.
Limburg. 1 E. Erpach 1 E. Leiningen 5 E. Falckstein 5 E. Hanaw 5 E. Luchtenberg
5 E. Nassaw, Breda, and Dillenborg 10.7 E. Wisbaden and Iltzstain 5 E.
Sarbrucken. 5 E. Waldtpurg. 4 E. Nassaw in Weilpurg 5 E. Belstein 6 E.
Koningstein and Epstein 5 E. Eisenberg the higher 5 E. Eisenberg the lower. 6
E. Mersen E. Budinghen E. Wirnenburg 7 E. Solms 5 B. Vinnenburg or Vanenberg 7
E. Arnsberg. 7 E. Of Rhene 5 H. Falckenstein 4 H. Kunseck. 4 H. Kunseckerberg 4
Count Horn 10 Count Seyn 7 Co. Vintzlingen Co. Reyen. Co. Bitsch. 5 Co. Salm 5
Co. Veldentz 5 Co. Dengen 4 Co. Rappin 4 Co. Hardech. 3 Co. Hohenstein 8 Co.
Wolkenstein 3 Co. Schaumburg and Giengen. 7.3 Co. Dierenberg, and Someraw. 7
Co. Mansfeilt 8 Co. Stolberg 8 Co. Buchlingen 8 Co. Barbey and Mullingen 8 Co.
Gleichen. 1.8 Co. Schwartzenburg Co. Suenberg, or schonberg. Co. Jude H. im
Ruech. H. Geraw. Co. Ples. 5 Co. Plawen 8 Co. Weda and Ringelberg 7 H.
Reichenstein. Co. Olnbrug. Co. Lebenstain 4 Co. Regenstain Co. West frieslandt.
Co. Ostfrieslandt 7 Co, Van der Lip 7 Co. Oldenburg 7 Co. Delmenhorst 9 Co.
Hoya. 7 Co. Westenburg 5 H. Muntzenburg 5 Co. Lemgow Co. Waldeck 5 H.
Lostenstein. Co. Diepholt. 7 Co. Steinfort 7 Co. Benthem. 7 Co. Brunchorst 7
Co. Witgenstein Co. Spigelberg Co. Biversdorff H. Ridberg. 7 Co. Teckelnborg 7
H. Linge. Co. Dortmund 7 Co. Winsdorff Co. Ortenberg. 2 Co. Rippershode^ Co.
Hagen 2 Co. Hoonfels 2 Co. Lecseneck 8 Bo. Bergen. 10 C. Degenburg 2 B.
Obersultzberg H. Somiriss Co. Manderscheid 7 Co. Reiferscheidi 6 Co. Egmont and
Isselstein 10 H. Bergen and Waelhelm 10 H. Haber, alias Havere. 5 H.
Wildenfelfs, or Widerfels. 8 B. Tautenberg. 8 Co. Tubingen. 4 Co. Blanckenberg
or Blammont 5 Co. Kirchingen, Krehanges 5 H. Senster 3 H. Roggendorff 3 H.
Alendorff. H. Kunigfuckerbeg H. Morspurg and Befort 5 H. Brandenstein and Rans^
H. Wolfsteine H. Permont H. Fronsbek H. Flackenstein H. Witten Ritt. Fridberg
Ritt. Gleichausen.
In this second member, some do want numbers, because they are not mentioned
afterward in the Circles. Pr. signifies Princes, Ghe. Fursten, a Praelate, D.
Dukes, Co. Countes. H. Heerschafften, Lords, B. Barons.

The third member of the Empire is of the free Cities.
Rheinische Banck. Coln 6.8 Aken 7 Worms 5 Spier 5 Turckheim 5 Hag^^aw 5
Weissenberg 5 Straesburg 5 Ober Ebenhaim 5 Roshaim 5 Schletstat 5 Colmar 5
Altach 5 Basel 5 Kaisersberg 5 Mulhausen in Suntgow 5 S. Gregoris Munster 5
Metz 5 Toul 5 Verdun 5 Landaw 5 Kaufmans Sarbruck 5 Besancon 5 Camerick 7
Franckfort 5 Fridberg in Wederaw 5 Gelnhausen 6 Wetzlar. 5 Aleu. 4 Lubeck 9
Hamborg 9 Dortmund 7 Mulhusen in Duringon 9 Northansen. 9 Gosler 9 Gottingen 9
Brakel 7 Wartburg 7 Lemgow 7 Duysburg 7 Dantzick 8 Elbinghen Schwabishche
Banck. Regensburg 2 Nurenberg 1 Rottenburg an der Tauber 1 Weissenburg an
Nortgaw 2 Donawerd 4 Washaim 1 Schweinfurt 1 Wimpsen 4 Hailbrun 4 Hal in
Schwaben 4 Norlingen 4 Dinkelspuel 4 Vlm 4 Ausptrg 4 Gengen 4 Bopfingen 4
Gemunt in Schwaben 4 Eslingen 4 Reutlingen 4 Weyl 4 Pfullendorff 4 Kauffbeurum
4 Northausen Vberlingen 4 Wangen 4 Ysui 4 Lewkirch 4 Memmingen 4 Kempten 4
Buchorn 4 Ravenrsburg 4 Bibrach 4 Lindaw 4 Costintz 4 Rotweil 4 Offenburgk 4
Gengenbach 4 Zel in Hamesbach 4 Schaffhausen 4 S. Gal 4 Buchaw am Federsee 4
Besides these several members, for the avoiding of schisms in the Empire,
and for the mutual defense, and common preservation of peace among the Princes
of Germany, the Provinces of the Empire are divided into certain Countries,
which they call Circuits, and in them there are particular Counsels appointed,
which belong to several Circuits. First, 6 were instituted in the year 1500
at Augusta, and afterward 10 in the year 1522 at Norimberg. But every Circuit
chooses out of themselves a secular Prefect, who is either a Prince, a Count,
a Baron, or one of the chief of the Nobles, to whom four Counselors chosen
out of the same body, being honest, and wise men, are joined as assistants. I
will here only reckon up the Circuits, but in the Tables I will describe
their Princes, and their parts.

The first Circle is of Franconia, and it shall be described in the Table of
Franconia.

The second is of Bavaria, and it shall be unfolded in the Table thereof.

The third is of Austria, and it shall be declared in the Table of Austria.

The fourth is of Suevia, in the table of Wirtenberg.

The fifth is in the Circuit of Rhene, and it shall be unfolded in the Table
of the lower Alsatia.

The sixth is of the four Electors of Rhene, in the Table of the Palatmate.

The seventh is of Lower Germany, in the first Table of Westphalia.

The eight is of lower Saxony, in the same table.

The ninth of lower Saxony in the same table.

The tenth of Burgundy, in the table of higher Burgundy.

The Imperial Chamber*
Besides these Counsels in the Circuits, for the deciding of more weighty
business which happen in the Empire, there is an Imperial chamber instituted
at Spires, in which there is a Prince for the Praesident, or at least an Earl,
or some secular man that is thought fit for this office. He has also two
Barons or Earls to be his assistants, two Lawyers, and two Noble men, which
have haereditary Lands, and Manors in the Empire; so that in all he has six
assistants. Moreover he has one of the Electors, and two out of every
Circuit, the one half whereof is chosen out of the Lawyers, and the other
half out of the Gentry.

A Catalogue of the Tables in Germany.
1. Germany in general. 2. West Friesland. 3. The County of Embden. 4. The
first Table of Westphalia. 5. The second Table. 6. The Bishopric of Munster.
7. The third Table of Westphalia. 8. The Archbishopricke of Colen 9. the fourth
Table of Westphalia. 10. The Diocaese of Leodium. 11. The County of Muers and
Cleveland. 12. Waldecke. 13. The Palatinate of Rhene. 14. Wirtenberg. 15.
Alsatia the Lower. 16. Alsatia the higher. 17. Saxony the Lower. 18.
Brunswijck. 19. Hassia. 20. Nassovia. 21. Thuringia. 22. Franconia. 23. The
Dukedom of Bavaria. 24. The Palatinate of Bavaria, the bounds whereof
Northward, See in the Table of Franconia. 25. Saxony the higher. 26.
Brandenburg. 27. Pomerania. 28. The Islands of Rugia. 29. Bohemia. 30. Moravia.
31. Austria. 32. Saltzburg. 33. Polonia and Silesia. 34. Polonia. 35. Hungary
GERMANY.
THus you have seen the description of the Low countries both in general and
special: now passing over the Rhene, high Germany, which Ptolemie calls great
Germany, offers it self, which is the largest Country of Europe, and the
glory of the Roman Empire. This Country I will run over in the same method
as I did the other, describing it first in general, and then in particular.
But that I may begin with the name thereof, diverse do diversely derive the name
of Germany or the Germans. One says, that the Germans were so called as
it were Gaermannen, that is, stout men, in regard of their Martial manly
strength: another supposes that they were so named, from their mutual
fidelity, and faithfulness; neither did he guess much amiss, who denveth the
Etymology of their name from their honorable warfare, as it the people were
called Geertmans, and so by contraction of the word Germans. Another thinks
that they were so denominated from the Latin word genuini, that is, genuine or
native, because no nation does retain more of their ancient integrity, and
rusticke simplicity: but it seems that the author of this dream did speak
this to gain the favor of the people: albeit the Geographer Strabo and Livy:
do both erroniously suppose that the Roman people did give this name to this
country, because they were Cose^ Germans to the Celtae, both in regard of
their manners, 2and f^^^^ons, and also in respect of their great stature, and
red hair. John Goropius Becanus does probably derive the name thereof from
their gathering and mustering of soldiers, from Geren, which signifies to
gather or muster. Which opinion Tacitus seems to fortify and confirm, who
professes in his commentary of the Germans manners, that Germany is a new
fresh name, because they who first passed over Rhene (that I may use his own
words) having droven out the Frenchmen, were sometime called Tungrians, and
sometimes Germans, which name afterward grew so frequent, that first the
Conqueror, and afterward they themselves, did call themselves Germans. Some
do interpret the word German to signify a scattered people, collected out
of other nations, from the word Geren which signifies to collect or gather
together. Some do suppose their denomination does intimate that they were a
warlike people desirous of war, from Gerra, or Guerra, which signifies war.
A learned Saxon does derive the name thereof from the Carmanians a people of
Asia, whom Lucan mentions, as the Saxons were so called from the Sacians: and
in other places he deduces the Etymology of their name from an Hebrew word, as
it were Ger^mani, which in that language signifies strangers or poor and needy
people. But Peucerus delighting in the studious searching out the original of
his Countries name, thinks that they were called Germans, as it were
Hermenner; that is, military men. The most learned Iunius does derive the name
of it from the great Deluge, which drowned all the world: when Noah parted the
world among his three children: at what time (that I may speak nothing of Sem
and Cham) Europe fell to Iaphets share. He, as it appears in Moses, had a
son, called Gomer, who had three sons, Aschenaz, Rephat, and Thogarma. And
they affirm that the Germans descended from Thogarma: although the Rabines
do hold that the Germans came from Aschenazin. For the original of the
Germans name does clearly shine forth in the word Thogarma, or Thegerma, by
taking the second vowell for the first, as if we should pronounce it in our
language by the article the, The Germans: also there is a fit Etymology
answerable to the word and nation, which is from Gara or Gera, which signifies
a bone, and metaphorically strength, because it is a stout and strong bon'd
Nation. Some also do call this part of Europe Alemaine, and the inhabitants
thereof Alemans, by which name they were first called, when the Empire began to
decline. Berosus does fabulously report, it was so called from Hercules an
Alemaine, who was governor over these people. Some suppose that it was called
Alemaine, from Mannus who was esteemed as a god in their Country, the son of
Tuiscon. Asinius Quadratus a faithful historian, does affirm that the
Almaines, were so called as it were a people collected and gathered from all
Nations, which spread themselves all over this Country; who did not, as it
seems, look exactly into the signification of the word, for he should have
called them Almaines because they were all men, and warriors. They that derive
Alemanie from the Lake Lemann, would have Germany so called from a Lake without
the limits thereof in Sabaudia: unless some do take the Acronian Lake for the
Lake Leman, on either bank whereof the Almaines did inhabit, as Ammianus
reports Lib. 15. And though some do promiscuously make Germany and Almany al
one, yet it is observed that they were two distinct Countries. Spartianus in
the life of Marius says: Omnis Alemannia, omnisque Germania, cum caeteris quae
adjacent gentibus; that is, All Almany, and Germany with the other adjacent
countries. Flavius Vopiscus says in the lif of Probus: Testes sunt Franci,
inuijs strati paludibus, testes Germani and Alemanni, long a Rheni semoti
littoribus, that is, The Frenchmen are witnesses, who dwell in the Low grounds,
the Germans are witnesses, and the Almaines who are far off from the
shoares of Rhene. I omit other testimonies, least I should be tedious. Some
also do call it Teutonia, from Teuto a certain Captain thereof: some think
that the Teutons, who are called in their own Country speech Teutche, and by
the Italians Tedaschi, and by others Teutons, were so called from Thuisto,
otherwise Thuisco, whom they believe was the Son of Noah. Tacitus makes
mention hereof: Celebrant carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos memoriae
and Annalium genus est). Thuistonem deum terra editum and filium Mannum,
originem gentis, conditoresque; that is, they celebrate in ancient verses
(which kind of Annalls they do only use) That Thuisto an earthy God and his
son Mannus, were the first founders of this Nation. Strabo places them in
Noricum: some suppose that they were the Agrippine Colonie, and that the place
was therefore called Teutsch. The inhabitants do now call it Teutschlandt, and
strangers Almany. The Sclavonians do call it Nimiecha: and the Graec^ans do
^ow call it ^lamags, and the Turks Alaman. But enough concerning the
Etymology and various appellations of Germany, now I come to the situation or
quantity thereof. Besides, authors do not agree in designing and setting
down the limits of Germany. The ancients do bounder Germany with the Rhene,
Danub^us, the Ocean, the River Ta^^^s and the Euxine Sea. The latter writers,
as Strabo, Ptolomie, M^la, Plinnie, and many other Greek and Latin writers,
do bounder it with the River Rhene and Vestula. Tacitus writes that the
mountains, or a mutual distrust one of another, does rather separate the
Germans from the Sarmatians and Dacians, than Vis^ula. All those Countries
which use the German speech or dialect are reckoned now as parts of Germany.
And therefore it stretches beyond those bounds which Ptolemie gives it, and
beyond Danub^us, containing Ri^^^a, ^^ndel^^a, the higher Pannonia, and beyond
^ly^a, even to the Tridentine bounds. Also beyond the Rhene, Germa^^ did
contain these Roman Colonies, and garrisons, Constantia, Augusta
Raur^^corum, Argentina, Nemetes, Vangiones, Mo^un^^a^^^, Corfi^^^^a, Bonna, the
Agrippin^ Colonie, and other places even unto the Sea. For as Ambrosius
witnesses, 11 Hexamer. Rh^^^ was heretofore the limmit of the Roman Empire:
and that on the French bancke thereof the Roman Pra^sidents did always lie
in garri^on against the Germaine^* partly that they might restrain that
ex^^^s^ons, and partly that they might make inroads upon them, and partly that
they might receive those Germans that revolted to them. And this is the
Reason, that on one of the banckes of Rhene, there are many old (...), but none
on the other: which may also be observed on the bancke of Danubiu^. Helvetia,
also is reckoned now as a part of Ge^man^^ and the Prutenians beyond Vistula:
so that the bounds thereof are now much larger than those which Ptolemie
attributes to it for on the W^s^^^ stretches beyond the Rhene, even to
Piccardi^ and Burgundy which are parts of France: on the South toward Danuvi^^
even to the Alps: On the East beyond even to Spru^^and: the Northern limit is
the Ocean. There are many chief parts of Germany, which shall be here
described, with the lesser subject or adjacent countries. The Kingdoms are,
Bohemia, the Palatinate* and the Kingdom of Poland, though it has a different
language, and is not contained in the Register of the Empire, yet because it is
situate within the bounds of ancient Germany, which is the River Vistul^*
therefore we place it among the tables of Germany. Also we join the Kingdom
of Hungerie to Germany, which is situate without the limmits of ancient
Germany, and in regard it has yielded many famous Emperors and has dominion
over many Countries situate within the Empire. There are also the Dukedom of
Saxony, the Archdukedome of Austria. Also the Dukedomes of Holst, of
M^^^lenburg, Pomeren, Lunenburg, Lawenburg, Brunswijck, Meissen, Schasen,
Moravia, Cleve, Berge, Franconia, or Eastern France, Bavaria* Wirtenberg, and
the County of Suevia: the Palatinate of Bavaria, the Landgravials of Hessen,
Duringen, and of the higher and lower Alsatia. The Marckgraniate Electorship of
Brandenburg, and of Baden, the Counties of Embdem, Oldenburg, Benthem, Lip,
Diepholt, Huy, Mansfelt, Anholt, Stolberg, Tirol, and Livonia which is reckoned
among the Provinces of Germany, but because it lies within Sarmatia, it is
there described. The situation being declared, the quality of the soil
follows, which arises chiefly from the climate and position thereof in
respect of the heavens. Germany is under the sixth, seventh, and eighth
climates, between the forty seventh and fifty five degrees of Latitude,
and the twenty fourth and forty sixth degrees of Longitude. The longest day in
summer in the Southern parallel is fifteen hours long and an half: in the
Northern Parallel, it is seaventeene hours long and a quarter; and albeit
Cornelius Tacitus says, that Germany is in a cold sharp climate, and Seneca
reports that it is always winter in Germany: yet it has a temperate air,
which though it be somewhat cold, yet it is healthful and wholesome.

The soil yields Barley, Wheat, Rye, Mill, Oats, and other kinds of corn
and pulse. The fields and Meddowes are fruitful, and the soil is every where
very fertile, and yields great stoare of Corn. Germany also has rich Mines
of Silver, Brass, Iron, Lead, and other metals, and in some places of gold:
so that for mettalls it is inferior to no Country. There are also many
excellent Salt pitts. Plinnie also says, the Cadmian stones, the Callais, the
Crystal, the Onyx, the Topaz, and the Adamant; are found in Germany. Also the
herbs. Here are a thousand delightful gardens, and Villages, and Orchards
full of Apples.

What, should I mention the wines? which are of an excellent taste and color?
Truly there are excellent wines every where; but yet in some places better
than in others. Here is also great variety of living creatures, and great
stoare of Cattle and wild beasts, which I will not spend time to reckon up.
C. Julius Caesar writes, that many kinds of wild beasts are bred in the Wood
Hercynia, which are not seen in any other place; of which (says he) those
that differ most from the rest, and are most worthy of remembrance are these:
there is a kind of Ox which is like a Heart, which has in the middle of his
forehead one high horn, and more strait than usual, from the top whereof
large Antletts or Tines do spread forth; the male and femall are of one shape,
and have one as big horns as the other. There is also a beast called Alcis,
which is like unto a ^^ate, but it is somewhat bigger, and having no horns at
all, and their legs are without joints, so that they cannot by any means lie
down to their rest, or if they fall down by chance, they cannot rise up
again; therefore they lean against trees, and so they take their rest: and
when the hunters have found by their footing where they usually haunt, they
either stub up all the trees, or else they cut them half down, and so leave
them standing: So that when the beasts rest against them according to their
usual manner, they overthrow the trees with their weight, and so fall down
with them. The third kind of beasts are those which are called Vri, which are
almost as big as Elephants, and like Bulls in shape and color: they are very
strong, and swift, and will prey on men and beasts: these they usually take in
trappes, and so kill them. But now I come to the ancient government. The
sacred Roman Empire, which being divided into the West and Eastern part, was
much weakened by the excursions of diverse Nations, and rent by civil
dissentions, was ready to be ruined by its own weight; having forsook Italy
did seek defense and strength in no other Country but Germany, and chose
Charles the Great King of France to be Emperor, who as they report, was borne
at Ingelheimij, which is a village Town two miles from Moguntiacum, and built
there a famous Palace, whose ruins may be yet seen. The Empire remained in
Charles his line an hundred years, and above: which afterward failing, it was
translated to Conrade Duke of Franconia: after whom followed Henry Fowler:
after him the three Ottoes: the last whereof when he understood that the
Romans, Crescentius being consul, did affect and desire the title of the
Empire, he raised an army and took Rome, and obtained of Pope Gregory, that
the Germans should have right and power to elect the Roman Emperors. But
they obtained it on this condition, that he which was elected should be called
Caesar and King of the Romans: and afterward having received a Crown from
the Pope, he has the title of Emperor Augustus. There are 7 Electors
ordained: of which three are Archbishops, and four are saecular Princes as
they call them: where after the decease of Otto, the first, that was chosen
Emperor was Henry surnamed the holy. Afterward in process of time, there were
diverse officers constituted and ordained in Germany, for the honor of the
Empire, concerning which see Mercator. Tacitus who was governor of the
Belgian^ under Vespasian, does commend the Germans in this short Elogi^ thus:
Nemo bellum Germanis (inquit) intulit impune. None made war upon the
Germans but they came by the loss. Which, three of Augustus Legions found,
being overcome and beaten by them: Also Carbo, Cassius, Scaurus, Aurelius,
Servilius, Coepio, Manlius, all great Commanders, who were slain and put to
flight. And there are these ancient verses: Welcher im Krieg will ungluck han,
Der fang es mit den Deutschen an.


Josephus calls them valiant, Dionysius Martial, Arrianus warlike. The
Germane is courageous, fierce at an onset, and desirous of wars, as Seneca
witnesses in his book de Ira. Moreover the Country of Germany is now so
pleasant, and so adorned with fair Cities, Castells, and Villages, that it is
not inferior to Italy France and Spain. There are 84 free Cities in it, as
Colonia Agrippina, Wirtemberg, Lubek, Luneburg, Franckfort, Breme, Lipsick,
Spires, Argentine, Friburg, Augusta Vindelicorum, Tubinga, Heidelburg,
Ratisbone, Vienna, Prague, Buda, etc. of which hereafter. Germany also is
watered with so many great Rivers, beside Lakes and Marshes of which it has
great stoare, that in this respect, also it may compare with the chiefest
Countries. Seneca in his third book of natural questions shows the cause
why it has so many Rivers: At contra, ait, constat Germaniam Galliamque, and
proxime ab his Italiam abundare R^vis, and fluminibus; quia coelo humido
utuntur, and ne aestate quidem, imbribus carent: That is, But on the contrary
(says he) it is manifest that Germany and France, and Italy which is next unto
them, have great stoare of Rivers, because they have a moist aye, and have
often rain in Summer. But these Rivers of Germiny are more famous, as
Danubius, Rhene, Amasis, Moenus, Necarus, Albis, Suevus, Visurgis, and Vistula.
That which Ptolomie and others do call Danubius, Plinny and Strabo do call
Ister; the one says that it changes his name near the Cataracts thereof; the
other, where it washes Illyrium. Ptolemie says, that it changes his name
near the City Axipolis: Appian near the confluence and meeting of the River
Savus: so that the higher part is called Danubius, and the lower part Ister.
Stephanus heretofore called it Matoas: also Danubis and Danusis: Festus calls
it Addubanus. Ancient coins do name it Daunvius: it is now called Done and
Donaw, from the noise and sound of the waters, as Althamerus says. Salust
writes that this is the greatest River next to Nile which flows into the
Mediterranian Sea; and Arrianus, lib. 1. of the acts of Alexander, calls it
the greatest River. It rises in the wood Hercynia, in the village Don
Eschingen, where it springs out of the bowels of the Earth. The ancients
do call the Mountain out of which it rises Abnoba, although as Munster an
eyewitness writes, there is no mountain nere it: but it falls with a
continual running stream, from a little hill which is scarce 15 or 16 foot
high. He adds that Tiberius had a desire to see the spring head thereof.
Herodotus believed that it rose out of the Pyrenaean Mountains, whose opinion
Aristotle also followed, 2. Meteorologicor. Maginus places those Pyrenaean
hills in Germany, thereby to excuse the error of grave writers. As soon as it
glideth from the fountain, it runs abroad through Moarish places, and
afterward it gathers it self into a Channel, and so being increased by
receiving other Rivers, it runs through many countries, as Sucuia, Pannonia,
Dacia, Bulgaria, until at last having received 6 navigable Rivers, it rowleth
into the Sea with five streams or mouths, as Dionysius, Strabo, and Herodotus
do mention: Plinny says with six, and Amianus, and Solinus with seven: and
with such violence, so that it runs with fresh water 40 miles into the sea.
And as Amian says: Et constat ab ultimis nostri finibus maris, agminaum
pariendi gratia petere Pisces, ut aquarum suavitate salubrius faetum educant,
nec intercipiantur, That is, it is manifest that the fish from the farthest
part of our seas do come hither in shoales, that they may spawne here in
safety. Tajanus Nerva built a curious bridge over this River in Moesia, which
afterward Adrian did demolish, as Dio Cassius relates. Concerning Danubius,
George Fabritius in a certain Itinerarie of his writes thus: -- Ister,
Qui centum populos and magnas alluit urbes,
Euxinum irrumpit bis terno flumine Pontum.
Ister that does through an hundred Countries glide,
And waters them, with Cities too beside,
Both fair and great, with six streams last of all,
Into the Euxine Sea at length does fall.


For at length all the most famous Rivers in the world do run into the Sea,
as Ovid also Lib. 8. Metamorph. does mention in this verse: In quo desinimus,
sacri, in quo currimus amnes.
We sacred Rivers to the Sea do come,
And into it we all of us do run.


The next is the Rhene, which Caesar and other do commend: it is now called
Rhijn. Caesar would have it rise out of Leopontium, and Strabo and Ptolomie,
affirm that it arises out of the Mountain A^^la, which is commonly called
Etzel, which is an arm of the Alps; and Claudian faith, that it rises out of
Rhetia. But Strabo and Ptolomy do think that Rhene begins on the Eastside
of the Alps where they are joined to the Mountain Adula, and where the
Lepontians do inhabit, and so springs out of two fountains, which are at
least a days journey distant one from another. The one being more to the
Northwest which is commonly called the foremost Rhene: the other lying more
Southeast, which the inhabitants call the latter Rhene. These two at length
meet together, and so do make the River Rhene, which near unto the head do
make two Lakes, the Acronian and Constantian, from the City Constantia which
is situated by it; concerning which we will entreat in the description of
Helvetia: the other is called Venetum, and now the Cellensian Lake, from the
little Town Cella, which Lake has abundance of all sorts of fish. From hence
turning Westward it waters Rhinfelden, and follows the same tract even to
Basilea. And there it runs Northward, until it come to Argentoratum: and so
waters many Countries, and having viewed many Cities, and having received
many great and small Rivers, it grows very deep, and comes swelling even
to Spires, Worms, and Moguntiam. Hence turning Westward it waters Bingium.
And from thence winding toward Caecia, having left behind it Bonna and Colonia,
at last near the edge of Batavia (which is now under the jurisdiction of
Cleveland, and is graced with the ancient Castle Lobecum) it does divide it
self, and with a double stream runs diverse ways. Which division
Mamertinus elegantly calls the Divorce, and Frontinus the turning of the
River. Near therefore to Lobecum it does divide his course, so that the one
part thereof called Rhene does run strait forward to Arenacum a chief City
of Gelderland. And from thence with many winding Maeanders, it glideth toward
Vada; and so bends from thence to Rhena, which Tacitus calls Rinnes: from
thence it runs to Bavodurum. Afterward the Rhene changes his name, and
begins to be called Lecca, being heretofore a little Rivulet, but now it is
become a River. Having glided by Culenburg and Viana, and having viewed
Schoonhovia, it powers it self into the River Merova, before it is called
Mosa. The other part of Rhene does bend toward the left hand, and flows by
the ancient City Neomagum, and runs by the walls of the City, it is now
called Vahalis: not long afterward it goes toward Tiela: and from thence with
a winding course it leaves Bomelius on the left hand: afterward not far from
Woricomium it receives the River Mosa, and by and by near Goricomium, being
increased with the slow smooth running River Linga, and it is called Merova,
from the Castle of the Merovaeans; by which having passed it glideth by
Dordretch a Noble Island out of the City: afterward having received the
Rivers Lecca and Isela which are arms of the Rhene, and gliding by Iselmonda,
it begins to be called Mosa near to Rotterdam, where it leaves on the
right side Sciedamum and Vlaerdinga, and from thence it glideth by the Town
Gerviletum, and the Brill on the left hand, and there it mingleth it self,
with the Ocean. That which Ptolemie calls Amasius, Strabo Amasias, Tacitus
Amisia, Plinny and Pomponius Amisius, and now Ems. The head of this River is a
little beneath Paderbona a City of Westphalia, and so bending toward Caecia
it glideth by Varendorp, Greva, Rhena, and Lingha: and from thence it goes
forward unto Meppenum and Nebuisum: and from thence discharging it self into
the Northern Ocean, near to Embda Market Town, whence it borrows his name
and is called Eems. The fourth River is that which Plinny calls Moenus, and
Pomponius Maenis, and Ammianus Menus: now it is called Meyn. Regino the
historian and the writers of that time do call it Mogonum. Velleius Patercules
calls it the River Iulia. Unless in steed of Iulia, it should be Lupia, as
some learned men do suppose. It arises out of a Mountain which is called der
Fichtelberg, and so gliding by Franckford, which from thence is called upon
Maene, and Wethermia, Herbipolis, and Papeberg; it mingleth it self with the
Rhene near to Moguntiacum, and does part the Low Countries from Germany. The
letters thereof do make by the Greek computation 365, equal to the number of
days which are in a year. The fifth River is Necarus, whence come the best
Necarian wines, it was anciently called Nicer, as Rhenumus witnesses, the
spring head therethereof is two hours journey distant from Danubius, and so
having glided through the fields of Wirtemberg, it runs into the Rhene a
little above Heidelburg. Albis follows which is a fair River of Germany, and
divides the Swevians from the Cherusians. Velleius witnesses that it does
flow by the confines of the Semnonians and Hermundurians. Tacitus writes that
the famous River Albis does arise among the Hermundurians, but Conradus Celtes
says that it does arise out of Hercinia in Bohemia, And so having glided by
mary fair Cities, at length it empties it self into the Ocean between the
Chaucians, and the Cimbrians. The ancient Latin writers do call it Albia,
and the Germans Elbe. And the Bohemians from whence it takes his original,
do call it Labe. Fabritius in his book of the Misnian affairs says, that it
received that name from 11, Fountains, or as the Saxons say, from so many
flowing River. For it arises as he delivers, in the Hercynian wood, which from
the Giants is commonly called Risenberg, from 11 Fountains, whose streams
meeting together do make the River Albis: for Elve and Elbe do signify in
the German language, eleven. The seventh River is Suevus, which some do
call Vtadrum, and corruptly it is called Odera, the spring head whereof is in
the Mountain Oderberg, and so being increased by the addition of many Rivers,
it glideth by Frankford, a famous University, and from thence it runs by
Stetinum the seat of the Sidinonians, which is a Sea town of Traffiques, and
from thence it windeth to the Episcopal Cities of Carminum, and there making
a great Lake it emptieth it self into the German Ocean. For they are in an
error who suppose that Sprea (or de Spree) is the River Suevus, although the
aforesaid Sprea is accounted a famous River, which flowing by Brandenburg does
run into Albis near to Haneloburg: of which opinion is Bilibaldus, who
writes that the River Sprea, runs into the Ocean near to the City Sunda.
The River Visurgis follows, commonly called de Weser, Dionysius Lib. 55.
calls it Ousiourgos. Ovid calls it Iturgum in that verse, Decolor infesta
testis Iturgus aqua*

Ptolemie calls it Visurigis, and Strabo Bisurgis, and Adamus in his
Ecclesiastical history Visuris, and Sidonius Vesatis. It arises out of
Hassia, and having watered the Cities, Werdensis, Mindensis, Gotingensis, and
Bremensis, it rowleth it self into the Ocean, and is there called Vesera. The
last river is V^stula, or Istula, which Bilibaldus calls Vandalum. This River
bounders Germany, because Ptolemie does place the European Sarmatia beyond it.
Iornandes calls it Scythia, which running by the Sarmatian rocks, does water
Cracovia which is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Poland, and being grown
greater by the receipt of Rivers, it does discharge it self into the Sea with
three inletts or mouths: from hence it flows by Dantzick, and afterward by
Elbinga, an University of the Borussians: and thirdly by the Town Loctetum,
and so does pour it self into the Venedician Bay. There are also many other
famous Rivers, which do either run into the Sea or into some greater River,
which I pass over least I should be tedious. Now I come to the German Sea.
For seeing we purpose to describe al Germany, we must add something concerning
the Sea, which washes the shore thereof. But in regard we have entreated
otherwhere more largely concerning the Sea, and especially in the general
description of Belgia: we will speak first concerning the tide of the Sea, and
afterward we will reckon up the properties of the German Sea. It is manifest
that the Moon is the cause of the tides of the Ocean. But as the Moon has
diverse changes in her motion, so the tides do also change. For they following
the Moon, do flow twice between the rising thereof, and do ebb twice in
four and twenty hours: so that the Seas do flow twice, and ebb twice every
day: they flow when the Moon ascends above the Eastern Horizon, and do ebb
when it declineth from the Meridian westward; and it flows again when the
Moon goes down under the earth, and comes to the contrary part of the
Meridian, and so likewise it ebbeth until it rise again. But as the Moon
does not always rise at one time, and in one place, but every day rises in
another place than it did before: so the tides do not flow at certain hours,
but at that time when the Moon passes through the Poles of the heavens.
Moreover it is to be noted, that the full Moon does move the Sea in another
manner than the half Moon. For this Luminarie has greater force when it is
at the full, than when it is weak, and in the waine. We use to call those
tides which are at the full of the Moon Sprinckuloedt, that is, a Springtide.
Which Agel Lib. 14. concerning the Ocean, does elegantly call the Moons
companion, seeing it follows the age and increase thereof; and also he notes
some aspects, and configurations: As for example sake, if the Moon have a fit
aspect unto Venus, and do run through moist houses, it does wonderfully
increase the tides of the sea: but if it be aspected with Mars, or dry Planets,
it does lessen the tides. Here also the ascension of the signs is to be noted.
But if the Moon be in signs of a right ascension, it makes the tides longer
than if it were in signs of oblique ascension: for it is observed that the
tides are never equal to the ebbes in continuance of time; but when the Moon
is in the Equinoctial signs and has no Latitude. Besides, some parts of the
water do find a greater influence proceeding from the beams of the body of
the Moon, either in regard of the rectitude and straightness of the beams,
or some other hidden quality. But the Moon has a different influence when it
is Northward, and another when it is Southward; for when it is here it
increases the tides on the Southern shoares, and when it is there, on the
Northern shoares. Moreover the Tides of the Sea are greater in some places,
and in other places very small or none at all. For as concerning this our
German Sea, it is certain that there are scarce any tides which can be
perceived, but as the Sea is carried with the winds, it flows now here and
now there: for when it is an East wind, the Sea goes very high, and drives
back Rivers, neither does it flow only to the Sea side, but it overflowes the
Land. And whereas the Spanish and Atlanticke Ocean is of an unsearchable
deapth, so that a line of three hundred or four hundred fathom cannot found
the bottom of it, yet the German Sea, in the most parts is but 60. Cubits
deep and never above an hundred Cubits, except on some shoares of Norway,
which are thought to be of an insearchable depth. Moreover it is worthy to be
mentioned, that whereas all other Seas are bitter and salt, our Sea has sweet
waters and not unpleasant to drink, and that in regard that many great fresh
Rivers do run into it out of the Sarmatian Mountains, and because the Sun
is too weak in those places to exhale and draw up the lighter and thinner
parts of the water, which some make to be the chief cause of the saltness of
the Sea. Which reason if it were good and probable, then the Amalchian Sea
also, and the Chronian Sea should not be salt, which is otherwise. Wherefore it
is rather to be held that the melted snow, and the aforesaid Rivers flowing
down out of the Sarmatian Mountains, do make this Sea clear and sweet.
Whereby it comes to pass, that other Seas do more easily carry vessels of
great burden, than this. And the reason is because the water of the salt Sea is
of a thicker substance, while the thinner waters do yield to the least weight.
It is easier also to swim in this Sea than in others. Yet it makes Sea men
more sick, in regard the waves go very high, so that sometimes they seem to
touch the Clouds, and then fall again and break into deep valleys. This Sea
in diverse places, has diverse appellations, or names; For sometimes it is
called the German Ocean, from Germany which is near unto it, and it
reaches from the French, and British Sea, which lies Westward, even to
Sarmatia in the East. It is also called the Northern Sea, the Cimbrian Sea,
the Balthick, the Codanian, the Suevian Sea, etc. And so much concerning the
Sea. There are diverse Mountains in Germany, the chief whereof are, Rolberg,
Mons Isidis, Melibocus, Pinifer, Hessus, Ostbergus, Senus, Sucvus, Pavonis,
Rheticus, Sprulius, Vocetius, and Vosagus. There are also many other Woods, but
the greatest of all is Hercynia. The best Latin and Greek Authors do mention
the Wood Hercynia, as Pomponius Mela, Strabo lib. 7. and Plinny in many places:
which although it be very large and wide, yet all the West and Southern parts
of it lies within Germany. And therefore Glar^anus says, that he never
accounted the Wood Ardenna to be a part thereof, which some in our time have
rashly done. Caesar Lib. 6. Com. de bell. Gal. writes that it is 60 days
journey long, and nine days journey broad. It has now gotten diverse names: for
in some places it is called the black Wood, from the great stoare of Pines in
it, or Der Schwarts Wald, and otherwhere Ottoes Wood from the Emperor Ottoes
frequent hunting in that part of the Wood: Sometimes it borrows his name from
the people unto which it reaches, whence it is called the Thuringian and
Bohemian Wood. But among the Cheruscians, it does still retain the ancient
name of the Hercynian Wood, so famous by ancient Greek and Latin writers; in
Dutch Der Hartz Wald. For the French and the Germans do call Resina Hartz.
Also Pandulphus Collenutins Pisauriensiis in his description of Germany, does
make mention of this wood in these words: the Wood Hyrcinia assuming diverse
names, runs out to the Dacians and Getes, until at length it comes to the
Tartarians, where it is called the dark Wood, and is impassable, both in
regard of the unknown ways and wild beasts, and the monstrous Fawnes. But of
these things enough, I pass to other matters: The public and private works
do follow, among which (to pass by others) is the Church at Argeutoratum,
famous for the neat structure and building, having a very high Tower. So that
it is the eighth miracle of the world. This Church was founded in the year of
Christ 1015. But in the year of our Lord 1277, in the time of the Bishop
Conrade of Liechtenberg, Erkuinus of Steinbach an Architect began to build the
Tower, being a famous work; so that there is not the like, either in Germany,
Italy, or France; it was built up to the top in seven and twenty years. It
is built even from the foundation to the top, of free square stone; it has
many open places to receive the air and the wind, and the ascent and going up
unto it is by four stairs; but when the breadth of it begins to lessen, and
grow sharp toward the top, there are eight stairs. The very top of it
which below does scarsely seem as big as a Bushel, is so great, that five
or six men might stand upon it. The height of it is 574. Geometrical feet;
there is also a curious and artificial Clock. And as concerning the
Ecclesiasticke state of Germany, there are 7 Archbishops in the Empire of
Germany. These are, the Archbishop of Mentz, under whom are 12 Suffragan
Bishops, as the Bishop of Chur, the Bishop of Costnitz, of Strasburg, of
Spires, of Worms, of Wurtzburg, of Ausburg, of Aystett, of Hildeshaim, of
Paderborn, of Halbertstatt, of Ferden. The Archbishop of Colen, who has 5
Suffragan Bishops: the Bishop of Munster, the Bishop of Vtretcht, of Leodium,
of Minden, and of Osenburg. Also the Archbishop of Triers, under whom are 3
Suffragan bishops; the Bishop of Metz, of Toul in Lotharingia, and the Bishop
of Verdum. Also the Archbishop of ^eydmurg Primate of Germany, under whom are
four Bishops; the Bishop of Morsburg, the Bishop of Naumburg, of Brandeburg,
and Havelburg. The Archbishop of Salizburg, has 9 Suffragan Bishops under him;
as the Bishop of Trent, Brixiensis, of Passaw, Frisingensis, of Vienna, of
Seckaw; of Gurox, of Lavenmund, and of Chiemse. The Archbishop of Bremes, under
whom there are six Suffragan Bishops, as the Bishop of Lubecke, Suerinensis,
of Lebus, of Schleswicke, of Ratzenburg, and of Hamburg, heretofore an
Archbishopricke. The Archbishop of Riga, has six Suffragan Bishops under him,
as the Bishop of Revel, Curiensis, the Bishop of Oesel, of Derpt. The free
Bishops are, Misnensis, the Bishops of Bamberg, and Ratispon. Mercator
reckons up these Universities: The University of Basil, of Colen, of
Dillingensis, of Moguntinum, of Marpurg, of Lipswicke, of Ingolstade, of
Heidelburg, of Cripswald, of Friburg, of Frankford near Odera, of Erphord, of
Prague, of Rostoch, of Coningsberg, of Trevers, of Tubingium, of Vienna, of
Breslavia, of Wirtemberg, and Wurtzburg; out of which as out of many Trojan
horses, an innumerable sort of learned men have issued. Which many, furnished
with all kinds of Arts, do witness: here are very skillful in the Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew tongues; here are eloquent Orators, subtle disputants,
absolute Arithmeticians, and exact Astronomers: and no Country of Europe has
better Geometricians. I omit their accurate skill in Physic. Now I come to
their manners. All Authors do report that the Germans are strong, and of a
great stature. Tacitus says they are gray eyde, red haird, large bodyed, and
very strong. Hegesippus and Plinny do call them great men: Sidonius calls
them cruel and fierce, Pausanias and Cassiodorus calls them proud: Appianus,
ungentle, Caesar calls them barbarous, treacherous, and dissemblers:
Pater^ulus says that they are very crafty, and are naturally given to lie. But
Tacitus who lived amongst them says, that the soldiers are very courageous,
and that it is a warlike Nation, but are neither cunning n^r crafty, but do
discover their own minds and secrets, and very faithful in keeping secrets
committed to them. Also the Emperor Iulianus in his Misopogne says, that he
knows by experience that this Nation cannot flatter, but that they deal
freely and plainly with all men. Ptolemy, 11. Quadrip. says, that they must
needs be of a quiet and peaceable disposition, in regard of the quality of
the Country which they inhabit. Concerning their religion, whereby the minds
of men are held and bound together by the tie and fear of some Deity, the
Germans (as Caesar writes) do use no sacrifices, they account them only to
be gods whom they see, and from whom they receive some benefit: as the Sun,
and Vulcan, and the Moon. But afterward, as it appears in Tacitus, who lived
under the reign of the Emperor Nerva; they had many other gods: as Mercury,
Hercules, Mars, Isis, and Berecinthia: also a certain god called Al^is. The
same Tacitus does report also that Velleda and Aurinia were accounted as Gods.
And the aforesaid Tacitus, makes mention of the Temple of Tanfana, who says
that the Suevians do reverence the mother Earth, which they call (as Lipsius
says) Aertha. But Plutarch and Clemens Alexandrinus do affirm that they had
no Images in their Temples, but certain holy women, which Tacitus calls
Soothsayers, and Agathias, and Polyoenus do call them Prophetesses, who did
foretell future events, by the sound, and courses of Rivers. Aemilianus does
note, that they do foretell things to come, by the flight of birds, by the
inspection of entralls, and all other signs. But they did chiefly reverence
Mercury or Teutates, and offered human sacrifices thereunto, as Tacitus
witnesses. In the time of peace there was no common Magistrate, but in the
time of war they did choose Governors. They spent all their life time in
military affairs: and to rob was accounted no disgrace, as we may read in
Caesar. Seneca says, that their chief delight was the wars in which they
were both borne and bread. If (as Tacitus witnesses) they have peace any long
time together at home in their own Country, then they go to the wars in
other Nations. They carry about with them their mothers, wives, and children,
who do carry their knapsackes, and provision: neither are they afraid of
plagues. They join battle with songs and warlike sounds. They count it a
great disgrace to lose their buckler in the field, so that many after the
battle for grief thereof have hanged themselves. Dion and Herodotus do report;
that they will march over Rivers in regard they are lightly armed, and of an
high stature. We read in Appian that they do contemn death, being persuaded
that they shall live again hereafter. They observe the rites of matrimony, and
are content with their own wives; so that few adulteries are committed; for
which they have this present punishment: the woman that is taken in adultery
has her hair cut off, and then her husband thrusts her out of doors before
her kindred, and beats her along the Town. Thus Tacitus reports. The
Mothers do nurse their own childen, and do not put them forth to Nurses.
Caesar says, that they account it unlawful to wrong a stranger, which comes
unto them upon any occasion, so that they are ready to protect them from all
injuries: their houses stand open, and they eat one with another. And here
good manners prevail more, than good laws in other places. The greatest part
of their food, as Caesar mentions, does consist in milk, cheese, and flesh.
Plinny witnesses that they live by no other grain but Oats; and Mela adds
that in times of want they will eat raw flesh. At dinners as Athenaeus
witnesses, they have pieces of meat roasted, and they drink milk and wine.
Their fare is homely, as the flesh of wild beasts, Crabbes, or sour milk:
their drink is made of Barley and wheat, neither is there any Nation more
magnificent in entertainment or in feasting. But as no man or Nation is without
some vice, so they count it no shame to drink night and day. Concerning their
habit, Tacitus says that they all wear a kind of Cloak buttoned before,
which loosely hangs over their shoulders: the same Tacitus says, that the
Germans did not wear a loose garment but a strait bodyed garment, such as
Sidonius says the French did use. The women do go in apparel like the men.
Heretofore the Germans were strong of body, but rude, and ignorant of Arts.
But now they do make all kind of excellent manufactures and works, and most
especially they are skillful in casting of brass, and in the knowledge of
mettalls. In this Country brass Ordinance and Printing were first invented,
and the making of Clockes was found out: and lastly, Germany is such a Nursery
of all Arts, that it does perfect some, and finds out other Inventions. Also
it transporteth into Countries both near and remote, the best Wines, Gold,
Silver, Coppresse, Tin, Lead, Quicksilver, Alume, and diverse painting
colors, also Corn, and diverse other commodities.

WEST-FRIESLAND.
SOme do write that Frisia or Friesland was so called from Phrygia; other do
derive the name thereof from the extreme coldness of the Country. Abbas
Spanheimus by the authority of Hunibald, a great corrupter of Historical
truth, does fabulously report, that it was so named from Frisus the son of
Clodio the hairy, King of France. Hadrian Iunius thinks that it was so called
from the freedom and liberty, which the people always desired. Moreover
Friesland is an ancient Country of Germany, well known to the Romans for
their warlike virtue and Valor, which never changed its name. Tacitus makes
them twofold, namely the greater and lesser Frieslanders. The greater (says
he) and lesser Frieslanders are so called in regard of their strength. The
greater, Tacitus properly calls Oostfrieslanders, not those Embdames who do
now usurp that name, for those are the lesser Chaucians; but the Staverians,
Succians, Franicians, and the Towns of Harling and Leovardia. Also the
West-Frieslanders, who being in the farthest part of Holland are called
Northollanders, and they do confine on the Caninifatians, as Plinny describes
them: for these two Countries of Friesland do stretch from the Rhene even to
the Ocean. Now the River Amisis divides it into West and East Friesland.
West-Friesland which is now so called from the situation, whose description we
do here exhibit and set forth to view, is most properly and anciently called
Friesland, and was always accounted the better part. On the West, and the
North the Sea does compass it* on the South it has a large Bay commonly call
Zuyder-Zee, and the Province of Trans-Isalana: on the East it is encompassed
with the River Amisis, which divides it from the Busactorians, and Westphalia.
The air is every where wholesome, except where it is infected with the foggie
exhalations of the Marshes, which are purified again by the winds. The
Country of West-Friesland is now for the most part Moorish, being low, and
overflowed in many places with water, which lie upon it not only in the
Spring, but also in Summer time: and in regard hereof, it has little stoare
of corn. For these yearly inundations which come betimes and go away slowly,
do either kill the seed, or drive it up and down. Yet here are excellent
pastures for fatting of Cattle, of which the Frieslanders may boast, for they
reap commodity and profit by them: so that the inhabitants do every year
make an incredible gain of Butter, and Cheese, which they transport abroad,
besides that which they daily spend at home, for it has great herds of Oxen,
and breeds also excellent horses. It has some woods, but those so thin of
WEST-FRIESLAND.
FRISIA occidenta.
map trees, that they do not yield wood enough to make a good great fire, such
as Martial and Horace do desire.

Dissolve frigus, lignum super focum large reponens. But provident nature has
given the Frieslanders, and Hollander. instead of wood, a certain kind of
turffe, which being dug out of the earth, and dried in the wind and Sun,
does burn very well, which is a better fuel than that which the Scythians
used, who wanting wood did burn bones, and kept fire with them. And there is
so great plenty of this turffe, as that it does not only serve the
inhabitants, but also other neighbor Countries. There are diverse kinds of
it, which do differ in color, lightness, and the whiteness of their ashes.
There is one bad, light, and spongie kind of turffe, of a Moss color, which
is of no esteem for use: which in burning makes those that stand by, as pale
as Lead, and to look like Ghosts, the smell whereof does cause many to swound;
but a little salt sprinkled on it takes it away. The other is thicker, and
fuller of seggs, and waightier, and serves for diverse uses. The third kind is
as hand as a brick, and whereas the other swim in the water this sinketh; it
is hard to take fire, but being once kindled it keeps fire a long time; it is
of an ash color, and is dug on a Moorish ground. In Zeland also there is a
kind of turffe made of Moorish earth, which they call Daria. Also the Country
people of Friesland, have a certain kind of turffe made of mud, tempered and
mingled with straw, ^eedes, and hay, and afterward dried in the Sun; but the
smoale thereof is very trouble some for the eyes. This Country of Friesland was
heretofore a Kingdom, even to the tune of Charles the Great, after whose
decease it was troubled, although before it was subject to the government of
Denmark and Norway. But at length it enjoyed some Halcyon days of quiet,
under the reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who was a peaceable prince.
There are 12 Cities in Friesland. Leuwarden is the Metropolis of all
Friesland, and a rich City, which as it is adorned and beautified with many
private houses, so it is strongly fortified with a Castle and rampires against
the assaults of enemies. The Court of Judgment, and the Chancery for all
Friesland is kept here, from whence there is no appeal. Near unto it is
Zutchemum, in the Country of Vichlijm. Doccum is 2 mile distant, having a
fertile soil and fair Meddowes. It is distant from the Bay of the sea, 1
mile, and was heretofore subject to Gelderland* Sneca, in the Country of
Westergoyum, is situated three miles from Leovardia in a low waterish soil, so
that it bears no come, but has fair Meddowes. It was a City about 200
years ago, but in process of time it grew so great, so that it is now equal
to any City in Friesland. It has produced many good wits: Ioachim Hopper
was borne and bred in it, who was not only a light and Ornament to this
City, but also to all Friesland, and the Low Countries. Also Peter of Fritema
a Lawyer, and Albertus Hero, a Philosopher and Divine were borne here, and many
other learned men. Staveren is situate on the shore of the South Sea: The
Country near unto it is plain, being full of ditches and Marshes. This City
has no magnificent building in it, but a strong Castle which stands over
the haven, which was founded by George Scheneke, Governor of Friesland, in
Charles the fifth's name, in the year 1522, that so the Burgundians, might
conveniently send thither souldies, and provision for the war, out of the
neighbor Cities of Holland. Plinny Lib. 4. cap. 15. calls the ^nhabitants
Sturians. Harlinga is situated by the jaws of the South Sea, a mile distant
from Franicum, it has a fertile soil, and a Castle well fortified against the
invasions of Enemies, and a convenient Haven: for it affords a fit and
necessary habitation for those which come out of North Friesland and East
Germany: whereupon great stoare of people did flock thither, being allured
with the convenience of the place, so that by this confluence of people the
City was much enlarged. Franicum is denominated from the Frenchmen, here
John Vlptus was borne, who was most skillful in the three languages. It has a
public University. There are also these Cities, Damna, Bolswardum, Ilsta,
Sloten, Worchum, and Hindclopen. There are many Islands in Friesland, the
chief whereof is Schellingana, which is famous for the taking of Dogfish with
Netts. Groening is usually joined with West-Friesland, which makes a province
together with the Territory belonging to it, called, Ommelanden. Here
Rodolphus Agricola, the most learned man of his time was borne. Also Wesselus
or Basilius, and Reinerus Perdinius, famous Divines and Philosophers were borne
here. Friesland has abundance of Lakes and Marshes, as we said before, and it
is watered with the Rivers Laubacum, (which some call Lavica, and Labola, now
Lauwers) and Amisis. It has on the South a very large Bay, which is now called
Zuyderzee, as it were the Southern strait. The Politic state of Friseland
does consist of three principal parts, which are: The County of Oestergow, the
Metropolis whereof is Leovardia, and is divided into these Praefectureships,
Lowarderadeel, in which is Leovardia; Tietzericksterdeel in which is
T^ettzarcke; Ydardacel, in which is Ydaert; Rauwerdeahem, in which is Rauwart:
Ferwerderadeel, in which is Ferwert: Dongerded in which is Wetzens;
Dantummedeel, in which is Dantumna Wolt: Acht Kerspelen in which is Suyrhusum^
Colmerlandt, in which is Collum: Vesterlant, in which is Be^tz: Smalingerlandi,
in which was Smalingerlee an Abbey of the order of Saint Benedict. The County
of Westergow, in which are Grieteneyen; Wonseradeel, in which is Witmarssum;
Framckeradeel, in which is Franiker: Banadeel in which is Mimersgae:
Meynaldummadeel, in which is Minaldum: Baerderadeel in which is Baerdt:
Hennarderadeel, in which is Hennaert: Weynbritz eradeel, in which is Gawe:
Gheesterlandt, in which is Wickel. The County of Sevenwolden, in which are
Grieteneyen; Donyewerstal, in which is Donigae: Leemster Vijfgae, in which is
Lemmer: A^nghevaert, in which is Cathry band^: Schottorelandt, in which are Nigh
and Old Schotten; Wittingerdeel, in which is Oldehorn: Hasscher Vijfgae, in
which is Hasscherborn. But all Friesland and Groeningland is subject to the
Bishop of Trajectum.

THE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM AND OLDENBVRG.
HItherto we have described Germany in general, our Method now requires that
we should entreat of the several parts. The Country whence to called.
This Table contains two Counties, the County of Embden and Oldenburg; the
County of Embdane is so called from the chief City thereof; and now it is
called East Friesland because it confineth on Friseland. For the Frieslanders
did not heretofore possess it, but the Chaucians, of which Plinny and Ptolomie
make two sorts, the greater and the lesser. The greater are those that do
inhabit the Bishopric of Bremes: the lesser are the Embdanians and
Oldenburgians. Forasmuch as Ptolemie seateth them between the River Amisis,
and Visurgis his words are these: They saw also in the North, the Nation of the
Chaucians, who are called the greater, and the lesser, where the Sea flows up
every day and night, so that it is doubtful whether it be Land or Sea. Where
the miserable people do get upon high hills, and their cottages do flote when
the Sea comes in, and do seem like shipwrackes, when it ebbeth back
again. They have no Cattle nor milk as their neighbors have, nor can they
kill any wild beasts because there is no shrubbes, nor harbor for them. They
make thread of Bulrushes and reeds, to weave fishing Netts, and so making a
fire with a little dried mud, they boil their meat, and warm themselves.
Their drink is rain water which they keep in trenches before their houses.
In this manner the Chaucians lived heretofore. But now they are much changed,
for now the Country does afford food not only for the inhabitants, but also
for the neighbor Countries. But heretofore it was a rude unhabited place, so
that Plinnie never mentions that Corn or any other fruits did grow here;
but now where is there greater plenty? The fruitfulness of the Soil.
It had heretofore no fruittrees, but now it bears all kinds of trees. They
had heretofore no Cattle nor Milk, but where is greater plenty now? For
nature has given them a champion Country, full of fair Meddowes, being of a
fat soil, and having many pleasant pastures, which are well replenished and
stoared with innumerable flocks, and herds of Cattle. Which appears by
that wonderful great plenty of excellent good Butter and Cheese, which is made
here, which to the great gain and benefit of the inhabitants is transported to
diverse Countries, and through all Germany. Also the fertility of this
Country appears by the fat and great Oxen, which many thousands do graze
within the Meddowes, and do grow so fat, that foreign Nations do much
esteem of them. Besides here is excellent hunting. So that this Country is
now of so rich a soil, that it needs no supply from neighbor Countries; for
it has such stoare of horses, Oxen, Cattle, Hogs, Wool, Butter, Cheese,
Barley, Oats, Wheat, Beans, Pease, and Salt, so that it does yearly
transport great plenty thereof to the Countries round about it, and those
which are more remote. Moreover the Emperor Frederick the third, Anno 1465,
when this province was governed by diverse Praefects, did make it a County, and
gave it to one Vdalrich. Afterward it had Earls continually even until our
time. There are two walled Cities in that County, Embda and Arichum. Embda or
Embdena, commonly called Embden, is the chief City of this Country, and a
famous Mart Town, seated by the mouth of the River Amisis, having a convenient
Haven, the Channel whereof is so deep, that great ships may come in under
sail: so that for wealth, for the public and private building, and for the
multitude of Citizens, it is known not only in Germany but also in all parts
of Europe One of the chiefest Ornaments is the Earls sumptuous palace, the
great Church, and the Praetors house. Here is wonderful plenty of all things,
both for necessity and pleasure, which the Haven, and the conveniencie of
importation of goods, and also the natural fertility of Friesland does yield.
The City is so called from the River Ems, which Tacitus calls Amisia. The
other City is Aurichum, which is a pleasant retiring place for the Nobility,
in regard of Woods and Forests, in which they do freely recreate themselves,
with Hawking and hunting. The Citizens are rich, and do give themselves
either to merchandise or some mechanicke trade. There are an infinite many of
Castells and Towns in this County. And such a number of Villages, that one
does even join upon another. The most whereof both for fair houses, large
streets, and populousness, may compare with some Cities of Germany. Neither
do rusticke people or husbandmen only live in them, but also Merchants, and
diverse kinds of artificers and some of the Nobility: There are also two other
Counties which are subject to the Earl of Embda, Esensis, and Ieverensis, so
called from their chief towns: the Country Ieverensis is situated beyond the
River Iada Westward, and does contain eighteen Villages. On the North, where
the River Visurgis does discharge it self into the Sea, these two Islands do
lie against it, Wangeroga, and Spikeroga, which are for the most part
unhabited. The County Esensis lies near the Sea shore, and does confine on
I^veria: on the West it is bounded with Berumna and Auriacum: on the North with
the Sea. The Lord thereof Hajo ab Husecke, in the year 1380, when he had vexed
his neighbors, and took the ships of the Bremensians in the River Visurgis,
and had filled the Sea with Pirates, and the Land with thieves and robbers, at
length after some light skirmishes with the Bremensians, in which he had the
worst, he sled to Elsena, and being there taken by the Bremensians, he was
delivered to Edo W^mmik^ Captain of Ieveria; who first ^ackt him, and
afterward cut him in pieces, because he had without any just cause repudiated
his Sister, whom he had married before. There is also in this table the County
of Delmenhorst, and the Lordships Ezes, Norden, Auricke, Iever, Vredeburg,
Ouelgunne, and Rheyde. The Rivers here are Amisis, Visurgis, Iada, and others.
The inhabitants of this Country do speak the German Language: but in
secret matters they use a peculiar speech of their own which strangers do not
understand. They either give themselves to trades, or husbandry, or
merchandise: their apparel is very decent, so that the Countrymen go habited
like Citizens. The women have a far different habit from others. For they
put all their hair into a Call or Huicke, which being full of silver buttons
and knots, they let it hang down upon their backs. In Summer time they wear
their hair in a red silk Call or Net, which is adorned and wrought with
silver. And in winter they put on a hood of green cloth, which covers all
their head, so that you can see nothing but their eyes: and they call this kind
of vestment Hat. Their gown or outward garment, is gathered and quilted in
small foldes, even from the head to the Anckles, and is so stiffened with
s^ver, and gold plates, that when it is put off it will stand an end. It is
sometimes made of red Cloth, and sometimes of green.

The County of Oldenburg.
SO much concerning the County of Embda: the County of Oldenburg follows,
which was so called from the chief City Oldenburg. This Tract heretofore the
lesser Caucians did inhabit, as also the County Embda, as we said before. But
the county of Oldenburg which this Table here presents unto your view, from the
East to the bank of the River Visurgis, contains the Provinces of Stegingia
which is subject to the Castle of Delmenhorst, and Stadland, which is divided
into five Parishes, and Butidia into seven, and Ieveria which is subject to
it, being a part of Friesland, which has four and twenty parishes: on the
West it has Amerlangia, which stretches toward the River Amisis, in the
middle of the Morineans. On the North it is bounded with Friesland and the
Ocean: on the South with the Diocese of Munster. Albertus Crantzius, Lib. 3.
cap. 15. writes, that this is the auncientest Country of them all. For he
reckneth Lib. 2. cap. 30. Windekindus Duke of Saxony (who lived in the time of
Charles the Great) among the Earls of this Country. Ierenicus delivers that
the City of Oldenburg, was reedified by Charles the Great, and that the
Bishop Agalgargus, did there dedicate and consecrate a Church to Saint John
Baptist. But I think in this matter Ortelius and he are both in one error,
because he reckons this City to be in Wandalia, and does place it near the
Sea. For this is not the same City, with that which is in the Country of
Holsatia. THE COVNTIE OF EMBDANVM and OLDENBVRG.
EMDEN et Oldenborg
map The Wandalians call it Stargard, the Danes Br^nnesia, as the same
Crantzius does witness. Lau^ent^us Michaelis does think that the Ambronians
had their original from hence, who as Plutarch reports, did heretofore go
into Italy with the Cymbrians, and were slain by Caius Marius; whose name does
yet continue in that Nation which they call Amerlander. And he is of the same
opinion, concerning the Ala^an Saxones, who ((...) suppose^) did in (...) near
the Lake Alanum in this tract, and on either side^ the (...) Alania even to the
Castle Ororia, and that they are now called L^gener, that is, the Alanians,
and Avergenla^, that is to say, the ^^^tralanians. The Castle of Delmenhorst
was built by the River (...) in the year 1247, which belonged 65 years to the
Bishop (...) ^ster; and Antonius Earl of Oldenburg, on Palm Sunday i^ the
year 1547. early in the morning scaled the walls with a b^nd of (...), and so
took it, and Hermann of Oer the governor of the Ca^ell, was kept in custody.
Concerning the Earls of this Country A^d^^as Hoppenr^d^us, does relate
something; but David Ch^rcus, more excellently in his history of Saxony. But
now by way of conclusion we will add something concerning the manners of the
Chaucians. Tacitus a grave writer does write thus of them: There is a Noble
people among the Germans, who are very just, not covetous but quiet and
secret, and not apt to stir uproares, neither do they liv^ by rapine or
Robbery. And this is a chief argument of their virtue that the great men do
not injure their inferiors; yet they ^ne exp^ in arms, so that arms of
footmen and horsemen is presently ^sed, before there be any rumor or report of
it.

THE FIRST TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
WEstphalia follows in our method, concerning the name whereof there are
diverse opinions. Some suppose it was so called from the goddess Vesta, as it
were Vestalia, because heretofore she was reverenced here: The Country whence
so called.
and so they would have the Westphalians to be so called as it were
Vestalians, for they say that those which dwell Eastward beyond the River
Visurgis are called Oostvalian Saxones, from Oost the Eastwinde, and Vadem
which in the Saxon Language signifies a Coult, which they bore in their
military ensigns, and Colors. But now that name is worn out, and it is
generally called Saxony. So the Westphalians, that dwell Eastward on this side
Visurgis, are so called from the Western wind. Lastly, others suppose that
the Westphalians were so denominated from Veldt that is a field, rather than
from Valen. It has on the East Visurgis, on the South the Mountains of
Hassia, which Ptolemie calls the Abnobij: The Situation
on the West the River Rhene: on the North it looks toward Friesland,
Holland, Trajectum, and Trans-Isalana. The air is cold and sharp, The temper
of the air.
but wholesome. The Country is fruitful, but has more pasturage than corn.
It has diverse kinds of fruits, as Apples, Nutts, and Akornes, with which
Hogs are fatted. The fruitfulness of the soil.
It is more fruitful about Susatum and Hammonia: and most fertile near
Paderborne and Lippia, but it is barren and desert ground in some places about
Amisis. The Dioecese of Munster confineth on it, and that tract of land which
lies near the River Visurgis. It is woody through all Surland, and the
County Bergensis: it has store of Metal in the Country of Colen, and and
the Country of March: and in some parts there are many Salt pits. It breeds
an innumerable sort of Cattle, and especially, The variety of living creatures.
abundance of Hogs flesh, which is esteemed a great dainty, and is served up
to Princes Tables. There are also many wild beasts in the Wood. Charles the
Great did first conquer the Westphalians, and converted them to the Christian
religion. He instituted these Bishoprics, the Bishopric of Munster, of
Osnaburg, of Paderborne, The ancient Government.
and Minden. But it is not found in the Annalls, how Westphalia was governed
after Charles the great, or whether it was subject to the Pope. Truly in East
Saxony there were secular Lords, who did govern the Country: at the first,
Kings that were descended from Charles the great, under whom the Dukes of
Saxony did grow up by degrees even until Henry the first, King of the Romans,
after whom there were three Ottoes, who were afterward Marquesses of Saxony,
being sons to Henry Duke of Bavaria, brother to the first Otto. But we do not
read what Princes, Westphalia which is West Saxony, had at that time joined
in government with the Bishops. But afterward Duke Leo, and his grandfather
before him, Luder Duke of Saxony, and afterward Emperor, did govern
Westphalia. For after the aforesaid Henry was displaced by the decree of the
Emperor Frederick the first, the Dukedom of Westphalia did assume the title
of the Archbishopric of Colen; and the Dukes of lower Saxony, being descended
from the Earls of Anholt, did hold and possess it. And now the aforesaid
Bishop does hold a great part of this ^ountrey, and especially Angria: and the
Westphalians are subject unto him, and his Nobles, being as it were slaves unto
them. Here formerly the Teutonians, the Busasterians, the Chamavians, the
Angrivarians, the Longobardians, the Dulhumnijans, the Angilians, the
Chaucians, and Cheruscians were seated. Those whom Mela and other call the
Teutonians, Ptolomie calls Teutones: they coming from the Balthicke shore,
where Ptolomie places their ancient seat, did give that appellation to
Teutoburg, which Tacitus places in Westphalia. Those whom Ptolomie calls the
lesser and the greater Busacterians; Tacitus calls them Bructerians.
Willichius writes that they did inhabit Munster. Those whom Tacitus calls
Chamavians, Ptolomie does name Camanians, as Villenovanus thinks. From whom
David Chitreus supposes that the Town Chamen in the County of March does
derive his name. The Angrinarians were seated Eastward near Visurgis: The
Longobarians or rather the Langobardians, Ptolomie places on the Frontires of
this Province, on the farthest part whereof was Bardewick: so also those whom
Ptolomie calls the Dulguminians, Tacitus names the Dulgibinians, from whom
the Town Dulmen in the Dioecese of Munster was denominated; here are also the
Angilians, who about the year 444 went over into Britain, and gave their
own name to England, as it appears by many histories, as also by Saint
Bedean English writer. But the Chaucians, whom Ptolomie calls the Cauchians,
and Suetonius, Lampridius, and Strabo the Gaucians, Dio the Chaucians, and
Claudian the Chaycians, as Tacitus writes, do spread themselves from
Friesland, even to the Catti. The same Tacitus does place the Cheruscians hard
by them: whence the Situation of their Country may be easily gathered: for Dion
the historian does witness that they dwelt beyond Visurgis, which may be also
collected out of Tacitus. But this first Table or Chart of Westphalia, does
contain the Counties of Oldenburg, Hoya, Diepholt, and the neighboring
Lordships. The Politic state of Westphalia does consist of three orders, 1.
The Clergy, 2. the Nobles, 3. the free Cities. In the first order are the
Bishops of Paderborne, Leodium, Vltrajectum, Munster, Cameracum, Osnaburg,
Ferdensis, and Mindensis. The Abbots Werdensis, Strablonensis, S. Cornelius,
Munster, Echternaokensis, Corbei, and Hervordensis; and the Abbatesle Essensis.
In the second order are the Princes, Earls, and Barons: as the Duke of
Cleueland and the County of March, the Duke of Iulia and Bergen. The Marquess
of Baden, the Earl of East Friesland or Embda: the Earl of Sein: the Earl of
Dillenburg: the Earl of Vernenberg: THE FIRST TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
Wesphalia cum (...)
map the Earl of Manderscheid: the Earl of Weida and Ringelberg: the Earl
M^ursensis: the Lord of Brunchorst: the Earls of Steinford, Benthem, Dortmund,
Oldenburg, the Lord of Ridburg: the Earls of Hoya and Diepholt, and Scaumburg:
the Lords of Spiegelberg, and Vanenberg: the Earls of Arenberg, of Lip, and
the Lord of Somerauss. In the third order which is of the free Cities, there
are Colen, Aquisgranum, under Wesel, Durun, Cameracum, Dortmund, Susatum,
Duysburg, Hervord, Brukel, Wartburg, Lemgow, and Werden. But so much of this,
now our order requires that we should unfold the Cities and towns of
Westphalia. But seeing we are to speak of the Dioecese of Bremes, we will
leave off for a while the description of Westphalia, and return to it again
in the following Tables, and so will pass to the Bishopric of Bremes.

THE BISHOPRIC OF BREMES.
THe Bishopric of Rhemes, commonly called Stifi Bremen, so called from the
City, The Country whence so called.
has the shape and figure of a triangled Isosceles, whose almost equal sides
are the Rivers Visurgis and Albis, which do meet at the highest corner, nere
the Peninsula, which is named after a Tower built there for the defense of
ships that pass that way. The Base of it is a line drawn from the river Esta,
through the borders of the Country of Luneburg, and Verdensis, a little beneath
the mouth of the River Allera, which does there discharge it self into
Visurges. For the River Esta is the limmit of the Country of Bremes and
Hamburg, which the River Sevena, (which is small at first, but afterward
emptyeth it self into Albis with three Channells,) does divide from the
Dukedom of Luneburg. This Country is not every where of one soil. For the
two farthest parts of the Dioecese of Bremes, near the banks of the River
Albis and Visurgis, are very fat and fruitful. But the middle tract between
Stada and Bremes, over which the Merchants do usually travel, is full of
barren sands, Marshes, and Briars. So that the Dioecese of Bremes is commonly
compared to a Cloak or Mantle, the two former parts whereof begin from the
confluence and meeting of the River Albis and Visurgis, and so falling down to
the banckes of both those Rivers, are embrodered as it were with fruitful
fields and Meddowes: but the other part is woven of a courser thread. Here the
ancient Chaucians were formerly seated, who held all that tract of ground from
Visurgis even to Albis, and Hamburg. The Metropolis is Brema, The Cities.
which Ptolomie, Plinnie, Appianus, Pencerus, and Ireni^us, do call
Phabiranum, it is commonly called Bremen. It is a Hanse City near the River
Visugis, well fortified both by Art and natural situation, having fair
streets, and being full of Citizens, and rich by merchandising and traffic.
It has a fair Market place, where there are markets kept weekly for all
kind of provision. On one side of the Market place the Cathedral Church
stands, and on the other side the Senate house, which has a public Wine
Cellar under it, in which the Senate does keep their wine, and sell it for a
reasonable price. Which is a common custom in many Cities of Wandalia, and
Westphalia, that the Senate makes that which is got by wine charges, defray
public charges. Brema was at first a poor Town, but as the Christian
religion did increase, so it did increase also; for which it is beholding to
the Bishops thereof, who made it a Metropolitan City, and graced it with the
title of the mother Church of all the North, and walled it about. See the
Catalogue of Bishops in M. Adams his ecclesiastical history. There is the
City Stada or Stadum, which is in the Archbishopric of Breams, being situate
nere Zuinga, on the Southern banck of the River Albis, and it is the greatest
City in Saxony. There is also the Town Buxtchuda. This Country is watered
with these Rivers, Visurge, Albi, Esta, which are full of fish, as Ecles,
Lampryes, and Salmons, which those of Breames do salt up and dry in the
smoke, so that the Citizens do sell them for rarities, and make a great
gain of them. The Bremensians are by nature warlike, industrious; and somewhat
inclined to sedition. They love learning and liberal Arts, especially when
they have gotten them abroad by studying in foreign Countries: but otherwise
they are more addicted to merchandising than learning, for they get their
wealth by traffic and trading, and by making long voyages. So that almost all
the Citizens are either skillful Merchants, or Tradesmen, or Shipwrights.

THE SECOND TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
IN our description of Westphalia, the Cities are, The Cities.
among which the first is Munster the Metropolis, or Mother City, of all
Westphalia. Ptolemie calls it Mediolanum, as Pyrchaimerus thinks, it is
commonly called Munster. It is a very fair strong City, in which both
learning and the Roman Language did flourish 60 year since. The City of
Munster names the whole Bishopric, which was so called of a famous monastery
built there. See Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographie. Here began the faction
of the Anabaptists, in the year of our Lord 1533, so that all of that sect did
repair hither, where they chose one John Buckholdus a Cobbler to be the head
and ringleader of this sedition, a Vulgar fellow, fit, for any attempt, and
far excelling all the rest, both for wit, boldness, eloquence, and cunning.
He did not fear to style himself King of Munster. Whereupon the Bishop
thought it meet to suppress this sect, and so being aided and helped by the
Archbishop of Colen and also the Duke of Cleveland, after fourteen months
seige he obtained his City. And then he commanded that the King should have
some of his flesh pulled off with hot Pincers, and then he should be hung out
of the Tower in Iron chains.

Susatum or Soest is the richest and fairest City next to Munster, having
ten great Parishes. They report themselves, that it whas but a Castle at the
first, but afterward by degrees it became a very great City. And from thence
it was there called Susatum, because in regard of the convenient situation,
houses were built by the Castle, so that from the daily increase thereof it
was called Sutatum, as it were ein Zusatz. It has also many neighboring
Villages which are subject to it, which they commonly call Die Burden. This
City is now under the Duke of Clevelands protection, but before it was
subject to the Bishop of Colen. Wesel is a fair rich City, famous for
traffic and Merchandising. It is called the lower Wesell to difference and
distinguish it from the higher, which is situate also on the left side of the
Rhene. The River L^^ brings up many Commodities unto it, which running by the
left side thereof, does straightway associate and join it self with the
Rhene. There is at Wesell a memorable Altar of mercy, which the ancestors of
the most illustrious Lord Henry Oliserius, surnamed Baers, Lord Chancellor of
Cleueland, etc. did place here and consecrate: being an hospital for aged
people; where they have all things necessary provided for them, and the son
following his fathers example, has enlarged the yearly revennewes of it.
Osnaburg, or Ossenburg is a famous City built by the Earls of Engerne, as
Hermannus testifies. Others do suppose that this City was begun by Julius
Caesar, as the Saxons Annalls do mention. They report that it was so named
from the Oxehides, with which this City was encompassed. It is situated in a
pleasant Valley, and it is watered with the River Hasa; they brew good fat
drink in it, which they call Buse. Charles the Great when after 30 years
wars he had conquered the Saxons; and had took the Castle of Widekind
which was near unto this City, and had put a strong garrison in it, he
instituted twelve Bishoprics in Saxony, and made the Bishopric of Osnaburg
the chiefest. For he esteemed this City above all the rest, and granted them
the privilege of a free School, for the teaching of the Greek and Latin
tongues; as Munster, Hamelmann, and the Chronicles of Argentine do also
mention. Minda commonly called Minden, is a pleasant strong City, and the
River Visurgis yields it great store of fish, and brings up many
commodities unto it: it breweth good drink, which is much esteemed, and
venteth great store of commodities by way of traffic. Concerning the
beginning hereof Munster writes thus: When Wildekindus, the first Duke of
Saxony, was converted to the Christian faith; he gave the Emperor Charles
his Castle near the River Wesera, on condition that the Bishop should have
part of it, for it was able to receive them both, so that the Bishop might say,
This Castle shall be mine and thine for both of us have right unto it; and
from hence it was so called in the Saxon Language Myndyn. But in the process
of time the letty ^ was changed into an e, and now that same City is called
Mynden.

Arnspergum commonly called Arnsperg, is the Metropolis of the County of the
same name. It is situated near the River Rura, and has a Castle adjoining to
it seated on a high Mountain, where the Bishops of Col^n have their residence,
being a pleasant seat both for hunting, and for plenty of fish which the
River Rura does yield. Warburg is a fair Town in Westphalia, being built on
an unequal foundation, by the Dimula; it had heretofore a County belonging to
it as Hamelmann reports, who commends it for excellent good drink, and
cheap. Tremonia, or Dortmont is in the middle of the County of Tremonium, it
is an Imperial City. The City Trotmania, which was heretofore so called
from the Trotmans a people of Suevia, the same was afterward called Tremonia,
and now Dortmund^. Ancient Chronicles and Monuments do declare that in that
place, where the City Tremonia THE SECOND TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
Westphaliae tabula.II.
map was afterward builded, there were heretofore two Villages; namely the old
and new. But when Charles the Great had subdued all these Provinces of Saxony,
it became a free Town. For he having considered the fruitfulness of the
soil, and the excellency of the Situation, brought his Colonies hither, and
kept his Court here. Whereupon all those fertile grounds which lie round about
it were called Conings-Hosts-Landt, and all those fair Villages which are
near unto it are called Reichshofen, and are bound to bring in rent-corne
yearly to serve the Kings Court. There are also Dusseldorp, and Hervordia. And
the lesser Towns of Widenbrug and Coesvelt. There are also in this Table the
Counties of Lemgow, Benthem, Lingen, Tecklenborch, Diepholt, Schouwenberg,
Ravensberg, in which are 5 Praefectures, Sporenberg, Ravensberg, Vi^thens,
Lymberg, and Lip. Also the Bishopric of Munster, in which are these
Praefectures, Walbecke, Sassenburg, and Stromberg. And these Burgraviates,
Werne, Bocholt, Ahus, Horstmar, Bevegern, Rhe^e, Meppen, Nienhuys, Cloppenburg,
Wilhusen, Vccht: and these Counties, Steenverdt, Gemen and Ersmarschalck,
Nortkereken, Osnaburgensis, Mindensis, and Paderbornensis. But of these things
enough, we pass to the rest. Westphalia is watered with many Lakes, Marshes,
and Rivers: The Rivers are Visurgis, Amasis, Glaa, Ne^h, Hasia, Honta, Sala,
Lippia, Stevera, Aa, Vidrus: to Amisis, these tributarie streams belong,
Dewera, Dextra, Galaa, and Berckel, whose spring heads are in this Country.
There are also many hills and Mountains in Westphalia, as Baemberg, and
others. And there are many Woods among which are: dat Hens^erholt, and de Avert
and Holt-mar^kt, and the Forest of Teuteburg, near the head of the River
Lippia. I come to the public works. Char^es the Great builded up many
Churches in Westphalia, but the first was the Cathedral Church in honor of
Saint Peter, Crispine and Crispianus. There is at Susatum, a wonderful great
Church, with a very high Steeple, consecrate to Saint Patroclus, which is the
^utelary god of this City. I pass by the other Churches, Monasteries,
Hospitalls for the sick, and the guest-houses which are in Munster and in
other Cities. Charles the Great, as we said before, did enforce the
Westphalians to receive the Christian Religion. But seeing that after they had
been many times subdued, they were yet stubborn and refractory, and did
violate the oath which they had taken, he thought it meet to chastise their
insolency, by punishing some, to the fear and terror of others. Therefore he
constituted certain Judges, and gave them power to examine and punish perjured
persons or rash swears, or those that were guilty of any fact, without hearing
them, or admitting any plea in their own defense. This sharp severitie made
the Westphalians both fruitful and obedient, when they saw that Noblemen, and
men of great estates, were hanged up in the Woods by Martial law, without any
trial. Aeneas Pius writes, that this kind of Judgment did continue even
until his time, and that the secret rites, were observed, by which they judge
delinquents, and offenders, and do punish the guilty wheresoever they are
found, before they know that they are condemned, and the Judges are called
Scabini: but so much hitherto. John Lewenclavius a learned man and skillful in
the Latin and Greek tongues, was borne in Westphalia, who most happily
translated all Xenophon, all Nazianzenus works, and some Greek historians,
and other Greek books, to his everlasting fame and renown. The people of
this Country are comely and handsome, of a large stature, strong limmed, Their
manners
and very hardy and courageous. It has plenty of Soldiers, so that they can
presently raise an army. The Inhabitants also are witty, and it is a proverb,
that there are more crafty knaves in Westphalia than fools. They punish
adultery with much severitie, Their Diet.
Their food is black bread and cheese: their flesh meat is Porke, hung Beef,
and Bacon, of which they have great store: Especially the Gammons which the
inhabitants do eat raw. Their drink is a kind of Beer: the rich drink
Renish wine, although it be very dear. Their Arts.
But seeing the Country in most places is unfit for tillage, therefore the
inhabitants do give themselves to Mechanic Arts and merchandising. Their
Traffic.
Their commodities, are free stone for carving, and building, and also
Milstones and Whetstones; and especially they have delicate gammons which are
accounted great dainties even at Princes tables. Concerning this country are
these verses in Meeter: Hospitum vile,
Cranckbroot, dunbier, langhe mile,
Sunt in Westphalia:
Qui non vult credere, loop da.


THE BISHOPRIC OF MUNSTER.
THe Bishopric of Munster is situated in a fertile soil, abounding with all
kinds of fruits: on the North it has the County Benthemium: on the East the
Bishopric of Padelbrum; on the South the Counties of Zutphan and Marcan.
Charles the Great, Emperor of Rome, and King of France, which conquered lower
Saxony, which is now called Westphalia, did institute this Bishopric, and
called it Mimingerodensis, or Mimingardevorensis. Afterward he called it
Munster from a Monastery which he built there, in the honor of the blessed
Virgin Mary. Hermannus was the first Bishop thereof. The City is strongly
fortified both by nature and Art, especially since the faction of the
Anabaptists ceased: it is situated on a plain having five fair Canonical
Colleges, and a school famous for learning and Arts. The inhabitants are
laborious and industrious, and do transport their commodities into foreign
Countries. But after that the Spaniards had wars with the Low Countries, they
were prohibited and forbidden to trade and traffic with the united Provinces.
And after the reign of Ferdinand the first, all that were not of the Roman
religion were enforced to leave the City, to their great loss and damage.
It was governed formerly and now also by Bishops, their Catalogue follows.
The first Bishop was Ludgerus Frisius, brother to Hildegrine Bishop of
Halberstadt, who dyed in the year of Christ 809. after whom there followed
Godfry, Alfrid, Lubbertus, and Bertoldus, in the reign of the Emperor
Arnulph: and in the year 895, and afterward, William Richard, Reinolds,
Hildebald, Dodo, Suederus, Theodore, Sigefride, and Hermann the first, who
built a Monastery beyond the water, whence the Town was called Munster, in the
year 1025, whose successors were called the Bishops of Munster: namely Robert,
Frederick, the brother of the Marquess of Misnia, Erpo, Theodoricke of
Wintzenburg, Henry, Egbert, Wernerus, Henry, Ludovicke, Godescal, a Saxon, who
dyed in the year 1200. Hermann the second, Count of Catznelbogen, Otto Count
of B^nth^m, Theodoricke, Ludolphus Count of Holte, Otto the second Count of
Lip, William the second Baron of Holte; Gerard Count of Marca; Everhard Count
of Deest, Otto the third Count of Retberge; Conradus, Ludovicke Count of
Hassia, Adolphus Count of Marca, in the year 13^5. John Count of Virnenburch,
translated to Vltrajectum; Florentius Count of Vevelichoven, Paro Bohemus, THE
BISHOPRIC OF MUNSTER.
MONASTERIENSIS Episcopatus.
map Henry Wulf, Otto the fourth Count of Hoya, Henry Count of Mursium,
Walramus brother to Henry, John Bavarus, Henry Bishop of Bremes, Conrade Count
of Retberg, Eric elected Duke of Saxony in the year 1508. Frederick Count of
Weda; Eric Count of Grubenhager, Franciscus Count of Waldeck, in whose reign,
the Anabaptists, did make a great tumult or faction, having one John of Leiden
for their Captain, who would needs be called King of Israel. After Waldeck
there were William Ketler, Bernard Raesvelt, and John Comes of Hoya, who dyed
in the year 1574. John William Duke of Cleveland, who resigned to Ernest Duke
of Bavaria and Bishop of Colen, after whose decease his Nephew Ferdinand
succeeded.

THE THIRD TABLE OF WESTPHALIA
THe third Table of Westphalia as the Title shows, does lively delineare and
describe three parts. The Dukdome of Bergen, the County of March, and the
Dioecese of Colen. The Dukedom of Bergen whence so called.

The Situation


Which we will run over in the same order as they are propounded. The first
is the Dukedom Bergen, which is so called from the Town Bergen, it begins
at low Wesel, and so runs up a great way toward Rhene. But concerning the
original of this Dukedom, Munster writes thus. In the time of Henry Auceps
King of the Romans, namely in the year 724, The Government.
there were two brothers, unto whom for their former service, King Henry gave a
certain part of Westphalia, in which the elder, namely Adolphus, built a
Castle near the County of Arnsperg, and called it Volvesheg; and afterward
he brought all the Country to Civilitie, and adorned it with many Towns and
Villages. The other brother called Eberhard, did also build a Castle, and
called it Aldenburg. But these brothers increasing both in power and wealth,
the King made Adolphus a Count, and the Country a County, which was called
the County of Altenna. Also he made Eberhards land the County of Bergen. A
little after Eberhard being made a Monk, passed over his territories to his
brother, and builded a monastery near the River Dune, and was made Abbot
thereof. After Adolphus and his posterity, there succeeded these Counts,
Engelbert, Adolphus, Engelprechtus, and Adolphus. But Adolphus dying without
issue, the County of Bergen came to his Sisters son, namely Gerard Earl of
Iuliacum. After whom his son Wilhelmus governed both Countries, and after him
succeeded his son Wilhelmus, the first Duke of Iuliacum, and Duke of Bergen
and Gelderland. After him, there succeeded in these Dukedomes, his brother
Rainold, who dyed in the year of Christ 1433. some say, that the County
Montensis was errected and established at that time, when Henry the proud was
deposed by Frederick the first. But yet in the year of Christ 1336. Charles
the fourth made this County a Marquiship, and made his son Wentceslaus Duke
thereof. Here is the Imperial Town Essendia, in which Alfrid the fourth
Bishop Hildesheymen builded a Nunnery, for 52 Virgins, and an Abbatesse, and
likewise a College for twenty Cannonists and a Deane. The Country yields
great stoare of wheat and corn, so that the white bread of Essendia is much
esteemed. The Townsmen are Merchants, or Weavers or Smiths, so that there is
much armor made here. It has many wels and a black kind of stone coals,
which the Country near unto it yields, but chiefly by Steltium a Town by
the River Rura. There is also Dusseldorp, the Metropolis of this Dukdome, so
named from the river Dussela, which runs through the middle of it.

The County of Marck.
The County of Marck follows. It seems that the Vbians did heretofore
inhabit this Country, and the Dukedom of Bergen. But the Counts of Altena were
formerly contented with this title, The ancient Government.
until Count Frederickes son, having gotten Marck, writ himself Earl of
Marck and Altena, The Towns.
and boar the arms of it, about the year 1004. in the time of Wichman the
thirteenth Earl of Cleveland. Marck is a large County of Westphalia, having
many flourishing Towns on the bancke of the River Lippia, as Hammon, Vnna,
Susa^^, Tremonia, Werdena and others. We have formerly spoken concerning
Susatum and Tremonia. Werdena in the entrance to Westphalia, is a Town near
the River Rura, it was built by William de Hardenburg, the 42 Abbot of the
Monastery built by S. Lutgerus, in the year 1317, and Engelbert Earl of Marck
did give it many privileges, which it still enjoyes. The Townsmen live for
the most part by feeding and grazing of cattle. They have pleasant fields and
pastures, and very high woody Mountains, in which there are great stoare of
hogs, and little Rivulets with a murmuring sound to run down the
mountains. Besides, the river Rura, yields them many commodities, besides
great stoare of fish, and fat Eeles: there is a stone bridge over the River
Rura, for passengers to go over. There is also the Town Chamen which David
Chytraeus supposes that it was so called from the Chamavians, who came hither
in Trajans time.

The Dioecese of Colen.
The next County in this Chart is the Dioecese of Colen, commonly called Stift
Coln, so called from the chief City thereof. The Vbians did heretofore
inhabit it, who were first seated beyond the River Rhene, in the County of
Marck, and which belonged to the Prince of Cleueland, so that it is a wonder
that Volateranus was not ashamed to place the Vbians in Marchia Badensis, which
is near Helvetia. Tacitus Lib. 4. Hist. does call them Agrippinnians. Iunius
says that it is likely, that the Vbians derived their name from a Town
commonly called Tuysch, and heretofore Te vbisch, and by contraction Tubisch,
and from thence Tuysch, where there is a fair ancient Monastery built.
Neither is it unlikely that the great Altar, which Tacitus often mentions was
built here, near which Segimund (whom Strabo corruptly calls Semiguntus) the
son of Segest Prince of the Sicambrians was created Priest, who afterward at
the revolt and defection of Germany fled to the rebels, and broke his fillets
which were the ensigns of his Priesthood. Pucerus does think that the Vbians
were the inhabitants of Eij faliae, which are farther off, and some do rather
think that they were those Tarbelliant which Caesar mentions. The Metropolis
is Agrippina, which Tacitus calls Colonia, or COL. CLAVD. AVG. And
Agrippinensium, THE THIRD TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
Westphaliae tabula tertia
map in an ancient writing: and in Claudius coin it is called Col. Agrippina
Vbtor. In Vitellius coin it is called the 19 legion: and Ptolomy calls it the
Agrippin legion: Plinny and Suetonius, do name it the Agrippine Colonie. The
inhabitants do now call it Colln, and the Frenchmen Coloigne. Some do
fabulouslly suppose that it was called Colonia from Colonus a ^rejan: and some
would have it so called because it was a Roman Colonie: Cornelius Tacitus
writes thus concerning it: But Agrippina, that she might show her power to the
neighbor Nations, commanded that the old Soldiers and the Colonie called by
her name, should be brought into the Town of the Vbians, in which she was
borne. And by chance it came to pass, that her Uncle Agrippa received those
people into his protection, after they had passed over the Rhene. So that this
City had both those names of Agrippin^ and Colonia from Agrippina* and from
that time it was called the Agrippine Colonie, and the Citizens were called
Agrippinensians. But afterward when the Roman Empire began to decay: the
Frenchmen under the conduct of their King Chila^ricke in the year of our Lord
452, did drive them all forth, and by force got the possession of the Colonie,
and did govern it until the time of Otto the first. But in the year 749 Otto
the Roman Emperor took this Colonie from the Frenchmen, and restord it to
the Roman Empire. Since which time it has always been a free Imperial
City. It is situate on the left hand bancke of the River Rhene, being great
in compass. It was at first four square, but now the form of it is like an
half Moon, having many fair houses, and streets, pleasant Gardens and
Orchards, being well fortified with a strong wall and a double ditch; besides,
it is populous, and rich: it is famous for Mechanicke Arts, and for the
University, and for wealth it excels the most Cities of Germany. In this
City about the year of Christ 134^ Taulerus a famous Doctor of the Church
did preach.

Bonna is seated on a pleasant plain, where the Mountains of Rhene do
descend and become level ground. There is also Sont^na a fair Town, and the
Village Brula. Also on the Coasts of the Vbians there was Tolb^acum, as Tacitus
reports, Lib. 5. Histor. I cannot omit the public works. The public
works.
Here is the great Church of Colonia, built with free stone curiously wrought
and carved, which is consecrated to Saint Peter; which if it had been
finished, it would have exceeded all the Churches in Germany, for building and
largeness; and it might worthily have been counted one of the wonders of
Europe. What, should I mention the fair Church of the Machabees? Or what
should I speak of the other Churches and Monasteries? What should I mention
the Guesthouses, the Hospitalls for the sick, the Hospitalls for the poor,
The Government.
and for Orphans? Besides, the Praetors house does much beautify this City.
I pass by other things.

Moreover the Politic government of this City does represent the
flourishing government of the Roman Commonwealth. For if you consider the
dignity of the Consuls, Proconsuls, Censors, Tribunes, Quaestors, and the
Praefects of the Corn, or the inflexible staff of Justice, which is carried
instead of the knitch or bundle of rods: or if you observe the order of the
companies, or the civil authority of the Senators, you shall see that this
Commonwealth of Agrippina is as 'twere the Effigies, and lively Picture of
Rome, so that it deserves to be called the Roman Colonie* But so much
hitherto let us pass to other matters.

THE ARCHBISHOPRIC OF COLEN by RHENE.
THe Vbians in Caesar's time were seated on that bank of the river Rhene which
is toward Germany, and had a flourishing City; but they being vexed by the
Suevians who were the most potent people of Germany, sent Ambassadors unto
Caesar and made a league with him, leaving pledges and desiring aid of him
against their enemies; who being then suppressed, yet afterward the Suevians
assailed them again. Whereupon that they might live in more security
hereafter, M Agrippa son in law to the Emperor Augustus, brought them over the
Rhene to a place which they now call Vpen. And also Agrippina, wise to Agrippa,
N. Claudius, afterward Emperor, the son of Germanicus; brought thither in
the reign of Tiberius, a Colonie because she was borne there, and so as
Tacitus says, it was called after her name: so that afterward they would not
be called Vbians but Agrippinians. This City grew so big, that Zosimus
calls it the greatest City, and Ammianus calls it a well fortified
City: and it is manifest that it was the head City, and Metropolis of
Germany, and a Dukes seat, so that Vitellius, as Suet^nius witnesses, sent
the Dagger hither, with which Otto stabbed himself: and in the same City
Trajan received the ensigns of the Empire, being sent unto him from Nerva. It
continued faithful unto the Romans, until in the year 462, their strength
being weakened and spent, the Frenchmen under the conduct of King Childericke,
by force got possession of it, and held it until Ottoes time. For he having
took it from the Frenchmen, restored it to the Roman Empire, and set it at
liberty. But before Frederick the seconds time, about the year of Christ
1201, it was associated and joined to Hansa. It is now fortified with 38
Towers, and with a double ditch and a wall, on both sides whereof there are
rows of trees. It has in many things some affinity with Rome; in the
Magistracy there are Consuls, Proconsuls, Praetors, Censors, Tribunes,
Questors, and Aediles: As for sacred buildings, it has many fair Churches,
and for civil buildings, it has a Court, a Market place, a Porch or an
Exchange. The Court has a high Tower of curious workmanship, of free square
stone, which is every were adorned with curious artificial statues. The River
Rhene glideth by the City, on the opposite bancke whereof the Divitensian
Castle was built with a bridge by Constantine the son of Constantius, who
placed a garrison therein for defense of the Frenchmen, which together THE
ARCHBISHOPRICKE of COLEN by RHENE
COLONIENSIS Archiopiscopatus
map with the bridge was destoyed by the Bishop Bruno, who built an Abbey with
the stones thereof. which in the year 1124. was governed by Rubert a famous
divine. There were 78 Bishops of Colen, from Beatus Maternus Saint Peter's
Scholar, as some would have it, even to Ferdinand Bavarus. Their territory is
very large, and they have many Towns subject unto them, the chief whereof are
Bonna, Nussia, and Ardernacum near the Rhene. It is a fruitful Country
abounding with corn and wine. Their sacred jurisdiction is extended far and
near; and in saecular matters they are Potent Princes, and they have the
second place among the Electors of the Roman Empire.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
NOw we do add this fourth Table of Westphalia, that so we may have the
better knowledge of this large wide Country: it contains that part of the
Country which is bounded on the North, with the River Rura, and it has on the
East the Bishopric of Padleborn, and the County of Waldecia: on the South
Hassia, on the West it is joined with the County of Marcan. It is full of
Mountains and Hills, especially toward the East, where it joyneth to
Padleborne, and Waldecia, in which tract there are many Towns, as upon the
banck of the River Mommius: Holthusen, Osbern, Hullinchoven, Arensberg,
Nienhus, Gunne, Stocckem, Fullin^k, Berchem, Molhem: and many others as Bergen,
Nettlestede, Langstraten, Mensel, Hemerde, Heddingchasen, Over-Almen, which are
watered with other little Rivulets. But the River Mommius arises out of the
aforesaid Mountains, and has also besides the aforenamed, these Towns,
Hilbr^chusen, Brilon, and Ruden, which are known through the neigbouring
Valleys, for the commodities which that River yields. The River Hime is also
no less famous, which rises in the middle of this Province, out of a small
Fountain near Frederick Burg, and waters the little Towns, Me^ler,
Eiselpe, Helmerinchuse, and Meschede, where it meets with another little
Rivulet. The River Win begins at Holvede or a little above, and glideth by
Berentrup, Passert, Dorler, D^epinck, and beyond Grevenstein after many
windings and turnings, it comes to Freinhol, and so runs among the
Mountains, and at length mingleth it self with Mommius near to Neijm. The
River Lenne, begins in the Mountains near Nodarem, and comes to
Overkirchen on the South, and Smalenborg on the North, and from thence it
runs by Meygen, Grevenburge, Habbeke, and so having received another Rivulet
near Plettenberch, it goes forward to Ebrichusen, and Werdecke, and at length
about Limburg, it does cast it self into the River Mommius. Moreover the River
Rura, runs and rises from hence, which glideth by Oldenda, and so near the
River Sunderen receives Bor^hou, and so being much enlarged, it runs into
the Rhene. The Country toward Hassia is Mountanous, and therefore
unfruitefull. The inhabitants are of a great stature, and strong, but very
rude, and eat course fare, as Bacon, Beef, Beans, Pease, and Lettice. The
great labor which is bestowed in tilling the earth, and the small profit which
arises from thence, makes them less diligent. For in winter time they Banquet,
and drink great store of a thick kind of drink; and they take no care but
of their Cattle, which they keep with their own dwelling houses, The Rivers
do afford them fish, but not so well tasted as those which are taken in the
Rhene. They are not very expert or ready in matters of war, and therefore
they shun the doubtful chance of war, as much as they can: and albeit the
Saxons were accounted heretofore a warlike Nation, yet now they are despised
and contemned of their neighbors, and now for want of use they are not
esteemed for matters of war.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF WESTPHALIA.
WESTPHALIA Ducatus
map

THE DIOECESE OF LEDEN.
THe Dioecese of Leden is so called from the chief City Leden Hubert. The
Country whence so called.
Thomas of Leden does affirm that it was called Leden, from a Roman Legion
that was slain in that Valley, and the inhabitants do call it Liege, as it
were a Legion. Some think it was so named from a little small River called
Legia, which rising three miles from the City, does within the City mingle
it self with the River Mosa. The Situation
It is commonly called l' Eu^sche de Liege. On the North West it has Brabant,
on the East partly Mosa, and partly the Dukedom of Limburg. On the South the
County of Namurcium. The length of it is 31 Leden Miles, and the breadth 15.
It has a clear, The temper of the air.

The fruitfulness of the soil.


temperate, and wholesome air: the soil is pleasant and fruitful, especially
Northward where it confineth on Brabant, where it yields great store of
Corn, and other fruits, and in some places wine. But toward the South where
it joyneth to Lutzenburg and France, it is somewhat barren, and Mountanous, and
Woody; for here is some part of the Forest of Arden, which is the greatest,
as Caesar witnesses, in all France. This is the external face of the soil:
but within it has Mines of Iron and Lead, and also some of Gold. There are
also Quarries, out of which to make great men's Tombs, white Marble which the
Graecians call Alablaster, is dug. There are also a kind of pit-coale dug
out of them, which are gotten with great pains, and with hazard of life, and
some times they are dug out under the Channel of Mosa, and are brought into
our Country by ships, and there is yearly raised out of them, an hundred
thousand Ducats. This stone they commonly call Leden coal, or Charbon de
Liege: which as soon as it has took fire, it kindles by degrees, it is
quenched with oil, and water makes it burn: The heat of it is very
vehement,: whence it comes to pass that Leden does boast of three thrings
above other Nations: Bread better than bread: Iron harder than Iron: and fire
hotter than fire. They report that a certain stranger in the year 1198 did
first find out the use of this stone, who showed it to a smith. Moreover this
Country abounds with all kind of Cattle; and it has Woods which afford
great store of Game for hawking, and hunting. They report that Saint Maternus
Patavinus, the first Bishop of the Tungrians, about the year of our Lord 10^,
did convert this Country to the Christian faith. For the Bishops seat THE
DIOECESE OF LEDEN.
LEODIENSIS DIOEC.
map which is now at Leden, was then at Tunguris, and it continewed to the
year 488, at what time Trajectum was translated by S. Servatius to Mosa, when
the Hunnians under the conduct of Attila, then broke into Germany, and did
wast that City together with other towns and it continewed there even to
Bishop Huberts time whom the year 713, did translate it to Leodium, where it
now remains. Moreover from Hubert the first Bishop of Leiden, even until our
times, Guicciardine reckons 62 Bishops. Neither is this Praelate a Bishop
only but also a Prince of the Empire, Duke of Bouillion, Marquess of
Francimont, Count of Loten and Hasbania. The ancient inhabitants of this
Bishopric were the Eburonians, the Tungrians, Centronians, and Ceraesians.
Now it takes up a great part of the ancient Lotharingia, for the Dioecese of
Leden contains the Dukedom of Bouillion: the Marquiship of Francimont, the
County of Hasbania or Haspengaw, and Loten, and many Baronies. And there are
in this tract besides Trajectum, the middle part whereof is subject to the Duke
of Brabant, 24 walled Cities, and a thousand 700 Villages, with spire Steepled
Churches, and many Abbyes and Lordships. The names of the Cities are these:
Leden, Bolonium, Francimontium, Loots, Borchworm, Tungri, Hojum, ^lasselt,
Dinantum, Masacum, Stochum, Bils^num, Saint Trudonis, Visetum, Tumum, Varem,
Beringum, Herck, Bree, Pera, Harmontium, Sinetum, Fossa, and Covinum, as
Guicciardine reckons them. The Metropolis of them all is Leden, which some
call, Augusta Eburonum, the inhabitants do call it Liege, and the Teutonians,
Luyck and Luttich. It is an ancient City, and Hubert Thomas, a Ledener does
refer the original thereof to Ambioriges a courageous King of the
Eburonians, under whose conduct the inhabitants by an Ambushment, slew Co^a,
and Sabinus, having cut off one Roman Legion, with 5 Cohorts, as C. Caesar,
Lib. ^. of his Commentaries concerning the French war does relate. Others
suppose that it is a new City, which was built by Hubert of Aquitaine, but
their opinion is manifestly proved to be erroneous, by some ancient Monuments,
and buildings. There do flow into the City some other Rivers besides Mosa
and Legia, as Vtes, Veses, and Ambluarus, which arise out of the Wood Arden.
There are also very many clear fountains, so that many private houses, have
two or three. The City is wide built, and does contain some Mountains and
Vallyes, the compass of it is four Italian miles. There are fair Aedifices
and buildings, and the Bishops Palace for stateliness, and magnificence
exceeds all the rest, which was built by cardinal Erard of Leiden. But for
fair Churches, whether you consider their number, or their curious building,
or their richness; it does far exceed all the Cities not only of France,
but of both Germanies. There are eight Collegiate Churches in it, in which
there are very rich Cannons, but the chief and fairest is Saint Lamberts
Church. It is a Cathedral Church: and the Bishop thereof is Prince of the
whole Dioecese, and Country; but none are chosen to be Cannons, unless he be
descended of a Noble stock, or else a Doctor or Licentiate: and it is lawful
for any Cannon (unless he be chosen into the number of the Priests) to resign
his benefice, to marry a wife, and to take upon him another calling. In this
Church there are very many precious vessels, and many ornaments of Gold and
Silver: among the rest, there is Saint Georges statue of pure Gold, which
Charles Duke of Burgundy, consecrated. There are also four very rich Abbyes,
adorned with well furnished Libraries. There are 32 Parishes within the City,
and as many Churches. Whereby it appears, that that which Petrarck writ was
not undeserved, Vid^ Leodium, insignem Clero locum, that is, I saw Leden famous
for the Clergy men. The Bishop has the right and title of a Prince: yet the
City has so many privileges and liberties, that it may be counted a free
City. For it has Consuls: it was heretofore a great place of studdy, so that
it is observed, that at one time 9 Kings sons, four and twenty Dukes
sons, and 29 Earls sons, were students at Leden: Besides many Barons
sons, and gereat men's children, who were all for the most part Cannons of S.
Lamberts Church. Bolonium, or Bouillon, is a Castle four mile from Iuoys: and
sixteen from Leden, being built with rare workmanship, on the top of a
Mountain: it is the seat of the Dukes of Bouillon. Godfrey Duke of
Lotharingia, was borne here, who in the year 1016, at the general council
held at Claremont in Avernia, together with his brothers, Eustatius and
Balduine went to war against the Infidels, to recover the holy Land. At what
time this Noble Hero, to furnish himself for this war, sold this Dukedom to
Spertus Bishop of Leden, which was a greater glory to the seller than the
buyer. By his valor the Christians took Jerusalem in the year 1020: When the
Army offered him for his brave achievements the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and a
golden Crown, this Noble Christian Prince refused them, saying that he would
not be made a King, nor wear a golden Crown, there where his Savior had
worn a Crown of thones. Francimontium was heretofore a walled Town, but now
the walls are fallen down: Cardinal Erard whom I formerly mentioned built a
^^ort here. It is 4 Miles from Leden, and it is honored with the title of a
Marquiship. At Tuini (which is a Village Town near Francimont) there is the
best Lead, and in the Mountains near unto it, there are Marble Quarries. The
Tungrians are three miles from Mosa, and as many from Leden: their City is
now called Tongeren, being situated near the River Iecher; it was so called
from the Tungrians a people of Germany, who leaving their Country passed over
the Rhene, and seated themselves here. It is the Auncientest City in all
Brabant. It is two hundred miles from this City to Paris, and all the way was
once paved with stones, as it is yet manifest by some part thereof. Hercules
his Church within the City, shows the antiquity of it, whose statue does
yet stand over the gate. Hojum or Hoy, is so called from a little swift running
Rivulet which here casts it self headlong into Mos^, it is five miles distant
from Leden. Four miles from Leden near the little Town Dener is Eilsen, and
beyond that the Village Munster hilsten; three miles from the Tungrians, is the
City of Saint Truden, which as some suppose, was the seat of the
Centronians, whom Julius Caesar does often mention. A mile from Leden, is the
Village Ebure, which as it is supposed, also was the seat of the Eburonians.
Flacencius writes (that I may add this by the way) that a part of Trajectum,
joined to this Dioecese by the donation or gift of Porus, Count of Lovania. We
omit the other Towns for brevitie sake. This Country is every where watered
with Rivers, the most of which do run into Mosa: The Rivers
as Legia, or Legio, Vtes, Veses, Ambluarus, Ieckel, Hoy, Vesera, Vl^Veer, Vr^;
the others run into Demera, and so to Scaldis: as Rath^ck, Stimmer, Herck,
and Hespe, which are all fair clear Rivers, abounding with all kinds of
fish. Here was a Fountain concerning which learned men do not agree. Some
do affirm that it is yet within the City, Guicciardine and others do
contend that it was out of the City, half a mile from Limburg, 5 miles from
Leden, 8 miles from the Tungrians, near the Town Spa, in a pleasant and
delightful Wood, being a part of the Wood Arden. This Fountain has a great
virtue in curing desperate diseases, as the Gout, Dropsy, Fevers, and the
like. And here the Country begins to be full of Mountains, Mountains.
(...).
in which there are rich Mines. It has also many shadie Woods, which are parts
of the Forest of Arden, which is so celebrated by Julius Caesar. One small
part of it which is near unto the County of Namurcium, is called the Forest
Marlignia. And so much concerning the Dioecese of Leden: now we proceeed to the
rest.

THE COVNTIE OF MVERS, with the adjacent Countries.
IN this Table, in which the County of Muers is lively described and
delineated, together with the Countries, Cities, and Rivers which do
encompasse this County: we will only describe those Countries which we have
not described otherwheres: namely these. First the County of Muers, afterward
the Dukedom of Cleveland, The County of Muers.
and lastly the Dukedom of Iuliacum. The County of Muers commonly called
Graefschaft Muers, was so called from a Town of the same Name. On the East it
has the Dukedom of Bergen, The Situation
and the County of Marck: on the West Gelderland: on the South the Dioecese of
Colen and the Dukedom of Iuliacum: on the North Cleveland. The Country
yields great store of corn, and has many pleasant Meddowes. The chief
Town is Muers, The chief Town.
which does name, the Country, it stands over against Dutsburg, not far
from the left banck of the Rhene. And so much concerning the County of Muers.
I come to the Dukedom of Cleveland, The Dukedom whence so called.
which was so called from the Cliffes: and there is a small Town of that name,
near the bancke of the Rhene, which is built on three Cliffy bills. It is
boundered on the East with the Dukedom of Bergen, The Situation
the County of Marck and Westphalia; on the North with the County of
Zutphania, Trans-Isalania, and Batavia; on the West with Gelderland, and Leden;
on the East with Colen and Aquisgranum. The Country has a good and wholesome
air, The temper of the air.

The fruitfulness of the soil.

The variety of living creatures.

The ancient Government.


it yields great store of Corn, and pleasant Meddowes. Here are diverse
kinds of living creatures: and in some parts diverse wild beasts, as oars,
Foxes, Hares, Connies, Hearts, wild Cats, and wild horses* they have great
store of Partridges, Thrushes, and Stares. An innumerable sort of Duckes, and
great plenty of all kinds of provision. They report also that Pipin, and
Charles Martell, did give A^lius Gracilis when he flourished in wealth and
power, that part of Batavia, which is now called Cleueland. There succeeded
after him Theodoricke, Rhemhold, Rudolphus, John, Robert, Balduine, and others
even to John who was the 27 from A^lius, and here the line was extinct. Yet
Adulphus was adopted by the Emperor and the provinces into this family, and
in the Council at Constantia, the Emperor Sigismund, created him Duke of
Cleveland. This Dukedom has these Towns on the confines of France: The
Towns.
Xantum, or Santen, a Town on the left bancke of the Rhene, which Pig^ius
heretofore called Trajana Colonia, and Pyramus, and many others Vetera: it
seems to be very ancient and of great antiquity, by those stones which are
called Duynsteen, of which great stoare are gathered out of the ruins.
Burichum, or Burich is a small Town, situate over against Wesel, hahaving
pleasant fields and Meddowes round about it. Clivia, or Cleve is the head Town
of the Province, not far from the bancke of Rhene, not far from that place
where it spreads forth his arms, and begins to Inile Batavia. It was
heretofore a very great City, as we may collect by the ruins thereof. It was
called Cleve because it is situate on three cliffie rocks, near the Rhene. On
the highest part of the three hills, there is seated a high, broad,
foure-square Tower, with a fair Castle, which they report was builded by Caius
Julius Caesar, in his French wars, as a Fort of defense against the
Germans: which may be seen in these words written in the great Court of the
Palace by the Princes commandment. Anno ab. vrbe. D^XCIIX.C. Julius.
Dictator. Ilis. Partibus. Subactis Arcem. Clivens^m fundavit. That is, in the
year from the building of the City D^XCIIX.C. Julius, the Dictator, in these
parts, having subdued Arcem, founded Cleve. Now it is memorable because it is
the seat of the most illustrious Dukes of Iuliacum, Cleveland, and also for
the Collegiate Church, and the courtesy of the inhabitants. It is very
conveniently situated, and has a fair prospect into a fair plain, which is
clothed with green grass and herbage: but especially from a high Tower,
which from the weathercocke is called the Swanne Tower. Calcaria is a Town in
the Island of Rhene, which was built first by the Earls of Cleveland, as a
Fort and Tower of Garrison to prevent the incursions and inroades of these of
Colen and Gelria, with whom they had often wars. It was so named from the
ancient Castle Calcer, from whence there was passage from this Island to the
farther bancke of the Rhene; it grew rich and powerful by clothing, and
brewing of drink, which was transported from thence to other places. Above
Calcaria in that place which is called Ausden Baern, it is thought that Caesar
Germanicus did build a bridge over the Rhene, when he marched from his old
tents unto the Martians, who are now called Twentanians, but yet the little
Town Otma^rsen retains its ancient name. Griet is situate on the left
bancke of the River Rhene, and below it on the same side is Griethusium on the
confines of Batavia, near the ancient Castle Lobecum, which signifies the
corner of the course, for Loop signifies a course, and Eck a corner: for Rhene
divides his course and runs diverse ways. On the bancke toward Germany,
there are Vesalia, of which we have spoken in the descripion of Westphalia;
also Duisburg, or Teutoburg, a Town of ancient Germany, situated heretofore
on the bancke of the River Rhene, between the Rivers Rura and Angra. Both
histories, and the fair buildings do declare and demonstrate that it was
always a famous Town. And the writers concerning the affairs of Flanders do
show, that it was frequented THE COVNTIE OF MVERS.
CLEVE et MURS
map by Merchants for trading and famous Marts which were kept there. Embrica
is a very neat Town, well peopled, having fair streets, and a well governed
school; the Commentators on Tacitus do call it Asciburg, but it is commonly
called Emmericke. And so much concerning Cleveland: the Dukedom of Iuliacum
remains, commonly called Iuliers or Gulick. It was so named from the Town
Iusiacum. It is situated between the River Rhene and Mosa, in the same manner
as Cleveland is, but that the latter lies Northward, and the other Southward.
For otherwise they have the same Countries confining on them. It has a good
wholesome air: and the soil yields abundance of Corn, The tempe^ of the ^y^.
which is very weighty. It brings forth also good Woad, The variety of
living creatures.

The ancient Government.


which is very gainefull to the inhabitants: and it has many flourishing
Meddowes, but no Wine. Here are variety of living creatures, and especially
excellent horses. The Princes of Iuliacum are thought to be descend from
Euslathius brother to Godfrey Bilioneus. But the Country of Iuliacum, was
heretofore a County, and the Emperor Ludovicke, made it a Marquiship in the
year 1329, and 30 years afterward the Emperor Charles the fourth, made it a
Dukedom. But William the fourth was the Marquess and Duke thereof. His son
William succeeded after him in the Dukedom of Iuliacum and Gelria: he dying
without issue, left Raynold his brother to succeed him. And he dying without
an heir, his wife married his kinsman Adolphus of Bergen, who was created Duke
of Iuliacum, and Bergen. They dying without issue, William was made Duke of
Iuliacum and Bergen, and had a son named Gerard, who succeeded his father:
William was son to Gerald, who married his only daughter to the only son
of John Duke of Cleveland: and so the three Dukedomes of Bergen, Iuliacum, and
Cleveland, were made one Country. But this John had a son named William, who
joined the fourth Dukedom, namely of Gelria, to the three Dukedomes of
Cleveland, Iuliacum, and Bergen; but in the year 1543, he was conquered and
subdued by Charles the fifth, and spoiled of his Country, and afterward upon
new conditions he received it again, with all Gelria, by marrying the
daughter of Ferdinand King of the Romans. The chief City which names the
Dukedom is Iuliacum commonly called Gulich, The Cities and Towns.
which Antoninus mentions in his Itinerary; it is situated near the River
Rura. The other Towns besides Iuliacum are Marcodurum, commonly called Duren,
a Town famous for holding out against that fiery seige, which Charles the
fifth laid against it. The Monastery of Eyphalia is a pleasant town: lying in
a vale between two Mountains, not far from the fountains of the River
Ervatis: also Euskirchia, Birchemum, commonly called Caster from the
magnificent Castle wherewith it is fortified; also Grevenbrocck, Sladbach,
Dalen, and Wassenberch. It has many Castles belonging to Noble families as
Palant, Meroden, Rensschenberg, Nesselroden, and Wachtendoncke. There is also
the Baronie of Wickraden having a strong Castle, which was sometime the seat
of the Quadians. In this tract the City Aquisgranum is situated, which
Ptolemie calls Vetera, in which the thirtieth Legion was billited.
Lhuithprandus calls it the Palatine Granum, and Rheginus Thermas Grani, and
Aquis Palatium. And the writers of those times do often call Aquae Aken, the
Germans call it Ach, and the French, Aix. It is a fair City and has an
wholesome air, and a pleasant soil, although the buildings are not so
beautiful as they have been formerly. It has many hot bathes both within the
walls, and without, which are sovereign to cure many diseases. This City is
famous, in regard Charles the great made his residence here, who both dyed and
was buried here. These Countries have besides the Rhene the River Rura, or Rora
which near a little Town of the Vbians, called Roeroort, which signifies the
end of Rora, is mingled with the Rhene, where we may see a great difference
between the two confluent Rivers, the one whereof is green, the other white.
Moreover Rora has many winding turnings, and yet it runs with so violent a
stream, that sometimes it breaks into the Meddowes, so that in a short time
it will overflow three or four Acres of ground, and sometimes it fills the
ground full of shelles: there are also Nersa, Lupia, Angria, Duselium, Erfatt,
Nirsi, Vornium and others. It has also woods, one of which is that which
Tacitus calls Saltus Teutoburgensis, which is a very large Wood near to
Duisburg, in which there are an innumerable sort of wild beasts. It has many
clear Rivulets. The Mountains are steep and clothed every where with high
trees. But enough of these things.

THE COVNTIE OF WALDECK.
Iodocus Moers of Corbach, who first described and set forth this Table, does
reckon two degrees of Nobles under the Earl of Waldeck, one free who always
resideth in the County, the other holding of the County; therefore seeing I
have nothing else to insert, I will here reckon up these orders, and what
houses are contained in this Table.

The stock of the free Nobility within the County, are Virmundt, Meissenburg,
Gogreben, Zertzen, Tolmerichausen, Dalwig, Eppe, Rodehausen, Reen, Sconstat,
Hertzinghausen, Twist, Hanxtelden, Greismar, Roman, Dorfelt.

The stock of those that hold of the County, as well without as within the
County: are Witstein, Reiteel, Spiegal, Calenberg, Westfal, Canstein, Malspurg,
Lebenstein, Mengersen, Mescheden, Beinenburg, Papenheim, Wulfft, Volckenbergb,
Vrf.

THE COVNTIE OF VVALDECK.
WALDEK Commit.
map

The County whence so called.
I Return to Mercator in whom the County of Waldeck follows, commonly called
De Grafschaft Waldeche. It is so called from the City Waldeck: and it is a
great part of Hassia. The Situation
It has on the East Hassia: on the North the Bishopric of Paderborne: on the
West the Dioecese of Colen. The length and breadth of this Country is six
miles. It has a fertile soil, The fruitfulness of the soil.
fair spreading Hills, and pleasant Rives. It brings forth great store of
Corn and Wine: it produces diverse kinds of mettalls, as Gold, Silver,
Brass, Iron, Lead: Quicksilver, Alum, and Salt, which are all dug forth of
the bowels of the Earth, near the City Wildunga, and the Castle Eisenburg.
There are also Coalestones dug forth, as in the Bishopric of Leden: which
the Germans call Stercolen, which they burn in steed of coals. It produces
diverse kinds of living creatures, and great store of wild beasts which the
inhabitants do often hunt. The variety of living creatures.
The County of Waldeck is originally derived from Widichindus Earl of
Snalenburg, whom Charles the Great made governor of Paderborne, which right
one Widichindus Earl of Waldeck being to go with Frederick Barbarossa into
Asia, did pass over to the College, in consideration of three hundred Marks
of silver paid unto him. The anci^nt Government.
Neither is there any continewed catalogue of the former Earls. Therefore we
must reckon from Henry Ferreus, who first added Corbachia to the Earldom.
Henry Ferreus, who built the castle of Laudoria, did bring Corbachia under his
obedience in the year 1366, on the 11 day of March. This Henry in the year 1400
slew Frederick Duke of Brunswicke, being chosen Emperor, near to Frissaria,
his wife was Elizabeth of Bergen. Welrad yields himself into the protection
of the Bishop of Moguntum. Philip the second was his son, whose wife was Anne
the daughter of John Duke of Cleveland. Wolradus Pius the second was a learned
man: and Praesident of the College of Ratisbone, in the year 1556, he dyed in
the year 1478. Josias was borne in the year 1578 and dyed in the year 1558.
Christian and Wolrad were the sons of the Earl Josias. But as concerning the
Imperial offices, this County is the chief, among the four, namely
Waldecke, H^^^, Fulchen, Arusperg, and Rabnaw. The chief City is Walde^^a,
commonly called Waldeck, which names the Country, having a Castle which the
River Fidera waters. There are also the Towns Ast^^chausa, and Dudinschausa:
and the City Landavia with a Castle adjoining threunto: also the City
Mengerhusa with a Castle, where the Earls keep their residence, being two
miles distant from Wadecia: Rodenum is an ancient City with a Castle, in the
Territories whereof there is good hunting. The Castle of Wetterberg has a
pleasant seat and prospect, being situated between the Rivers Tw^sta and
Ahra: there is also the City Wildunga: near to which there are Metal Mines,
from whence great store of gold, Brass, and Iron is daily dug forth. Here
are also certain fountains, unto which the sick persons did heretofore come
out of diverse Countries. And here the best drink is brewed: There are also the
Towns of Friage^, Saxenhus^n, Saxenberga, and Furstenberga: also the Castle of
Isenburg, near unto which there are Mines of Gold and Iron, as near W^^lunga:
^^lhusia a well seated Castle, and divided from the City by a River
Corba^hia, is a fortified City: Albertus Magnus makes mention of gold Mines
which were found near unto it, and he affirms that there is less waste of
that gold in refining and purifying of it, than of that in Bohemia or any
other. Neither are the veins thereof yet altogether exhausted, for not far
from Corba^^^a, there is gold found among the sands. Newburg is a Town with a
Castle. There are also the Castle Ither, and the Monastery Werba. This Country
is watered with many Rivers, the chief whereof is Edera, which may compare
with Tagus of Spain, Hebrus, of Thrace, and Pactolus of Asia; and it has
golden sands, being very full of fish, and it cutteth through the middle of the
Province of Waldecke, and it flows out of the Mountains of Nassaw, through
the County of Witgenstein to Francoburg, and waters the Castle of Waldecke,
which is built on an high rock; standing in a low valley, environed on every
side with Mountains, and so gliding by Frisla^a, a Town of Hassia, and having
received the River Sualma, it discharges it self into Fulda, a little above
Cassella, and afterward into Visurgis. The other River are Dimila, Twista,
Vrba, Abra and Ither. There are also diverse Mountains, as Grunebeckerbeg,
Winterberg, and Den Astenberg, and others which are described in Mercators
Table. There are also many woods in this tract, as Aldewaldt, W^terholt,
Geppenhage, Plat. I omit the rest which are every where dispersed through this
County. And so much concerning the County of Waldecke, I pass to the
Palatinate of Rhene.

THE PALATINATE OF RHENE.
The County w^en^^ ^o called
AFter Waldecia there follows in my method the Palatinate of Rhene, commonly
called die Pfaltz. Some suppose that this Noble part of Germany was so called
from the Palace of Rhene; some would have it so named from Charles the Great,
and others from the Palace of Trevers. Beatus Rhenanus endeavors to prove
out of Ammianus Marcellinus; that the Palatinate was so denominated from the
Country Palas. For Ammianus writes in this manner. A Bridge being built near
M^guntiacum, the legions passed over the Rhene, and pitched their Tents in the
Country of Capellatium, which was so called from Palas. And in another place*
When they came to the Country which is called Cappellatium o^ Palas, they
pitched their Tents there, where the bounde^ stone does distinguish the
confines of the Romans and Burgundians. Moreover Rhenanus adds: Here we may
observe that the Prince Palatine was not so called from the Palace of Caesar,
or from that little a difice or building which is near the Rhene, but that he
receives that appellation from the Country. But seeing there are many Count
Palatines of other places mentioned in Histories, some do reject this opinion
concerning the Etymology of a Palatine. But most do think that the title of
Count Palatine is derived from a Palace; which was and is a title of great
dignity in the Roman Empire. So that those who did serve the Prince in the
County of the Palace were called Palatines. The Country has on the West the
Dukedom of Zwe^bruck, (...)
on the East Franconia, and the Dukedom of ^^rtemberg* on the North it is
bounded partly with the River Moenus, and partly with the Wood, which they call
Ottenia: on the South it has A^s^tia. All this tract is not interior to any
part of Germany, both for pleas^^^nesse, fruitfulness, and plenty of all
things. The Mountains forth* most part do bear Vi^^s, which do yield most
excellent Wine* which other Countries do^ fetch from thence: and these
Mountain on the ^^rthside are full o^ Chestnuts. The fields do yeel^ abundance
of (...) as Wheat, Pul^e, and Barley. There are also many (...) Gardens, and
Orchards, which are planted with all kind (...) which bea^e great store of
apples.

Th^^e a^^ excellent Vines between Wormacia* Heyd^^berg Neo^^diu^* (...), and
Oppenhe^mum* and especially at P^ (...) may compare for goodness with the
S^^^an, (...) Vines. There are also Woods and Mountains (...) b^^r^s
especially Hearts. And also the inhabitants (...) THE PALATINATE OF RHENE.
PALATINATUS Rheni
map up many Goats and Kiddes in these woods, in regard that they delight more
in woody Forests than in Meddowes. For Caprae or Goats are so called a
Carpendo, that is, from cropping of trees, and therefore it was wont to be a
clause of exception in letting of ground, that no Farmer should keep Goats in
his ground. Near Heydelburg there is great storne of Hearnes, which breed
there in the Woods: there is also a kind of water Foul, which lives in the
water, and yet cannot endure any rain or tempests, which she avoydeth by
flying high in the air, according to that of Virgill: Atque altam supra volat
Ardea nubem,
And the long-wing'd Herne does fly
Above the clouds that are so hie.


It is called also Ardea, quo ardua suo volatu petat, that is, because it
flies high. She builds her nest in the highest trees, and does naturally
hate the Hawke, as likewise the Hawke seeks continually her destruction. But
when they fight in the air, they both strive which should get uppermost; if
the Hawke be above her, he comes down upon her with great violence, and kills
her. But to the matter. There were always Praefects of the Palace, especially
in the Emperors Court, which the Frenchmen did heretofore call the Majors, of
the house or Palace. But at what time the County Palatine of Rhene was
instituted, and where the Palatines of Rhene did keep their residence four
hundred or five hundred years ago, I cannot determine, seeing there are
diverse different conjectures. Some say the first Palatines, were only Noble
men until the time of Otto the third, at what time they were made Princes
Electors: for they had more dignity. The first Elector Palatine was Henry, who
with the other Electors in the year 1003 did choose the Emperor Henry. But
Munster says that he does not find it mentioned in any writings, either where
he kept his Court, or what Country he governed, or what people were subject
unto him; but some do suppose, but without any certain ground, that the
Princes Palatine did heretofore keep their residence at Worma^^^, and had
great power in that City. It is manifest, that Conradus Duke of Fre^^^^^ in
the year 742 did reside at Worms, but not the Prince Palatine. This was the
seat heretofore of the Intuergians, the Nemetians, and the Vangionians, as
some do suppose. The I^trergians were a people of Germany, which Pencerus
does place in the Palatinate near to Heydelberg, which Country was also called
Capellatium and (...) as we said before. Those whom Ptolomie and others call
the Nemetian^, were a people in Germany near the Rhene, confining on the
Met^nsians, Ar^^n^^mentians, and Wormacensians; Rhenanus calls it now the
Episcopal City of Sp^res, and ^^thicus calls it Augusta Nemetum. Also
those whom Ptolomie calls V^ngiones, are a people of Germany, near the
Rhene: Rhenanus and Lichtenavius do call them Wormbser-B^s^^^umbs. But P^ on
the contrary affirms that the Vangionians are those of Sp^res, and the
Nemetians those of Worms; and Irenicus adds this reason, namely because
Ptolemie, who in description of Rhene, did usually proceed from the South
Northward, does first mention the Vangians, and afterward the Numetians. But
Sig. Gemblacensis, who writ about five hundred years ago, calls Worms the
City of the Vangionians. Also John Herald does gather, out of an inscription,
that the City Worms, was heretofore called the Watch Tower of the
Vangionians. There are 48 Cities in the Palatinate, the chief whereof is
Heidelberg, where the Prince Palatine keeps his residence. It was so called
either from the people, whom the Germans call Heyden: or from the
Mir^le-tree, which they call Heydelbeer, and hereupon the most learned
Melissus does call this City Myrtilletum. T^a^ which Pyramius calls
Durlacum, others more rightly do call Durlach. John Herald does call it
Capellatium, others do call Cap^llatium the Palatinate, as we said before.
Munster calls it Bergstras, which stands in the way from Frinckford to
Heydelburg. Some do suppose that the City which Ptolemie calls Beudoris, was
scared here, but this is but conjecturall. For Ptolemie placed Beudoris; in the
51 degres of Latitude; when as Heidelberg, is in the 49 degree, and 35 minutes
of Latitude. Some suppose that it should be read and written Edelberg, which
signifies the noble Mountain: and others Eidleberg, which signifies the near
Mountain. It is situate by the River Nicrus or N^icarus, in the entrance of
the Mountains, it has been a famous University for learning and Arts from
the year 1356, being then instituted by Rupert the elder, Prince Palatine, who
sent for one Marsilus from Paris to be governor thereof. And from that time it
was well replenished with learned men, and students. The most famous Doctors
were Rodolphus Agricola, John Dalburgius, John Virdungus, William Xilander,
Thomas Erastus, Zachary Vrsin, and many others. Moreover, the whole Palatinate
is divided into four Praefectureships, as Heydlebergensian, the Alzaeens^^^
the Neostadiensian, and the Mosbachensian, which are so called from the Cities
of Hedelberg, Alzea Neostadium* and Mosbacum. There is also Bretta, which is a
small Town near the River Salza, in which Philip Melanchton was borne, who
writ much concerning the liberal Arts: also Ladeburg, so called from the
Roman Tents, half of which was pawned to Duke Rupert the elder, the other
part came to the Bishop of Worms. Sifrid of Stralnberg sold unto the aforesaid
Prince in the year 13^7, the Town Schriess^n, and the Castle of Stralnberg.
And in the year 1344, the Town W^inheim, was given to the Prince by awardment
of Arbitrators, which heretofore the Bishop o^ Moguntinum did possess. There
are also the Towns Cauba, G^l^usen, Sintzon, Luden by the River Tuberus,
Oppenheim Caesar^a ^^tra, Inge^heim, Lowenstein: and in Brureinia there is
Bruxells and others, as may be seen in the Table, and also many Castles and
Villages. The chief Rivers are Rhene and Neccarus. The latter does water and
cut through the middle of the Palatinate, and does discharge it self into the
Rhene, near Ladeburg; the ancients did call it Nicer, it has great store of
Mullets, which are commonly called Barbells. Also there continually comes
down this River great pieces of timber, from the wood Otto, which the River
Necarus brings into the Rhene. The lesser Rivers, are Tuberus, Lutherus,
Iaxtus, and others. The Country is both Mountainous and field ground. It has
high Mountains, which do bear excellent Vines, of which the Rhenish Wine is
made. And there are Woods which yield stoare of game for hunting. The chiefest
whereof is the Wood Otto, which is a part of the Hercynian Wood: the breadth
thereof is from the River Necarus even to Manus, and the length from the
Mountainous way called Bergstras, even to the River Tuberus. But so much
hitherto. There were many Churches, in the Palatinate, and many Monasteries; as
the Monastery of Lorsch, which was built by Charles the Great, or as some
suppose by Pepin. Concerning the Library, thereof Munster writes thus: There
is not a place in all Germany, where there is a more ancient Library than in
this Monastery. I saw there a Manuscript written with Virgills own hand: and
in it Ammianus Marcellinus his last book was found, which is now published,
being written before in great capital letters. John Dalberg Bishop of Worms a
learned man, did take the best books from thence, and put them in the Library
at L^den^u^^. There are four Electors in Germany; the Palatine of Rhene, the
Arch^ishops of Mentz, of Triers, and Colen. The free Cities are Men^z, Colen,
T^^r, and Gelenhausen. The Princes and Lords are the Count Palatine: Count
Nassaw: and Beilslaine: H. Reiffersche^de, and Rheineck: T^utscb Ordens Hern in
Coblentz: the Abbey of S. Maximinus near Triers, the Provost Seltz H. Nider
Eisenburg. But so much hitherto, I come to the Dukedom of Wirtemberg.

THE DVKEDOME OF VVIRTEMBERG.
THe Dukedom of Wirtemberg, The Country whence so called
commonly called Wurtembergerlant, was so called from the ancient Castle
Wirtemberg, which stands in the middle thereof, on a high hill not far from
the Imperial City Essing. This Country of Wirtemberg, does lie by the River
Nicrus. It has on the East the Swevians, Vindelicians, and Noricians: The
Situation
on the West the Palatinate, and the Marquiship of Baden; on the South it has
the Mountains of Arbon, and the Swevian Alps, for so the Inhabita^ants do
call the higher Mountains of this Country: on the North Franconia and not
far off the wood Otto. The Climate.
The air of this Country is very wholesome and temperate both in Winter and
Summer. It is as fruitful also as any part of Germany: both for Wheat,
Pulse, The fertility.
Wine, and other fruits. But yet all the Country is not of one soil, for that
part where the River Neccarus arises, and confineth on Hercynia, and that
which lies by the Swevian Alps, between Danubius and Nicrus, is rugged, and
unfit for tillage or planting of Vines. On the Alps it is a stony soil, but
very fruitful, and also by the black Wood, it has a sandy red colored
earth, which yields great store of Corn. But there where the River Neccarus
flows through the Champion ground, it is very fertile and fruitful: for it
has every where hills crowned with Vines, green Meddowes, fruitful fields,
and great store of Wine, Corn, and Apples. This Dukedom also has Mines of
Silver, not far from Wiltberg, and it is said that the Town P^^lathium is
built on Mines of Brass: it has also Iron and Brass. There are diverse
colored stones found, which for the most part are enameld and streakt with
blew. So that it seems that Nature did endeavor to enrich this place with
precious stones. There are diverse kind^s of living C^eatures, and in the Woods
there are an inumerable sort to be seen. It was made a Dukedom in the year
1495, by the Emperor Maximilian, in a meeting or Parliament held at Worms,
and he made Eberhard Earl of Wirtemberg a Duke. Duke Eberhard the second
continued but two years in his Dukedom, but having melted his gold and silver
plate, he fled first to Vlma, and afterward to the Prince Palatine, and dyed
without is^ue. After that the Emperor Maximilian created Eberhard the Nephew
of Eberhard, Duke of Wirtemberg. But he was droven out of his Country in the
year 1519, by the Swedlanders. Christopher succeeded his father Vlricke: and
Ludovicke his son succeeded after Christopher. And Ludovicke was succeeded by
Frederick, the son of George Earl of Mount Vellicard. The Intcurgians were
formerly seated here, but Rhenanus called them the Vuithungians. This Dukedom
is as it were circular and round, The Cities
and does contain many Cities and Towns. The chief Cities are Tubinga and
Stutgardia. Tubinga is commonly called Tubingen, which is situate near the
River Neccarus, being a very neat City, having store of bread and Wine,
which is transported to Swethland; and it has a stone Bridge over the River
Neccarus. It has also a Castle, and a hill planted with Vines, a College of
C^nnons, and an University. In this City, besides John Stoffler, and others,
Leonard Fuchsius did profess Physic. And the most famous and learned Martin
Crusius, was the Rhetoric professor, in the same Academy. It was instituted
by Eberhard Earl of Wirtemberg, whom Maximilian, (as we said before) created a
Duke, in the year 1477. John Herold in his book of the German antiquities,
shows by an inscription engraven there, that Augustus had a Mansion house at
Tubinga. Which Peter Appianus in his book of ancient inscriptions does set
down thus.

MAX. IN
AV^. EM. GER. MAX.
DA^. MAX. ARM.
MAX. TRIB. P.
COS. ET.
But Heroldus sets down the whole inscription, as the Emperor was usually
enstiled at Rome. Imp. Caes. Divi. L. Sept. Sever. Pert. Aug. Parth. Tarah.
Adiab. F. M. Aurel. Antonin. Aug. Sarmat. Max. Ger. Max. Dac. Max. Armen. Max.
Britan. Max. Arab. Max. Aleman. Max. Parth. Max. P. E. Pont. Max. Trib. Pote
vi. Cos. Procos. Perpet. Leg. 8. Ant. Aug. P. E. Ejus. Number. Devot. Prin. Opt.
Fortis.

Stutgardia, which is the Metropolis, and Dukes seat, is situate near the
River Neccarus. The County of Stutgard was named from this City: which was
built by the Vandalls, and afterward reedified by the Elector John Marquess of
Brandenburg, and Otto the third. But in the year 1290, Albert the fourth,
Marquess of Brandenburg, and Prince of Anholt, the son of Otto the fourth,
gave it as a Dowry with his Daughter Beatrice, who married Henry Leon
Wandalus. This City is environed with a fruitful soil. And great store of
Wine is made every year in this Town. John Rheulius was borne here, a
learned man, skillful in the Law, a great Linguist, and one that taught Hebrew.
There is also Reutlinga, being seated near the River Neccarus which was made a
City in the year 1240 by the Emperor Frederick, the second. This City is
famous for paper Mills. The other Towns are very pleasant, and most of them
fortified with strong Castells, as namely Vrachum, by the River Amerus, also
Nirtingum, Kircheda, Heilbronna, Lauffena, Pinigtheim. The Castle of Asperga,
Greininga, Marbachum, Canstadium, Waiblinga, Schorendorffum, Geppinga, Fiesen,
formerly called Aludtacum, Heidenheim, and Wilipergium, where the most diligent
Cosmographer Daniel Cellarius was borne, being situate near the River Nagolta;
also the Towns Herrenberg, Rotenberg, and Hechingum, Belingum, and diverse
others that you may behold in the Table THE COVNTIE OF WIRTEMBERG.
WIRTENBERG
map or Map. This Dukedom is a chief part of the Imperial circle of
Swethland, which because George G^^d^erus, and David Selixl^s have described it
alone more accurately than the rest, I will here set down the whole circle of
Swethland. The circle of Swethland does contain three orders, the first is the
Clergy, the second the Princes: the third the free Cities. In the first order
are the Bishops of Chur, ^^s^entz, and Auspurg. The Abbots of Kemp^e^, of
Reich^^new, of S. Gal. in Helve^ia, of Salm^swerler, of W^^garten, of
We^ss^new, of S. Blasius, S. Peter, of Maul^^r^, of Ch^ss^a^s^^, Stainam Rh^^n,
Kreutzlingen, Petershusen, which lies by the Rhene Northward, also the Bishop
of E^^sideln, Ps^ssers, Ps^ss^^on, of S. Joan in Thurthal, of Schussenriedi, of
So^ken^^^^g, of Ochsenhausen, of Cunigsbron, of Marchial, of ^l^^ingen* of
Ys^^e, of Munchrod, of Aurspurg, of Y^see, of Gengenbach, of S^h^^t^rn, of
Disi^sen. The Abbatesses of Lind^w, of Rottemnu^ster, of B^^chaw, of
Guttenzell, of Beund, of Heppach, of Teuts^h, of and Burgund. In the second
order which is of the Princes, there is the Duke of Wirtemberg, the Marquess
of Baden. The Earls of Helfenstein, Wersenstag, Orm^, Lauffen, Mountfort,
Furstenberg, and the Marquess of Eberstain. Also the Earls of Tollern, Bultz,
Laebenstain, Tubingen, Kirchberg, Tengen alas Dongen, Gundelfingen. The Lords
of Stu^gart, of Tussen, of Waldeburg, of Sonneburg, of Val^kenstain, of
Kuns^^^, of Kuns^^zerperg: also the Barons of G^^oltz^k, and Ober Helwe^. In
the third rank there are the Cities of Ausburg, of Kauff^^ur^, of Vl^^, of
Memmingen, Kempton, of Bibrach, of Leukirch, of Ys^^, of Wangen, of Lindow, of
Ravenspurg, also ^ucborn, Vberliagen, ^z, Psullendorff, S. Gal, Schafhausen,
Reutlingen, Estingen G^, Weil, Heilbron, Wimpfu. Hal in Schawben, D^nckelspuel,
bopsingen, Ge^n, Alen, Nordlingen, Don^werd, Buchaw, Offenburg, Gengenbac^,
Z^^nt Ham^sparch, Rotwe^l. I return to the Dukedom. This Country is watered
with many pleasant Lakes, and Rivers very full of fish, the chief whereof is
the River Brentius, which is never frozen in the coldest and hardest time of
all winter. The River Ni^^r runs through the middle of it, and having
received many Rivers, of which the chief are Nagolta, Entius, Remisus,
^o^herus, Lagusta, Fritz^, but Brentius mingleth it self with Dan^bius. The
Alpine Mountains are in this Dukedom, which are called Alps abal^ from their
whiteness, for the white stones thereof are seen a fair off, and they have
many several names, as Schera, Albuchus, Han^^^n^phus, and Hertf^ld^s. Also
part of the Wood Her^nia and M^tiana, does spread into this Country, which have
several names, as the Wood A^^u^hius, the Wood Stubenthal, the black Wood
commonly called Schwartzwalt, the Wood Odenwelt, etc. The people of this
Dukedom, are valiant, courteous, constant and religious.

THE LOWER ALSATIA.
ALsatia commonly called Elsasz, The Country whence so called.
was so called as some suppose, as it were Edelsalz, that is, a Noble and
famous seat: others think it was so named from the River Illa by changing a
into i, as it were a seat by the River Illa; whence some do affirm that it
was called the Country of Illesass, and not Alsas. It is as fruitful a Country
as any that lies by the side of the Rhene; on the East it has Helvetia, which
parts it from Rhene; on the West Lotharingia, where the Mountain Vosagus is
the bordering limit between Lotharingia and Germany* on the South it has
part of Helvetia and Burgundy* on the North it is boundred with the Dukedom of
Wiriemberg. It is nine German miles long, and from Rhene to the Mountains it
is three German miles broad, but toward Haganoa it grows broader, between
the Mountains. But this Country is so fruitful and there is such great plenty
of all things, especially of Wine and Corn, in this little tract of Land: that
it does not only serve the inhabitants, but other people also of Germany,
both far and near. Therefore James Wimphelingus in his Epitomy of Germany,
does call it the Store house and Nurse of Germany. For, excellent Wines are
continually brought out of this Country in Carts, and sometimes are convayd by
shipping into Helvetia, Swethland, Bavaria, Lotharingia, and the Low Countries,
and sometimes into England. In Sungoja there is great store of corn, and all
over the plain ground of Alsatia even to Argentina, there is every where great
store of corn, so that the inhabitants of the Mountains of Lotharingia, the
Burgundians, and a good part of Helvetia, are sustained by it. It has
Mountains which yield excell^nt good Wines, and in the plain ground, it has
Corn, and diverse kinds of fruit trees. It has also on the Mountains Woods
of Chestnuts; and Mines of Silver, Brass, and Lead, especially in the val^
Leberthal I^ has also fair pastures both upon the Mountains and valleys, as
appears by those excellent fat cheeses which are made in Munsterthall, so
that there are great store of Kine and cattle bred in this Country. And it has
in some parts many wild horses, also Leopards, Bears, Martines, and Hearts,
and innumerable other wild beasts. Alsatia was heretofore under the Dominion
of the Kings of France, as also a part of the Kingdom of Austria. Alsatia was
held to be the chiefest Dukedom, which H^ldericke King of France, did honor
with that title, and gave it to his Cosen Etico in the year ^84. After Etico
there succeeded his son Adelprechtus, who being slain with an arrow, left
two sons, Linfrid and Eberhard who were governors of Alsatia. Afterward
their family was expelled forth of Alsatia by Charles Martell, Palatine and
Master of the Court in the Kingdom of France. But in the time of Otto the
first, the Earls of Kyburg, who where allied by consanguinitie to the
Emperor, did govern Alsatia. Some say that they were made Landgraves of
Alsatia, others say that Otto the third did divide it into Landgraveships, and
that the higher Landgraveship which contains the Town Einsheim, and the
adjacent Towns did fall to the Earls of Habsburg. The other to the Earls of
Ottingen to whom it descended from Henry Landgrave of Lower Alsatia, who dying
without issue, did sell it to the Bishop of Argentine. But this small Country
is so fruitful and pleasant, that it has 46 Cities and Towns in it, which
are walled about. Fifty Castles which are situated on Mountains and Plains,
and an innumerable sort of Villages. Alsatia is two fold, the Lower which is
described in this present Chart, and the higher which is painted forth in the
Table following: the Tribocians did possess them both. The chief City is
called by modern writers, Argentina. Sextus Aurelius and Ptolomie do call it
Argentoratum, Reginus names it Strasburg, who writ five hundred years before
and more; Rob. Constantinus supposes it to be the same with that which
Aurelius Victor, and Diac^nus, do call Angentaria. It is commonly called
Strasburg from the number and capacity of the streets. This City is situated
in a fertile soil, and has great store of Wine and Corn. And Munster writes
that there are in this City above an hundred Gardiners, who make a great
gain out of Turnips, Onions, Radishes, Cabigges and the like. An arm of the
River Rhene and three other Rivers do run through this City, and the
several Channells do glide through the streets as at Venice. It is well
governed, and it has a famous school, and a Church. On the West there are the
Tabernae celebrated by Antoninus: Simler calls them Zaborn: Frodoard names
it Zabreni, Ortelius calls them tres Tabernae, Concerning which Antoninus
says thus: -- Riguasque perenni
Font Tabernas --


But the Tabernae were a Fortress of the Romans, placed there to restrain
the incuisions and inroades of the Almaines, into France, where now the Bishop
of Argentoratum has a Palace. This Fortress was razed by the Alemanes, but
Ammianus writes that Julius Caesar did reedifie it. This place abounds with
Wine, Corn, and al other things necessary for man's use. Not far from the
Tabernae, there is the Town Maursmunster, with a monastery adjoining to it:
there is also another Monastery a little distant from Brocomagum, which is
called Stephani Campus, or Stephens field, and corruptly Stetchfeldt. Hence
Northward is Hagenoa. This City was walled about in the year 1164, by
Frederick Barbarossa. The soil round about the walls is sandy, but the fields
that lie somewhat farther from the City are very fertile and fruitful. The
next is Wissenburgum, commonly called Weissenburg, as it were the white
Castle, being a very fair town, at the foot THE LOWER ALSATIA.
ALSATIA INFERIOR
map of the Mountain Vogesus, being pleasantly seated, and environed on every
side with little hills, and on the West it has Woods, and diverse kinds of
trees: the soil is very fruitful, and the Town is fortified both by Nature
and Art. The River Lutra, whose Fountains do rise in the Mountains somewhat
more than seven Miles from the Town, does run through the middle of it, and
so having glided by the walls of the Town, it runs in a narrow Channel,
and with a hasty stream two miles, and so discharges it self into the
Rhene. It is of so great antiquity, that the original cannot be found out.
There is also the Town Hasla near the River Bruschus: which Dagobert King of
France, gave unto Florentius a Scot, with the adjacent fields, in which place
Florentius built a Monastery. There are many Rivers, which water this Country,
besides Rhene, and many other Rivulets as Kimsgus, Illa, Brusschus, Sorn,
Matter, and Lauter. But the chief River of Alsatia is Illa, which runs
through all Alsatia, which rises in Sungovia, above the Town Altkirck, and so
flowing by the Towns, Mulnhausen, Einsheim, Colmar, Selestadium, and
Benfelden; it runs strait forward to Argentina, where it enters into the
Rhene, having first received all the Rivulets which do flow out of the
Mountain Vosagus, and it is very full of Salmons and other fish.

The Country is partly Mountainous, and partly plain, and it is every where
adorned with Woods and Forests, some of which are full of Chestnuts, Almonds,
and Nutts. The Country people lives very miserably; for they spend their
provision every year, and do keep nothing for the future time, so that in
times of war, or when unseasonable weather does kill the fruits of the
earth, they live very penuriously. Yet the poor are releeved out of public
granaries.

This Country has not many native inhabitants, for the greatest part consists
of strangers, as Swethlanders, Bavarians, Burgundians, Sabaudians and
Lotharingians, who having once entered into a Country, do not soon remove from
thence. The Swethlanders do chiefly reside in it. Moreover the fifth circle
of the Empire is that of the Rhene. It consists of three orders, first the
Clergy, secondly the Princes, and thirdly the free Cities. In the first there
are the Bishop of Worms, of Spier* Straesburg, Basel, and Besancon; in the
County of Burgundy, in the Province of Wallis, whose Metropolis is Selton;
there are the Bishops of Geneve, Losanna, Metz, Toul, and Verdun. The Abbots of
Hiersfe^d, Morbach, S. Gregoris Munster. In the second order are Princes,
Earls, and secular Lords, as the Dukes of Lotharingia, and Saveye, the Count
of Spanhein: the Marquess of Baden, the Duke of Sweibrucke, the Count of
Veldentz, the Landgrave of Hessen, the Prince of Calim, the Count of Nassaw in
Sarbrucke, the Earls of Rhene; the Lords of Rapoitzkirchen, near Rapoltstain,
the Earls of Bitsch, Salm, Hanaw, Lichtenberg, Lemingen, and Falkenstain, the
Lords of Morspurg, and Befort, of Rapolslain, of Hoen, Rechpurg, Blakenberg,
and Blammont in Lotharingia: the Earls of We^baden, and I^stain, and
Cuningstaine, the Lord Van Eppenstam: the Earls of Isenburg in higher Alsatia,
of Solms, of Nassaw in Weilburg, of Sienvigen, of Havare, the Lord of
Muntzinburg: the Earls of Westenburg, of Witgenstam, of Waldeck, of Flesse.
The third order is of the free Cities, which are Mulhusen in Sundtgow of
higher Alfatia, also Basel, Colmar, Kaisersperg, Turckbam, Saint Gregoris
Munster, Ober Ebenhaim, Straesburg, Rosenhaim, Schletstat, Hagenaw,
Weissenburg, Landow, Spier, Wermes, Francfort, Fridberg in Wederaw, Wetzlar,
Metz, Toul, Vedtn, Kausmans Sarbruck, the Castle Besano, Fridberg, and the
Castle Gleichhausen.

THE LANTGRAVIATE of the higher ALSATIA, with SVNTGOVIA and GRISGOIA.
IN this Table or Chart, Alsatia the higher with Suntgovia and Brisgoia are
delineated. The Country
The higher Alsatia commonly called Ober Elsaz is first placed, the Metropolis
whereof is Einshemum. The Towns
The chief Senate is held there, whither they appeal from the Lower Courts of
Suntgoia, Brisgoia, and the four Towns near the Rhene a little above Basil,
which are subject to the Archduke of Austria. It came in the year 1000, to
belong to the Territories of Albert Earl of Harspurg, Father of King
Rudolphus. Rubeacum or Ruffatum commonly called Ruffach, is an ancient Town
in Alsatia, which was built by the Romans, and was so named from a Rivulet,
which in regard of her red water was called Rotbatch, now the inhabitants call
it Ombach, which rises in a Valley not far from Lutsmach, and sliding
through the fields and Vineyards, with a red colored Channel, does serve the
City for many uses. This City had at first many magnificent buildings, and a
double Suburbs, the Roman Nobility did a long time keep their residence
here, in regard of the fruitfulness thereof, and plenty of all things
necessary for man's use: here were excellent laws made against thieves, which
were so severely executed, that it is a Proverb in Germany: Der alt Galghen zu
Rufach, hatt gut Eichen holtz: that is, The old Gibbet of Rubeacum was made of
strong Oak Wood. Colmar was built out of the ruins of Argentuaria, it is a
neat Imperial City situated on a fertile Plain, being an hours journey
distant from the Mountains; it stands in the middle of Alsatia, and it is
watered with many Rivers, especially these, Louche, Duro, Fetchto, Illa, and
others of less note, some whereof do run by the field, some of which do
run by the houses, and do fertilize the soil and make it fruitful.
Selestadium is walled about as Colmar, in the year of Christ 1216, or about
that time, in the reign of Frederick the second. But before that, namely
about the year 1404, in the reign of Henry the fourth, Hildegard Duchess of
Suevia, built a Temple there according to the figure and form of the Temple of
Jerusalem, which not long after her son Otto Bishop of Argentine, did
dedicate to the blessed Virgin, and made it a Monastery, which in short time
grew so rich, that of a Monastery it became a Provostship, concerning which see
Rhenanus who was borne at Selestade. Selestadium is firmly situated, having on
the one side namely toward the Rhene unpassable Moors: and on the other side
toward the West, even to the Mountains THE HIGHER ALSATIA.
ALSATIA SUPERIOR
map of Lotharingia, it has a fruitful soil, there are Vines and Chestnuts
growing on these Mountains; and great store of Corn is reaped on the plain.
Gebwiler is a Town situated in the jaws of the Mountains, it is thought that
it was founded in the year 1124. It has abundance of Vines round about it,
and is subject to the Abbot of Murbacum, who keeps his residence there. There
is also another Town called Watveil situated near the Mountains, which is
governed by the aforesaid Abbot. Mercator reckons these Countries in higher
Alsatia, of Horburg, which is a pleasant Country belonging to the Earl of
Wirtemberg, under whose Dominion is the Town Reychenwyer, where excellent
Wines are made: there is also the County of Egisheim, and de Sultz: the
Lordships of Bolwiller, of Landsperg, of Hohen, of Hatstat, of Hobenack, of
Rap^stain, under whose dominion are Rapoltzwil, Gemer, the Town and Castle of
Cellenberg. And the Imperial Cities, of the fifth circle. Also Munster, in the
S. Gregorin Vale, called Gregoris Munster, also Durkheim, Colmar, Milhausen,
famous for good Wine, and Keisersperg. Sungovia or Sunggoja, commonly called
Sungow, on the North cleaves to Alsatia: on the East it has the Rhene, on the
West the borders of France: on the South it confineth on Helvetia. It has
Vines in many places, and every where great store of Corn, which is
transported into Neighboring Countries, namely into Helvetia, the black Wood,
Lotharingia, and sometimes into more remote Countries. Sungoja does contain
the County of Pfirten, the last Earl whereof Vlrick, dyed at Basil in the
year of Christ 1024; leaving two Daughters behind him, the one whereof called
Ioane, Albert Duke of Austria married, and gave to Vrsula his wives sister, for
her Portion eight thousand marks of silver. The Lordships are Befort, and
Mospurg. These places also belong to the County, Altki^ch, Dattenri^t, Befort,
Rosenfels, Maszmunster, Thanu, and Senheim: which now the Princes of Austria
have divided into Praefectureships. In Befort there is a Collegiate Church
which the Earls of Pfirt founded, together with the Nunnery Veldpachus, where
thirty Earls, and as many Countes^es have been interred. In Maszmunster there
is a famous Nunnery of Vestall Virgins, and Cannons, which was founded by Mason
Duke of Alemaine, from whom that Vale was called Vallis Masonis, otherwise
called Wast. Thannum is a neat town, and is joined to the County of Pfirt.
There is a Castle that hangs over the Town which is called Engelberg, and
near unto it is the Mountain called Rang, in which there grows excellent
good wine, which is called Rang-wine, well known at Basil. Here the River
Thuris glideth by out of the Mountains, and separateth Sungovia from Alsatia
Morsmunster, which is a Monastery in the County of Pfirt, being founded by
the Earls of Pfirt. The Church of Amarinus, and the Castle of Fridberg, are
one mile distant from Thannus, and are subject to the Abbot of Murbacum: not
far from thence the River Mosella rises. There is also Mulnhausen in Segovia
which is an imperial City, and it was under the protection of the Bishop of
Argentine; as also the Towns Colmar, and Kersersperg, in the year 1261, but a
little after Rudolph the Earl of Habsburg, when he he had took Colmar he got
the Town Mulnhausen, and razed the Castle thereof, and those that were in it
he took Prisoners. But Rudolphus was elected King of the Romans, and those
Towns returned again to the Roman Empire. The Townsmen do chiefly give
themselves to planting of Vines and sowing of Corn: so that there is very good
wine made here. The Town Otmarson has a Nunnery, which was built in Henry
the fourths time, by Rudolph Earl of Habspurg. His brother Wernher was Bishop
of Argentine, who dyed at Constantinople. On the West the County of Mount
Belegard joyneth to Sungoja. It has the famous City of Mont^s-Beligard, with
a fair Castle. Besides, this Country has many other Towns and Castles: as the
Town Grans and the Castle, the Town and Castle of Clarwang, the Town
Passewangum with a Castle, all which belong to the Duke of Wirtemberg: the
inhabitants do speak the Burgundian Language. The Town Bruntant is near to
the County of Mont Beligard, where the Bishop of Basil has a royal Palace.
And so much concerning Sungovia.

Brisgo^a remains, The Country whence so called.
which is to be unfolded and described in this Table: Brisgovja or Brisgoja,
is commonly called Brisgow, which signifies in the German Language a fair
Town. And truly this Country does deserve that title in regard of the
fertility and fruitfulness thereof, in which it is not inferior to Alsatia,
which we have even now described. But if we have recourse to ancient writers,
we shall find that this Country was so named from the Metropolis Brisacum, of
which we shall speak by and by. Brisgoja is ten miles long, and eleven broad:
for it begins at Nortnaw, The Situation
and runs out almost to Basil. The fruitfulness of the soil.
It is a fruitful Country both for tillage and Vines. And here is great store
and plenty of Corn and Wine, and of all things necessary for the sustenance of
man's life. The Archdukes of Austria, and the Marquesses of Baden, do jointly
govern this Country. The Metropolis of Brisgoja was heretofore Brisacum,
whence the Country is denominated, and Antonius mentions it in his Itinerarie
of the Mountain Brisacum, when as he makes mention of no other Cities beyond
the Rhene, but those Provincial Cities which are seated by the Rhene:
Luitprandus Ticinensis, who lived in the time of Otto the first, does make the
Mountain Brisacum to be in Alsatia, and shows that it was an Island of
Rhene. This City is situated on a round Mountain like a Castle, and it has
the Rhene on the West. It is a neat Town, well fortified and populous, but in
process of time it exceeded Friburg it self, for magnificence and riches.
This City increased presently, and grew famous in regard of the Mineral
Mines, which are near unto it. In Brisacum there is an ancient Castle, which
has long been ruinate, yet now at length it has been reedified. It has a
strong well fortified Tower, which Bertholdus Ziringensis the third built, as
appears by these following verses, graven on the stone walls: Hanc Dux
Bertholdus portam struxisse notatur
A quo pro fraud Burgundia gens posulatur,
The Duke Bertholdus builded up this gate,
Which the Burgundians did ruinate.


This City has but one fountain, over which there is a Conduit built, in
which there is a wheel, in which they go and draw up water a great depth* and
the Citizens do yearly pay for the drawing up of the water. For it has on
every side a great steep descent to the Rhene and the plain, from whence it
is very hard to draw up water into the Mountain. Half a mile beneath Friburg,
there is a ruinate Castle situated on a high Mountain, which is called
Zaringhen, from which the Dukes of Zaringa had their title. Friburg is a famous
Town in Brisgoja, and now the Metropolis thereof; it was built by Duke
Ferthold the fourth, the son of C^nradus the first, in the reign of the
Emperor Henry the fifth, being formerly but a Village. It is a City
pleasantly seated among the Mountains; being adorned with many magnificent
houses, Churches, and Monasteries. There was an University erected there in the
year 1459, wherein Vdalrick Zasius, a famour Lawyer did teach and read
publicly. It had heretofore a rich Vein of silver, a mile distant from the
City. There also is in Brisgoja Zering, (heretofore a Dukedom) the County
of Friburg, the Marquiship of He^^berg, and the Lordships of Badenwille,
Staussen, and Burcken.

THE LOWER SAXONY.
Saxony was so called from the Saxons. The Country whence so called.
Their original as also of other Nations, not only the Monks ignorant in
Antiquities, but modern judicious writers, have wrapped up in fabulous
inventions: some suppose that they were so called from Saxo the son of Negno,
and the brother of Vandalus; others a Saxca natura from their stony nature,
others from the remainder of the Macedonian Army, some from their skeines or
short swords, as appears by these verses in Engelhusins: Quippe brevis
gladius apud illos Saxa vocatur,
Vnde sibi Saxo nomen traxisse putatur.
A cuttell or a short-sword they Saxon call,
Whence the name of Saxon takes original.


But the learned C^pino does derive it from the Phrygians: Let every one take
which of these conjectures he pleases, for I do not purpose to refute their
opinions. But I embrace their opinion, who suppose that the Saxons did descend
from the Sacians, a people of Germany, and that they were so called as it were
Sacasones; that is, the sons of the Sacurians; and that coming out of
Scythia or Sarmatia, together with Getes, Sueuians, Dacians, and others, they
spread themselves by degrees over Europe, which opinion is probable, which
brings the Saxons out of Asia. For Strabo writes that these Sacians, as the
Cimmerians before, did make many invasions, and called part of Armenia after
their own name Saracena; and Ptolomie also places the Sassonians, the
Suevians, the Massagetians, and the Dasians, in that part of Scythia; and
Cisnerus observes, that these Nations did still keep the same vicinitie,
which was between them. Moreover albeit Saxony is the greatest Country in
all Germany, yet it is not now so large as it was heretofore. For ancient
Saxony was extended between the Rivers Albis and Rhene, the German Sea, and
the River Eydera, even to Hassia and the confines of Turingia, and Brunswick
was the Center of it: and so also Westphalia, Marchia Vetus, Misnia, Lusatia,
Mansfield, and many other Countries were called Saxony. Now it is not bounded
with such natural limits, as Rivers and Mountains, but with the confining
dominion of others Principalities. The air of this Country is dry, pure, and
wholesome, except the marshes do moysten it too much. Saxony has abundance
of all things, except Wine. It has great store of Barley and Wheat of which
they make very white Bread, and very brown drink. It has diverse kinds of
m^^talls, especially in the Mountain Melibocus, which reaches from the Catti
to the Saxones. There is found also in the same Mountain a black kind of
stone, which has much pitch and bras^e in it, and it shines with Veins of
Gold and Copresse. They dig out great store of this Oar, which they melt and
resine into metal. In this stone there are diverse lineaments and proportions
of living creatures, and especially of these that do live in the neighboring
Lake, as Eeles, Carpes, Frogs, and sometimes also cocks, who have strange
three double Combs. Also G^slaria has Mines of brass, gold, and silver, and
rich Fountains of salt, like those at Halla and Luneburg. And in other places
the Mountains do yield plenty of Marble. It is said that Otto the first found
Mines of silver, near Goslaria, which yielded him a great revennew. But the
Citizens abusing it, God suffered the pit to fall down, which killed an
hundred men that were working in it. And since that time, there was never found
any silver or gold, but black Lead. First they make a kind of shooemakers
Ink or blacking, and afterward they boil Lead and silver out of it. But they
report that the metal in G^slaria was thus found out. A certain Noble man
tied his horse, called Ramelus, to a bough of a tree, on the Mountain; who
beating and s^^iking the ground with his ^oofes that were ^hod with iron, did
at last beat and wear away the earth, so that the veins of black Lead did
appear; like the winged Pegasus, who as Poets feign, with a stroke of his
hoof, on the Mountain, did open the spring of Helicon on Parnassus. And as
the fountain was from thence named Hipp^^rene, that is, the horse-fountaine; so
the Saxons do call the mountain Ramelus, which does now yield great store of
Lead. The chief City of this Country is Halla, which is derived from a Greek
word. But Goropius would have it derived not from the Greek, but from the
great store of salt which comes from thence; as Halla in Suevia and in other
Cities. For as the River Halis in Armenia, (as Strabo says) was so named from
the Greek word, because it is salt. So Halla seated by the River Sala, a fair
River in Saxony, was so called from the great store of salt that came from
thence. Whose salt Fountains were first found out by the Wendians before
Christ's birth, whom we may ca^l Hermandurians; and when the neighboring
nations did perceive what benefit might arise by them, they began to labor
about them as if they had been gold Mines. Now the Marquess of Brandeburg,
resideth at Halla. There belongs also to Lower Saxony the Dukedomes of
Lauwenburg, Lun^burg, Brunswick, and the Dukedom of Meckelburg. In the Dukedom
of Lun^burg there is the famous City of Lun^burg, which was so called, from
the Idol of the Moon, which was heretofore set up upon the Mountain Calcis:
or else from the River gliding by it, which is now called Elmena, or di^
Almenow, as it were Elven Ow, from the eleven Rivers which do slow into it,
and heretofore it was called Luno, or Lunow, by Isis, as they feign, who
travailed this way to her kinsman Granbrivius. It is a City well fortified
with Trenches and Rampires, being almost foure-square: It has a rich Fountain
of salt. For salt is the chief commodity of these Cities, which they
transport by Land and Sea, into far remote Countries; yet the Merchants of
Hamburg do buy THE LOWER SAXONY.
SAXONIA INFERIO et Mekleburg
map up the most part of it, and do get much by it. It has six Churches for
confession: and also an Hospital for the sick. The Inhabitants of this City
are divided after the Roman manner, into Citizens, Patricians or Senators,
and Plebeians. It flourishes for Politic government, learning, justice,
peace, and concord between the Clergy, and the Governors of the
commonwealth, amongst whom the Patricians have the chiefest power. I pass by
the other Towns for brevitie sake, because I intend to speak something
concerning the Dukedom of Meckelburg.

The Dukedom of Meckelburg, was heretofore a part of a Province belonging to
the King of Vandalia, lying near unto the Baltic Sea, but now it is one of
the chief Dukedomes of Germany and a member of the Empire: it has on the
East Pomerania: on the West the River commonly called de Elve: on the South it
has the ancient Marca: on the North, the Balticke Sea. It is a very fruitful
Country, abounding with Wheat, Apples, Wood, and Fish. There are also diverse
sorts of living creatures, and great store of Oxen and Cattle, and wild
beasts. Moreover Aritbert being descended of the royal stock, and having
lived some while in Charles the Greats Court, married the Emperors sister, by
whom he had Billingus, a man powerful yet mild and merciful, whom the
Sarmatians and Vandalls, even from Vistula to Visurgis, and from Odera to
Holsatia did obey; he had his Palace at Meckelburg. But his two sons
Mizilaus and Mislevus degenerating from their fathers piety and goodness,
began to persecute the Christians. But concerning these and other Princes of
Meckelburg you may read Munster. The first inhabitants of this Country,
Authors do call Herulians or Obotritians, and by a general word Vandalians.
It is a Country well replenished with cities, towns, castles, and villages.
In this Dukedom there is the ancient city Surinum, which was built before
Lubecke, Sundius, and Wismaria. The figure thereof is fouresquare, and so as if
it were four cities, it has four names. The first is called Senerinus, the
second Neapolis, the third is named from the Cataract, the fourth from the
Marshes. The Village Fichela which stands by the Lake Suerinus, is but 5
miles distant from the Balticke Sea: the vicinitie whereof made them bestow
much labor in vain to make a ditch out of the Lake into the Balticke sea, as
in like manner there was an attempt made, to cut through the Peloponnesian
Isthmus. Rostochium commonly called Rostocke, and heretofore Lacinium, and
corruptly Rhodopholis and Laciburg, is a sea city: it was first a castle,
after, Godscall the son of Endo did change it into a city; and afterward it
was enlarged by Primislaus the second, the son of Nicolottus. It has now a
flourishing University, which the Princes of Meckelburg did erect and
constitute in the year 1415. The air here is wholesome, and there is great
plenty of provision for food, and very cheap. There is also Wismaria, which
some imagine was so called from Wismarus King of the Vandalls, in the
flourishing reign of Constantine the Great: some do affirm, that a Colonie
of the Goths was brought thither out of Visbina, the Metropolis of Gothland.
But Crantzius Antiquities, and Charters of the commonwealth, dated after the
year 1250, do show that it was built before the year 1240, out of the ruins
of the great ancient City Mecklenburg, which gave the name to the whole
Country, by Gunzelinus, Earl of Suerinus. But in a short time, this City
did wonderfully increase by the traffike and trading of other Nations, having a
convenient Haven on the Balticke shore, to receive ships of great burden,
where they may lie safely without letting fall any anchors: whence it is likely
that the City was named, from the safety and conveiance of the Haven. It is
compassed round about with small towns; who do bring plenty of provision
thither, and do furnish themselves again from thence: Moreover this ninth
circle of the Empire called Nider Saxon, does consist of three orders, the
first whereof is the Clergy, the second are the Princes and Secular Lords, the
third are the free Cities. In the first there are the Archbishops of Bremes
and Magdeburg: the Bishops of Hildesheim, of Lubeck, of Suerinus, of
Ratzenburg, and Schleswick: the second contains the Princes and saecular
Lords: as the Dukes of Lauwenburg, of Brunswicke, of Luneburg, of Mecklenburg,
and of Holstein: the Earls of Roffain, and Delmenhorst. In the third there are
the free Cities: as Lubeck, Hamburg, Mulhausen in Duringen, and Northhausen,
Goslaria and Gottinga.

THE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICK.
THe Dukedom of Brunswick was so called from the chief City Brunswick. And
the City it self was denominated from Bruno the Son of Ludolphus Duke of
Saxony. The Country whence so called.
For he left his name to the Town which he had begun, and so from him it was
called Brunons Town, which in the Saxon Language they call Wyc; but now it is
called Brunsvicum, or Brunsweich. The Situation
The Country of Brunswicke is very large, for it reaches from the boarders of
the Dioeceses of Magdeburg and Halberstad, and from the wood Hercynia even to
the River Albis. But about the year of Christ 1230, The ancient Government.
the Emperor Frederick did change the Earldome of Brunswick into a Dukedom,
and made Otto Duke of Brunswicke and Luneburg, who succeeded Henry Leon, who
was Lord of all Saxony. Frederick the second made Otto Nephew to Leon, Duke of
Brunswick, and Luneburg, and gave him those Arms, which his Uncle had brought
out of England, namely two Lions Or, for the Country of Brunswick, and another
Lion Azure, with Ermines for the County of Luneburg; which arms did
heretofore belong to Duke Herman, and his posterity, with the Dukedom of
Saxony. Concerning the other Dukes, see Munster Lib. 3. of his Cosmographie.
Brunswick is now not only the Metropolis and mother City of this Dukedom,
but also of all Saxony, which heretofore from the builder thereof was called
Brunopolis. Ptolomie calls it Tubisurgium according to the opinion of Francis
Irenicus. It is a large City being four square, and adorned with many fair
and beatifull buildings; very populous and well fortified with double rampires
and ditches, by which there are diverse sorts of trees planted: it has five
Praetorian Halls, and as many Magistrates. It was built by two brothers Bruno
and Theodore, otherwise called Theomar, the sons of Ludolphus Duke of
Saxony, in the year 961, as Hermann their own Historian does witness. The
River Onacra glideth by this city, which rising in the Hartonican wood, does
divide the City into two parts, and carries away all the filth of the City
with it, having many bridges built over it, and at last it joyneth with
Visurgis. This City has no good water to drink, and therefore they have a
kind of made drink, but they have little or no wine. This City rising from
small beginnings, yet in process of time increased very much, both in strength
and wealth, so that the Princes thereof were styled Dukes of Brunswick. I will
here briefly make mention of those words which are praefixt and written upon
the Court of this City, in regard of the frequent suites in law which are
commenced in this contentious age. In controversijs causarum, capitales
inimicitiae oriuntur: fit amissio expensarum: corpus THE DVKEDOME OF BRVNSWICKE.
Brau^swik et Meydburg cum (...)
map quotidie defatigatur, labor animi exercetur: Multa inhonesta crimina
consequuntur: Bona and utilia opera post ponuntur: and qui saepe credunt
obtinere, frequenter succumbunt. Et si obtinent, computatis laboribus and
expensis, nihil acquirunt. That is, suits in Law are the occasion of much
enmity, they put men to much charges: they weary the body, and trouble the
mind: they learn craft by following them, they neglect their own callings
and more profitable employments, and those who are confident that they shall
have the better, are oftentimes overthrown by oppression. And if they get the
better, yet labor and charges being reckoned, they get nothing. Among other
Cities of this Dukedom, Gostaria is not the last, being an Imperial City,
which Henry the first, the father of Otto the great, did build and found in the
year 1051, and the Emperor Henry the third did wonderfully adorn this
City, which the aforesaid Henry did build, and augment, until of a Keepers
lodge it became a great City as it is now at this day, in which the Emperor
builded a royal and magnificent Palace. The Town Helmstad is in the middle
way between Brunswicke and Magdeburg: which William Duke of Brunswicke,
redeemed from the Abbot of Werden, with a certain sum of money, paid unto
the said Abbot, and so reduced it into his own power. Halberstad is an
Episcopal City, by which glideth the River Oltemia. In the middle of this
City there is a hill, which is two furlongs in length, and on the top of it
there is a large plain, at the two farthest Corners whereof, there are two
Churches. In the middle there is a Market place which is encompassed round with
Religious houses: but that part which is situate on the Mountain is called the
City, and that part which lies at the foot of the hill, is called the
Suburbs. The soil round about this City is very good, having standing Corn,
which is higher than a man on horseback. Quedelimberg is an ancient City
and not far distant from Magdeburg, which was built by the Emperor Henry
Auceps. There is also the Town Hannovera by the bancke of the River Leine,
over against an ancient Castle belonging to the Earls of Lauwenrod, but now
in the time of Henry Leen, about the year of Christ 1056, it was subject to
this Castle, which because it stood on the other side of the River, the
Courtiers called it Hannover. It is now a flourishing City in Saxony. For it
is well fortified with ditches, and very populous. Hildesheimum, or Hildesium,
which Ptolomie and Irenicus call Ascalingium, is an ancient City, being at
first divided into two parts, but afterward it was united. It has a very fair
Church, and the steeple is gilded. It is a pleasant City, and Ludolphus of
Colen an excellent Mathematician was borne here, being a Bishops seat,
Irenicus does reckon up the bishops thereof, which Crantzius also does in his
Metropolis, and Antonius Monch^acinus more accurately, Lib. 2. of the first
beginning of Christian religion. But the Bishopric of Hildesheim was first
founded and instituted in Saxony by Charles the Great, King of France, and
Empeperour of Germany. Northausen is an Imperial City. There are also
contained in this Table the Dukedom of Grubenhagen, which is a member of the
Empire, and also the Principality of Anhalt: also Mansfielde and ancient
County of ancient Saxony, by the river Sala; so that Hegenus, who lived in
the time of King Arthur of Britain, was Earl of Mansfeld in the year 542;
it was so called from Mannus the son of Thuiscon. The chief Cities are
Mansfeld, near the River Wiperus, also Eislebia and Wypra. E^slebia is the
Metropolis, between the Rivers Sala and Wiperus: which was so called from
Isis, who (as Tacitus reports) did wander after her husbands death through
the coasts of Suevia. Near unto it there are metal Mines in the Mountains
Melliboci. It is supposed that the Tubantians did inhabit these parts. This
County has under it these four Counties, Wippra, Arnslein, W^tin, and
Quernfurt. Also the Counties of Barby, Stolberg, Hohenstein, Regenstein, and
Please. There are also these Ecclesiastical principalities: Meydburg, the
Archbishopric of Germany, and primate of Germany; the Bishopric of
Hildesheim, and Halberstat. Also the Bishopric of Quedelborg, and Gernroade,
and Stifien, which are in the eight circle of the Empire.

There remains in this Table the Bishopric of Magdeburg. The Bishopric of
Magdeburg commonly called Meydburg, is so called from the chief City.
Charles the Great, having reformed all Saxony, did institute twelve
Bishoprics in it, the chief whereof was the Bishopric of Magdeburg, whose
seat was at the first in Styde, afterward it was translated to Valersleve, and
thirdly to Vrese. And afterward in the year 1130 Otto did translate it to
Magdeburg, who made it the primate of Germany, as it appears by a great
book of Chronicles which has no Authors name set to it. Albeit the Archbishop
of Saltzburg, and other Archbishops that are Electors, do not yield priority
or supremacy to the Bishop of Magdeburg, as Crantzius delivers i^ his
Metropolis. But Otto the first did make the Burggrave of Magdeburg, that he
might sit in public judgment, in the Emperors steed, both in this Country
and Bishopric, and in the adjacent Countries. Gero Marquess of Lusatia was
the first that bore this office by the ordination and appointment of Otto;
whose memory is preserved by a Monument which is in the Friary of Geroden.
After him they reckon some others who followed successively in this order,
Hermann Duke of Saxony, Lotharius Earl of Waldeck, Frederick the son of
Lotharius, Conradus his Nephew, Manfred half brother by the mother side to
Conradus. He being slain in the wars, Dittericus Earl of Plocensium, had
his honors, whose Daughter Vdo Marquess of Brandenburg having married, and
thereby got the Burgaviate, he left his son Henry his successor. After whose
decease Lotharius did leave the same office to Burchard of the house of the
Lords of Quetfort, from whom the Earls of Manifeld are originally descended.
After whom there were the Lords of Schrapela, after whom the Emperor did
translate it to the Dukes of Saxony Electors for the Empire. The chief City
is Magdeburg, heretofore called Parthenopolis, from Venus Parthenia who was
worshipped there, situated by the River Albis; John Capni^ calls it Domadum
Pyrgum. Aeneas Silvius calls it Magdeburg, and writes that Virginopolis, was
a famous Metropolitan City in Saxony, memorable both for wealth and
strength* Ligurinus calls it the Virgin City, and the habitation of
Virgins: and Ptolomie calls it Mesovion. Otto builded this City as Lupoldus
writes: Otto Frisingensis did enlarge it and was buried there. This is a
famous Imperial City, it is divided into three parts, and fortified with
walls and Bulwarks, having strong Towers and Rampires, also fair houses,
large beautiful streets, and magnificent Churches, especially the great
Church of Saint Maurice, being built by the Ottoes of square free stone. The
Magistrate does keep the civil law of the Romans written in the Saxon
language, which was confirmed and established by Charles the Great, so that the
neighbor Nations do thereby decide controversies, and this law is much
reverenced and esteemed. And let so much suffice concerning the Bishopric of
Magdeburg. And now to conclude this description, let us set down the Rivers
which are in the Countries contained in this Table: which are: Albis, Onacra,
Oltemia, Sala, Wiperus, Inderst, Struma, Roide, Ruma, Vker, Fues, and others.
It has also the Mountains, der Ramelberg, Meliborus, and others: and also
diverse woods, as Auff them Hartz-waldt, Solingerwaldt, and others which you may
behold in the Table or Chart.

HASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.
Hassia has great store of Nobility and Noble places, which it would be
convenient to know; but I could discover nothing hitherto of them, nor of the
state of the government. I have only found out that there are two Counties,
Solms, 30.15.50.35. and Witgenstein. 30.17.50.50.

The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the 510 Parallel to
the great circle.

AFter the Dukedom of Brunswicke, our method lays open Hassia: It is
doubtful whence the name thereof is derived. Some from the Mountain Hessus,
but this Mountain is neither found in Hassia, nor no where else, unless it be
that which is at Noviomagum, which is somewhat likely. For some do relate that
one Bato the son of the King of the Cattians (who both enlarged, reedified,
and walled Noviomagum) had a son called Hesus, who for the love of his native
Country, called it after his own name. Whence also the Mountain Hesus, was so
called. Others would have it so named from the Cattians, who (as they report)
did inhabit this Country, by changing the Letters, whence it is yet called
Catzen Elbogen, which shows the antiquity of this Nation. Beatus Rhenanus,
Li. 1. of the German affairs says, that the Hessians coming out of high
Gremanie, and having expeld the Catti did possess these parts, and did call
them after their own name. This Country has Turingia on the East, on the
South Franconia, on the West Westphalia: and on the North it has the Dukedom
of Brunswicke, the Bishopric of Minden, and other Principalities. The air of
this Country is wholesome, having great plenty of wheat, pulse, and fruit:
But has no Wine, except it be by the Rhene. There are also fair Meddowes for
fatting of cattle, in which there are great herds of Oxen and young beasts.
The woods also are full of wild beasts, and especially of Hearts, which do
afford the Nobility good sport in hunting. It has also in some places
Mettalls, as Brass, and black Lead. It has no salt pits, but salt
Fountains. All the writers of our age are persuaded that the Catti did
formerly inhabit this Country, which was then a County, but now it is a
Landgraviate, although Crantzius be against them, who in stead of the Catti,
makes them to be the Saxones: Ptolomie calls them Chattae; who afterward, as
Tacitus mentions did pass into the Island of Batavia, where some memory of
their name does still remain in two Towns of one name, the one by the Sea,
and the other by the Rhene. Concerning their Etymology the most learned Iunius
writes thus: The Catti, whom both ours and the former age did call Hessians,
were so named from Catts, in regard of fierceness in assailing their enemies.
For who knows not the violent fierceness of that beast, which though it be
domesticke; yet will fly in his throat, that persues him closely: or else
from their sudden stratagems and ambushments by which they suddenly came upon
their enemies as Catts do leap upon the Mice. For such the nature and
disposition of the warlike and fierce Nation of the Catti seems to be. Hither
also may be referred the word Hessius, which among the Huesdenians does
signify a Catt. Truly the virtue, and excellency of this Nation does no
where appear more, than in Tacitus, who for military discipline does prefer
them before the other Germans, etc. So that this name did most fitly express
the nature and disposition of those people. But Hassia was heretofore only a
County, and subject to the Lordship of ^uringia, which appears in the book
of Tournaments, in which we read that in the year of Christ 1042 Ludovicke
Earl of Hassia was at a Tourneament at Hallis. You may read the Genealogy of
the Landgrave of Hassia. There are moreover in Hassia besides other smal^er
Towns, two chief Cities, Marpurgum, and Cassula. Marpurgum which Ptolomie
calls Amasia, and Amisia Lib. 8. Geogr. is commonly called Martpurg: some would
have it so called from Marcomirus Prince of France. Histories do report that
this City was heretofore a Village: the famous River Lona flows by it. The
City is famous for the Princes seat, and a free school, built in the year
of Christ 1526 by Ludovick Bishop of Munster. John Oldendorp, the most famous
Lawyer of Germany: also John Draco, and Andrew Hiperius, famous Divines lived
here. Cassula is one of the chief Cities of Hassia, so called as it were
Castellum or a Castle, Ptolomie calls it Ste^eontium: they report that it
was heretofore only a Castle. The City is watered with the Rivers Fulda,
Ana, and Trusula, and has a fruitful soil, and pastures for feeding and
breeding of Cattle. So that the chief trading and traffic of this City
consists in wool. Not far from Marpurg is Franckenberg, which is a neat
Town, both for situation and building, and also venerable for antiquity,
being se^ted by the River Edera: it was so called from the Frenchmen who there
pitched their Tents against the Saxones. King Theodoricke began to build it in
the year of Christ 520. and afterward it was enlarged by Charles the great,
804. There are also other Towns: as Eschwega seated on a hill, it has a very
fertile soil round about it, and is watered with the river Werra, so that the
herb Isatis, which Plinnie calls Glastum, and a kind of dye made of it,
which grows also plentifully in Thuringia, a mile from this Town, is first
put in boats, and so carried to Minda, and from thence by the River Visurgis
which receives Werra, it is carried by boat to Brema, and through all
Ostland. Histories do make no mention concerning the first original of
Eschwega, in regard it was HASSIA or the Landgraviate of HESSEN.
HASSIA Landgraviatus
map three times wasted with fire in the time of the Hungarian wars. But the
Chronicle of Franciburg shows that Charles the Great, about the year 796,
did institute diverse Bishoprics, and founded many M^nasteries and Churches in
diverse Towns; and does mention also that Gauffinga not far from Cassela, and
also that Eschewega was built by him. Also the Emperor Henry the second was a
great benef^ctor to this Town, who reedified it when it was ruinated and
wasted by the Hungarian inroades and incursions, and did enlarge it with new
edifices and buildings. It was grievously aflicted again in the year 1377, in
the waries between Adolph Archbishop of Moguntinum, and the Landgrave of
Hassia, at what time it came under the government of Hassia. Fristaria also is
a famous Town of Hassia, commonly called Fritzlar, it is pleasantly seated by
the River Egra: and walled round about; but it is not level, nor the Country
it self which is here and there mountainous; yet it has a fruitful soil
round about it, both for wheat, pulse, and fruits, and some wine. And albeit
Frislaria be in Hassia, yet it belongs to the Archbishop of M^guntinum, so
that it has often tried the doubtful chance of war, but the Dake of Hassia
did often infest it, and the Saxons took it, and afterward burnt it. I pass
by many other Towns of this Landgraviate. Diverse Rivers do water, and glide
through this Country, the chief whereof are the Rhene which runs South
West: Visurgis or We^s^rt whose spring Wetra rises in the Toringian wood: also
Lupia which runs into Westphalia: There is also the River which Tacitus
calls Adriana, and Historians Aderna; Althamerus calls it Aedera, and
Ritheimerus Rhoer: Iunius in his Nomenclator names it Eder, and does add that
it is a River of the Catti, and that it falls into the River Ada. But in his
Batavia he writes that it runs into Fulda, and this appears to be true by
the Tables. The lesser Rivers are Lanus or Lona, which rises in the County of
Witgenstein, and so glideth by the Castle of Widekind sometime Prince of
England, it waters Lasphe a Town in the same County: there is also the River
Fulda, and others. The Country is every where Mountainous, but the most noted
are Melibocus, and Abnobus. The other Mountains have diverse names, as
Kesselperg, and Geyne etc. There are many woods which are pieces of the wood
Hyrcinia. But let so much suffice concerning Hassia we will only add for
conclusion that which Aelius Eobanus Hessus, in his verses gratulatory for the
victory of the Landgrave Phillip, delivers concerning the nature and situation
of the Country, and the manners of the inhabitants.

Qualis Hyperborcum prospectans Thrasa Booten,
Gradivi domus ad Rhodopen, Hemum que nivalem
Circumfusa jacet, gelidis assucta pruinis,
G^gnit in arma viros duratos frigore, quique
Aut Hebrum Nestum que bibunt, aut Strymonis undas:
Talis and ipsa situ, talis regione locorum
^t fluvus, Silvisque frequens, and montibus altis
Hassia: Natura similes creat alma locorum
^eu natos in bella viros, quibus omnis in armis
Vita placet: nonulla juvat sine Mart, nec ullam
Esse putant vitam, quae non assueverit armis.
Quod si tranquillae vertantur ad ocia pacis,
Ocia nulla terunt sine magno vana labor,
Aut duro patrios exercent vomere colles,
Aequatosque solo campos rimantur aratris,
(Namque and planities segetum faecunda patentes
Explicat innumeras, and plena mess colonos
Ditat, and ipsa sibi satis est) aut ardua Sylvae
Lustra petunt, Canibusque feras sectantur odoris.
Venatu genus assuctum, Genus acre virorum:
Aut leges aut Iura ferunt, aut opida condunt -- Fortia, etc.
As warlike Thrace looking upon the North
By Rhodope, and Hemus stretches forth
It self, and is mur'd to snow and cold,
Breeding such men as hardy are and bold;
Who of Hebrus, or of Neslus water drinks,
Or of the River Strimon, yet never shrink.
Such for Situation, and Mountains hie
For many woods, and Rivers gliding by
Is Hassia: for the men by nature are
Like those, and even borne unto the war,
Who in the wars alone do take delight
And all their life time are enured to fight:
And if sometime they live in quiet peace,
From toilesome labor they do never cease.
For either they the level fields do till,
Or with the Plough they tear up the hard Hill
(For this same land has many fruitful Plains
Which plenteous harvests do bring in much gains
Unto the husbandman) or else repair
To the woods to hunt such wild beasts as there are
With Hounds, for these same people don't contemn
Hunting, but are a violent kind of men.
For either they make laws, or Towns do build
Which do not only strong defense them yield,
In times of War; but in the times of peace
They yield delight when as the wars do cease.
What should I here the Sacred springs commend?
The Greenes and valleys which do even contend
With the Aemonian vales, which do excel
For fruitfulness? or what should I declare
Those sweet and shady places which even are
Fit to be the Muses seats, and may right well
Become the Goddesses therein to dwell?
O ye Fountains of my Country clear, and cold!
And O ye Rivers that were known of old:
O the vales! and pleasant Caves which still did use
To be most acceptable to my Muse.
THE COVNTIE OF NASSAW, or NASSAVIA.
NAssavia is called as it were Nass-gavia, which word signifies a moist and
slimie Country: for the Town which names the Country, is encompassed on every
side with moist and moorish grounds: and in the German speech Aw, and Gaw do
signify a Country; so Thurgaw signifies a dry Country, Rhyn-gaw a Country by
the Rhene, Otten-gaw, a Country abounding with corn, and so also Oster-gaw,
Wester-gaw, and Brisgaw. But this County has others annexed to it, as
Weilburg, Ideste^nen, W^esbaden, Dietzen, Cattimelibocen, Beilstein. It is
boundered on the South with the County of Wiesbaden, and Idesteinen: on the
East with Isenburg, Solms, and Hassia: on the North it is bounded with
Westphalia and the County of Witgenstein: on the West with the Dukedom of
Bergen, and the Counties Weidan, and Seynen. It has many Praefectureships. As
Frudebergen, Sigenen, Nephens, Hegerana, Ebersbacen, Dillenburg, Hilligenbacke,
Dringensteinen, Lonbergen, Herbornen, Dridorf, Beilsteinen, Marenbergen,
Honstetten, Ellerana, Cambergen, Altenberg, Kidorff, Nassavia, and many others.
It is one of the freest Counties of the Empire, the Lords whereof are subject
to none but the Emperor, and do enjoy all the royal privileges, and
praerogatives of the Empire as well as other Noble men. They have power also to
coin gold or silver or brass money, as appears by some pieces of gold which
are ye^ current. The Landgrave of Hassia and the Earl of Nassavia are
Coe-Lords, and by a joint Title, do receive the revennewes of the County of
Cattimeliboc, by a covenant made in the year 1557 between Phillip Prince of
Hassia, and the Earl of Nassavia. The Country in some places is plain
ground, and in other places it rises and swells into hills; here it has
flourishing Vines, as in the County of Dietzen, and by the bancke of the River
Lanus; and otherwhere it has pleasant meddowes and pastures, or else
fruitful cornefields. It has also metal Mines. For in the Territory of
Sigen, a certain kind of Iron Metal, is melted out of stone, out of which
they cast Fornaces, Iron Potts, Kettles, Stithies or Anvills, Bulletts, and do
make all kind of Iron work. At Frendeberg there is excellent steel made.
There are also the like Mines, in the Country of Dillenburg, Hegeran, and
Burback, out of which Lead and Copresse are dug as in Ebersback, where there
is also a Glasse-house. The chief wood is Westerwalt, which is a piece of
Hercyni^; the lesser woods which are also part of Hercinia are Kalt-Eych,
Heygerstruth, THE COVNTIE OF NASSAW or NASSAVIA.
NASSOVIA Comitatus
map Schelderwald^, di^ Horre, der Calemberg, in which there is great store of
wild beasts for hunting. The chief Rivers are ^a^^^^, Siega, and Dille; near
Siega is Sigena, near ^illa is He^gera, D^llenburg, and Herborn: near Lana
are Dietz, Nassovium, L^^^ste^^^um, where ^ane mingleth the river Rhene. The
Baths at Emsana do belong both to the Earls of Nassavia, and the Landgrave of
Hassia, unto which they come far and near in regard of the sovereign virtue
of the water, which they find to be very wholesome for many diseases. There
are also Fountains at Codinga and C^mberga, the water whereof being drunk
will expel the wind Cholicke. M^^^^a and Bertius among others have drawn the
Pedigree of the Earls of Nassavia.

THVRINGIA, or the Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.
The Nobility and state of this Country are yet unknown unto me: I have
only found out the County of Glei^hen, 32, 50, 50, 58, etc. and I think
Kranichfelt, 34, 17, 15, 26, Also the Bishopric of Mersburg, 34, 17, 51, 26.

The Meridians are mutually distant one from another according to the
Proportion of the Parallel 510 to the Aequinoctiall.

THuringia follows after Hassia, commonly called Duringen, being situated
between the two Rivers Sala and Werra, The Situation
the latter on the West Side: the first on the East Side: on the North it has
the wood Hercynia which they call Hartz: and on the South the Forest called
Duringer waldt. The length is equal to the breadth, being 12 miles over. This
Country has abundance of all kinds of fruits and pulse, and has more
store of Corn than any other part of Germany. So that George Agricola calls
it the fat of Germany. Here is great stoare of that herb, The
fruitfulness of the soil.
which Plinnie calls Glastum, is now called Guadum and Pastillum, and
commonly Weedt Pastell; which makes a blew color, which to the great benefit
of the inhabitants is transported into other Countries: so that a famous Poet
writes thus: Herba Thuringorum celeberrima crescit in agris,
Hanc Isatim Graecus sermo vocare solet.
Ponderis haec magni est, and multo venditur are:
Hac etenim tingi lana parata solet.
A famous herb does in Thuringia grow,
In Greek called Isatis, and named so.
It is weighty, and much gain is made thereby,
For with it they their wool do use to die.


Concerning which Plinnie Lib 21. cap. 1 Simile plantagini Glastum in Gallia
vocatur: quo Britan^orum conjuges nurusque toto corpore oblitae, quibu^^am in
sacris nudae incedunt, Aethiopum colorem imitantes. That is, in France there is
an herb called Glastum which is like a Plantaine, wherewith the wives in
Britain do paint their bodies, and in some sacrifices do go naked,
colored like Ethiopians or Indians. There is also great store of provision and
fruits, except win^, which is brought thither from other places. There are
also Mines of gold and Silver and rich salt pits. It was heretofore a Kingdom,
but now it is a Landgraviate. Thuringia and Hassia were united together, and
governed by the Kings of France 366 years, The ancient Government.
until the time of Charles the Great, and Henry Auceps. At length the Emperor
Charles the Gross made Ludovicke Duke of Thuringia; his Nephew Burchardus was
slain in Hungary, and dyed without issue. So that the Emperor Henry Auceps
took possession of Thuringia, and it is now subject to his successors, being
Princes of Saxony. For albeit after William the son of the Emperor Otto the
first, who being Archbishop of Moguntinum, did possess Thuringia by his
fathers permission, his successors the Archbishops of Moguntum, did challenge
and arrogate to themselves the government of all Thuringia, and of the City
Erford, which they do yet hold; whose substitute or Vicegerent was sometime
Ludovicke Barbatus in the reign of the Emperor Conradus Salicus: yet
afterward the Barbatians did yield up Thuringia with the title of Landgrave to
the right heirs. Until at length about the year of Christ 1250, it came into
the hands of the most illustrious Henry the son of Theodoricke, and Nephew to
Hermann Landgrave of Thuringia, and Marquess of Misnia, being descended from
the posterity of Widekind the Saxon. After whom succeeded his base son
Albert, and his sons after him Frederick, Admorsus, and Theodoricke, who
were made heirs by their Uncle Theodoricke Marquess of Misnia. They report
that the Sorahians did heretofore inhabit this tract of ground, whom Eginhart
and Ammoinius do mention. Peucerus does now call the remainder of them Sorbec
and Sernestein, between the Rivers Albis and Sala. Reyneckius, in his book of
the original of the Misnians, supposes that these Tyringetians are as it were
the Tyringotians, and from thence they imagine that the City was called
Gotha. Ortelius writes that it was reported unto him by Hugo Brinckhorst an
Englishman, and a Citizen of the City of Erford, that there are in this
Country though it be small, twelve Counties, and as many Abbeys, which they
call Gefurstete Abtien, 144 Cities, and as many small Towns, commonly called
Merckt steken: 2000 Villages, and an 150 Castles. Erdfurdia or Erdford, called
aunciently Erphesfurdia, and Erdfesfurt, is a chief City of Thuringia, which
was so called from Erft the first founder thereof. For he being a miller placed
his mill by the River Gera, and so afterward the City began to be builded,
about the beginning of the reign of Arcadius and Honorius: afterward it was
much enlarged and beautified by Clodoveus King of France, in the year of
Christ 438: and in the year 1066, it was encompassed with such large walls, so
that now it is held to be one of the greatest Cities of Germany, and the
Thuringians do call it Nicht ^ine Stadt, or Sondern ein Gantzes Land. The
River Gera does water it and keep it sweet and clean. It was heretofore a
Bishops seat, but afterward it was translated to Moguntiacum. It has a
flourishing School, which Pope Boniface the ninth did adorn with privileges,
in the year 1392. The soil THVRINGIA or the Landgraviate of DVRINGEN.
THURINGIA.
map round about this City is very fruitful, having pleasant Meddowes, and
great store of the herb Isatis* Henry the fourth did much impoverish this
City by laying a taxation of Tenthes upon it, having always enjoyed a
freedom and immunitie from such impositions. So that when the Saxon war
began, they chose rather to defend their ancient liberty with the sword, than
to submit unto the Universal taxation of Tenthes; and that with so great
courage, that they brought Augustus to a great strait. This City as if
fortune an enemy to greatness, meant to triumph over it, was oftentimes
burnt, so that no other great City in Germany, was ever burnt so often as
this: the last time that it was burnt, which was in the year 1472, it
sustained much loss, especially in the Churches of the Virgin Marie and
Severus, so that a third part almost of the City was burned down. This was a
terrible fire, which began by some that were hired to set it on fire, of whom
the chief was a Dominican. Two Collegiate Churches, as they call them,
together with the Bridge, and a great part of the City were all burnt down.
In the year of our Lord 1509 there arose a grievous sedition between the
Senate and the Citizens of Erford, occasioned by those unusual impositions
which the Senate laid upon the Common people. For the Commons gathering
together, would needs know how much the City was indebted. The Senate giving
way to the tumultuous fury of the people, endeavored to appease them with
fair and gentle words, telling them, that in convenient time they would bring
in an account of their receipts and expenses; which words quieted the Citizens
for a while. But when the day appointed came, they assembled themselves
together, and desired the Senate to bring in their account. But then one more
insolent than the rest, spoke sharply unto those whom the Citizens had sent
to the Senate, which did much provoke and exasperate the Citizens. And when
the Citizens saw that they prevailed nothing, but were put off with delays:
they put down the Senate and chose a new. In brief, from hence there arose a
grievous sedition, contention and war. But the Bishop of Herbipolis, and the
Emperor Maximilian endeavored to appease this sedition, and to bring them to
concord and agreement. Weimara is a fair Town, having formerly a County
belonging unto it, but now the Dukes of Saxony keep their Court in it, having
a fair Palace there, nea^ely built of square freestone, and an Orchard
curiously planted with all kind of trees, and watered with the River Ilma,
which does run at length into Sala. There is also the City Iena, so called
from Ianus: but he was not worshipped in Germany. And therefore Stigellius
sings more probably.

Hinc placet Hebraeo nobis hanc nomine dici,
Vt vetus a Iajin nomen Iena tenet.
Cur ita crediderim, nisi mentem vocula fallit,
Certa hujus ratio nominis esse potest.
Quippe vocat Iajin Solimae pius incolaterrae,
Hoc quod nos Latio dicimus ore merum.
Quae caput in medijs urbs fertilis erigit vuis
Hanc quisquam a vino nomen habere nega^*
Hence from an Hebrew word at first it came,
As we cold Iena do from Iajin name;
And unless we b^ deceived in the word,
We may some reason for this name afford.
For the holy inhabitant of Palestine
Calls that Iajin which we do call wine.
So this City standing in the midst of Vines,
May well be named from the fragrant Wines.
Thus much Stigellius. It has a public School which was erected in the
year 1558. G^tha was so called from the Goths. And hence Ritha^merus in his
description o^ the world, writes, that the Turingians were originally de^ from
the Goathes, because the Goths builded a City in this Co^^^, which they
called Gotha, about the year 723. It had a wonderful strong Castle called
Grimmenstein, which is now level with the ground. And this was the cause that
it fell to ruin: William Grunbach, a nobleman rather by descent than virtue,
in regard of his many enormous attempts, whereby he endeavored to depose the
Emperor, and to introduce a new form of Empire, was declared and pronounced
to be guilty of conspiracy with all his associates, and was condemned and
banished, both by the Emperor Ferdinand, and the Emperor Maximilian his son:
and the Emperor and the other States of the Empire, with one consent did
commit the execution of this sentence, to the most illustrious Prince Elector
of Saxony. Which banishment he contemned, trusting to himself, and his
Protector John Frederick the second, Duke of Saxony. Who after many
admonitions from the Prince, did still persist in defending the rebels, so
that the most illustrious Duke of Saxony and Prince Elector, enforced by
necessity, beseiged the City, and took it by surrender. And then
Grunbachius, with four more of the conspirators, for their treason against
Caesar were put to death, the Castle was razed to the ground, and Duke John
Frederick, was brought prisoner to Vienna. This Country is ^atered with many
Rivers: as Sala or Salza, Werra, Vnstrut, Ilma, Ge^* Or, Apselstet, Helbe, and
Cling. And Her testifies that the Mountains have mines, which have rich
Veins of gold and silver, which ^d not far from Braitenborn, and
Schwartzenburg. This Country also is here and there clothed with woods, which
are part of the wood Hercynia: also the Thuringian wood is well known,
commonly called Thuringer Waldt, Caesar calls it Baceins, it is a wood in
Germany which divides the Cheruscians from the Suevians; there are also
Hainich, Hainset^e, and Finne with diverse others, where there is good hunting
of diverse kinds of wild beasts. There are also in this Country many
Churches, and Monasteries, among which is the Church of the blessed Virgin
Marie at Erford, which was built by Bo^^^e Bishop of Moguntium. This Church
has a great Bell, which is famous through all Germany. The people are fierce,
hardy, couragio^s against their enemies; the men are large of stature, strong,
and well-set.

THE DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.
The Country whence ^o called
THuringia a Country of high Germany being thus described, there follows
next Franconia or East France. Which was so called from the Frenchmen. Some say
that the original of this name came from Francus, whom others call Francio,
fabulously supposed to be the son of Hector, and the first founder of this
Nation. And Peter Ronsard the Poet writes, that the ancients did call him
Astyanacta Francum, as it were Hastigerum, that is, the speare-bearer. Others,
as Gaguinus and Aeneus Pius, do affirm that the Emperor Valentine gave that
name to Franconia, because the Frenchmen in the Northern Language where called
fierce; or from the remission of tribute, and their freedom, they were called
Franci, that is, Freemen. Albeit I do more approve of a latter Etymology,
that they were called Franci, as it were Frioncy, because they were free from
taxes and impositions which ^y signifies; or else they were so called, as it
were fryansi Fransi; for Ansi being a word proper to the Gothish speech, does
signify those who excel others in fortune and riches. And are next to Heroes
or Semigods, that are above the condition of mortals: whence they corruptly
call Great Noble men Ansos, and with an aspiration Hansos. But to the matter;
the Frenchmen after they grew wealthy, and weary of the Roman yoke of
subjection, encouraged by the desire of rule, got their liberty, and thereby
gained the name of Franci, instead of the old name of Germans. Fronconia on
the South is near to Suevia and Bavaria, on the West to the Rhene, on the East
it has Bohemia; on the North it has Hassia and Thuringia. The air of this
Country is pure and wholesome. The Country it self, except it be that part
which is called Norica and is near unto the Rivers, is not very sandy, as
Aeneas Silvius writes, nor yet very stony. But it is generally very
fruitful, and does yield a great increase of Barley, Wheat, and all kind of
grain and pulse which is sowed there. There are no where greater and better
Turnips and Onions than here in this Country. And in many places there are
hills planted with Vines, of which excellent wine is made, and transported to
other Countries. The Country of Babenberg, does yield such great store of
Liquerize that whole Cart loades of them are carried through Germany. This
Country also has many fair Orchards and pleasant meddowes; it has great
store of tame Cattle and wild beasts. The Princes do cherish the wild
beasts, who have many Dens in the Woods, where they live in the winter time,
and do house themselves as it were from the stormy THE DVKEDOME OF FRANCONIA.
FRANCKENLAND
map weather. It is not lawful for any private man to take them, or hunt them.
It is manifest that the Germans were originally and aunciently called Germans
as appears by others writings, as also out of Procopius Caesariensis, who was
a sharp sighted and judicious writer. The first Prince of Franconia was
Genebaldus, who was governor thereof thirty years. After him there succeeded
Marcomirus, Dagobert, Ludovicke the first, Marcomirus the second, Waramund
alias Pharamund, who being made King of France left his Dukedom to his brother
Marcomer: also Prunmesser, Genebald the second, Suno, Luitemarus, Hugbalaus,
Helmericus, Gotefrid, Genebald the third, Ludovick the third, after whom there
followed Erebar^, Ludovicke the fourth, Gospert the second, and Hetacus the
last Duke, who dying without an heir, he left the Dukedom to Wituninus King
of France, who was also called Pepin, which afterward his son Charles the
Great, gave to Burchard the first Bishop of Viceburg, and to his successors
after him, and so bestowed it on the Church, in the year 752. It is now a
Dukedom which tittle the Bishop of Herbipolis assumeth to himself. Yet all
Franc^nia is not subject unto him. For Kitzinga and Bristadium are subject to
the Marquess of Brandenburg, and Gralingiacum to the Bishop of Babenberg. Also
Chronacum, Forchimium, Staphelsteinium, ^ochstadium are under the bishop of
Herbipolis. Koningspergum, Oxenfordia, Carolastadium, Hasfordia, and
Bischofsheim, Alderburg, Middleburg, and some other towns are subject to the
Bishop of Moguntinum. Colburg belongs to the Duke of Saxony. Wirceburg;
which Conradus Corta calls Erebipolis, Ligurinus Herbipolis, Spanhemius
Marcopolis, Ptolemaeus, Artaunum, and the inhabitants Wirtzburg, from a sweet
kind of wort or drink, which the Country of Herbipolis does yield: is the
Metropolis and Mother City of East France, in which Boniface Archbishop of
Moguntinum in the year of Christ 751 erected a Bishopric. It is situated on
a plain, being encompassed on every side with fair hills, pleasant gardens,
and fruitful Meddowes, and also well fortified with ditches, rampires, walls,
Towers, and Bulwarks. It is full of Citizens, and has many fair buildings.
On the West Moenus runs by it, which is a navigable River, and it has a
stone bridge standing over it, which is built on strong piles. Near the River
Moenus there is a Castle seated on the Mountain, which has held out many
seiges, and therefore seems to be impr^gnable. At the foot of the Mountain
there is a Monastery; which was built by Burchard, at the cost and charges of
Cumbert King of France, in honor of the great confessor. But it would not be
much from our present purpose, to know the form and order of the inauguration
and consecration of the Bishops and Dukes of Wirceburg. After the decease of
the former Bishop, the Bishop that is designed enters into the City with a
great troop of horse. Being come into the City he alighteth from his horse,
and having put off his richest roabe, four Earls do bring him into our
Saviors Church, or house, bare headed, and barefooted, in a poor weed or
habit, girt about with a little cord. The official Earls are the Lords of
Hennenbergh, Castle, Werthein, and Reineck. Then the Deane together with the
Clergy goes forth to meet him, and asks him what he seeks? or what he
desires? And then he answers very submissively, That though unworthy he is
now ready to take upon him that office, unto which he was chosen, and to
discharge it faithfully. Then the Deane says; In the name of the Chapter I do
here commit unto thy charge the house of the Savior of the world, and the
Dukedom annexed to it, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Afterward he follows the Clergy into our Saviors house, and having
put on the Pontifical roabe, he first hears Mass, and afterward has a
banquet, but first the body of the Bishop deceased is emboweld and set down in
the Chapel of the Castle: and his heart being took out is put in a glass
vessel. The next day he is brought out of the Castle into Saint James his
Monastery, holding in his right hand a Crozier, and in his left a sword; the
third day they go again to our Saviors house, where after Dirges and prayer,
he is at last buried with a Crozier and a sword. The other Cities are that
which Ptolemie calls Bamberg; Peter Appianus calls it Granionarium, and
Granionarion in a Greek book: it was at first called Balemberg, that is, the
Mountain of Baba, from Baba the daughter of Otto Duke of Saxome, and wife to
Albert Earl of Babemberg: others do call this City Psawenberg; it is a very
pleasant City, situated by the River Regnuz. It has many Mountains, Hills,
and Gardens, and a very fruitful soil, where great store of Musmillians and
Liquerize do grow. It is an Episcopal Seat; and as it has bread many happy
wits, so it glories chiefly in Ioachim Camerarius a man famous for all kind
of learning, as appears by his works set out by him, which are read with
much admiration. There is also Francosort, or Francoford, by the River Moene,
which is commonly called Franck Furtam Mayn, to distinguish it from the other
Franckofort which is situated by Odera. Munster writes that it was heretofore
called Helenopolis, but he does not show when or from whence it was so called.
Henry Stephanus calls it in his Emconion of this City, the Academie of the
Muses, the Athens of Franckford, the Muses Mercuriall Faires, and the
Compendium or Epitome of all the Marts of the world. This City is divided
into two parts by the River Moenus, and joined together again with a stone
Bridge. It is now an Imperial City, and famous through the whole world for
two Marts or Faires. Here the Electors do choose the Roman Emperors, and if
there be competitors that stand for the Empire, they do here sight for it, and
try it by battle. There is also Moguntia commonly called Mentz, some call it
Moguntiacum. Ptolomie Lib. 2. cap. 8. tab. 3. calls it Neomagum. Moguntia is so
called from the River Maenus, which some do call Moganus and others Mogus. It
is an Episcopal and Metropolitan City. It has a fruitful soil on either
side of the River Rhene, which yields great store of wine. It is large and
well fortified, and very populous on that side which is toward Rhe^^* but on
the other side it has few inhabitants; it is very long but narrow. There are
fair houses built after the Roman fashion, and magnificent Collegiate
Churches, with the Bishops Castle. Here was an University erected by Bishop
Theodoricke, and it is thought that the Art of Printing was invented here. It
is subject to the Archbishop who is elector, and Chanceller of the Empire.
There is also Mons Regius commonly called Conigsperg, where John de Monte
Regio, a great Mathematician was borne, whose Commentaries upon Ptolomies
Almagest are yet extant. Schweinfordia is situated by the River Moene in the
middle almost of Franconia. There are also Kitzinga, and Fridberg an Imperial
City, and others. Moreover the first Circle of the Empire is in Franconia, in
which these are called to Council, first the Clergy, as the Bishops of
Bamberg, of H^rbipolis, of Wirtzburg Duke of Franconia, of Eichstett; der
Teutsch Ordens Master: the Provost of Camberg, the Abbot of Saint Gilgen:
Secondly the secular Princes, as the Marquess of Brandenburg, Burgervom
Nurenberg: the Countes of Hennonberg, of Castle, of Wertheim, of Rhemecke, of
Hohenloe: the Lords of Reichelsperg, and Limpurg; and the Countes of Horpach
and Schwartzenburg: Thirdly the free Cities, as Norunberg, Rottenburg,
Winshaim, and Schweinfurt. Many Rivers which be full of fish do water this
Country, the chief whereof are Moenus, and Sala accompanied with eight lesser
Rivers: also Sinna, Rhadiantia, A^stus, Tubera, and some other. It has these
woods, Speshart, Ottoes wood, and other parts of Hercinia, which do enclose it
as it were round about with a growing wall. It is a warlike Nation, Noble,
witty, and laborious. Men and women do both plant Vines, so that none are
suffered to be idle.

THE DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA. The second Circle of the Empire.
WE come now to Bavaria, which were so called by the addition of one letter
from the Avarians the remainder of the Hunnes, The Country whence so called.
who having droven out the Noricians seated themselves in that Country, and
also Bojaria from the Bojans a people of Gallia Cis^lpina, who sometime dwelt
here: it is commonly called Beyeren. It has on the East A^stria, on the West
Sucvia: on the South (...) Rhetian A^pes: The Situation
and on the North Franconia. The length is 29 Germane miles. The breadth five
and twenty. The air is very wholesome, The temper of the air.
and the Country very pleasant: and generally very fruitful, but yet it has
no great store of Wine nor Corn: but in some places it has a ^^^^e of shar^e
hedge Win. The fruitfulness of the soil.
The richer Wines are brought thither out of Alsaia, Franc^^to, and Austria.
There is great store of Cor^e about Ra^ispon and Landshat. Moreover, it has
abundance of S^l^, fruit, Iron, Cattle, Foul, will ^e beasts, and all things
necessary to life. It does breed great store of Sw^^e, which feed on ^cornes
and crabbes, The variety of living creatures.
so that as Hungary fur^isheth other Countries with Oxen, so this Country
furnishes most parts of Europe with Swine. And besides Bears, Boares, and
other kinds of wild beasts, it has great herds of Dear, which they cannot
hunt without the Princes leave. In the year 1562, on the 22 day of August,
there was a Heart taken in Bavaria, of so large a body, that it weighed 625
pound. The Nariscians, Vindelicians, and Noritians were formerly seated here.
The Nariscians, whom Aventinus calls Nortgew, and Melanchton Narcaw, are
divided from the rest by the River ^anubius. The Vindelicians according to the
ancients Description, are situated between the Rhaetians and Noricians.
Rhaetia is twofold, the one is larger containing the Vindelicians, the
Noricians, and the Rhaetians, the other is lesser. The River Lycus does
separate the Vind^l^cian from the Rhaetians, if we believe Ptolomie; but if we
follow Strabo they are separated by the Rhene, and the Brigantine Lake, which
we have showed in our description of Helvetia. Danubius does part them from
Germ^nie, and the Alps from Italy. Marcus Velserus has rightly observed out
of Ricardus the name of the Vindelicians.

Respicit and lase fluvios Vindamque Lycumque
Miscentes undas, and nomina littoris, unde
Antiquam gentem, populumque urbemque vocarunt
Vindelican^ --
It sees the Rivers Vinda and Lycus flow
Mingling their names and waters as they go;
Whence the Country, and the people it containd,
And City too were Vindelicians named.
It may be gathered out of Plinnie and Ptolomie, that there were certain
Countries, and Cities belonging to the Vindelicians. Augustus sent to conquer
them Tiberius Claudius Nero, and Nero Claudius Drusus, who were both the
Emperors sons in Law, who having quickly dispersed and dissipated the
Barbarians forces, did easily overcome them, and reduced them to subjection.
See Paterculus Lib. 2. Dion. Lib. 53. and Horace Lib. 5. Odar. The Noricians do
begin from the River Oenus; and so bend South East even to Hungary and Italy.
They were always great soldiers, and being accustomed to war, they did
often invade the bordering Romans. As appears by the Norician sword which
Horace celebrateth. And also by an inscription which is found on this side
Danubius to this effect, and in these words: DIS MANIBVS ET MEMORIAE LEGIONVM.
ET MEMORIAE MISERRIMORVM, VINDELICIS PRAEFECTIS MOCENIANIS ET VICTORI ET
AVRELIO FILIIS VINDELICIS SVRINVS INFELIX PATER F. C.

The ancient Government.
Bavaria was heretofore governed by a King of its own, even to the time of the
Emperor Arnulp: and as the Parthians called their King Arsaces, the Egyptians
Ptolomie, so they called their King Cacannus. Afterward it had Dukes as it has
now. Bavaria is divided into the higher and lower. The higher lies Southward
by the Alps. It is full of Moors, violent Rivers, and dark thick woods. It
is only fit for pasturage, and feeding of Cattle. The Lower Bavaria is more
fertile, and fruitful, and more inhabited, having Vines all along the sides of
the Rivers Danubius, Isara, and Lavarus. And thus Bavaria is divided naturally.
It is divided Politically into the County of Bavaria, and the Palatinate. The
County is described in this Table, and the Palatinate in the Table following.
The Cities.
The Cities of the higher Bavaria are Monachum commonly called Munchen, being
situated on the bancke of the River Isara, and built by Henry Duke of Bavaria,
in the year 772, in the time of the Emperor Otho the first. It is the
pleasantest City of all Germany: being seated between the Rivers Oenus and
Lycus, between the Cities Wassenburg, Augusta and Frisinga, and between the
fishie Lakes, among which the Duke has a fair Garden, full of curious knotts,
herbs, and flowers: there is an artificial fountain and a Summer house
adorned with Pictures and Statues, and about twy-light (which is very
wonderful) a great heard of Dear does come and graze, every day under the
windows. In the City there are Churches, Towers, Libraries, a Court, and an
exchange full of tradesmen and Merchants, and all things necessary not THE
DVKEDOME OF BAVARIA.
BAVARIA
map only for use, but also for Ornament, and delight. Ingolstadium commonly
called Ingolstatt, is situated by Danubius, which was aunciently called
Ingelstat, or Angelostadium, from the Suevian Angeli, who first began to build
this City with others. It was at first a Town, but the Emperor Ludovick
Bavarus made it a City. There was an University instituted for all Arts and
sciences in the year 1410, and afterward Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, and Pope
Pius the second, did adorn it and endow it with great revennewes and many
Privileges. Trisinga heretofore Fruxinum, as Rhenanus and Munster do
testify, is thought to have been built at that time when the Romans by their
Praefects and Lievtenants of Provinces, did possess and govern that part of
Bavaria, which runs out from the bancke of Danubius to the Alps. The River
Mosa does glide by it. There are also 22 Towns in it. In the Lower Bavaria
there are Ratisbona commonly called Regensperg, situated by the River Danubius,
it was built by the third Emperor Claudius Tiberius Nero about the time of our
Saviors passion, who called it Tiberina or Augusta Tiberij. Onuphrius writes
that Tiberius is mentioned in an old stone. And Goltzius produces some of
Tiberius coin, with this inscription. Col. Aug. Tib. Simlerus thinks that
this Regensburg is that which Antoninus calls Regium, and in the register
book it is called Castra Regina; Althamerus reckons up many other names
which the Barbarians did give unto it, as Regin^burg, Rhaetobonna, Rhaetopolis,
Hyaspolis, Imbripolis, Regnipolis, Tetrapolis, Quadrata and Germanisheim. The
name of Ritisbone is derived from Navigation. It was formerly the Metropolis of
Bavaria, and the seat of the Kings and Dukes of that Country; It has a stone
bridge which was built in the year 1115 by the Emperor Henry, over Danubius
on twelve Arches, being four hundred paces long, and 70 broad. There is also
Patavium or Patavia, which is called in their own language Passaw: Velserus
thinks that it is called in the Register books Batavas. That which Ptolomie
calls Bojodurum, Auentinus, Pyramius, and Lazius do think to be a City of
Vindelicia. It is a fair near City in the lowest part of the lower Bavaria,
at the beginning of Austria, in the consines or Frontiers of both Provinces,
between the meeting, and confluence of Danubius and Oenus, being commodiously,
and pleasantly seated in the manner of a Peninsula. It is famous for the
Bishops sea, and for traffic and commerce. For it is seated so conveniently
by the River both for commerce and trading* that as Lions in France, and
Gandauum in Flanders do flourish for merchandising, in regard of the concourse
and meeting of Rivers near unto them: so Patavia in this part of Germany,
does in this respect excel other Cities. Landshuten, commonly called
Landshut, is a famous City, and of chief note: being situate by the River
Isara, which glideth by this City, to the great advantage and commodity of
the Inhabitants. Irenicus out of the fifth table of Ptolomies Europe, supposes
it to be Inutrium, which has not the same situation. And therefore Ptolomie
does better place it, and makes Inutrium to be the same with Mittenwaldt a
Town of Bavaria on this side the Alps. It was built in the year 1207 by
Ludovicke Duke of Bavaria, having a fruitful soil round about it, both for
corn Cattle Wine and all kind of fruits. The City has many fair neat
buil^ings, the chief whereof is the great Church, which is curiously built of
freestone, wi^h a very high steeple. There is also in the lower part of the
City the magnificent Palace of the most illustrious Duke Albert, which was
heretofore called the New building. There are many Rivers which do water and
enrich Bavaria, The Rivers.
as Danubius the greatest River in all Europe, celebrated by Greek and Latin
writers; also Lava^us, and the River Isara, being pleasant, full of fish, and
running violently: also ^icetus, Oenus, Lycus, Alemannus, or Alimula, Nabus,
Regus, Ambra, Zoysa, Vilsus, Wolfada, Gyssea, and many others. And besides
these R^vers it has many great spacious Lakes; which have several forms and
shapes, and several sorts of fish in them: as the Lakes Ammersce, Asce,
Wirmsee, and Rorsce. It has diverse high Mountains, which I cannot reckon in
particular, but the chief are the Paenine Alps, and the Mountain Caravancas.
There are so many woods which lie scattering about, so that it seems to be
one wood: For without doubt they are parts of the wood Hercinia, which
heretofore did almost cover over all this tract of ground. But these parts of
the wood Hercinia have diverse names: as Heynerdoch, Schwardtzwalt, Greinwaldt,
Zellerwaldt, etc. The people are more addicted to tillage, and breeding of
Cattle, than to warfare, neither are they much given to merchandising, but
rather to drinking and getting of children, and they do seldom go out of
their native Country. Moreover the Bavarian circle of the Empire does consist
of three orders. In the first are the Bishops: as the Archbishop of Saltzburg;
the Bishops of Passaw, of Freisingen, and the Bishop of Ratisbone: the
Abbat^sses of Alt Munster, and Ober Munster at Ratisbon. In the second there
are the Duke of Bavaria, the Count Palatine of Bavaria, the Landgrave of
Luohtenberg: Count Hage, B. in Stauffen, or Stuaffnegk: the Lord of Rinfels or
Rhinfelden, B. Degenberg, Obesultzperg. In the third are Freistet, and
Regensperg.

THE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.
Jn which is the Landgraviate of Lutchtenberg. 33.27.49.35. It is in the second
Circle of the Empire. We do not yet know the other Nobility.

The Meridians are distant according to the proportion of the Parallels 49, and
51, to the greatest Circle.

BAvaria besides the aforesaid divisions, is divided into Bavaria on this side
Danubius; and Bavaria beyond Danubius is the Country of Nariscians, of which
we have spoken before. It is now called Nortgovia, and commonly Nortgow, and
this is the Palatinate of the Lower Bavaria, which, seeing we have hitherto
spoken of Bavaria in general, and of that part which is called the County, we
will not describe. But Nortgovia, that we may begin with the Etymology, was so
named because it is a Northern Country. For Nort in the German language
signifies North, and G^w signifies a Land or Country. Moreover this Country
is called the higher Palatinate to distinguish it, from the Palatinate of
Rhene, which is called the Lower. This Bavaria was heretofore called Noricum,
which Ptolomie bounders with the River Aenus, and part of Danubius, which
runs from Aenus to the Mountain Cetius; also with the Mountain Cetius, and
with part of Pannonia, and the Mountain Carrancas. But after that the Bojans
having driven out the Romans, did transmigrate and remoove into that part of
Vindelitia, which lies between Aenus and Lycus, this tract also began to be
called Noricum, Bojaria, or Bavaria. For sothe third Deacon of Lumbardie, as M.
Velserus intimates in his letters to Ortelius, does describe it in these
words. Noricum which is a Province of the Bojans, has on the East Pannonia, on
the West Swethland, on the South Italy, on the North the River Danubius.
Sextus Ruffus does reckon two Provinces of the Noricians, and the Register
books do mention the Mediterranean Noricum and the Ripensian. But this
Bavaria has on the North Vcitlandium, on the East Bohemia, on the South the
River Danubew, which separateth it from the other part of Bavaria; on the West
it THE PALATINATE of the Lower BAVARIA.
Palatinat. Bavariae
map is boundered with Hanecamp, The Fertility.
and a part of Suevia, and Franconia. The air of this Country is pleasant,
and wholesome: but the soil is hard and rugged, although in some places it
brings forth good store of Corn; and it has pleasant pastures fit for
feeding of Cattle. Near to Kelheime there are many Vines growing on the
bancke of Danubius. But they yield a kind of hard sharp Wine, so that it is a
common saying that Vinegar grows on those Mountains. In other places also it
produces diverse kinds of mettalls, especially great store of Iron, of which
the Nortgovians do yearly make a great gain and commodity. There is also an
excellent kind of blew color, which they call Lazurus. Moreover Noricum,
which is now the Palatinate of Bavaria, was heretofore a Kingdom, and had
Kings of its own, when the Romans had reduced the other part of Bavaria into
a Province even till the year of our Lord 500: whence Julius Caesar in his
Commentaries, mentions that Arivovistus King of Germany, married the King of
Noricums Sister. But what Princes the Noricians had afterward does not appear,
until they became Christians. But in the year 511, by the labor and
industry of Theoden the second, Bavaria was reduced into one Kingdom, who
made a great slaughter on the Romans and drove them out of Bavaria; afterward
it was divided into three Dukedomes by his three sons; Theodon the third who
was seated at Ratisbon, Otto at Otingia, and Theobald at Tyrolu. It would be
too long to reckon up the other Princes. But at length the Emperor Ludovicke
Duke of Bavaria, in the year of Christ 1439, did divide it in this manner,
that the whole Norican Bavaria should belong to the Prince Palatines, except
some Imperial Cities, and whatsoever formerly appertained to the Empire. The
Metropolis of Bavaria is commonly called Nurenberg, which is pleasantly seated
by the River Pegnitius, which waters the City, it is very large and
beautiful, and has many fair Churches, curious buildings, great streets,
being fortified with strong walls, Towers, and Bulwarks; and full of
Citizens, rich in Merchandise and famous through the whole world for Mechanic
Arts: it is situated not only on the Navel as it were or middle of Germany,
but also of Europe; it is 500 miles distant from Jerusalem. Though the City
be of no great antiquity, yet the Castle which is situate on a high hill,
which was heretofore called Castrum Noricum, is very ancient being built by
the Emperor Claudius Tiberius, whence it was called Neroes Castle. Heretofore
it was subject to Albert Duke of Franconia, after whose decease it came to the
Empire in the reign of the Emperor Ludovicke the third, and afterward it
increased and began to grow very populous. In the time of Charles the fourth it
was walled about: and again in the year 1538. Now it is the fairest and
largest City in all Germany, so that it has 128 streets, 11 stone Bridges,
which do conjoyne and unite the two parts of the City. The River Flavius
passing through the City does drive 68 water-mills. There are also in this
City 116 wells, and 12 Conduites, 6 great gates, and 13 common bathes.

In the year 1575, the Noribergians did institute an Academie of University
at Altorsium, and drew thither with great stipends and pensions, Professors of
the tongues, also of the Arts, Philosophy and other faculties: As appears by
an inscription at Altorsium: Inventuti, Religionis Christianae Doctrina,
Linguis Latina and Graeca, Optimis denique artibus ac disciplinis informandae,
Georgio Volkanfro, Philippo Geudero, Hieronymo Baumgartnero Oppido Praefecto,
Senatus Nortbergensis Scholam hanc nobilem and Patriciam aperiri and solemniter
introduci voluit. 3. Call. Iul. Qui dies Petro and Paulo Apostolis Sa^ra est.
Anno a nato Christo Salvatore 1575. That is, George Voll^anfrus, Phillip
Geuderus, Hierom Baumgartner, being learned Praefects, and Balthaz^r
Baumgartner being Prefect of the Town, the Senate of Norinberg has solemnly
instituted and ordained this Noble free School, for the instructing of youth
in the doctrine of Christian religion, as also in the Latin and Greek
tongues, and lastly in all good Arts, and Sciences on the third of the Kall.
Iul. which day is sacred to the Apostles Peter and Paul: and in the year from
the birth of our Savior Christ 1575. This tract of Land has many other Towns
besides this Metropolis, as also diverse monasteries and Villages, one of the
chiefest Towns is Amberg, which was walled about in the year of Christ 1030,
also Auwerback, Sultback, and the Monastery of Castle, where the Princes of
Nortgow did formerly keep their Court: also the Towns Eger, Beierut, E^stet,
Napurg, Newenstadt, Ruwenkelm, Kemnat, Krusen, Grewenwerdt, and the Castle
Gainum which is so called from wayling or Lamenting. For here Danubius passes
by dangerous fearful places, which make the Mariners cry out when they pass
by it; in the Germane Language it is called Die Strudel from the noise and
violence of the waters: there are also the Towns, Eschenback, Weiden, Parnaw,
Pleistein, Herspruck, Rurbaock, Neumarkt, Tursentur, Elbagen, Cham, Schonsee,
Kunsperg, Stauff, and some others, which for the most part belong to the Prince
Palatines. This Country also of Nortgow does include one of the four
Landgraviates, which were heretofore instituted by the Emperors, namely
Lutchtenberg, in the second Circle of the Empire, which was so denominated from
the Castle Luchtenberg, albeit the Princes of that Territory do keep their
Court at Pfriembdt and sometime at Grunsfeld. This Landgraviate did not grow so
powerful as the other three, which in process of time were much enlarged both
in territory and power: but especially the Landgraviate of Hassia, as Munster
writes. This Country is watered and enriched by these Rivers, namely Egar,
Nabus, Vilsus, Regus, Pennitius, Schwartzach, Sultza, Altimulus, and Lautra,
and some others. Historians do relate concerning the River Regnitius, or
Regus, that Charles the Great being at Ratisbon, was persuaded; that a
navigable passage might be made out of Rhene into Danubius, if a ditch were
made between the Rivers Regnitius and A^imulus, which might be capable to
receive and carry boats and vessels: because the one of those Rivers do
run into Danubius and the other into Rhene. The King straightway chooses out
a convenient place for this work, and having got great store of Laborers, he
spent all the Autumn quarter about it. So that a ditch was made between the
aforesoyd Rivers, which was two miles long, and three hundred foot broad.
But this work came to nothing, for by reason of the rain, and that the soil
was a Moorish kind of earth, the work could not stand, for the earth fell
down in the night, and filled up as much as they had dug in the day time.
Near the Town Werseberg, there are some tokens yet rem^^ning of this vain
attempt. It is to be noted that all the Rivers of Nortgo^ have Iron mills and
other metal mills, so that they do blow the bellows, and drive the two
hammers with their streams, so that the Smith need but put the Iron under the
Hammers on the Anvill, and the water will make the Hammers forge it. There is
in this Country the Mount Piniser, commonly called Fitchtelbergk, being six
miles about: out of which there do slow four famous Rivers, Moenus, Nabus,
Sala, and Egra, which winding in the figure of a cross; do run toward the
four several corners of the world This Mountain does produce diverse kind of
mettalls, and the best blew color, which is called Lazurus. There is Lead also
found on the top of the Mountain, and many pits, out of which mettalls were
formerly dug. This Country also is very where clea^^ed with some pieces of
the wood Hercinia, as Wetsenburwalt, ^merwalt, and others, which are
represented in this Table. Moreover when Bavaria had received the Christian
faith, there were laws made, enacted for the government of the Land, namely
concerning the liberty of the Church, concerning Church-burne^ and
Incendiaries, concerning those that took Sanctuary, concerning strikers of
the Clergy, concerning Tithes, seditious persons; also Martial Laws, Laws
for the tenure of Lands, for Brokage* for titles of inhaeritances, for buying
and selling, etc. These laws the Bavarians obeyed for many years, and some of
them they do still obey. And here I cannot choose but add some of the Bavarian
Laws. It was enacted that the Judge, to the end he might judge rightly,
should have the Book of the Statutes, and that thereby he should determine and
end all suits and controversies. Neither should the Judges respect persons or
gifts, but when he had Judged rightly he should have the ninth part of the
composition money. But it wrongfully, he should pay twice as much, as he had
took away by his unjust judgment: and moreover should be fined forty
shillings. He that sold any thing for a certain price, should set down the
bargain in writing, and have witnesses thereunto. No bargain sale unless it
were free and voluntary, should be firm and current I omit the rest, least I
should seem to over burden this descripti^^ with the repetition of those
laws, which John Boeme Aubanu ^o describe at large.

THE DVKEDOME of the higher SAXONY, with MISNIA and LVSATIA. The eighth Circle
of the Empire.
WE come to the higher Saxony, which is the eighth Circle of the Empire. For,
Saxony is divided into the higher and the lower: The higher which this Table
does exhibit to your view, we will here describe. Concerning the Lower we have
spoken, in the foureteenth Table of Germany; and therefore we will not repeat
that which we have delivered before concerning Saxony, least it might seem
tedious to the Reader. The higher Saxony, commonly called Ober Saxen, the Duke
whereof is one of the Electors, has on the East old Marchia, on the West
Hassia: on the South Thuringia, and Misnia; The City of Wittenberg
on the North the Dukedom of Brunswick. The chief City is Wittenberg,
situated by the River Albis. It was built by Windechind the first, some say by
Windechind his son, and that it was called Wittenberg, from Windechind the
father or the son. Duke Frederick erected there an University, in the year
1502, which another Frederick did so adorn and beautify, that being at the
first of small account, as Eras^^^ witnesses, yet at last it grew famous.
Peter Mosellanus says, that Frederick did so adorn and furnish Wittenberg,
with Professors of all Arts, and especially of the three tongues, so that it
seemed to be the pattern of a well founded University. In which Henningus and
O^l^n^lorpius two Lawyers, did flourish and were famous for their works
through all Germany. Albertus Crantzius in his Wallia, Lib. 8. cap. 30. has a
memorable story concerning the trial by hot Iron which is used in this City.
It chanced that one was wrongfully accused in this City for setting houses on
fire by stealth: but he forswea^ing it, desired that he might be tried by the
trial of hot Iron, which the Lay-Iudges, did either not know, or else
contemned, as being interdicted by the Law. Whereupon he took up an hot Iron,
and carried it a great way, and then cast it out of his hands, and was neither
burnt, nor had any harm by it. A year afterward, a Pavier paving the same
street, thrusting his hand into the gravel found this Iron, which being yet
hot burnt his hand. Those which stood by wondered at it, and told it to the
governor of that Ward. Who straight began to suspect that this man was guilty
of that fact, of which the other was wrongfully accused: so he commanded him to
be brought before him, whereupon examination, he confessed the fact, and was
broken on the wheel, and afterward put to death for this crime. There is also
a story concerning this trial by hot Iron, which Genildis wife to Henry the
third did undergo: who being accused of adultery, did clear her self by this
trial of hot Iron. I find also in George Cedrenus, that they did use the like
kind of trial, for those who were suspected to be de^^ourers of Virgins, and
for those who were thought to be no maids. Some also do place Torga in higher
Saxony, which others do place in Misma, M^snia and Iusatia are described with
Saxony as parts thereof, of which seeing they are delineated in this present
Table, we will speak briefly.

Misnia.
Misnia or Meyssen, is a Country of higher Saxony, lying between the River
Sala and Albis, which was so called either from the Lake M^sia, near which the
inhabitants hereof did dwell; or from the City Misna, to which opinion
Rithamerus in his description of the world does agree. But it seems that this
Country was lately so named, seeing we may gather out of Tacitus, that the
Hermundurians were formerly seated here, for he mentions that the River Albis
did rise among the Hermundurians. It is bounded on the North with the
Marquiship of Brandenburg and the higher Saxony, on the East with Lusatia and
Silesia: on the South it looks toward the Kingdom of Bohemia and the
Sudetian Mountains: on the West it has Turingia. They say the air was
heretofore very bad and insufferable, in regard of moist exhalations arising
from the Mountains and the Woods, but now the Woods being cut down the foggy
clouds are vanished, so that the air is now more wholesome. This Country
abounds with all kind of fruits, so that it furnishes other Countries. It
has every where great store of Corn, and also great plenty of wine, honey,
and cattle: except in the Valley of Ioachim: where the soil is harder, and
less fruitful. But the rich Mines of Silver does recompense the barrenness
of the superficies or surface of the earth. The Mountains also have diverse
kinds of mettalls, as Silver, Brass, Steel, Iron, Lead, and in some places
Gold. In the time of Otto the Great, this Country together with that higher
Saxony, was called the Marquiship of Saxony, before the higher Saxony was
made a Dukedom. Afterward in process of time, these Countries were divided
into more Lordships, and afterward they were reduced into one Dominion, and had
one denomination or name; which happened in the year 1241, when the Landgrave
of Turingia, dying without issue, his Territories came to the Lords of Misnia,
who from that time got both titles, and were called Marquesses THE DVKEDOME of
the higher SAXONY.
SAXONIAE Superioris Lusafiae Misniaeque des
map of Misnia, and Landgraves of Thuringia. And in the year of our Lord 1423,
the Prince Elector of Saxony having no issue male, the Emperor Sigismund did
give the Dukedom of Saxony, to the Princes of Misnia, which they do still
possess; and after that, as Munster writes, they usurped a triple or
threefold title. There are many Cities in Misnia: the chief City is Misena,
on the left hand bancke of the River Albis, which was built by Otto the first.
The next is Dresdena, very pleasantly seated and well fortified. Here the Duke
of Saxony has an armorie, and a magnificent Palace, and a curious stone
bridge. Lipsia is a famous Mart Town, situated by the River Pleissena, which
excels all the other Cities of Misnia for wealth; and beauty: here is a
Noble School for learning and wisdom, which in those troublesome times at
Prague, was translated thither in the year 1408. In the same tract there are
Itenburg, Antiquae cellae, Lautenberg, and other Towns. This Country is
watered with these Rivers, Albis, Sala, Mulda, and others; and it has many
woods, as Gabreta and others, which are parts of Hercynia. The inhabitants are
strong, valiant, and well proportioned in body; they are also merry and
pleasant, friendly, modest, and peaceable, and are not like the ancient
Germans for rudeness of behavior.

Lusatia.
LVsatia also as Rithamerus does witness, is a great part of Saxony: which
lies between the Rivers, Albis and Odera, and the Mountains of Bohemia. But
the name of Lusatia is derived from the Elysians or Lygians, who, as Ioachim
Carens says, were seated here. This Country has good store of Corn, and is
very fruitful. It was sometime joined with Misnia: at length the Bohemians,
who strived to enlarge their Kingdom, took it to themselves. Lusatia is
twofold, the Lower, and the Higher. In the latter there are these Cities,
Sprenberg, Prybus, The Cities.
and Cotbus: in the former Gorlits, and Zitaw. Gorlitum commonly called
Gorlitz, is the chiefest and Noblest City in the higher Lusatia: having many
fair houses, and being well fortified with walls and ditches, and by the
mountainous situation thereof, and also by the Vicinitie of the River, which is
very profitable and commodious, to Millers, Brewers, Dyers, and other
Citizens. There is a stone Bridge to pass over it, which is covered over
head. But of all the public and private costly aedifices, S. Peter's Church,
and the Palace are the chief. This City was first founded and built in the
year 1030, as the Annalls thereof do witness. But in the year 1301, it was
burnt down to the ground, so that there was not one house left standing. But
like a Phoenix that rises out of her own ashes, so eight years afterward out
of these ruins, it was built fairer and more curiously than before. It is
subject to the Kingdom of Bohemia, as also Lusatia. And John Dubravius Lib.
21. concerning the affairs of Bohemia, does show how it came to the Crown of
Bohemia. The River Nissa does water Lusatia and does much enrich it. But so
much concerning Lusatia. Now let us return to Saxony, and speak briefly of
it. These Noble Rivers do water Saxony, Albis, Sala, Visurgis, The Rivers of
Saxony.
also Lusimicius, Multa^ia, Misa, Sala, Fulda, Leyna, Allenius, Odera, Ola,
Nisa, and others. It has also many woods, as Lunenbergerheid, Spondawerheid,
The Wood^.
Rottenawerheid, Galberheid, Pomerischeid, which are parts of Hercynia. The
Saxones were heretofore distinguished into four ranckes, or orders, the
Nobles, Gentry, Freemen, and Servants. And there was a Law made that every one
should marry, in their own rank or tribe. So that a Noble man should marry a
Noble woman, a Gentleman should marry a Gentlewoman, a Freeman should marry a
Freewoman, and a Servant should marry a Servant, and it was death to break or
infriuge this statute. They had also excellent laws for punishing malefactors.
Moreover, Their Laws.
Ober Saxon which is the eight Circle of the Empire, does consist of three
orders, the first are the bishops of Misnia, of Merspurg, of Naumburg, of
Brandenburg, of Havelburg, of Lubecke, of Caminum. The Abbots of Salveldt, of
Rottershausen, and Falckenreiten. Also the Abbetesses of Quedelnburg, and of
Genrode: the second are the Princes and saecular Lords, as the Duke Elector of
Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg Elector, the Dukes of Pomerania* the
Princes of Anhalt: the Earls of Schwartzenburg: Count Mansfelt: Count
Stolberg: Count Hohenstein: Count Buchlingen: Count Rappin: Count Mullingen:
Count Gleiche: Count Leisneck: Count Widersfelt: the Lords of Bernaw: B. de
Tautenberg: Count Regenslein, Russe de Plaw. D. de Gratz, D, de Schonberg. The
third are the free Cities, as Da^^iscum, and Elbingen.

THE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG.
THe Marquiship of Brandenburg, which is represented in this Table, was
heretofore inhabited by the Vardals, who spread themselves from the River Albis
Eastward, through the Countries of Mechelburg, Brandenburg, Pomerania, Bohemia,
and Polonia. It was so called from the Metropolis, which at first was called
Brenneburg: as George Sabine says: Italiam quando digressus ab urbe petebam,
A Duce quae Brenno condita nomen habet.
Going to Italy, that City I did leave
Which from Duke Brennus does her name receive.


Charles the Great did beseige them a long time, and Henry Auceps overthrew
them near Brenna, and put a Garrison in the City, with a Colonie of Saxons.
This Marquiship is 60 German miles long. On the West it is boundered with
Saxony, Misnia, and the Megalope^sians Country; on the North it has the
Stetinians, Pomeranians, and Cassubians; and on the East it has Polonia, and
Silesia: and on the South Bohemia, Lusatia, and Moravia. The Country is very
fruitful, especially for corn: it has also Vineyards, out of which they
make great store of wine. Moreover this Country does produce Coral, and many
precious stones. Moreover the Marquess of Brandenburg is one of the Electors
of the Empire, and is counted one of the richest, and most potent Princes of
Germany. Who besides his Marquiship, has also many Cities, in the County of
Lusatia and in Sil^sia. There was a diverse and various succession of Princes,
for the line of the Marquesses being extinct, Ludovicke Bavarus in the year
1119, gave this Principality to his son Ludovicke: the Bavarians in the
year 1363, sold it to the Emperor Charles King of Bohemia: and so from John
the son of Charles, the Marquiship passed to the Princes of Moravia, Iudocus,
and Procopius: Iudocus being much endebted did morgage it to William Marquess
of Misnia: at length in the year 1417, in the Council at Constantia, King
Sigismund gave it to Frederick Burgrave of Noriburg. The whole Marquiship is
divided into three parts, namely into the Old, the Middle, and the New. The Old
Marquiship begins at the Desert or Forest of Luneburg, and stretches even
to the River Albis. It confineth also on the Dioecesses of Magdeburg,
Halberstadt, THE MARQVISHIP and Electorship of BRANDENBVRG.
MARCA BRANDENBURGENSIS and POMERANIA
map and Megalopolis. The inhabitants hereof were formerly the Senonians and
Suevians, and also the Angrivarians, and Teutons. In this tract there are
seven great Cities, namely Tangeramond near the River Albis, and situated
there where Angra or Tonagr^ does empty it self into it; it was heretofore
the seat of the Emperor Charles the fourth. Also Stendalium, which is the
chief City of this Marquiship. There is also Soltwedelum which is divided
into two Cities, the Old and the New: also Gardelen with the Castle
Eischnippia. Also Osterburg, Werbum, Senohousum, which was so called from the
Senons. The lesser Towns are Arnburg situate by the River Albis, with a
Castle adjoining to it. Also Bis^marchum, Bostera, and Bucka, not far from
Albis; also Kalba, and Mestinga, which they call Letzolinga. And moreover here
are 465 Villages. The middle Marquiship does begin at another part of Albis,
and does reach to the Rivers Odera, and Su^vum commonly called Spre. It was
formerly inhabited by the Su^vians. The Metropolis of this Marquiship is
Brandenburg, which is a famous City situated by the River Havila, which some
think, was builded and named by Duke Brennus: some suppose that it was built
by Brandon Prince of France, son to Marcomir, who about the year of Christ
140 did subdue this Country. Here was the Vandals Pantheon, whose gods were
Zarneb^cke, and Swandewitz, besides others, as it is related in the Chronicles
of Mersburg. Here the high Court is kept for all the Country. This City has
many privileges and immunities, which were heretofore granted by Emperors,
Kings, and Princes: which appears by a statue which stands in the New part
of the City, holding in his right hand a drawn sword, which they call
Roland. The next to Brandenburg is Rathenavium seated by the River Su^vus: and
also the two Towns Colonia and Berlinum, which are separated by the River
Suevius. There is also Franckford a chief City, very pleasantly seated by
the River Viadrus (which they call Odera) which has great store of fish: this
River runs on the Eastside; the other parts of the City are encompassed
with pleasant hills, and choice Vineyards, out of which they make wine, which
they carry down the River unto Pomerania, Denmark, Borussia, and other
places. This City was first built in the year 1253 by Gedine of Hertsperg,
by the command of John the first Marquess of Brandenburg. It is a famous Mart
Town, and has three Faires kept there every year. It has an Academie for
Arts, Languages, and Sciences, which was built in the year 1506, by Marquess
Ioachim, and endowed with revenewes. In which there have been from the first
institution thereof most excellent professors of Arts and Sciences, some of
which Sebastian Munster reckons. There are also other Towns as Breitza,
surnamed Fid^. also Belitza, Bernavium, Cellinum, Mittemwaldum, Monachobergum,
Bisenthalum, Blumoberga, Botzavium: also Fryenwaldum and Oderebergum. Here
Marquess Albert the second built a Castle by the River, which commanded those
that sailed by it to pay custom. There are also Frisachum, Gereswaldum,
Grimmitzum, Grunchyda, Grunewaldum, and Koppenicum. Also the little Town
Lichenum, and Parstainumum with a Castle: also the little Town Mulrosa;
Bornavicum, and the little Town Lossa, with a Castle, also the small Towns
Wruzonum, and Selowium, and many other Towns and Villages. The new Marquiship
is disjoined from the middle Marquiship by the River Odera, where the River
Warta does discharge it self into Odera near Costrinum. The chief City in
this Marquiship is Gostrinum, which was reedified by Marquess John the son
of Ioachim the first, and well fortified, and chosen to be the Princes seat.
There are other Cities as L^nsberg by the River Warta, also Regiomons,
B^rnwaldum, and the little Town Bers^cinum with a Castle, also Bernaw^cum and
Berlinicum, or the Town new Berlins Moreover there is the City Arnswaldum,
the little Town Thamum, and Soldinum, which was heretofore the prime City of
this Marquiship. There is also the little Town Purstenfeld: and Bramburg,
Dri^senum, and the City Falkeburg with a Castle, which is situated on the
consines of Pomera^i^. Also Kartaw, Lepena, Morinum Schiffelbenum, Osemundum,
Sco^^flies: Woldenberg, Zedon, Zandocum. Some divide the whole Marquiship into
seven or eight Provinces, which are these, Alde Marck, or old Marchia; Meddel
Marck, or the middle Marquiship, new Marck, or the new Marquiship, the
Dukedomes of Vber Marck, Pregnitz, and Croffen; the Lordships of Sterneberg and
Cotbus, and also a part of L^sat^a. There are also lesser Countries in these
Provinces, as Rapin, and Vterrad^n, and Kustren, which are Marquiships. The
whole Marquiship of Brandenburg, with the territories belonging thereunto does
contain 55 great Cities, 64 Towns, 16 little Towns, which they commonly
call Marctflecken, 38 Castells, or noblemens houses, and 17 Monasteries. It is
watered with the Rivers Odera; or Viadrus, Suevus, Albis, Havela, Warta, and
others. Near the Monastery of Carthusians at Franckford, there is a little
Rivulet, which rises out of a hill of Vines, which as it has been proved,
does harden everything that is cast into it, and turns it into a stone. And so
much concerning the Marquiship of Brandenburg; it remains that we speak
something concerning Pomerania which is contained in this Table.

P^merania was called by the first inhabitants in the Vandall speech Pamortza,
now it is a Dukedom which lies by the Balthick sea, The Country whence so
called.
and it is stretched in a long tract of ground, from the borders of Holsatia,
to the consines of Livonia. The Country is every where very fruitful, The
fruitfulness of the soil.
having pleasant Meadows, and green pastures. It has such abundance of Corn,
Butter, Honey, Wax, Flax, Hemp, and other such like commodities, that the
inhabitants make a great benefit of them by transporting them to other
Countries. The inhabitants also do gather up Amber by the Sea side, but in
lesser quantity than the Borussians. There are diverse kinds of tame cattle,
The variety of living creaturese
and herds of wild beasts, which run up and down in the woods. This
Country had always Lord, and inhabitants of its own, which were never
conquered, nor driven out of their Country. Here are many fair Cities. The
chief is Stetimum, by the river Viadrus, which was heretofore a long fisher
Town, seated on the bancke of the River, and after it had received the
Christian faith, the Mart being translated thither it began to increase, so
that it is now the Metropolis of Pomerania. Pl^^e th^s l^^fe (...) the q^^re
(...) of two sheets in the quire, and after (...) 56^.
Gripswald^n is a famous town, for learning and good Arts, there was an
University built there in the year 1546. Iulinum accounted heretofore the
greatest town in all Europe, was a Mart town of the Vandalls. Stralsundia is
a fair Town on the shore of the Balthick sea, having heretofore a Duke
thereof. Wineta is a very rich seafaring Town, but it was ruinated by
Conradus King of Denmark. There are also other Cities, as Neugardia,
Lemburga, Stargardia, Bergradum, C^menez, Publina, Grifenburga: and by the
shore side there are Colberga, Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Pucka, Revecol,
Lovensburg, and Hechel. And so much briefly concerning Pomerania. Also
Mecklenburg or the Dukedom of Magnopolis is contained in this Table. There are
also in the same Table these Ecclesiastickes; the Bishop of Magdeburg Primate
of Germany, under whom are the Bishops of Brandenburg, in the Marquiship of
Brandenburg, and the Bishop of Havelburg in Mecklenburg; also the Bishop of
Swerinium under the Bishop of Bremes; in Pomerania there is the Bishop of Camin.

THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.
POMERANIA is now a Dukedom, it lies by the Balthick Sea, and reaches from
the confines of Holsatia even to Livonia. This Country was called by the first
Inhabitants in the Vandals Language, Pamorzi, and it had always a peculiar
people, who were never conquered and as Bertius witnesses, unto whom we are
beholden for this description, they were beaten or expulsed out of their own
Country. The Country is plain, and has few Hills, but every where fruitful,
and watered with Rivers and Springs, having pleasant Meddowes and green
Pastures, shadie Woods, in which there are diverse kind of wild Beasts. It
has abundance of Cattle, as also great store of Corn, Butter, Honey, Wax,
Cotton, Hemp, and other Commodities, so that the Inhabitants do gain much by
transporting them. There are many fair Cities in Pomerania. The chief City
is Stettinum which is situate by the River Viadrus, which is now called Odera:
it was heretofore a long Fisher Town by the bancke of the River, but now it is
the chief Metrapolis, and Mother City of Pomerania. Gripswaldum is a Town
famous for learning and humane Arts: an University was built here in the year
of Christ, 1556. Here is also the Town Iulinum, which was heretofore the most
famous Town of all Europe, and a Mart Town of the Vandals, unto which the
Russians, the Danes, the S^rabians, the Saxones, the Sarmatians, and the
Suevians did bring their Commodities, and Merchandise. The Inhabitants when
they perceived that the Christian Religion began to flourish and increase,
would not suffer any stranger to mention the new Religion, and this was the
cause that they received the Christian faith so lately. But at last by
compulsion they received this Religion about the year of Christ 1000. but they
reuolting often from their faith, and having made a great massacre and
slaughter of the Christians in the year 1066. did return to Paganism, until
Otto Bishop of Bamberg began again to preach the Gospel of Salvation in
Pomerania, with such good success, that three Brothers who were Princes,
namely Ratisborus, Bugislaus, and Suantepolcus, were baptized, and received the
Christian Religion. The first Bishop of Iulium was Adelbert, but in regard the
City was still infested by the Danes, he thought good thirty years afterward
to translate his seat to Caminum, and so the other City fell to the ground.
Stralz^na^a is a fair Town on the shore of the Balthick Sea, which had
heretofore a Duke of its own, but now it is subject to the Duke of Pomerania,
it is supposed to have been built by the Frenchmen, and reedified by Waldemar
King of Denmark about the year of Christ 1209. but now it is a strong Town,
and is a defense to Denmark, and Swethland. Wineta is the richest of all the
Sea Cities, being situate between the River Suenus, and the Island Rugia, and
it was ruinated by Conrado King of Denmark, in the year 1030. There are also
other Cities, as Neugardia, Stargardia, Camenez, Grifenburga, and by the
shore, Colberga, Caminum, Collinum, Sunda, Lovensburg, and many other.

THE DVKEDOME OF POMERANIA.
Brandeburg et Pomerania
map

RVGIA.
RVGIA is an Island in that part of the Eastern or Swevian Sea, The Situation
which is properly called the Balthick Sea. On the North it has Denmark, and
the Chaulkie Island Mona. On the West and South it has the Cities Pomeranta,
Bardus, Stralesundius, Gryphiswaldus, and Walgastus. This Island was heretofore
far larger then it is now, insomuch that the Island Ruden was so conjoined
with it, that it had nothing but a small Ditch which a man might leap over with
a staff, to part it. But in the year 1309. all that part of it which lies
between Rugia and Ruden, was swallowed up and washed away, by a violent
tempest, which did blow down and overthrow Towers and Houses, so that there is
now a Channel of half a mile breadth, which will bear Ships of great
burden, and it is now called the new passage. Das Neure Si^f oder Shiffart.
For heretofore great Ships were wont to fall down to Sea by another way or
passage, not Eastward, but Westward, which they call Dan Bellen. This Island is
encompassed round about with the Sea, and is seven Germane miles both in length
and breadth. The circumference whereof if it were round, according to the rules
of the Mathematics, should be 21. miles. But now the circumference of it is
not only distinguished with many Islands, and Peninsulaes some greater and some
lesser, but also he that shall diligently note the windings of the Sea into
the middle parts of the Island, also the Islands, Isthmusses, Peninsula'es, the
Bays, turnings and windings of the shore, shall find that the circumference
of this Island is not much less then 70. miles. And besides it is observable
that there is no place in all this Island, that is above half a mile or three
quarters of a mile distant from the Sea. The Shores also are so well fortified,
so that the raging waves of the Sea cannot endammage it. The fertility.
Moreover this Island has great store of Corn, and is as it were the Granary
of the City Stralesund, as Sicilie was the Granary of Rome, as Strabo
witnesses. Here are pretty store of Horses, Oxen, and Sheep: but great store
of great Geese. This Island has no Wolfes, The variety of living Creatures.
nor Rats, albeit in the Peninsula of Wittovia, there were some seen, which
came either from some Ships which rode there at Anchor, or were Shipwrackt
against the shore. The Inhabitants hereof were called heretofore the fierce
Ranians or Ruthenians, who could not be tamed or subdued by the power of
neighbor Kings and Princes, and they were so strongly addicted to Idolatry,
that they were the last of all the Inhabitants near the Swethish Sea, who did
receive the Christian faith. For the Princes of this Island being heretofore
very potent, did not only possess many Cities and Countries out of this
Island, as Birdus, Grimma, and Tribbesea, but also they had continually wars
with the King of Denmark, and the neighboring Princes of Pomerania, and
wearied the I^becenstin; RVGIA.
RUGIA
map with continual wars, and so begun to be feared of their neighbors for
their power and fierceness. They used formerly the Slavonian or Vandalian
language, which the Pomeranians used also. There is nothing recorded concerning
their achievements, The ancient government.
in regard they desired rather to excel in martial matters, then in learning,
and there were but few learned men at that time especially in those parts. The
first Prince of Rugia was Crito, who lived in the time of Swantibarus Duke of
Pomerania, and married his Daughter Slavina, about the year of Christ 1100.
They report also that this Crito was Prince of Holsatia and Dithmarsia, and did
found Lubeck, who after he had made himself drunk at a Banquet, as he
stooped and put forth his head to go forth at a low Gate, a Dane that stood in
a secret place cut of his head. After whose death his Father Retze surviving
after him was Prince of Rugia in the year 1106. whose Posterity did
successively possess the Principality of Rugia, even to Wart^slaus, in whom in
the year 1352. the Royal Line of the Princes of Rugis was extinct, and the
Dukedom of Rugia came to the Princes of Pomerania, and that by a certain
mutual covenant and agreement, whereby it was agreed, that if they did not
leave Sons to succeed them in their own Dukedomes, the Dukedom for want of
a Prince, should descend and come to the other Duke. There were three Churches
at Charantina, and many Idols in them: of the chief whereof is Rugae-viti:
which had seven faces on one head, and seven swords buckled to it, holding in
its right hand a naked sword. It was a long thick, and terrible Idol, which
they called Mars, or the God of war. The other had five faces on one head,
and without a sword which they called the God of peace. The third had four
faces on one head, and one in his breast, holding his forehead with his left
hand, and laying his right hand on his knee which they called Porcuitum and the
God of their Empire. It would be tedious to speak of their other monstrous
gods. Ar^ona was heretofore the strongest City of Rugia, being situate on the
highest Promontory of the Peninsula Wittoviae Northward, on the North, and East
it is encompassed with the Sea, on the other side with a low Valley, there are
some ruins of this City yet remaining. The Valley was so deep, so that an
Arrow shot upright out of a strong Bow could not reach to the top. This City
was besieged on Ascension day, and it was taken on Saint Vitus day, by Gods
providence, who punished their Idolatries even on Saint Vitus day, which did
first spring and arise from S. Vitus. The Citizens of Arcona trusting at first
to their City and Castle, did valiantly resist the Enemy, but at length on
Saint Vitus day being wearied and tired, they were enforced to accept of
conditions of Peace, and to receive the Christian Religion, and to yield unto
the Conquerers the revenewes of the Swantovian Church and Idol to maintain
Christian Ministers: also to burn the Idol Swanto with the Temple, and to set
the Christian Captains at liberty without any ransom, and to pay tribute
every year to the King of Denmark. The strong City being taken, the City
Charentina did yield it self upon the same conditions. Among all the three
Princes of Rugia, Tetzlaus, Stouslaus, and Iaromarus, Stouslaus did first leave
his Principality to his Brother Geromarus, unto whom being a Christian Prince
of Rugia, Woldomarus King of Denmark married his Brother Canutus his daughter.
And thus Arcona and Charentina being wearied with continual wars, were not
yet quite extinguished or rased. But yet not long after the Princes of
Pomerania did raze it to the ground, because the King of Denmark had not
requited the Pomeranians for that aid which they lent them in subduing of
Rugia. But this Island which had heretofore strong populous Cities and Castles,
has now none at all, but only some few Towns, the chief whereof is Berga,
in which there are not above 400. Citizens: The other Towns, as Sagart, Vick,
^ingst, and many others, are lesser. But yet this Island is well replenished
with Inhabitants, so that it can raise 7000. armed men on a sudden. In the
furthest part of the Peninsula Iasmunda Eastward, there is a very high
Promontory, which being hollow underneath, was formerly a safe harbor for
Pirates and Robbers at Sea, which they call De Stubben kamer. Not far from
thence on a woody Mountain, there were some ruins of a strong Castle. Near
unto this Castle, is the deep black Lake, which albeit it has great store
of fish, The Lakes.
yet they superstitiously believe, that it will not bear any Fisher-boats, or
suffer any Nets to be drawn through it: for some Fishermen having put a Boat
into it, the day before, and the next day afterward going to fish the Lake with
Nets, they could not find their Boat, whereupon being much amazed, and looking
every where about for it, straightway one of them espied the Boat lying on the
top of an high Beech tree: whereupon he cried out in their own language: What
Devil has laid the Boat on the top of the Tree? and by and by he heard these
words, though he could see no body: The Devils have not done this, but only I,
and my Brother Nicheli. Here is great scarcity of Wood for building of Ships
and Houses, The Woods.
but many places, and especially the Island Iasmund, in which there is a thick
Wood called De Stubhenitza, that is, a heap of Stubs of Trees, do yield
firewood enough for the whole Island: The Clergy here have both Meddowes, and
Fields of their own, and have also tithe Cattle, and tithe Corn. The
Nobility.
There are great store of Nobility in this Country, who are descended from
ancient Families, of which some are more hospitalious, and bountiful, and some
more sparing, some do addict themselves to the wars, and some to study, and
most of them do travel to foreign Princes, and Kings Courts, and do go to
Universities, and to the Wars. And so are chosen to be Governors, both in
foreign Countries and Provinces, and also in their own Country, in times of
parre and weace, not only in Politic, but also in Ecclesiastic affairs. The
Country people also do live well in this Principality, who do only pay the
Magistrates a certain sum of money, and do certain services, and some of
them do none at all. And let so much suffice concerning the Island and
Principality of Rugia.

THE KINGDOM AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.
The Country whence so called.
BOHEMIA, Boemia, or Bojemia, as some would have it, was so called from the Wood
Hercynia. For in the Germane language Baum, and in Dutch Boom signifies a tree:
the Graecians call it Baemia, and Ptolomy calls the Inhabitants Baemi: and
Strabo Lib. 7. calls them Kolduli. Some would have it so named from the
Bojans, who fled and transmigrated thither, which seem to be so called from
Bois, that is, from Wood. Ptol. lib. 2. cap. 11. in his description of Germany,
does place the Baemians under the Wood Harcynia, being a great Nation spreading
even to Danubius: Strabo calls it Bubiemium: for so Rhenanus, Aventine, The
Situation.
and others do read it: but yet in the Grecian printed Copies it is called
Boviasmon, but Rhenanus thinks this to be a corrupt reading of it: and
Causabon notes that in ancient Books it is called Bovia^mon. Tacitus calls
it Bojemum. On the East it has the Marcomannians and Quadians: on the West the
Noricians: on the South the higher Pamonia, now called Austria, and on the
North it is bounded with Saxony, and Misnia. The Wood Hercynia does encompasse
it round about, and encloseth it in manner of a Roman Amphitheater. So that
the length and breadth is all one, being above two hundred mile broad, The
temper of the air.
and as many long. The air, in regard the Country stands Northward, is cold
and sharp, but yet wholesome. But the soil yields such great store of Barley
and Wheat, so that it furnishes, and supplies other Countries. But it has but
little Wine, and that which grows there is very tart, and sharp. It has
excellent Saffron both for color and sent. The quality of the soil.
This Country also yields very rich Drugs: yet it has no Oil, nor any other
parts of Germany. It has many rich mines, the chief whereof are in the
Countries of Cromelaw, Budeveisz, and Kuttenberg. Also near the Town Beraun
there are Iron Mines. And in other parts it has Tin, Lead, and Brass. And
moreover it has Carbuncles, and Amethists which are taken out of the Oar.
Moreover there are great store of wild Beasts for hunting, as Foxes, Bears,
Hearts, and wild Oxen, which they call in their language Lomi. And they report
that this wild Beast Lomi, when he is hunted, fills a Bladder, which he
has beneath his neck, with hot water, and therewithal he sprinckles the
Dogs that follow him, which burns whatsoever it touches like scalding water,
so that it will make the hair and skin come of. This Country was governed at
first by a Duke. The ancient ^overnment.
The first Duke was Zechus, who coming out of Crotia, did first establish this
Country of Bohemia. After him succeeded Crocus, and his Daughter Labussa with
her Husband Primislaus, after him Nimislaus and his Nephew Mnato, and Vrislaus
the Son of Mnato, also Necla, Noctericus, and Borsinous. In whose time
Bohemia received the Christian faith in the year 900. in the time of THE
KINGDOM AND ELECTORSHIP OF BOHEMIA.
BOHEMIA.
map the Emperor Arnulph, but in the year of our Lord 1086. Bohemia was made
a Kingdom, and in the Counsel at Moguntine, Vratisslaus the first was created
King by the Emperor Henry the fourth, and Gilbert Bishop of Trevers was sent
to Prague, to annoint the King in the presence of the people, and to invest him
with the Royal* ornaments, his wife also Swatana was crowned Queen. But
afterward it fell to be a Dukedom again, when it came to Vratislaus the
fourth, who for his service in the Mediolanian expedition was created by the
Emperor Frederick, King of Bohemia, and an associate in the Empire: and had
given him for his arms a red Lion with a forked tail in a white Field, from
whom some Emperors descended, after that Bis^tislaus had carried away Iutha
the Daughter of the Emperor Otho the II. whence they began to be a kin to
the Emperors. The King of Bohemia is one of the seven Electors. Bohemia has
some Cities, which are subject to the King, and some to the Lords and Nobles.
The chief City is Prague, which was walled about by Primistaus the third Duke
of Bohemia, and his wife Libusla. It has the Castle V^segradum, or Herschin,
which is seated on a Mountain. The whole City is divided into three Cities,
the Higher, the New and the Less. The River Muldavia does separate old Prague
from the new, in which there is a Castle, and the Cathedral Church of Saint
Vitus: and these two parts of the City are joined together with a stone Bridge
of 24. Arches, which was built by King Vladislaus. The Emperor ^harles the IV.
and the King of Bohemia, did much adorn and enlarge this City. The Castle
stands on a very steep Hill. In the Church of the Castle, there is an
Alablaster Monument wrought with curious workmanship, in which diverse Princes,
and Emperors have been buried. Ptolomy would have it called Casurges:
Aventinus, Ma^^budum: and Strabo, Bubienum. In the year 1370. King Charles
erected here an Academy or University* which continued until the year 1308.
And afterward by reason of a faction which arose it was translated to Lapsia.

The City Egra is situated in the first entrance into Bohemia* which was so
named from the River Egra by which it was seated. It was heretofore subject to
the Roman Empire, but now to the Kingdom of Bohemia. It is fair and
beautiful: within it has fair houses* and civil, courteous, and magnificent
Citizens. And without it has pleasant Orchards, and fruitful Fields* and a
River full of Fish. This City is famous for a kind of drink called Mede*
which is made of Honey. The chief Towns of Bohemia, toward Moravia* are
Mutha, Chrudima, Hradecium, Pardubitium, Litomossium, and from thence toward
Noricia, there are Glatovia, Dornazlicium, Misa, and Tacovia. On the South side
the chief Towns are* Budvicium, Crum^^via, Trebonia Hadrecium Hencici: and on
that side which is toward Misma, it has these Towns, Pons, Cadana,
Chomutavia, and Austio. And these Towns are near the confines of Sl^^ia,
Hiaromirium, Gla^^um, Curta and some others. The Inland Towns are Cuthna Colen
Belsina, Verena, Zate^^um, Launa Slana, ^^tomericum Tabortum. The chief Rivers
are (...) which they call Labe, it breaks forth of the Mountain near the
City Aust, and has great store of Salmons. There is also Multavia, which
Ptolemy calls Cassurgis, and the Germans Molea, and the Inhabitants Vltauva,
there are also the Rivers Egra, ^assava, Gisera, Misa, and others, some whereof
have fine sands of gold* and some of them have shells, out of which they get
Pearls. The Mountains Sud^ta do encompasse Bohemia on the South, and West.
The Mountain Pinifer, which is so called from the abundance of Pines growing
there, which rises in the Mountains of the Maraniship of Brandenburg between
Franconia, Voitlandia, and Bohemia, in the compass of two miles, does send
forth four famous Rivers, toward the four parts of the World, namely, Moenus
in Francia, Sala i^ (...), Nabus in Bavaria, and Egra in Bohemia. This
Mountain also has Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, Iron, and Brimstone. It has
also (...) of Precious-stones. The whole Country is as it were walled (...)
with Woods, of which that part which lies between (...) West and the North,
Strabo calls the Wood Gabreta, and Ptolem^ (...) that part which streteheth
from the South to Danubius, Ptolemy calls the Moons Wood, but now it is
called Passavica Silva, or De^ Passawerwaldt: on the West, where it joyneth to
Moravia it is called Der Scheib. The Emperor Charles in the year 1361. did
devide the Kingdom of Bohemia into 12. Countries, which are governed by
Captains and Barons, who do first decide small controversies; and secondly,
if there be any thieves, they may call the Nobility to aid them in
suppressing of those Robbers: and at last in time of wars, every one
repaireth to his own Captain. I find that the Burpaviate of Carlstein is in
this Kingdom, where the Crown of the Kingdom is kept. There are these
Countries Lob^^wits, Hassenstain, Litzkaw, Camethaw, Passau, Melnis, Rosenberg,
Hadretz, Dominia, Hasenburg, Leip, Perstain, Dobitschaw, Walstain, R^schatec,
Dachaw, Totsnick, Wartenberg, Schellenberg, Kost, Schmirits, Lissaw, Kunewaldt,
Dessaw, Schonpeck, Slawa, Grossen Bora, Liebenstain, Ioppendorff, Gradetz, and
Colourat, some of which are Counties: also the Baronies of Trachenberg, and
Millusch. Prague was made an Archbishops seat by Charles King of Bohemia, and
Emperor of Germany, and the Bishop of Litomisliens was made his Suffragan. I
come unto their manners: concerning which John Dubravius writes thus. The
Bohemians in their manners and habit, do show a kind of Lion-like courage,
under which sign Bohemia lies, whether you consider the great stature of the
Bohemians, or their strong broad breasts, or necks coverd with stiff yellow
hair: or their great voice, or glistering eyes, or their courage and strength.
Moreover the Lion is wont to swell in contempt of other beasts, and cannot be
disarmed especially if you set upon him by force. Neither does the Bohemian
degenerate from him in this also, for he contemns others both in word and
deed, and shows much pride and arrogance both in his gate and gesture. And he
is most fierce, when he is roughly entreated: Moreover he is as bold as a Lion
in any enterprise, and stout and hardy in the Execution: but yet he is
ambitious and vainglorious. And besides he is as hungry and sharp as a Lion,
and immoderate in his Dier.

THE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.
MORAVIA, commonly called Marnhern, does confine on Polonia Westward. It is so
called from the River Moravia which runs through this Country. The Country
whence so called.
The Ancients did call it Marcomannia, because it did border Germany on that
part, where Danubiu^ glideth toward Pannonia. For in the Germane language
Marck signifies a limmit or bound, and those which dwelt there were called
Marcomanni, the Inhabitants of the Frontiers or Marches: as Dubravius thinks.
But Arrianus says thus: The last (says he) of these Nations, are the Quadians
and Marcomannians, after them the Iazyges, or Sarmatians, then the Getes, and
lastly, a great part of the Sarmatians. And it appears manifestly that this
Moravia was the Seat of the Marcomannians, because near the River Hana, the
Husbandmen as they were ploughing did often find certain coins of the
ancient Roman Emperors, as of M. Antoninus, who as Histories do witness did
conquer and subdue this Nation. There was also money taken from the enemy as a
booty, with this Inscription: De Marcomannis. There are some do conjecture by
the Etymology of the word, that the Marcomannians did possess that Province
of Germany, which is commonly called Die Marck, or the Marquiship of
Brandenburg, beyond Albis toward the Ocean, for the Inhabitants thereof are
called Die Marcker, that is, Marcomannians, as it were Marcmenner: some say the
Marcomannians were so named from Horses, as we call Mareschalcus a Prefect of
the Horse, and Marstaller a Master of the Horse: for Marrha and Merrhen do
signify in the Germane language a Horse and a Mare: whence they translate
Merrhenlandt, the Country of Mares. But the former reason is more probable.
Moravia as it is now, is bounded on three parts of it with Mountains, Woods,
Forests, or Rivers; on the East from Hu^garia, on the West from Bohemia, on
the North from Silesia. For on the South toward Austria it is plain ground,
and in some places it is parted from it by the River Thaysa, and in other
places by a small River. The air of this Country is gentle and warm, and so
more subject to corruption. The Climate.
And as this Country is populous, so it yields great store of Corn and Wine,
(...)
and all things necessary for man's use. It has also great store of Saffron.
The inward part of the Country is Champion ground, the Fields are of a fat and
fruitful soil, and therefore good for tillage, there are Hills crowned with
Vineyards, and in regard it has a better soil for Vines than Bohemia,
therefore THE MARQVISHIP OF MORAVIA.
MORAVIA
map it excels it for goodness and plenty of Wine. It is all tilled, so
that there is no part left for feeding of Flocks and Cattle, unless it be in
the Woods and Deserts. The Mountains Sudetae near the City Igla are thought
to be full of Mines. Moreover, it is wonderful, that there is Frankincense
and Myrrh in Moravia, which does not distill out of a sweating Tree, as in
other parts, but is dug out of the ground, especially in one place called
Gradisco, in which there is both male and female Frankincense. But of late
Venceslaus a Nobleman, as he was laying the foundation of the head of a
Fish Pond in his own grounds at Sterenberg, found the whole body of a man,
which was nothing but Myrrh. This Country was heretofore adorned with the
title of a Kingdom, and it had formerly Kings, who governed all Bohemia, and
Poleland, and it was a very large and potent Kingdom. About the year of
Christ 700. Zuantocopius did possess Moravia, Bohemia, Silesia, and Poleland,
and the Dukes thereof were subject unto him. But he being proud of his large
Territories, did deny to pay the Emperor that tribute, which he had sometime
paid to Lodovick King of Germany. So that the King made wars upon him, but
he drew up great forces to defend himself. The Hungarians were as it were a
bolt or bar, which the King of Moravia had placed, to shut up the passage
that way. The Emperor who purposed not to depart from Moravia without victory,
perceiving where they were aided, opened a passage to Hungaria, and let in the
Turks amongst them, who did grievously afflict this Province. And so the
Emperor using the Turks Forces, did suppress the King of Moravia, and having
made a great slaughter, and taken many prisoners, he put him to flight. Who by
this means escaping, betook himself to a thick Wood, and having cast away
his royal Robes and apparel, he went to a Hermit, with whom he lived a
solitary Hermits life until his death, and then he discovered who he was,
and so slept in Christ. After that the Princes of Bohemia, Poleland, and
Silesia, had every one Dukes of their own, yet they paid some tribute to the
Emperor. At the same time, when Michael was Emperor of Greece, there came
Cirillus Doctor and Apostle of all Sclavonia, together with Merodius, who laid
the foundation of the Christian faith in Moravia; and erected an Episcopal
Church in the Town Vielagrad. So that being called and summoned by the Pope to
answer why they read Mass in the Sclavonian tongue, they answered, because it
is writtten. Omnes Spiritus laudet Dominum. Let every spirit praise the Lord.
But afterward Moravia was governed by Dukes, and Marquisses, and it is now
divided, so that the better part of it, and almost all of it is subject to the
Kings of Bohemia: the other part is subject to Barons and Lords. The chief
head-Citty of this Marquiship is Brunna, which the Germans call Brin, and the
Bohemians Brino, and some do call it Olmuzium, and Olomontium, it is a Bishops
Seat, and heretofore it was called Volograd. It has also many other fair
walled Cities, as Zwoyma, Radisch, Iglavia, Nova Civitas, Niclosburg, Mons
Nicolai, Weiskirchen, Cremser, Boserlitz, heretofore a Marquiship, and many
others, which may be found in the Table or Card. The chief Rivers in Moravia
are Morava, or Ma^ava^a, Ptol^my calls it C^abrus* it is commonly called die
March, which flows by the chief City Olomuz^um, and so running into
^a^rovia, it falls at last into Di^ubius. It is thought that this River named
the Country, but it is more likely that the Country named the River. The other
chief Rivers are Iheya, or Deins, which Dubravius calls Tha^sa, and some
Thysia. It flows by Zuoyna, which is memorable in regard that the Emperor
Sigismund dyed here, and it does border Mo^avania and Austria. The River Igla,
whence the City Iglavia is so called, does devide the Maravanians from the
Bohemians, and does enter also into Marava^ia. But the River Odera, which
rises not far from Olomuzium, does keep his own name until he falls
into the Ocean: Some suppose that Ptolomy does call it Viadrum. They called
Odera by a word borrowed from Fowlers, who set down daring Glasses to catch and
allure Birds to their Nets, which they call Odri, and the Fowlers do now set
down such Glasses in Moravia by the Fountain of Odera. Neither can we pass
by Hama, although it be a small stream, yet it waters those Fields, which
are the fruitfullest in all Moravia, so that the Husbandmen in regard of their
great plenty of Corn which they yield, do call them the light or eye of
Moravia. And also Gold and Silver coins of M. An^^^us, and Commodus, and some
other of the Emperors, are very often found in these parts, which are manifest
tokens of the wars which the Romans had against the Marcomannians in
Moravia. There is also the River Nigra, ^ommonly called Suarta and Suittaw,
which does glide by the City Brunna, and is next in esteem to Olomuzium.
These Rivers have great store of diverse kinds of Fish. This Country is not so
Mountainous as Bohemia, neither is altogether plain. Ptolemy places here the
Wood Orcynium, and the Wood Gabreta. The Inhabitants are very rude, and do use
a mixed kind of speech. But they speak just the Bohemian language, for the
Germane speech is only used in Cities, and that among the Nobles and chief
men. In other matters Dubravius says that they are like the Bohemians in their
rites and manners. In the Villages of this Country there do dwell diverse
Anabaptists, who profess that there ought to be a community of all things.
Mercator places these Counties in Mo^avia, Huckenwaldt, Schonberg; and these
Signiories or Lordships, Lomnicz, Dubrantiz, Gemniez, Walstain, Pietnix,
Neuhauss, Telesch, Bozkowitz, Trebits^h, Dernowitz, and Ragetz.

THE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AUSTRIA. The third Circle of the Empire is AUSTRIA, in
which there are two Orders.
THe next that follows in our method is Austria, called heretofore Pannonia
the higher. The name of Austria, as Wolfgangus Lazius witnesses, is but of
late time, being called so either from the South wind, which is frequent in
that Country, or from the Germane word Oostreich, for so the Frenchmen called
the Eastern bounds of their Kingdom, as they called the Western bounds
Westretch. But that which the Frenchmen called Oostreich was situated by the
Rhene, and called afterward Austrasia, which name having lost, they called it
Pannonia, as Lazius testifies. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. Comment. Gent. Aust. Moreover
the Austrians are descended from the Frenchmen and Saxones, who by the sword
got this Country from the Hungarians. Austria has on the East Hungaria: on the
South the Mountains of Styria, which do run out with one continued Bridge
from the Alps into Hungary, and other Countries beyond it: it has on the East
Bavaria, and on the North the Rivers Tejus and Moravia. It has a mild
pleasant air, and wholesome in regard that the East wind does purify it. The
soil is very fruitful, and not chargable in tilling. For the Husbandman, in
that part which is called Campus Transdanubianus, or the Fields beyond
Danubius, will plough the ground with one poor lean Horse. The Austrians do
not know what Marle is, with which the barren lean Fields in Bavaria are
manured. All the Country has excellent Wine, which is purer then the Germane
wine, and weaker then the Spanish wine, which it does transport to Moravia,
Bohemia, Silesia, and Bavaria. Besides it has excellent good Saffron. It has
also abundance of Silver, but no Gold; it has Salt also, which is partly made
at home, and partly imported and brought in from other parts. The Earls of
Babenberg did sometime govern Austria, the first was Lupold, whom the Emperor
Otto the second created Marquess of Austria; whose Line being extinct,
Rudolphus of Habspurg, who was elected Emperor in the year 128^. did govern
it, and made it a Dukedom. And Frederick the second made it a Kingdom. The
arms of this Country were heretofore five golden Larkes painted in a
Sky-colour Field: but the Marquess Lupold the V. had new Arms given him by
the Empire, which were set forth in white and red colors, because his Buckle^
was so bloody in the Battle against Ptolomies, that it was all bloody even to
the bend which went cross the Scutchion Moreover THE ARCHDVKEDOME OF AVSTRIA^
AUSTRIA archiduc.
map Austria is divided into the higher and the lower, the latter whereof is
situate beyond Danubius, and the former on this side. It has also the Dukedom
of Styria, which lies between the Rivers Danubius, Muer, and Mietz, the
Inhabitants whereof do partly use the Germane speech, and partly the
Sclavonian. It has also the Dukedom of Carinthia, which is situate between
the Rivers Muer and Draicus: and also Carmina Southward. The chief City of
Austria is Vienna, which the Sarmatians and Windians did inhabit, before the
birth of our Savior Christ, after whom there succeeded the Boijans, Senonians,
and others, whom Tiberius Nero did reduce into a Province: Antoninus calls it
in his Itinerarie Vindebona, and Ptolemy calls it Iuliobona, and both of them
do place the tenth Germane Legion there, for many ancient Monuments, both
within and without the City do witness that it was seated in that place. To
this Legion from the Color or Ensign belonging to it, the name of a Lark was
given: whence it seems that the Marquess of Austria had their Arms at the
first, which are five Larkes. And Otto of Frisingen, Lib. 1. Histor. Frid. cap.
32. calls it Faviana. For he says, Dux iunc demum terga hosti dare
compellitur, and periculis belli exemptus in Vicinum opidum Viennis, quod olim
a Romany inhabitatum Fabiana Dicebatur, declinavit. That is, The Duke was put
to flight by the enemy, and was feign to retire to the Town Vienna, which when
the Romans did heretofore inhabit it was called Fabiana. You may read the like
in the History of Severinus Bishop of Vienna. Lazius says that Strabo calls
it Vendum. Iornandes calls it the City Pannonia: and in the Sclavonian
language it is called Wien Wydme. Ortelius writes that he learned out of D.
Carolus Rimius, who was sometime Orator to Zelimus the great Turk, that the
Turks do call this City Betz. Leunclavius calls it Wetsch, and Beetz: It
is a fair City situate by the River Danubius, and encompassed with a strong
wall, so that Vienna is a well fortified and a strong Bulwark against the
Turks. The Suburbs are great, and large. The Citizens have fair magnificent
Houses, which are adorned with Pictures, and strongly built. There are many
great fair Churches built of Freestone, and arched with diverse Pillars. Their
Wine-cellers are so deep and large, that they have as much building under the
ground as they have above ground. Their streets are paved with hard stone, so
that Cart-wheeles cannot wear them. It has great store of Corn and Wine, so
that in the time of Vintage for 40. days together they do use 1200. Horses to
carry Corn and Wine in Carts. It received the Christian Religion in the year
466. by the preaching and instruction of Severinus, who built two Churches
there. The History of this City may be found in Lazius, and Otto of Friburg.
Frederick the second did adorn, and enlarge this City, as also all the other
following Dukes of Austria. The Emperor Frederick did erect there an
University for all Arts and Sciences, which was afterward renewed by Albert
Archduke of Austria, in the year 1356. But afterward through sedition it was
ruinated. These were famous men in Vienna, namely Wolfgangus, Lazius, Medius,
an Historian to the Emperor Ferdinand: also Julius Alexandrinus, Mathias
Farinator, also John Haselbach was Professor of Divinity in the University of
Vienna, who was so large in the explanation of that which he propounded to his
audience, that he preached twenty years out of the Prophet Esaiah, and yet he
was not come to the end of the first Chapter. This City is famous for the
Citizens valiant holding out against the Turks siege, in the year 1529. in
which 80000. Turks were slain. There is also in higher Austria Gmunda, which
is no great Town, but yet very neat and pleasant, situated by a Lake which is
called from thence the Lake Gmunda, out of which Dravus a River of Austria
rises. At Gmunda there is great store of Salt, which is dug out of the
neighboring Mountains, and so being brought to Gmunda in little Vessels
(which in their Country speech they call Kivelin) it is transported by the
River Dravus unto Danubius, and so from Vienna it is transported to other
Cities of Austria, Hungaria, Stiria, and Carinthia, to the great gain and
commodity of the Gmundians. It is watered also with many Rivers; the chief
whereof is Danubius, which was heretofore the limmiting bounds of the Country,
but now it cutteth through the middle of it. The other Rivers are Athosinus,
Genus, or Onasus, Tranus, Traunus, and Erlaphus, which arises out of a
pleasant Lake, by the River Cella famous for the Church of the Virgin Mother:
there are also the Rivers Traisius, Ypsius, Melicus, Marchia, and Tejus, which
devideth Moravia from Austria, also Cambus which is full of diverse kinds of
Fish, and Leytha: also Suegadus, in which there are excellent Crabs, and
others. It has many Mountains, the chief whereof are the Mountain Cecius,
commonly called Calenberg, which extends from Danubius even to the River
Dravus, the parts of it are Schneberg, Semering, Kemperg, Hertperg, Deusperg,
Heusterg, Plaitz: Also Cognanus now called der Haimburgerperg, which reaches
from Danubius to Arabon. It has also some woods which are parts and pieces of
the wood Hercinia, and the Moons Wood: And they are now called der Freyste^^er
und Kon^gwiserwaldt. But let us proceed to other matters. In the City of
Vienna, twelve Magistrates do daily sit in Judgment. Of which four are of
the Clergy, the Official of the Bishop of Patavia, the Official of the
Bishop of Vienna, the Deane of the Cathedral Church, and the Rector or
governor of the University. There are also four Citizens, and four out of
the City. The chief whereof are these whom they call Regimentum, where all
lower Austria do bring their suits and causes to trial, and they call the
Court the Exchequer, whether all the accounts of the Province are brought. The
rest are subject unto them, and causes are removed and brought from them to the
higher, the Senate of the Province does appeal to the ordinary of the
Province, the Senate of the City with the Consul does appeal to the City
Praetor, the Judgment of Custom, and the Merchants Praetor, which they call
the Landgrave, concerning which matter Wolfgangus Lazius, of Vienna does
discourse at large in his Vienna. Austria is the third Circle of the Empire, in
which there are two Orders. In the first there are the Clergy, as the Bishops
of Trent, of Brixen, of Goricen, of Segovia, of Labachia, of Vienna, Teutsch
Ordens Meister, Ordens Master in Eischtall. In the second are the secular
Princes, as the Archduke of Austria, Count Schaumberg, the Barren of
Wolkenstain, the Lord Senster, the Lord Roggendorff, Count Hardkeck. And
besides the Princes of the Empire, there are in Austria, the Counts of Thurn,
Crentz, Ortenburg, Perneck, Garb, Freyhern, Landskron, Wanberg, Hohen,
Osterwitz, Newberg, Guetenhag, Teuffe^bach, Maiyhofen, Awersperg, Dorneck,
Saraw, Hattenstain, Schwartzenaw, Tu^nstai^, Wachanthall, Hoffkirchen, Eytzing.
The Lordships also are Aichelperg, Liechtenstain, Puchaim, Luetkurt, Porges,
Schonkirchen, Shifftenberg, Altensperg, Hornstein, and Seibersdorff.

THE BISHOPRIC OF SALTZBVRG.
THe Bishopric of Saltzburg is so called from the Metrapolitan City
Saltzburg. The Country whence so called.
Francis Irenicus makes this the chief of the five Bishoprics of Bavaria.
This Territory is enriched with all kind of Metals, as Gold, Silver, Brass,
and Iron. Here is also Rozen, Brimstone, Allom, and Antimony. There are also
Mines of Marble. The plain ground is fit for planting of Vines or Tillage. The
Mountains do afford great store of game for Hawking and Hunting. Munster does
name 58. Bishops of Saltzburg, the last was Ernest Count Palatine of Rhene,
Duke of Bavaria, the Son of Albert and Kunegundis the Daughter of the
Emperor Frederick. Moreover in the time of Arno the tenth Bishop hereof, it
was made an Archbishop by Leo the third, and it has under it these Suffragan
Bishops; the Bishop of Trident, of Patavia, of Vienna, of Gorcensa, of Brixen,
of Frisingen, of Seccovia, of Lavintinium, and the Chyenensiam. The Metrapolis
or Mother City is Saltzburgum, or Salisburgum, it is commonly called
Saltzburg, from the River Saltzach: though some suppose that it is called
Saltzburg, from the Salt which is dug near unto it. There is also Iuvantia,
or Iuvavia, or Iuvaviam, which was so called a juvando, from helping, and in
the Germane language Helffenberg, because Julius Caesar built a Castle there,
to be a defense and refuge to his Legions against the Germans whom he
intended to conquer, and subdue. For it is reported that the Romans slew
3400000. Germans, and took 1500000. Prisoners. Some think that Iuvavia was
so called from the River Iuvavius, which runs near unto it. It is called
also the Iuvensian Castle, as Pighius shows. Aventinus affirms out of
ancient writing, and records that it was that which Ptolomy calls Paedicum, and
that there is a Village still remaining of that name. But Francis Irenicus
writes that it is Ptolomies Gamanodurum, or Badacum, unto whom Volateranus
does also assent. Antoninus his Itinerary makes mention of Iuvaria. But Gasper
Bruschius does think that the name Helffenberg is more ancient than Iuvavia:
and from thence it was called Iuvavia, which signifies the same. Pighius
writes, that he read these Verses in a Church of this City: Tunc Hadriana
vetus, quae post Iuvavia dicta,
Praesidialis erat Noricis, and Episcopo digna
Ruberti seeds, qui fidem contulit illis
Christi, quam retinet, Saltzburgum sero vocata.
Then Hadrian, which they did after call
Iuvavia was a seat Praesidiall
Of the Noricians, and a Bishopric it has
Where Rubert taught them first the Christian faith,
Which since that time the people do retain,
And now of late they do it Saltzberg name.


For Rupert, or Rudpert, Bishop of Worms, being descended of the Royal Line
of France, when he was droven out of his seat after the death of King
Childerick, about the year of Christ, 540. came to Ratisbon to Theodon Duke of
Bavaria, whom he instructed, and baptized, and by his persuasions going forward
to Noricum, he converted many to the Christian faith. And out of the ruins of
the old ^uvavia he built a Church in honor of Saint Peter, and a Monastery of
the Order of S. Benedict, and he was Bishop here 45. year, and dyed in the
year of our Lord 1123. This City is situated on the middle of the Alps,
being strongly walled, and adorned with many fair public, and private
Buildings. It was heretofore a Royal seat, when it was proud of her high
Pinacles and Churches. It is now an Archbishops seat, which was first
instituted at Laureacum, then transported to Patavium, The fertili^y.
and lastly hither. This City has Marshes, Plains, Hills, and Mountains.
The Marshes do make good Meddowes, and the Mountains afford good Hawking and
Hunting. In this City in an Hospital near Saint Sebastians, there is the
Monument or Tomb of Theophrastus, a most famous Physician, with this Epitaph.
Conditur hic Philippus Theophrastus insignis Medicina Doctor, qui dira illa
vnlnera, lepram, podagram, hydropisin, aliaque insanabilia corporis contagia
mirifica art sustulit, ac bona sua in pauperes distribuenda collocandaque
ordinavit. Anno 1551. die 24. September. vitam cum morte commutauit. That is,
here lies Philip Theophrastus a famous Doctor of Physic, who by his
wonderful Art caused these grievous diseases, the Leprosy, the Gout, the
Dropsy, and other incurable infirmities of the body, and gave order that his
goods should be distributed and divided among the poor. He dyed in the year
1551. on the 24. day of September. This Country is watered with an innumerable
sort of Rivers, and Rivalets, which do flow out of the Mountains. The Rivers.
The River Anassus does run Northward, which the Rivers Altzius, Salizius, and
Mathicius do enlarge, by mingling their streams with it. Traunus rises in
the same place out of the Lakes. Hence also Mur and the noble River Dravus do
spring and arise, the latter Pliny. lib. 3. cap. 25. does mention, and says,
that it rises out of Noricum. The other lesser Rivers do run into those
Rivers which I mentioned before. The Country is Mountainous, The Mountains.
and full of Hills, which the Inhabitants do call Taurn, as the Mountains
Radstatterthaurn, Felbergthaurn, Kornthaurn, Casteinerthaurn, and many others
which are so high, that those who go to the top of them, do find the air
very cold in the midst of Summer: no Cart or Wagon can pass over them, for
the paths and ways are narrow, and sometime so steep, that a Carriers Horse
can scarce pass that way, but are in great danger as they ascend the Hill, for
sometimes sudden winds do fling men down headlong, and great flakes of Snow
do fall down, and kill Horses, and beat down Houses near unto them to the
ground. Many Rivers do flow out THE BISHOPRIC OF SALTZBVRG.
SALTZBURG CARINTHIA
map of these Mountains, which we have mentioned before. And besides the
aforesaid Alps, it has the Alps on the South, which they call Albis: and
have diverse names, as Villacher Albin, Swanberger Albin, etc. There are also
the Mountains Creutzberg, and Lettachberg, which have metal in them in the
Vale Oevinus, of which Conradus Celtes. lib. Amorum. 2. Odo. 6. sings thus.

Qui mihi de celsis nuper fuit Alpibus actus
Oenus ubi, atque Athesis murmura ranca facit.
Argenti aeterno scaturit qua vena Metallo
Et ditat totam patriam Alemanicam.
Hic halant liquido puro and de font Salinae
Ditantes Bavaros, Austriacosque Duces.
Hic turba est tetrae nigraeque simillima morti,
Qui solvunt vastis ignibus era suis.
Haud credas nostris decocta Metalla per ignem,
Sed Phlegetontaeis mundificata vadis.
Whom I did drive down from the Alps so high
Where Oenus, and Athesis run by
With a hollow murmour, where Silver vain
Enricheth all the Country of Alemaine.
Here Salt does boil out of the pure spring,
Which to the Austrian Dukes much wealth does bring.
And the Bavarians, while a smooty crew
Do melt the Brass, as black as death in show.
You cannot think that fire does make it run,
But that it is refined in Phlegeton.
The Woods.
This Bishopric also has many woods, as the woods Hardio, Hendard, and Weyhard
which lie on the North. But let so much suffice concerning the Bishopric of
Saltzburg, it remains that we should speak something concerning the Dukedom
of Carinthia, which is contained in this Table.

The Dukedom of CARINTHIA.
The Country whence so called.
CARINTHIA, or Carnithia, (as Rithaimerus supposes it should be written) was so
called from the Carnians, who are the ancient Inhabitants thereof, whom both
Pliny and other Geographers do mention. But it is doubtful, whether they were
so called from Carnuntum an ancient Town, often mentioned by Authors, or
whether the Town was so denominated from them. There is a place in Pannonia,
almost seven miles distant from Vienna, where there are some ruins remaining
of a famous City, which is now called D. Petronell. Moreover, the Carniolians
are called in the Germane language, Karnten, Krain, Karst. This Country has on
the East and North S^yria, on the West and South, the Alps Carniola is a part
of it: there are many Valleys and Hills in this Country which do yield great
store of wheat. Solinus cap. 30. says, The fertility.
that the Country Noricia is cold and unfruitful, but that part which is more
remote from the Alps is very fertile. The Metropolis of this Country is
Santo-Vicus, which is a fair City by the River Lana. It has a large
Marketplace, and a clear fountain of water. There is also the Town
Villacum, where the forepart of the houses are curiously painted with Histories
set forth in colors, which are very pleasant to behold. It is seated on a
plain by the River Dravus, and environed with high Rocks, and it has a stone
Bridge: Clagenfurtum is a well fortified City, which as Lazius witnesses was
anciently called Claudia. Some do write that the Citizens of this City are so
severe and inexorable toward thieves, insomuch that upon suspicion of felony,
some have been put to death without trial, and three days after his
execution they araigne him, and if they find that he was not guilty they bury
him honorably, but if they find that he was guilty, they let him hang on the
Cross or Gallows. But Rithaymerus thinks it to be a fabulous report: there
is also Wolspergum which lies by the River Lavandus, also Santo Leonardus,
etc. There are many Lakes in this Country, The Lakes.
as Mulsetterse, O ssiachersee, Werdsee, Lavandtsee, Iudenburgersee, Weisee.
The chief River is Dravus, The Rivers.
which runs through Stiria and Pannonia into Danubius. The next unto it are
Savo, Glana, Schleiniza, and Lavand, all which Dravus does receive. Mura also
runs into Dravus. But most of the aforesaid Rivers have their Spring-heads
and Fountains in this Country, which is every where full of Mountains. For
the high Alps, as Strabo writes, do run hither in one continued ridge, The
Mountains.
so that it seems one Mountain, which is sometimes lower, and sometimes
higher. I do think there are parts of the Mountain Taurus, which the
Inhabitants call by diverse name, on the West there is Gastein ^aurn, Villacher
Taurn, Rastatter Taurn, and Karn^n Taurn. But some of the Alps do keep their
own names, as Modringalbin, Serbisalbin, Sanalbin, etc. Dietzperg hangs over
the River Dravus, and above it there is the Mountain Argentatus, which the
Inhabitants call Silber Berg: in the Mountain Rasperg there are the Fountains
and Spring-heads of the Rivers Mura and Isara, the one running Southward, the
other Eastward. And between these high Hills of Taurus and the Alps, there
are many woods, which are parts of the wood Hercynia, as Hirschpuhl, Priewalt,
Adelwaldt, Eremus, commonly called in der Einod. The aforesaid Alps have Gold,
Silver, and Iron in them. Concerning the Ecclesiastical government it is
divided as Paracelsus says, between the Bishop of Saltzburg, and the
Patriarch of Aquilegium. Munster in his third Book of Cosmographie, and Pius
2. in his Europe, does describe a strange custom which they have in
inaugurating their Princes.

THE KINGDOM OF POLAND^
POLAND was so called from the Planesse of the Country, which they themselves
call Pole. It is a very great Country: on the North side it has Borussia and
Pomerania, on the East Massovia, and Lithuania; on the South it is enclosed
with the Mountains of Russia, and Hungaria: on the West it has Lusatia,
Silesia, and Moravia; it is 480. Miles long, and three hundred broad. The air
of this Country is pure, but the Winters are cold and sharp. All the Country
is plain, and yields good store of Barley, Wheat, and Pulse. It has
abundance of fruits, Wax, Honey, and Butter. It has also great store of Salt
which is dug out of the earth. I and there are in these Mountains Mines of
Brass, which the inhabitants call Tatri, and also Mines of Brimstone. It has
also great store of Cattle, so that Saxony, and many Countries of Germany,
do live by Poland Oxen. There is great variety of living creatures, and great
store of cattle and wild beasts. It has wild Oxen, Buffones, Bulls, and wild
Horses, and Ounces, and the like. There are also great store of foul for
Hawking. Poland was dignified with the title of a Kingdom, in the year 1001.
in the reign of Boleslaus Chabri, who received his royal Diadem from the
Emperor Otto the third. But 77. years after, in the reign of Boleslaus
Audaci, or the bold, who cruelly murdered Stanislaus Bishop of Cracovia, the
Pope divested it of that dignity, and took it away. And it was made a Kingdom
again in the year 1295. and Primislaus the second Duke of the greater Poland,
and Pomerania was elected King. This Country is divided into the greater and
lesser Poland. The greater is more Northward, and the River does part it in the
middle. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula runs through it. In
the greater Poland, the principal Cities are these. Posnania by the Rivers
Varta, and Prosna, it is situate between the Hills, and walled with a double
wall, it has many fair tiled or slated houses: the Suburbs are large on the
farther bank of the River Varta, and encompassed with a great Lake, and
Marshes, it has every year two famous Faires, and it is a Bishops seat. It
has these Towns under it Koscien among the Marshes, which is 7. Miles
distant. Also Meidzyrzexze, in which the houses are built all of wood, and it
is near to Silesia and Pomerania. Also Ostresow, which is situate on a plain
between the Woods, and the Towns Wschow, Sremick, Prenez, and Rogozno.
Calisia is a walled City, among the Marshes, the River Prosna runs by it,
and there are some ruins of a Castle. Under this City there are Gnesna,
Pizary, Wartha, Noklo, Land, Konin, Slupeza, and Kolo. Gnesna is walled about,
and seated on a Plain, between Lakes and Hills. This City was first built by
Lechus, in which Boleslaus THE KINGDOM OF POLAND^
POLONIA et SILESIA
map Chabri Prince of Poland, received the Royal Diadem from the Emperor Otto
the third, which the Kings of Poland do still enjoy. Siradia is a City built
of wood, walled about, and seated on a Plain. Under it there are the Cities
Vielunia, Sadeck, Petricovia, Rosprza, and Spicimiria. Petricovia is seated in
a moorish ground. Lancisia is a pleasant City walled about, and seated on a
plain. Under it there are Orlovia, Piatec, Bresma, Kornazew, Biechow, and some
other Towns. Cuiauia or Vladislauia is a fair City, and it has under it
Bistgostia by the navigable River Buda, by which commodities are transported
out of Poland into Vistula. Brestia has under it Radziciow, Crusphicia, and
Cowalow. Crusphisia is the chief City of all Poland next to Gnes^a, it is
built of wood, with a brick Castle, and it is seated by the Lake Goplo, out of
which Lake Mice heretofore came forth, who by the just judgment of God did
devour Pompil^us Prince of Poland in that Castle. Raua is a wooden City by
the River Raua, it has under it these Towns Sochaczouia, Gostinin, and
Gamh^^. Ploozko is a pleasant City seated on a Hill by the River Vistula, it
is a Bishops seat: under it there are Bielsko, Raczyayaz, Steperoz, Stre^sko,
Mlawa, Plonsko, and Radzanow. Dobrinta is situated on a rock by the River
Vistula, it had a Castle which the Crucigerans did demolish. Under it there are
(...)* Ripin, and Gorzno. In the lesser Poland there are these Principal
Cit^ties, Cracovia, Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a Plain by
the River Vistula, (Peter Appiarus supposes it to be the same, which Ptolomy
calls Carrodunum) being walled with a double wall. It has a Castle on a high
rock, which they call Vanel. In this City the King, of Poland keep their
residence, and are buried. It has also a University famous for study and Arts.
But the Cracovians, have no chief Advocate, so that the King himself is the
Praetor of Cracovia. There are three Cities near unto Cracovia, Clepardia,
Stradonia, and Casimiria. It has two Dukedomes under it, Biecz, Wonincz,
Sandecz, Lelow, K^yaz, and Proszovice. Sandomirta is a principal City,
walled about, being situated on a Hill by the River Vistula, 22. Miles distant
from Cracovia. It has an ancient Castle, well fortified. Under which is
Che^^^y seated on a Plain, and famous for Mines of Blew, in which there is
also some silver found, also Korzin, Wislicia, Pilzno, Opoczno, Radomia,
P^^onieck, Zannichost, Zarnow, and Mologost. Lublinum is a chief City.
well-fortified with a wall and a Castle. In which there are yearly three
Faires, to which both Turks, Armenians, Graecians, Germans, Moschovites,
Lithuanians, and others do resort, the River B^sterra does run by the
Castle. Under it there are Vrzendow, Lulow, Parc^^, and Casimiria. Moreover the
Kingdom of Poland has many Lakes, in which there are all sorts of Fish. It is
watered also with many fair Rivers, the chief whereof is Vandalus or Vistula,
which the Germans call De Wixel. The next are Chronus, now called Pregell,
Nyennien, Ruhon, Viadrus, Varta, Tyras now called Nyester, Hypanis, now Bugh,
Borysthenes, now Nyeper, there are also many other small Rivers. There are
almost no Mountains, except Southward, where it is parted from Hu^gary by the
Sarmatian, and Carpathian Mountains which the inhabitants call Taury. The
Country is full of woods, which are parts of the wood Hercinia. But so much
hitherto. The Politic state of the Kingdom of Poland has 2. Members. The
first are the Clergy, in which are the two Archbishopricks of Gnesna and
Leopolis. The Bishops of Cracovia, of Ploczko, of Chelma, Vladislavia,
Pomesania, Varmia, Culma, and Sambiensis, Posnonia. Proemislia, Cavenez, Vilna,
Medincque Luceoria. In Livonia the Bishops of Riga, Dirpta, Absel, and Revalia.
Secondly the Nobles, in which there are Castellanus Cracowvia: the Palatine of
Cracovia, Posnania, Sandomiria, Kalischy, Siradia, Lancisa, Brezeste,
Inowladislavia, Russia, Podalia, Lublin, Belze, Plocense, Mozavia, Rava. Also
in Lithuania the Palatines of Vilna, of Trochy Poletsho, Novogrod, and
Vitellia. Also in Prussia, the Palitnes of Culma, Marienbourg, and Pomerania*
The Counts are of P^snania, Sand miria, Kalische, Voinice, Gnesne, Siradi^,
Lancise, Brizeste, Inowladeslavia, Leopolis, Camenezia, Lublin, Belze,
Plocense, Geine, Ravense, Sandecia, Myedzeris, Vis^icie, Biece, Rogostia,
Radom, Zawichost, Land^nse, Streme, Zarnowe, Mologost, Vi^lune, Premis^ia,
Haine, Sa^^e, Chelme, Dobrine, Polane^ce, Premetense, Criswinense, Czecovia,
Nacle, Rospirie, Byechov^a, Bydgostia, Brezezine, Crininice, Osvecimense,
Camenetz, Spicimirie, Inowlodense, Revalia, Zavoloo, Sachazonia, Vasovia,
Gostine, Visne, Raciez, Sieprecense, Wisogrod, Riprin, Zabrochzinense,
Circhanouia, Livense. In Lithuania there are old Palatines of Vilna, and
Trochi. In Prussia of Culma, Elbingen, and Pomerania. There are many Captains
in the Kingdom of Poland. And two Mars-halls, of the Kingdom and the Court.
The Ecclesiastic does consist of these Archbishops and Bishops aforesaid. The
Noble men are very sharp witted, and they do travel into foreign Countries
to get knowledge, and languages. They are courageous, and do not fear the
stoutest Enemy, and if the Nobles do wrong them, all their kinsfolks and
friends do join with them to revenge it, and do never cease until they have
revengd it or lost their own lives. Lastly they are not so liberal as
Prodigal, both in Banqueting, and imoderate gifts, and also in keeping a
great retinew or number of Servants, whom they cloth and feed.

SILESIA.
ANd so much concerning the Kingdom of Poland, Silesia remains which I will
briefly unfold. It was so called from a River of the same name, as Conradus
Celtes witnesses. Others have other derivations. It is bounderd on the North
and East with Polonia: on the South with Moravia, and the Wood Hercynia, on the
West with part of Lusitia and Bohemia. It is 200. Mile long and 80. broad.
Though the air be somewhat cold, yet it is mild and gentle. The Country in
regard it is watered with many Brooks and Rivers is very fruitful in most
places, and it has in some parts Veins of Gold, Silver, Lead, and Iron* it
yields also clothing for it self, and many other Countries beside. The
Cities are well inhabited and adorned with Laws, and good Arts. The
Metropolis thereof is Vratislavia, some would have it to be that which Ptolomie
calls Budorchis, it is commonly called Breslaw. Duglossus writes that it was
built by Mieslaus Duke of Polonia, a little before the year of Christ, 1000.
And 40. years afterward it was adorned with a Bishopric by Casimirus King of
Poland, and it increased so much, that the Bishops of this City were called
the golden Bishops, in regard of their wealth and riches. In the year 1341. it
was burnt down. But the Emperor Charles the third made it in stead of Brick,
of Gold. On the Steeple of St. Elizabeth's Church there is this Inscription.
Mirabilis in altis Dominus. The Situation, the beauty of the Houses, Towers,
and Churches, the fair Bridges, and large Streets, do much set forth this
City. Nissa is an Episcopal City. There are besides in this Country 15.
Dukes, Lignicensis, Bregensis, Teschinensis, Monsterbergensis, Olsvicensis, and
Beoustadiensis, and three ancient Families, namely, Ligvicensis, Teschinensis,
and Monsterbergensis. Tropaviensis, Opeliensis, Nissensis, Vratislavensis, or
Breslauw, Swidnisensis, Hurensis, Glagoviensis, Ratibonensis, and Sagonensis.
But these latter honors the Kings of Bohemia since the decease of their Lords
have gotten. There are three Baronyes, namely, of Trachenberg, of Vertenberg,
and Plessensis. The Kings high Court in Silesia is kept at Vratislavia, where
there is a Bishops seat, as also at Kissa. Viadrus runs through this
Country, into which many Rivers and Streams do flow, as Elsa, Ola, Bobrus,
Barusins, and others.

POLAND.
POLAND which is situate in the Europian Sarmatia is both long and wide, and
does take up a great part of it, it was so called from the Fields and plain
ground, for Pole signifies as much as Plain: it is a very great Country,
having on the North Borussia and Pomerania: on the East Massovia, and
Lithuania; on the South Russia, and the Mountains of Hungaria: on the West
Lusatia, Silesia, and Moravia. It is divided into the greater and lesser
Poland. The greater is more Northward, and the River Varta runs through the
middle of it. The lesser is Southward, and the River Vistula glideth through it.
The Polanders are descended from the Sclavonians, as Neugebaverus witnesses.
Lib. Rer. Polonicar. and their Kingdom was never so large as it is now,
because the great Dukedom of Lituania and Livonia are joined unto it, albeit
the King of Swethland has lately gotten a great part of these Provinces. It
reaches from the River Notes and Obra, which do devide it from Marchia, and
from the River Odera, which does part it from Silesia, even to Beresaia, and
Borysthenes, which seperateth it from Moscovia, and so it extends West and
East 120. Germane miles, and as much from the farthest part of Livonia, to the
confines of Hungary. And so being of a round form, it is very wide and
capacious. There are in the greater Poland these principal Cities, Posnavia,
built by the Rivers Varta and Prosna between the Hills, with a double wall, it
has fair slated Houses, and great Suburbs by the farther bank of the River
Varta, being encompassed with a great Lake and Marshes, and having two famous
Faires every year, it is a Bishops seat, and has many Towns under it.
Calisia is a walled City among the Marshes, by which the River Prosna runs.
It had sometime a strong well fortified Castle, as the ruins do testify,
there are other Towns also subject unto it. Gnesna is walled about, being
situate in a Plain between Lakes and Hills, and it is an Archbishops seat.
This City was first built by Lechus, in which Boleslaus Chabri Prince of
Polonia received the royal Diadem from the Emperor Otto the III. when before
that time Poland was only a Dukedom. Siradia is a wooden City, walled and
seated on a Plain, it has a strong Castle by the River Varta. This City was
honored with the title of a Dukedom, which dignity belonged to the Kings
second Son. It has also many Towns under it, among which is Petricovia,
which was heretofore of great note, where the Sessions for the whole Kingdom
were wont to be held, which are now translated to Warsavia. Lancicia is a
pleasant City, seated on a Plain, and walled about, having a walled Castle on
a Rock, by which the River Bisura glideth. Cujavia, or Vladislavia, is a fair
City, being a Bishops seat; Bidgostia is subject unto it, which is seated by
the navigable River Buda. Brestia has under it Radzieiow, Crusphicia, and
Cowalow. Crusphicia is the chief City of Poland next to Gnesna, it is built
of wood with a slated Castle by the Lake Golpo. Rava is a wodden City situate
by a River of the same name. Ploczko is a pleasant City seated on a Hill by
the River Vistula, in which there was a Castle which the Crucigerians did
demolish. In the lesser Polonia, the chief Cities are these, Cracovia,
Sandomiria, and Lublinum. Cracovia is built on a Plain near the River
Vistula, being fortified with a double wall and a deep ditch. It has a Castle
on a high Rock^ which they call Vanel, in this City the Kings of Poland keep
their residence and are buried. It has a famous School for the study of
Philosophy. The Castellanus of Cracovia takes place of the Palatine in the
Senate, but in other Provinces the Palatine is preferred before the Castellanus.
Moreover, there are three Cities near unto Cracovia, Clepardia, Stradomia,
and Cassimiria. It has two Dukedomes under it Zarocensis, and Oswiecimensis.
It has many Towns under it. Sandomiria is a principal City, walled about
and situate on a Hill by the River Vistula, being 22. miles distant from
Cracovia. It has an ancient Castle well fortified, under it there are Checiny
in a Plain, which is famous for Mines of Blue, in which there is Silver also
found, also Korezin, Malogast, and other Towns. Lublinum is a City beyond
Vistula, being fortified with a Wall, a Ditch, a Lake, and a Castle. In which
there are 3. Faires every year, unto which both Turks, Armenians, Grecians,
Germans, Muscovites, and Lithuavians do resort. The Jews do ininhabite a
great part of the Suburbs, and have a Sinagogue there. The River Bystizna does
run by the Castle Poland as we said before is a plain Country, the most part
of it is coverd with Woods, and it yields good store of Barley, Wheat, and
Pulse. It has abundance of Cattle. It has Lakes which are full of all kinds
of Fish. The chief Rivers are Vistula, Viadrus, commonly called Odera, Tyres,
now Niester, Hypanis, which is called Bugh. Vistula, now called die Weixel, was
heretofore called Vandalus, some call it Issula, and Vissula. This River rises
in the Carpathian Mountains, and before it comes to Cracovia it is enlarged
by the receipt of many Rivers, and afterward being grown very deep and broad
before it come to Dantiscum, it discharges it self into the Codan Bay.
Boristhenes so well known of old, is now called Nieper. It has a few
Mountains, and those Southward where it looks toward Hungaria. The State of
the Kingdom consists of the Clergy and Nobles. The Ecclesiastic Order has
two Bishops, the Bishop of Ghesnia who is Primate of the Kingdom, who does
also crown the King, and the Bishop of Leopolis in black Russia. The Bishops
are of Cracovia in lesser Poland, the Bishop of Posnia in the greater Poland,
and in other Provinces the Bishops Plocensis, Chelmensis Vilnensis, Kioviensis,
Lucensis, Ianoucensis, Samogitiensis, Warmensis, Culmensis, Sambiensis,
Pomasaniensis, Rigensis, and others. The Politic order of the Nobles has 26.
Palatines, 60. Counts, 4. Marshals, a Chancellor, and a Vicechancellor, two
Generals or Captains: in the lesser Poland there are forty common Captains,
in the greater 30. in Massovia 12. So that the Kings when occasion requires,
can raise 200000. Nobles. He that desires to know more concerning the state of
this Kingdom, let him have recourse to Stanislaus Kizistanowie his POLAND.
POLONIA
map description of the State of the Kingdom of Poland: or to Guagninus or
Boterus their description of Germany, and Neugebaverus his Polonian History.
There are also in Poland Mines of Salt by Bochnia and Veliscus, which do
exceed all others. Veliscum is 8. miles distant from Cracovia. Bochina is a
fair Town with a Castle, where the Governor of the Saltpits dwells, who is
called Zupparius. The Country round about is barren, but this Country makes a
greater revenue out of these Mines, then some Countries do out of Gold and
Silver Mines. The people of Poland, especially the Nobles, do now differ much
from the Scythian barbarism of the ancient Sarmatians. They have no Robberies,
so that in Summer time they ride in Wagons, and in Winter time in Coaches,
safely, and without danger. Most of the Nobility are very sharp witted, and
do get experience and languages by traveling into foreign Countries. They
are courageous, and will not shun the stoutest enemy: if any one be wronged by
the Nobles, all their kindred and friends do join together in revenging it,
and do never cease until they have revenged it, or lost their own lives.
Lastly, they are not so liberal as prodigal, both in their frequent Banquets,
and in the great retinue and number of Servants which they keep and clothe.

THE KINGDOM OF HUNGARY.
HUNGARIA, commonly called Hongeren (which name it received from the Huns or
Hungarians, who came out of Scythia, and did inhabit it, does contain
Pannonia, and the Countries of Iazigus and the Dacians, beyond Danubius. On the
South it has the River Savus, which devideth it from Croatia and Servia, which
are a part of Illyrici over against the Adriatic Sea. On the North it has
Poland and Russia, which are disjoined by the Mountain Carpatus. On the West
it has Austria, which was heretofore the head of the higher Pannonia, together
with Moravia, and Styria; on the East Mysia which they now call Rhetiana. It is
an excellent Country both for the goodness of the soil, and the pleasantness
of the Situation. The Country is very fruitful and fertile, and yields
Pearls, Gold, Silver, Colors, and Salt, which are to be dug out of the
Earth. It has abundance of Grass, Wheat, Pulse, and Fruit. That Country
which is by Danubius does yield excellent wine, even from the Country of the
five Churches to Taurunus, or Belgrad. But there is no Oil, and excepting
that, it is adorned with all the gifts of nature. It has diverse kinds of
living Creatures, having such great plenty both of Oxen, and Sheep, that great
Droves are carried into other Countries, especially into Italy and Germany. It
has also abundance of wild beasts, as Hares, Does, Goats, Hearts, Wolves,
Bears, and the like. And also great store of Birds, especially Thrushes,
Partridges, and Pheasants. The Paeonians or Pannonians did first inhabit this
Country: afterward the Goths, who were expulsed by the Huns; and the Huns by
the Longobards, who were seated here 13. years. But the Huns came in again
under the conduct of their Captain Attila: after whose death, Charles the
Great took it into his own possession. But in the year 700. the Huns coming
out of Scythia, in the Reign of the Emperor Arnulph, possessed those parts,
being Pagans until King Stephen, whom they called the holy, was inaugurated
and made King. And after him, even until our times Hungary did profess the
Christian Religion. Hungary does contain all the whole Country of Iazigus
Metanastarum, which Ptolemy circumscribeth or boundeth with Danubius ^ibiscus,
and the Sarmatian Mountains. There are some ruins yet remaining, which by
contracting the word are commonly called ^az. But they inhabit those parts
which Pl^^ describes, and their speech differs from the Hungarian language.
The first King of Hungary, after the Christian Religion was established
therein, was Stephen surnamed the Holy, after whom there follow^d his Co^^a
Peter, his Kinsman Andreas, also Bela, Solomon, Geysa, Ladislaus, Almus,
Stephanus the II. Bela Caecus, Geysa the II. Stephen the III. Bela the III,
Emericus, Ladislaus the II. and others, even until the time of the Emperor
Rudolphus, King of Hungary. The King of Hungary does govern his Kingdom by
two Magistrates: the higher is divided into three Magistrates, the first of
which governs the Kingdom in the Kings name, in which are the Palatine of
the Kingdom, who is next to the King, and judges the King if he be accused,
whom the people of the Kingdom do choose, neither is it an heriditary office.
Also the Judge of the Court, who is one of the ordinary Judges of the Kingdom.
The Chancellor, who is the Metropolitan of Strigonium, who is called the
Primate, and Secretary of the Kingdom, and he has power to annoint the King
that is chosen, and he keeps the Privy Seal. The Master of the Court does
follow the Kings, and is one of his Privy Counsel. The Master of the
Regallities does judge of all matters concerning Mines of Gold and Saltpits,
and lastly, all matters which appertain to the Exchequer. Secondly, those
which sit in Judgment, of which there are certain Officials, three of greater
authority, as the Vice-Palatine of the Kingdom, the Judge of Personal
Presence, The Vice-Palatines Protonotary, or chief Clarke, the Vice-Judges
Protonotary. They are all called Masters, and have these assistants or
associates joined to them: the Archbishop of Strigoniums Secretary, who is
called the Secretary of the Exchequer, twelve Assistants, and some sworn
Clerks. Thirdly, those that serve the King, as the Treasurer, the Master of
the Bedchamber, the Cup Bearer, the Master of the Pantry, the Master Porter,
and other lesser offices. Moreover, because the Country is large there are
several Judges appointed through the Provinces, which the Hungarians call
Counties. And they are these beyond Danubius on the West of the River Tibiscus.
Posoniensis, Nitriensis, Cepusiensis, Gewinariensis, Posthiensis, Semliniensis,
Comariensis, Leptoniensis, Novigradiensis, Abavivariensis, Bathiensis,
V^gensis, Traachimensis, Barsiensis, Hontensis, Borsodiensis, Bodroghtensis,
Peregriensis, Turoezensis, Omuzolis, Tornensis, Heweciensis, Zolnocensis,
Moramarusiensis. Above Danubius on the East of Tibiscus there are Vgoghiensis,
Bihoriensis, Zatmariensis, Oradiensis, Zabolciensis, Temesiensis. Between the
Rivers Danubius, and Dravus, there are Musunensis, Zaladiensis, Tolnensis,
Rhab, or Iauriensis, Vespriniensis, Strigoniensis, Soponiensis, Albensis,
Sinigiensis, Castriferrensis, Pelisiensis, Waranlensis. Between Dravus and the
River Savus, there are Valkonensis, Rifiensis, Syrimiensis, Warasdiensis,
Prosegiensis, and Zagrabiensis. The Ecclesiastical government belongs to the
two Archbishops, of Gran, or Strigonia, the Popes Legate and Primate of the
Kingdom. It has under it Agriensis, Vaciensis, Nitriensis, Quinque
Ecclesiensis, Vespriniensis, who is the Queens Chancellor, and crowns her,
and the Bishop Iauriensis commonly called Rab: Colosensis, or Colotz, under
whom are Sagabriensis, Transilvaniensis, Voceadrensis, Visemburgensis,
Sulniensis, Cenadiensis, or Chonad, and Bosnensis. All Hungary is divided into
the hither-most, and the farther. The hither-most Hungary does contain all
that Country which is on this side Danubius: the farther-most does contain
that Country which is beyond Danubius, and Tibiscus THE KINGDOM OF HUNGARY.
HUNGARIA
map glideth through the middle of it. The Metropolis and Mother City of this
Kingdom is Buda, which was so denominated, as the most do suppose from Buda
the builder of it, who was Brother to King Artila, or as others write, from the
Budines, a People of Scythia, of whom Herodotus makes mention. If you consider
the Situation of this City, it is seated partly on a Mountain, and fortified
with strong Bulwarks, so that it is the strongest, and pleasantest City in
all Hungaria, it has many fair buildings both public and private. It
stands in a fruitful soil, Soliman the Turkish Emperor took it from the
Christians in the year 1526. on the 20. day of August. The Next is Posonium,
commonly called Prezborgh, which is a noble City. Here the River Leyta
deviding the higher Pannonia from the lower, does mingle it self with the
River Istrus. It is an ancient fair City, having a pleasant air and
situation, and does therein excel all the Cities of Pannonia. It has
Mountains planted with Vines, which are also full of Wood. In the Suburbs it
has a Castle seated on the top of a high Rock. There is also Belg^ad at the
meeting or confluence of the Rivers Savus, and Danubius, it is commonly called
Alba Graeca, the ancients called it Taurunum, and the Germans Griechs
Weissenburgh: Soliman the Turk took it in the year 1520. and having been
before a Town of defense against the cruel enemy of Christianity, now it is
the Turkish Emperors seat. A little lower down the River Danubius there is
Singidunum, which was taken by the Turk in the year 1439. In the midst
between these two Cities, there is a Field famous for the victory of
Hunniadus against M^homet the Turkish Emperor: they call this Field Maxons.
This Battle was fought in the year 1456. Down the River there are many places
where the Christians have received many fatal overthrowes. The City Valpo was
taken in the year 1543. Quinque Ecclesiae by Dravus in the year 1543. Zigetha
was taken in the year 1566. Buda we have mentioned before. Strigonium by
Danubius, commonly called Gran, was heretofore an Archbishops seat, but it is
now in the Turks hands. Alba Regalis, or Stulweyssenburg, is famous in regard
the Kings are crowned and buried here, it was taken in the year 1543. In the
same Country there is Stridon, where Saint Hierom was borne. There is also the
City Comara, in an Island of the same name, which the Turks in vain
attempted. Iaurinum, commonly called Raab is an impregnable City by the River
Danubius. I pass by the other Towns. There are also in Hungaria many famous
Lakes, the chief whereof is Balaton, which the Germans call Platze, being 40.
Italian miles broad, and 8. Hungarian miles. The chiefest Rivers are Danubius,
Savus, Dravus, and Tibiscus, the three former are common to other Countries,
but Tibiscus runs only through Hungary. It rises in Maramusia, in the high
cliffes of Carpatus, and for plenty of Fish it exceeds all the Rivers in
Hungary, for it has abundance of all kinds of Fish, as great Pikes, Lampreys,
and Sturgeons. There are also other Rivers besides these, which have great
store of excellent Fish, as Trowts, Salmons, Perches, Lampreys, Barbels, and
others, and those Rivers have gold veins in them. The chief Woods and
Mountains beyond Danubius, beginning from Austria and Moravia Lazius reckneth
to be Tarchzal, in Greek Carpatus, which was heretofore so called from the
Minerals in it, it stretches and extends it self through the Counties
Turocensis, Arnensis, Liproviensis, Cappusiensis, Gewineriensis, and Sariensis,
which the Inhabitants call by diverse names, as den Vatter, den Munch, den
Wurtgarten, den Schnepberg. The second River is Matran, which is planted with
Vines near Agria. The third and greatest of all is Erdel. There are many other
Rivers, which for brevitie sake I omit, and so conclude Germany.

ITALY. IN WHICH THESE Countries are contained. Lombardie. The Dukedom of
Venice. Liguria, the Dukedom of Genua. The Dukedom of Friulum. Istria. The
Country of Romandiola. The Dukedom of Thusany. The Dukedom of Spoleto. The
Marquiship of Anconitana. Latium, now called Campagna di Roma. Abruzzo,
Aprutium, Samnites. Terra di Lavoro, Campagna felice, a Principality. Apulia,
the Kingdom of Daunia piana. Lucania, Basilicata, Princip. Terra di Barri,
Apulio Peucetia. Terra di Otranto Regnum. Calabria superior Regnum. Magna
Graecia. Brutij, Calabria inferior.

The Kingdom of Naples does contain a great part of these Countries.
Because I know but a few Counties and Sigeionries in Italy and Greece, and
seeing their names and places cannot be assigned in Tables, in regard of the
imperfection of Tables, therefore I will describe but a few of them. For every
Student may set down those which he shall find. It would afford us a fair
prospect into matters of Policy, if the Nobility of several Kingdoms, and
their Offices, Places, and Lordships were known. Which if every one would
perform in his own Country, he should deserve much praise.

ITALIE^
ITALIA
map

ITALIE^
GERMANY was described before both in general and special: and now having
viewed the former I do enter into Italy: which as Pliny says Lib. Nature.
Hist. cap. 20. is a Country sacred to the gods, the most happiest in all
Europe, the Mother of Plenty, the Mistress of Policy, the Princess of Nations,
and the Queen of the World. It had heretofore diverse names. Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, Lib. 1. of Roman Antiquities, writes that the native people
did call this noble Country Saturnia: and the Graecians did call it Hesperia,
Ausonia, and Oenotria: and that at last in Hercules time it began to be called
Italy. It was called Saturnia from King Saturn. But it seems that this
appellation did not appertain to all Italy, but to a part of it, which was
also called Latium. Hyginus would have it called Hesperia, from Hesperus, who
fled from his Brother Atlas: and Macrobius from Hesperus the Evening Star, in
Latin called Vesperugo, which is seen always in the West. It was called
Ausonia from Auson. They called it Oenotria, from the goodness of the Wine, or
from Oenotrus King of the Sabines. It was called Italy from Italus, whom
Aristotle makes to be King of Oenotria. But Festus says, Lib. 9. Italiam
dictam, quod magnos Italos, hoc est Boves habeat, vitulos enim Italos esse
dictos. That is, Italy was so called, because it has great Italy, that is,
Oxen for Calves are called Itali* Timaeus fabulously reports, that it was so
called from the Ox Italus, one of Geryons Heard, which being droven away by
Hercules did swim over the Sicilian Bay, and in the Tyrrhene language a Bull is
called Italus. And the same Dionysius Halic. Lib. Antiq. Romans says, that it
was heretofore called Vitalia, if we may believe Hellanicus. Other ancient
appellations of Italy, which belong rather to the parts thereof than to the
whole Country, we omit. Strabo and Ptolemy do make Italy a Peninsula, being
encompassed on three sides with the higher Sea, the lower Sea, and the Jonian
Sea: on the fourth side it has the Alps, for toward the West it has the
Italian Alps, which the ancients did distinguish by peculiar names, as the Sea
Alps, the Cortians, the Grajans, and the Rhetians, which lie Northward even to
the River Arsia, and contains the Poenine and the Julian Alps: and so it
runs Northward by the Hadriatick Sea, even to the Jonian Bay, which is over
against it Eastward: and lastly, Southward and Westward it is beaten with the
Mediterranian Sea, as also the Tyrrhene and Ligustian Shores: and the Hadrian
Sea washes the Southern part, where Forum Iulij and Histria lies. The length
from Augusta Praetoria, to Brutium, even to the Promontory or Leu^opetra, is
755. miles: the greatest breadth is 475. miles, the middlemost breadth is 130.
the least breadth is 72. The whole compass of Italy according to Castaldus is
2550. miles. Those which have measured it more exactly, do make it to be 2250.
and those who have measured it most exactly, do reckon it to be not above
2240. Eustathius do liken Italy to an Ivy leaf: Pliny, Solinus, and others,
do resemble it to an Oak leaf, because it is longer then broad, bending his
head on the left hand, and so ends in the figure of an Amazonian Brestplate.
The latter Writers do more conveniently compare it to a man's thigh, the skin
whereof lies over against the lower Sea: the Calfe over against the higher
Sea: and all the foot is washed with the Jonian Sea: The heel does look
toward Epirum: the sole of the foot is the Tarrentine Bay, the more fleshy
parts do make the Promontories Zephyrius, Carcinus, and Bruttium, the toes are
turned toward Sicily, the knee is in the Populonian Promontory, the hippe and
upper part of the thigh do touch the Alps. I have spoken of the name and
quantity of Italy: the quality follows, which always arises from the
Situation of a Country. If any one will take a diligent account of it, he shall
find that according to the Longitude, the most Western Meridian does fall
upon the 29. degree; and the most Eastern Meridian the 43. degree. It is 7.
degrees in Latitude: for the most Southern Parallel is 28. degrees distant
from the Equator, and the most Northward 46. and so he shall find that Italy
is in the fifth and sixth Climats, and all the Parallels between eleven and
sixteen, in which space of Land the day differs one hour. For the longest
day of Summer in the Southern Parallel is 14. hours long, with three fifths,
but in the Northern Parallel it is 15. hours long with three fifths.. Italy
having such a Situation, and having the Alps running through it, which pass
length-wayes through the middle of Italy, on both sides, especially on the South
side have fair fruitful Fields and Hills lying by them: and therefore it is
no marvel, that all the times and seasons of the year are so temperate, and
that it is so fruitful, especially in some places. The Country is very
temperate, and very plentiful, and has good store of Corn, being not
chargeable in tilling, but very gainefull to the Husbandman. The Rosselanian
fields in Vmbria are reported to have been so fruitful, that Varro witnesses,
Caesar Vopiscus, when he pleaded his cause before the Censors, said that the
Rosean Fields were the Senum Italiae, in which if a Pitchforke be left the day
before, the grass will cover it over in one nights growth. Varro speaking of
the endowments of Italy, says, that it produces all things necessary for
food. Campania does yield Corn, Falernus wine: Cassinas Oil: Tusculan Figs,
Tarrentine Honey: and Tiber Fish. Moreover Pliny witnesses that Italy is the
Mother of all kinds of Trees. I will not mention the Vulgar common sort. For
here are great store of Orange Trees, Lemmon Trees, and Quince Trees. All the
Coast, as for example, Liguria, and that which belongs to Genoa, is adorned
and beautified with fair Trees, and great high Palm Trees, which are full of
sweet smelling fruit, so that it is pleasant both in sight and scent: and it
has every where pleasant Gardens to recreate sad minds, and drive away
Melancholy. And the same may be said of a thousand other places. The same Pliny
shows that there are Pepper trees in Italy. The Hydruntine Country has
abundance of Olives, so that he that has not seen the great Woods of Olive
trees which are in these parts, would think it incredible. The Barian Fields
in Apulia Peucetia, do bring forth great store of Oil, Wine, Corn, Almonds,
and Cotton, and other fruits. The Valley of On^lia in Liguria, has such great
store of Oil, that sometimes it yields 32. and 22. thousand Jarres, which
the Inhabitants call Barilas. There is also Manna in Italy. For Manna is
gathered near Altomontium in Brutia, which falls down like dew by night,
especially when the sky is serene and clear after rain. It is gathered from
the Leaves of certain Trees. Pliny reports that it has the choicest and
best Vines* so that it excels the most odoriferous Nations of the world, for
there is no scent to be compared with the delicious smell of the sweet budding
Vines. As the excellent Wines which are so celebrated and praised by ancient
Writers do testify. Pliny does devide the Wines of Italy into four sorts. He
prefers the Setine Wines before all others, which was so called from Setia a
Town of Latium. The next he accounts to be the Falerne Wine. The third he
reckneth to be the Albanian, the Surrentinian, the Massuan, the Stanonian, the
Calenian, the Fundanian, the Vilitertian, the Privernatian, and the Signinian
Wines. The fourth sort are the Pretutian, the Anconian, and the Palmesian
Wines. But of these things others do report: I pass to the other gifts of
Italy: and will describe them briefly. It is very fruitful in producing all
kind of herbs. What should I speak of the Metals, Stones, and other gifts.
Pliny says that it is inferior unto no Country for Metals. In Forum Iulium,
there is the River Hydra, and not far from thence a Mine of Quicksilver.
Great store of Allom was found heretofore among the Etruscians in the Territory
of Masla. In Campania there are Mines of Brimstone. Three miles from Volaterris
toward the River Caecina, there are some Hills, in which there are Salt Pits.
At Brutia also there are Salt Mines, which are hollowed into the inner parts of
the Mountain with digging forth of Salt. I omit the Stone Quarries, out of
which diverse Stones are cut. I do not mention the Marble, the Alablaster,
Crystal, and diverse sorts of precious Stones, nor the Saffron, Blue, and
Rosen. And that I may not be tedious in reckoning up the variety of living
creatures, Aulus Gellius. Lib. 11. Noct. Atticar. Cap. 1. Timaeus in his
History, and M. Terentius Varro in Antiquit. do report that there are great
store of Oxen in Italy, and that there are many Buffons bred in this Country.
Lucillius witnesses that the great strong Lucanian herbs did graxe here: Quem
neque Lucanis oriundi montibus Tauri
Ducere pro telo validis cervicibus possent.


Italy, besides other Foul, has Eagles and Vultures, which are so often
mentioned in the ancient Roman Histories. I come now to the ancient
Government. There is no indubitable certainty concerning the ancient Government
of Italy. Annius of Viterbium does speak of Comer, who came first into this
Country as a stranger, also of Chamus, Ianus, Sabatius, Sagus, Cranus, Aurunus,
Malotte, Tages, Ofrides, Hercules, Tuscus, Alteus, Ritis, Italus, Morgetes,
Roma, Romanessus, Iasius, and others: but approoved Historians do make no
mention of them. But if we read Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Pompeus Trogus,
Solinus Polyhistor, and other Greek and Latin Writers, that many years
before the building of Rome, we shall find that Italy was governed by diverse
people, as Sicilians, the Aboriginians, the Ligurians, the Umbrians, and the
Etrurians: which at last were all reduced under the government of the Roman
Empire. Rome at the first was governed by Kings for 245. years together, as
Dionysius and Livie do witness, whom in the Roman History it is best to
follow. In whom we may read the order and progress of their achievements,
and it is to be considered, that their power did increase abroad by military
Discipline, and at home by moderation and Justice, and by the order of
government. Afterward the Kings for their tyranny and lust were expelled, which
many times had caused many changes, and mutations in the Empire. The names of
the Kings are these: Romulus, who reigned 38. years, Numa, who reigned 43.
years, Tullus Hostilius, who reigned 32. years, Aneus Martius, who reigned
24. years, Tarquinius Priscus, who reigned 37. years, Servius Tullius, who
reigned 44. years, Tarqu^nius Superbus, who reigned 25. years. He was
expelled the Kingdom for his Sons wicked act, who ravished Lucretia. But when
the Kings were expelled, the government became Annual, and two Consuls were
created. The first of which was L. Iunius Brutus, unto whom was joined Sp.
Lucretius Tricipitinus. and after him M. Horatius Pulvillus. Thus Italy was
governed by Consuls, until the time of the Emperor Caesar Fl. Momyllus
Augustulus, whom Odoacer Herulus King of the Goths did depose, and subverted
the Country to himself, and afterward being slain, he left it to Theoderick
his Successors. I need not set down a Catalogue of the Roman Consuls and
Emperors, which are well known. And we may read in Histories the form of the
first royal government, the changes of Laws and Magistrates, the Romans
valor, their wars, and their many civil dissentions, until Rome had got
the Monarchy of the World: and how by luxury, civil wars, and the fatal
vicissitude and change of things, it lost again both virtue, and Empire. I
proceed to other matters. Italy has many fair flourishing rich Cities, many
famous populous Towns: and many Villages, adorned with Noblemens houses. It
will not therefore be impertinent to set down what Thomas Edwards an
Englishman has written concerning the most famous Cities of Italy.

Rome's holy by the blood of Saints there shed,
Rich Venice with the Sea's encompassed.
Parthenope does Captains stout beget.
Mediolanum pleasant is, and great.
Bononia does for study much excel
Many Citizens in shining Florence dwell.
Ferraria does yield much Iron Oar,
Verona has of all things wondrous store.
For Law and Physic Padua is extolled
Senas for eloquence may be enrol'd.
Cremona is a miserable place,
And Mantua sweet Virgins birth does grace.
Vtinus does transport of Wine great store.
Rich Brixia is liberal to the poor.
Papia does for Italian Verses shine
And Luca on two Dukedomes does confine.
Pisa bewailes her honor lost in the end.
Milk, Cheese, and Butter, ^arma do commend,
And fair Placentia wants not Innes most dear.
Virtue and Piety in Taurinum are.
Perusia has for Soldiers got much fame.
Vercella delights not in unjust gain.
Mutina holds that Frogs most wholesome be.
Anconas walls contemn the Enemy.
Macerat^ does all suits of Law decide.
Emporia is with Havens beautifie'd.
The City Livium is most prone to War.
In Bergomum they rude in language are.
Aretium does make the sharpest Sword.
Viterbus to the poor does help afford.
In Asta courteous Citizens are found.
Ariminium does with fruit and Geese abound.
Fanum has women fair, and most complete.
Novaria hates all Fare-like deceit.
Ravenna has lost the fame she had before.
Anglia has few Earls, Vincentia store.
Pisaurum has great store of Figs so great.
Pistorium of Chestnuts, Oil, and Wheat.
Dertona many rustic Clownes does feed.
And Regium great store of Hogs does breed.
Sweet Vineyards do Cesena compass round.
Clear Springs and Streams are in Tarvisium found.
Imola does it self in two devide,
Vrbinum by her Dukes is dignifide.
Faventia is well known for Potters ware,
Spoletum harbors those which strangers are.
Pompeia does fair Sheep and Oxen breed.
And Narnia on Eggs and Grapes does feed.
Assissum does rejoice because that here
Holy Saint Francis Corpse interred were.
Comum with Fish and Flesh is amply stored.
Savona leaving studies, wealth does hoard.
Italy has many Lakes, the chief whereof are in Etruria Tra^sumenus, Aprilis
Marinus, Vadimonis, Ciminus, Vulsiniensis, Sabatus, Palus Bientina, and Ciana.
In Latium there are Hostiae Lacus, Albanus, Aquae Salviae, Lacus Nemorensis,
Iuturnae Lacus, Regillus, Fucinus, Pontina Palus, the Fundale Lake, the
Tiburtine, Caecubus, the Simbruine Lake. In Picenum there is the Nu^sine Lake.
In Vmbria, the Veline Lake, Floridus, and the Cutiliensian Lake. In Campania
the Lucrine and Avernan Lake, Linterna Palus, Staetiva, and Pompeia. In
Salentinum and Apulia, the Adurianian Lake, and the Lesinian. In Flaminia there
is 7. Seas, and the Moore Padusa. In Langbardia Trans-padana, there are
Verbanus, Ortanus, Larius, Luganus, Gaviratius, Monatius, Trinatius, Chivensis,
Puscianus, Sebinus, Benacus, Idrinus, and Poeninus. In Venice Visigiolus. In
Istria Costiacus. It is watered also with many Rivers, as Padus, Athesis,
Rubico, Tiber, Arnus, Mincius, Tucinus, Ollius and Abdua. The chiefest of these
is Padus, which as Strabo affirms, is the greatest. River in Europe except
Ister. The Latin writers as Livy, Virgill, and others do call it Padus, but
the Italians call that which is called Pades, as Metrodorus Scepsins noateth in
Pliny, because there are many pitch-trees growing about the Fountain, which
are called in French Pades, and the Grecians and Poets did heretofore call them
Heridanos. Servius would have it so called from Phaeton the Son of Apollo,
for before that Phaeton rhrough his own temerity and rashness was cast down
headlong into this River, it was called Eridanus. It was called Bodincus as
Pliny witnesses, and Liguridus because it has no bottom, Polybius Lib. 3.
calls it Bodegkos, and the ancients did call it Vesulus as Pliny shows, who
notes also that Springhead thereof is in the borders Liguria, which is called
Visendo, because it is wonderful, and worthy of sight. It flows from the
Fountain with a clear stream, and so runs, through the straight narrow
Rocks, and the Valleys of the Rockie Mountain: and it falls down with such
violence as is wonderful. And so runs with a murmering noise through the
stones, and afterward it flows abroad, and is not confined with any
channel, for the space almost of three Miles, even to Paysana, where it
runs almost under ground, so that very little of it can be seen. But a
Mile from thence it rises up again near Paracolum, and so running forward it
receives many Torrents, and Rivers, from the Alps, and the Apennine
Mountains, and so being much increased by those tributary streams, it runs
through the middle of Langbardia, and a part of Romonula, and so with 7. mouths
or inletts, it discharges it self into the Hadriatick Sea. Pliny says that
it makes 7. Seas, because it runs with 7. streams a great way into the
Sea, in whom Lib. 3. Cap. 16. see more concerning the course of this River, as
also in Polybius Lib. 2. in Strabo, Lib. 5. in Pompinius Mela, Lib. 3. in
Solinus in his Polyhist. Cap. 7. also in Leander Albertus, and other modern
writers. Virgill in the ninth of his Aeneads calls it Rex Fluviorum the King
of Rivers. And Lucan Lib. 2. sings thus. Non minor hic Nilo, and a little
after, Non minor hic Istro, that is, this River is as great as Nilus, or as
great as Ister. The River Athesis so called by Virgill and other does follow
next; Strabo calls it Athigis, which the Italians do now call l' Adice or l'
Adese: and the Germans Et^sh. Pliny reports that Athesis does flow out of
the Tridentine Alps, at first with a small stream, but afterward having got
more strength by the acsension of many Rivers, it runs with a violent course
Southward, and afterward from Tridentum it runs with a more gentle stream
through the Plain: and so having glided through those fields, it runs
through the narrow passages of the Mountains with so great a violence, that it
seems to threaten these places by which it flows, and with the same
vehemence it does run headlong by Verrona, beneath which it is divided into
two Rivers, the one whereof goes toward the Marshes, the other bends to the
Sea-ward, and makes a fair Haven, you may see more in Leander. From the
Springhead thereof to Verona, it is not navigable or passeable for boats, by
reason that it has such a violent Current, but they bring down trees, and
pieces of timber out of the Tridentine Mountains, which they tie together and
make them swim down the River. But from Verona it is navigable even to the
Fossions. Torellus in his History of Verona, would have Athesis to be the same
which Ptolemie calls Atrianum. And some do think that Adrias is the same
with Athesis, which Stephanus and others do mention. The third River is
Rubicon, which Ptolemie and other Greek writers do call Rubikoon: Strabo
calls it Roubikoon: now it is called Pisatellus. It was that River which a
Pliny witnesses did anciently bounder Italy, after the bounds thereof were
translated from the River Aesus. The fourth River is Tiber, which is the bounds
between Etruria and Latium. There is no River more famous in Roman Histories.
It has had diverse names, some profane and some sacred. The profane heathen
names are Ianus, Albula, Rumen, and Tiberis, the Divine is Serra. Athenaeus
reports that it was anciently called Ianus, from the God Ianus. It appears
in Varro and others that it was called Albula, which Paulus Diaconus and
Servius do derive ab albo color from the white color of it, who shows also
that it was called Rumon. But the chiefest name of this River was and is Tiber,
of which there are diverse Etymologies. Some do derive it from Tibris, a King
of the Aborigines, Festius and Servius say that he was King of the Tussians:
Livy, Ovid, Festus Pompeius, and Eusebius do derive it from Tiberinus Silvius,
Prince of the Albanians. Varro delivers that this River was called Dehiberim
from Dehebris an Earl of the Vejentians: Servius says that it was called in
the Scripture by a sacred name Serra a secando from cutting. So much concerning
the names, in which it is to be noted that there was a difference observed in
the pronunciation of these words Tiberis, Tibris, and Tiberini. For in common
speech it was called Tiberis in Poesy Tibris; and in holy writers Tiberinus, as
Servius notes, which is not always true. It was called commonly Tevere. The
head of Tiber is in the Apennine Mountains, in the middle of it, near the
confines of the Aretineans, in that part, where the Fountain of Arnus, is
above Aretium. It is a small stream at first like a little Rivilet, but when
it has run forward it increases but a little, in regard it receaveth no
great streams, but such as proceed from small Fountains, but afterward by
the receipt of some Rivers it grows larger, and is Navigable for boats and
little vessels even to Rome, and so running not far from Tiphernum, Perusia,
Otriculus, it divides Eturia from the Vmbrian and Sabinians: and afterward 13.
Miles from Rome, it divides the Vesentians from the Crustiminians and
Fidenations: also it seperateth Latium from Vaticanum: and is so great and
broad a River at Rome, so that they cannot pass over it but by Bridges or
Boats, as Halicarnassaeus writes, and from thence it runs forward, and
rowleth into the Tyrrhene Sea. Pliny in his 3. Book Cap. 4. and Servius Lib.
7. of his Aeneads do describe the course of this River. See also Florus Lib. 1
Histor. Romans Cap. 4. and Varao Lib. 4. de L. L. Paulus Iovius writ a Book
concerning the fish in Tiber, Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 4. affirms that 42. Rivers
do run into Tiber. The River Arnus follows which Livy, Pliny, and others
have mentioned, Strabo and Ptolemy do call it Arnus: and in Italian it is
called Arvo. It rises, as Strabo reports on the right side of the Apennine
Mountain. It is a small stream at the beginning, and runs westward through
the steep rocks and valleys: and afterward being increased by the receipt of
many Torrents, and Rivers, it enters into the Florentine fields, and having
divided Florentine and Pisa it runs to the Sea. Virgill, Strabo, Pliny, and
others do call that Mincius, which the Italians do now call Mencio of Menzio.
This River having entered into the clear Lake Bennacum, and having encompassed
Mantua, 13. Miles from thence it runs into Padus. Livy, Pliny, Silius,
Polybius, Strab. Plut. Ptol. Steph. do call it Ticinus. The Itenarie Tables
call it q^icenus: it is now called Tisino. It rises out of the Mountain
Sumano, which is now called the Mountain of S. Gothard; from whence Rhene,
Rhodanus, Athesis, and other Rivers do run diverse ways. Out of this
Mountain it runs by the Lepontians Southward among the steep Rocks to
Belinzona a strong Town, and afterward growing greater by the aversion of many
Rivers and Torrents, it rowleth it self into the Lake Verbanum, through which
it runs, as Pliny affirms, and so returning through the Plain, it runs
with a clear stream into Padus. The water of this River is so clear, that
you may see any thing in the bottom of it. It has also some veins of gold
and silver, which may be seen in the sands. The River Ollius which in Italian
is called Oglio, has great stoare of good fish, especially of that sort which
they call in Italian Thymallo. In this River near the Palace, a great many
wicker wares are set, and at certain seasons of the year the water brings
down infinite stoare of Eeles into them, which are taken out and salted. To
search out the rising of this River would be troublesome. The common received
opinion is that two small Rivers do run out of the Lake Frigidulph, which is
between the Alps, the one on the right hand is called Fridigulph, and at
length is joined with Ollius: the other on the left hand does run with
another River, and from thence the River Ollius begins. Others make other
conjectures. It runs into the Lake Iseum near the Town Pisonium: it
waters the fields of Brixianum and Cremona, and make their barren soil very
fruitful: and it seperateth the Brixian Country from Cremonia and Bergoma: It
receaveth above 37. other Rivers. Pliny and Tacitus do call that River Abdua,
or Addua, which Polib. and Strab. do call Adovas, it is commonly called Adda.
It divides the Cenomanians from the Insubrians. It rises in the Mountain
Baulius: and Strab. notes that it takes his force from the Mountain Adula.
And so returning from the Lake Larius, through which it runs, it windeth
through the Plain toward Padus, and brings with it many other Rivers, as
Pilclavo, Meyra, Lira, Tarlene, Lacieumortum, Brembrum, and Serimortum, and
also Serius, which rising in the Mountains above Bergomum, and flowing by
Seriana, in the winter time it hides himself in his channel, and runns under
ground, and afterward rising up again near Crema, it runs into Addua: but
in Summer by reason that the heat of the Sun melts the snow upon the
Mountains, it does so increase and swell, that it does not only fill those
subterranean channels, and windings under the earth, but also it continually
overfloweth the upper face of the earth. I pass over the other Rivers, which
are many for brevitie sake. The Seas, Baies, and Havens do follow. The higher
Sea, the lower Sea, and the Ionian Sea do encompasse three sides of Italy.
Whence Pliny thus concerning Italy. Tot Maria, portus, gremiumque Terrarum
comercio patens undique, and tanqam ad invandos mortales ipsa ^vide in mare
procurrens: that is: there are so many Seas and Havens as if the Country did
spread and lay open her bosom for traffic and Commerce, and for the good of
men; she shoots herself far into the Sea. It has many Bays, as
Rappalinus Froycis, Amuclanum Mare, the Bayan Baye, the Paestanian Bay,
Hypponiates, Scyllericus, the Tarentine Bay, Vrtas, the Tergestine, the
Largian, and Flanitian. After the Bays I will name the Havens. Strabo Lib. 6.
write that Italy for the most part has no Havens, and those which it has are
very great and strong both to prevent the invasion of enemies, and for the more
convenient trading and Commerce. These are the Ports or Havens, the Haven of
Olivunlua, of Avaon, of Avison, of Hercules Menaecus, of Mauricus, of
Albirgiunus, of the Sabatrian Vadians, of Savona, of Genua, of Delphin, of
Erycis, of Luna, of Pisanus, of the Vadians, of the Populonium, of the
Scabrians, of Telamon, of Hercules, of Gravisia, of Augustus, of Antias, of
Caieta, the Julian Haven, the Bajon, the Vilinian, the Metaurian, Orestes
Haven, Hanniballs Castra. The Tarentine, and Brundusian Havens, Garne, Agasus,
the Anconitanian Haven, the Arminian, Ravenas, Peretolas, Livenza, P^la, and
many others. After the description or Catalogue of the Havens, the Mountains
do follow. The chief whereof are the Alps, which whether we make them belong
to France, Germany, or Italy it matters not: for these Mountains running
along do with a wall as it were separate Italy from France, and Germany.
Festus thinks that the Alps were so called ab Alberdine from their witness,
for the Sabines says he called that Alpum, which the Latins afterward called
Album or white. Isidorus would have the Alps to be a French name, and that
high Mountains are called in French Alps. The German speech does
acknowledge the name of Alps, for Alp or Alpen signifies in their language
pasturing Mountains, on which no Hay is cut or got against Winter, but only
Oxen and other herds of Cattle are put there to graze. Strabo writes that
these Mountains were heretofore called Albia and Alpioni: Stephanus also
calls them Alpia and Alpij. Phavorinus calls them Olbia, and Lycophran,
Salpij. Ovid. Lib. 3. de Art amandi, Lucan and others do call them Alpis in
the singular number, and Dionysius Afrus calls them Alpius. The Alps in
ancient writings and records have many names, which show that there were many
parts of the Alps over which they traveled. And these are the Sea Alps, which are also called the Ligustina Alps: The Cottian, Grecian, Penine, the Sammian
Alps, the Lepontian, the Rhetian, Julian and Carnician. And so much concerning
the Alps, which breadthwayes do seperat and part Italy from France and
Germany, the Apinine follows, which running with a continuing ridge between
the higher and the lower Sea, it divides it length ways into two parts or
sides. It is thought to have been so called, because the foot of this Hill is
by Hannibals Penine passage. Some think it was called the Apenine, because the
Paenians or Carthaginians breaking into Italy under the conduct of Hanniball
did make and open a passage this way, some derive it from Apis and ancient
Captain who overcame and conquered all Italy. Ptolamie and others call it
Appennina, Stephanus Apennium, the Apennine Mountain, says Pliny, is the
greatest in Italy, running with a continued ridge from the Alps to the
Sicillian strait. Italy has many other Mountains, which are either parts or
pieces of the Apennine, or such as it thrusts forth here and there, or such
as lie at the foot thereof, so that it overlookes them. But I pass over them,
least I should be tedious. Moreover the Mountains and aforesaid, the Valleys
and fields are crowned with woods, groves, and thicketts, many of which are
named and celebrated by the ancients. In Etruria there is the wood Viterbium,
which in Italian is called Boscodi Monte Fiacone, which is commonly called
Bolsena, the ancients as Leander reports did call it the Valsinan Wood. On
Ciminus a Mountain of Etruria, here was a wood, so thick that few travelld
through it, of which Livy thus. Silva erat Cimina, magis tum invia atque
horrenda, quam nuper suere Germanicj Saltus, nulli ad eam diem, ne Mercatorj
quidem adita, Eam intrare haud fere quisquam praeter Ducem ipsum audebat. That
is, the Ciminian Wood was more thick and impassable, than the Germane Forests
were of late, so that no man nor Merchant has passed through it, into which
none but the Captain durst enter. In Latium among the Capenatians there was
the Wood Feronia, of which Silius sings thus.

Dives ubi ante omnes colitur Feronia Lucos;
Et Sacer humectat Fluvialia Rura Capenas.
Where Feronia is reverenced above the other Woods;
And Capenas does moisten the Country full of Floods.
Near the River Numicum there was a Wood sacred to Jupiter Indigites, as Pliny
witnesses. Livie places Dianas Wood by Agninum Compitum. Festus notes that
the Wood Naeviam was four miles from the City. Livie writes that the Wood
Camenarus, was without the gate Capena. That which he calls Algidum Nemus, is
now called Selvadel Aglio. Servius places the Albunean Wood on the high
Tiburtine Mountains, and another of the name in the Laurintinianfields. Virgil
intimates that the wood Angitia, was near to Alba of the Marsians. Cicero
makes the wood Lurina to be in the Territory of Romania. D. Victor places the
wood Furina, in the 13. Region beyond Tiber. Plutarch calls it the Furies
wood. Pliny places the wood Vacuna near the Mountain Fiscellus in Vmbria.
Campania also has fair woods, as Luco Sacro, and Gallinaria Silva. Livie
calls Sacer Lu^us, or the holy wood, it is now called Hamij. Cicero writing
to Poelus, and Strabo. Lib. 5. do call it Gallinaria Silva. The Lucanian woods
are Eboli, Perigrivalis, Velia. In Brutium there is the Rhegian Forest. In
Apulia there are Batini Saltus, and Lucus Gargani. In Gallia Cis-Padano there
is the wood Lucina, and the Bedanian woods. In Trans-Padana there is that which
Strabo calls Castrorum Lucus: Lastly, there are two woods in Venice, the one is
called Iunoes wood, the other Diana'es. I come now to the public works both
sacred and profane, which are innumerable, but we will only reckon some few
of them. And that we may begin with the sacred works, they are almost
infinite, for Rome alone has at this day above 300. Churches, of which seven
are chiefly resorted unto for Religion sake; the first is Saint Peter's Church
in the Vatican: which exceeds all the Churches in the World for costly Marble
work, and magnificent building. There are many singular things in it: as some
Pillars which were brought out of Salomons Temple: two Brass Peacocks which
were brought from P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus his Pyramisse, which was
heretofore in the Vatican Valley. There are also the Tombs and Sepulchers of
many Popes, and a Marble Tomb of the Emperor Otho the second: and in the
Popes Chapel there is Doomesday, or the day of Judgment lively drawn by
Michael Angelo. And that I may not omit the Monasteries, the Hospitals for
Strangers, the Hospitals for the Sick, and for Orphans. What should I speak
of the Popes and Cardinals Palaces? The Popes Palace is in the highest part of
the Valitan, being fairly seated: who leaving his Lateran Palace, did remoove
thither in regard of the pleasantness and wholesomenesse of the Seat. It was
begun by Pope Nicholas the third, and enlarged by others, but perfected by
Julian the second, and Leo the tenth, and at last it was adorned with Buildings
and Pictures by Xistus the fifth, so that now the proud Pile seems to touch
the Heavens. The Stairs are broad and easy to ascend, so that one may ride on
Horseback to the top of the House. For it is so great that it seems rather a
Town than a House, there is Xistus Chapel which is as big as a great Church,
whether when the Sea is vacant, the Cardinals do meet together to create a
Pope, which is commonly called the Conclave. It would be tedious to mention the
other Palaces, and therefore we will pass to other matters. The government of
Italy follows, which is twofold, Political and Ecclesiastical. Concerning
the Politic and Civil government, this noble Country is divided into many
Signiories. Among which, beside the Pope, the King of Naples, and the free
Commonwealths, as Venice, Genoa, Lucensis, and others, the chief in the
Northern part are, the Princes of Etruria, Ferrara, Mantua, M^diolanum,
Montis-Feratensis, of Parma, of Salluzzia, and Verona. In the Southern part
there are many Nobles, which when occasion shall be offered, I will reckon up in
their proper places. In Ecclesiastic government the Pope is the Hierarch and
the head of the Church, and has a great Train. Quoties procedit Gemmis
conspicitur ornatus, and Sericis vestibus, tectus Auro, vectus Equo albo,
stipatus Milite, circumstrepentibus septus Ministris. That is, as often as the
Pope goes forth, he wears silk Robes, embroidered with Gold and Pearl, he
rides on a white Horse, and is guarded with Soldiers, and has Officers which
play on Music before him. The other Priests are here much honored, and have
great authority. And are more honored than Noblemen. The Cardinals as Peter
Messiah notes, did succeed in place of the Consuls, who heretofore governed
the Roman Empire: the Archbishops are equal to Dukes: the Bishops to Earls,
their Vicars or Substitutes are as it were Presidents of the Empire, and the
Provosts are as it were Praefects: the Arch-priests are in the place of
Tribunes of Soldiers, and the Chancellors do represent the Tribunes of the
People. Moreover, Italy has a threefold Law, the Pontifical, the Caesarian,
and the Municipall, the first and second are to be known other where is; the
third consists of Statutes and Laws, which the Cities themselves do enact
and make: but let so much suffice. I will only here set down that which is
read in a certain Manuscript concerning the Counsels of these several
Cities. It is written the Mediolanians are excellent in Counsel: the Venetians
wise: the Lucanians rash: the Pisanians inconstant: the Placentians provident:
the Florentines slow: the Veronians faithful: the Ferrarians wary: the Genoans
ignorant: the Lucensians profitable: the Volscians envious: the Brutians
blockish: the Mutinensians acute and ingenious: the Perusinians quick and
ready: the Senenians slow: and the Patavians irresolute. The Italians do
maintain, cherish, and honor Scholars, and are good Maecenasses unto them.
And hence there are so many Universities in Italy, as Romana, Mediolanum,
Bononia, Patavina, Papiensis, Naples, Perusina, Salerne, Pisona, Ferrara,
Senensis, Florence, Veneta, Bergomensis, Mutinensis, and Taurinensis; for the
Universities of Parma, Placentia, Anconita, and Macerata, are for the most part
decayed. And hence proceeds that great plenty of Doctors, and famous men
learned in diverse Arts and Disciplines. It would be troublesome unto me to
reckon up a Catalogue of them, and tedious to the Reader. Moreover, the
Italians do exceed other people for courteous conversation, for gentleness,
and for witty conference, and discourse. They are very ingenious and witty,
quick of invention, and very docible, in matters of study, and also in learning
diverse Arts. They have in all ages thirsted after honor and glory, and have
been more desirous of praise than any others. They are soft and effeminate,
and given to Venery, quenching pleasure with Milk, as fire is with Oil. They
are very desirous of revenge: and they think it sweeter than life, and do
sometime leave it by Will to their Posterity. Moreoover the aforesaid
Manuscript does paint forth the women of diverse Cities in this manner: the
Senensians are fair: the Florentines delicate: the Perusenians neat: the
Cajetanians fair: the Consentineans obstinate: the Beneventanians clownish:
the Bononians arrogant and proud: the Mutinensians bountiful: the Cesenatians
covetously scraping: the Genoans wanton: the Cremonians deceitful: the
Placentians hard: the Lucensians chaste: the Pistoriensians loving and
tractable. The Romans grave: the Capuanians proud: the Neapolitans careful:
the Brundisinians slothful: the Ferratians greedy: the Ravennatians courteous:
the Urbinatians affable: the Vincentinians constant: the Parmensians coverous:
the Papiensians desirous of gain: the Mediolanensians witty conceited: the
Pedemontanians prating and talkative: the Venetians wanton: the Verronians
comely: the Brixians diligent: the Formianians fair and beautiful: the
Laudensians superstitious: the Cremonensians costly: the Tarvisians jealous:
the Bergomatians crafty: the Aretinians saving: and the Puteolanians fair. The
Italians were heretofore sottishly adicted to many superstitions. But now they
do all religiously observe the Ceremonies and Rites of the Roman Church: but
that some few in the Southern part of Italy do follow the Grecian Rites, who
are also descended of the Graecians. But what a warlike people the Italians
have been, the conquest of the world does declare. And the aforesaid
Manuscript does show which Cities do exceed others in matter of War. In
warlike affairs the Perusinians are stout: the Calabrians rash: the
Spoletanians crafty: the Senensians fortunate: the Bononians fierce: the
Neapolitans courageous: the Turentines are mitigators of their enemy: the
Prarensians sacrilegious: the Collensians lustful: the Picenians ravenous: the
Aemilians inconsiderate: the Placentinians cruel: the Romans valiant: the
Mediolanians undaunted: the Vincentinians desirous of revenge: the Pistorians
bloody: the Papiensians firm and constant. Their Diet is sober and frugall,
and they are not curious in furnishing their Tables, but when necessity
requires. They do not all wear one kind of habit, but they vary according to
the time or the quality of the Person, and also in the form and shape of it.
The Mattoas heretofore did go with naked arms, breasts, and shoulders, and now
they cover all with thin Vailes according to the Spanish fashion. The Venetians
go civilly and neatly, the Florentians, the Tuscians, the Mediolanians, the
Aemilians, and Ligurians, do go somewhat bravet. But the Roman Courtier does
excel all the rest for long various colored Garments, but the Roman Citizen
goes more frugally, yet hansomely, but especially the women who of late did
affect the Tuscane dressing. Naples has a habit that is more shining and
splendide than costly. The Mediolanians in their apparel are gorgious, the
Genoas neat, the Mantuans childish, the Neapolitans costly, the Venetians
magnificent, the Florentines ridiculous. In revenging of injuries the
Lucensians are gentle, the Mediolanians are soon reconciled* the Perusinians
are dissemblers, the Fulginatians are hot, the Mutinensians are placable, the
Sonensians courageous. The Neapolitans are bountiful, the Ferrarians stiff
conceited, the Venetians crafty, the Cremonians plain and open, the Picenians
backbiters, the Romans unjust. Toward Strangers the Calabrians are
inhospitable, the Lucensians faithful, the Senensians loving, the Venetians
faire-spoken, the Patavinians hard, the Mediolanians unwary* the Ferrarians
sharp, the Mantuans flatterers, the Placentians severe, the Picenians
troublesome, the Neapolitans bountiful, the Florentines profuse and prodigal,
the Astensians benevolent, the Spoletanes rude and rustic, the Verronians
studious, the Papiensians wife, the Genoaes in hospitable, the Parmensians
inconstant, the Mutinensians tedious in speech, the Novocomians inhumane.
Lastly, the Italians are much given to merchandising. And the same Manuscript
shows their dispositions in trading and commerce: namely, the Florentines are
crafty, the Genoaes tolerable, the Mediotanians plain and open, the Lucensians
faithful, the Venetians stately and wary.

THE FIRST TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH THE WESTERN Alpine part thereof is
described, and also Valesia, which is commonly called Wallis.
Sedunum is a Bishopric of Valesia, 260.4534. it is subject to Tarentasia,
also the Archbishopric of Sabaudia, and Augusta likewise. 296.454.
HItherto we have described Italy in general, now we come to describe the
several parts thereof in particular. Some have divided Italy diverse ways.
Augustus as Pliny witnesses has divided it into 11. Countries. Strabo does
part it into eight. Others into more, but we omitting them will follow the
devision and method which Mercator has propounded unto us. And the first is
the Table of Lombardy, in which the Western part thereof, together with
Valesia is described. It is now Euphoniae gratia, or for the sound sake called
Lombardie, in stead of Langbardia, which was so called from the Langbardians,
who came hither out of Germany in the reign of the Emperor Justinian: who for
many years together were seated on both banks of the River Po. It was called
heretofore Gallia Cisalpina. Gallia was inhabited by the Frenchmen, the Boyans,
the Senonians, the Insubrians, the Cenomanians, and others, who inhabited all
that part which is between the foot of the Alps, and the River. That Rubicon
was called Cis-Alpina, because it was on this side the Alps, as the ancient
Italians and the Roman Writers do report, and the other was that which was
inhabited beyond the Alps. This Cis Alpina where it is most Northward, and
lies nearest to the Mountains, Pliny calls Sub Alpina, and Caesar calls it
the higher France for the causes before mentioned. Ausonius calls it ancient
France: Appian calls it Italia Gallica, or Galatiken: the Register Book of
the Provinces calls it the Mediterranean Italy: not because it lies in the
Mediterranean Sea, but because it lies in the inward part of the Country: it
is encompassed on the North, West, and South with the Alps, and the Apennine:
on the East with the Hadriatick Sea. Polybius and Pli^y THE FIRST TABLE OF
LOMBARDY.
Lombardiae alpestris pars occidentalis cu^ Valesia
map do make this Country to have a Triangular form, the top whereof is the
Alps, and yet Plutarch in Camillus witnesses that it is watered with many
Rivers. Sidonius speaks elegantly of this Country. Campi adeo culti and
uberes intercedunt (de Pado loquitur) ut satis constet haud temere alios
repiriri aut natura feraciores, aut rebus necessarijs ad hominum vitam
instructiores. that is, The Fields are so rich and fruitful that do lie on
either side (for he speaks of Padus) so that there are none more fertile, or
that afford more necessaries for the sustentation of man's life. Sigonius
afterward adds that the Ligurians and Etrurians were the ancient Princes
thereof: afterward the Frenchmen: and lastly, the Romans after whom the Goths
succeeded: and the Romans again after the Goths: and after the Romans the
Langbards, as we may see in Sabellicus. Lib. Hist. Venetae 1. Decade 4. Strabo,
Pliny, and others do make Gallia Cis Alpina toward the West twofold, either
Cis-Padana, commonly called Lombardia di qua dal Po, or Trans-Padana, della dal
Po, because the one is on the hither side, the other beyond Po. But here we
describe the Western part of the Alpine Lumbardy, which does contain a great
part of Lombardy Trans-Padana. This Country although it be Mountainous, and in
some places woody, yet it is enriched with diverse natural gifts: for the
Valleys and Champion grounds, are of a fruitful soil, having abundance of
Corn, Wine, and other fruits. And Hills which bear excellent Vines. In the
Woods also and the Mountains there is good hunting of wild beasts. Here are
many Cities and Towns: as Mediolanum, Crem^, Bergomum, Comum, Clavenna,
Luganum, etc. which may be seen in the Table. It has also more great Lakes
than any other parts of Italy: among which is that which Pliny and Strabo call
Verbanus, which the Italians, in regard it is greater than the rest, do call
Lago majore: and the Germans Lang see. Strabo makes the length of it 300.
furlongs, and the breadth of it 30. furlongs. It is so deep in most places,
that it seems to have no bottom. It does breed excellent Fish, especially
large Trouts and great Pikes, also Perches, and others. The Lake which Virgil
and others call Laris Lacus, and Paul Diaconus and Antonius do call Comacenus
from the adjacent City, the Italians do now call it Lago di Como, and the
Germans Chumer-see, it is greater than Benacus, and almost equal to Verbanus.
Strabo writes that the length of it is 300. furlongs, and the breadth 30.
furlongs. But modern Writers do measure it otherwise. It runs Northward
unto the South, but somewhat bending Eastward. But between Verbanum and
Larium, there are some lesser Lakes. As the Lakes Luganus, Gaviratius,
Monatius, and others. These Rivers also do water this Country, Ticinus, Adava,
Serius, Tosa, Bremba, and many others. There are also diverse Mountains, as
Lucumonis Mons, commonly called Lucmannier, Gothards Mountain, and the greater
Alps of Lepontium: also the Rhetian Alps, and many others. But so much
hitherto: now it remains that we should entreat of Valesia in the other part
of this Table.

VALESIA.
I Have not yet found whence the name of Valesia is derived, which they call
Wallis, or Walisser Landt. But it is supposed that it comes from the Latin
word Vallis, which signifies a Vale, or from Valeria a Castle of the City
Sedune. Valesia has on the North the Bernatians, Lucernatians, and Helvetians:
on the South the Cottian and Lepontian Alps: on the East the high Rhetian
Alps: on the West the Grecian Alps, and the Lake Lemman. The length of it
from West to East is 5. days journey: but the breadth is very narrow, but that
it is somewhat broader near to Octodurum, and Sedunum. This Country although
it be encompassed with high Mountains, and sharp Rocks, which for the most
part are a Germane mile high, and many of them are covered with continual Ice
and Snow: yet it wants nothing for the sustentation of man's life: for it has
good store of Corn, Wine, and other kinds of fruits: it has Wheat, Barley,
Oats, Beans, Pease, Fetches, and Mill. Wine begins to grow among the
Brigentian Dioecese among the Mountains, and the Plantation does continue
through all the descent of Rhodanus, until you come to S. Ma^icius. At Sedunum
the red Wine is better than the white, and it is so black and thick, that you
may write with it. Near Octodurum the white is better than the red. And there
is no better Wine in Germany than that which grows at Sedunum, and so is
transported and carried into neighbor Countries. Here as also in Siders and
Gundes Saffron grows in great abundance. There are Oranges, Almonds, and
Figs. And through the whole Country you shall find all kind of Apples,
Pears, Nuts, Prunes, Cheries, Chestnuts, Mulberies, Peaches, Apricocks, and the
like. Moreover the Mountains of this Country do yield many sorts of Physical
Herbs and Roots, which have special sovereign virtues. This Country also
is very fruitful of Mines: and pure Crystal is dug forth in Gums near
the Springhead of Rhodanus. It produces also diverse kinds of living
creatures, as Kine, Oxen, Horses, Asses, Mules, Sheep, Hogs, Goats, and
Cunnies: also Geese, Ducks, Hens, Peacocks, and Doves. It has also abundance
of Bees, of which they make great profit. Moreover the Mountains have some
beasts unknown to us as the Aegocerots, which are horned like Goats, also
wild Oxen, Alpine Mice, and Hares unlike to ours, also Pheasants, Woodcocks,
and Birds which they call Parnifas, also Partridges, Vultures, Ring-Doves,
Hernes, Finches, Magpies, Stares, and Thrushes. They have also abundance of
Bears, Wolves, Leopards, Foxes, Martines, and Faulcons. But they have no
Hearts, Goats, Boares, Scorpions, or Shelfrogs. Yet they have such great store
of Venison in this Country, that it is sold in the Market like Oxe-flesh, and
sometime cheaper. Moreover the Bishop of Sedunum is Prince and Lord of all
Valesia, both in spiritual and temporal matters, and Charles the great about
the year of Christ 805. gave this Country and Praefectorship to S. Theodolus
Bishop of Sedunum, and to his Successors. And many other Emperors did confirm
this donation, and strengthen it even until this day. Valesia is divided into
the higher and the lower. The higher does speak the Germane language, and
begins at the Mountain Furca, and so runs forth to Marca which is under
Seduum, near the River Morsus, and it contains seven Tithings, or Dioeceses,
which they call Zenden, namely, Sedunum, Syder, Leuck, Raren, Visp, B^^gg, and
G^mbs. In the lower Valesia they use the Sabaudian language: it begins from
the River Morsus, and stretches even to the Bridge of S. Mauritius, the
Inhabitants whereof were formerly called Veragrians. This lower Valesia has
six communities which they call Vexica or B^nnerat, namely, Condes, Ardon,
Sallien, Martinacht, Intrem^nt, and S. Mauritium. The Metropolis of Valesia is
Sedunum, in the Germane language Sitten, and in French Siun, it is a neat
City and grows every day more fair and beautiful. It is seated by a
Mountain, which rises Eastward in the middle of a Plain between the high
Mountains which do enclose the Valley, and it has two forked high Rockie
tops. But Sedunum a Bishopric of Valesia is subject to Torentasia the
Archbishopric of Sabaudia, and likewise Augusta. There is no walled City in
Valesia besides Sedunum, although S. Mauritius, or Agaunum may be counted a
pretty Town. Moreover here are the Castles of Martinacht, or Octodurum; of
Gradetsch and old Sider, also the Towns, Sider, Leuc, Raronia, Vespia, Brig,
Naters, and Moral. The Mountains which do encompasse Valesia, have other
names now than they had heretofore. The Mountain out of which Rhodanus rises,
was heretofore called Subecus, Coatius, and Vrsellus, it is now called Furca.
Near unto this is the Mountain Gothard, near to Briga is the Mountain
Sempronius, now called Simpelberg. Near unto it are the Mountains Sa^es and
Matter. On the other side of Rhodanus are the Mountains Loetsch, and Gemmi. In
the Poenine Valley, is the Icie Mountain Arolla. Over against Sider Northward
is the Mountain S^lvius, which is called Austalberg, and on both sides the
Mountain of S. Bernbard. The Wood Hercynia reaches forth some of his arms
hither, which are called by diverse names, for in some places near Arnes it is
called the Wood Milebach, and near Perigrad it is called Persim Waldt, and in
other places it has other names. The people in Valesia are now very courteous
and affable unto Strangers. But they are somewhat more harsh and riged, then it
becomes friends and neighbors to be.

THE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
WHICH THESE Countries are especially described, the Country of Tirolis, and
Marca Tarvisina.
THe second Table of Lombardy contains the County of Tirolis, and Marca
Tarvisina. The Country of Tirolis is so named from the Town Tirolus, which was
heretofore very fair. It lies between the Rivers Athesis, and Oenus, and
between the Alpine Rocks: on the North it is enclosed with Bavaria, on the
South with Lombardy: on the East with Marca Tarvisina, and Forum Iulij: on the
West with Helvetia. It was heretofore a part of Rhetium. This Country although
it be enclosed with Alps, and extends it self through the Rhaetian Rocks,
yet it is rich in fruits, and all things necessary to life, as also it has
great store of Gold, Silver, and all kinds of Metals, which are drawn out of
the bowels of the Mountains, the tops whereof are crowned with vast Woods, and
full of great store of wild beasts: the Hills and Cliffes, are full of fruits
and Vines: the Valleys are watered with Fountains and Rivers, and full of
Herds and Flocks of Cattle. And therefore this County may be equaled and
compared not only to a Dukedom* but also to a Kingdom. It was joined to the
House of Austria, in the year 1460. by Rodolph the Son of Albert Duke of
Austria. The Chief City is Oenipons, commonly called Inspruck, on the right
hand banck of the River Oenus, being the seat of the Prince, and the
Parliament of Austria is kept here. There are also the Town Ma^^^am, by the
Royal Castle; and Bolzanum a Mart Town of Tirolis. Halla is a Town by the
River Oenus famous for making of Salt: B^ixia is an Episcopal City by the
River Isacus where the River Rientius does disburden it self into Isacus.
There is also the old City T^iden^^^^ by the River Athesis, which Pliny and
Strabo do place in the tenth Country of Italy, some would have it built by the
Frenchmen; and so ^^^gus delivers. It is supposed that it was so named from
Neptunes Trident. For as the Randenensians do worship Saturn, so the
Tridentines did worship Neptune, whose effigies and statue may be yet seen in
the Church of B. Viglius, on that side which lies toward the Market.
Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths did wall this City with fair freestone. And
he fortified the Castle of Tridentum on the other banck of the River in
Verruca^ in like manner. Afterward wh^^ (...) Ostrogothes were expelled out of
Italy, the Langbards did posse^^^ as a Dukedom. But Desiderius King of
Langbards being overcome by Charles the great, it came again to be under the
Emperors Jurisdiction; and the Emperor did enlarge it, by the accession and
addition of the Town Ripa near Benacum, with some Valleys and Villages. After
him Charles the Saxone gave to the Church the whole County of Tridentum,
together with a fair Valley, and the Town B^lzanius. And the Earl of Tirolis
was made Defender and Protector thereof. And from that time the Bishop had
Jurisdiction over both. The Citizens do speak partly the Germane language,
and partly the Italians: and which is seldom seen in Frontiere Cities, they
speak as pure language, as in the middle of Germany, or in the middle of
Italy. In this City that famous Counsel was celebrated, in the year 1546.
under Pope Paul the third. This Country is watered with two special Rivers,
Oenus and Athesis. The other may rather be called Rivulets than Rivers. Here
are no particular Mountains, for they are all called by one general name the
Rhetian Alps, although they are afterward distinguished by their proper names.
Here are also many woods: as Grinwald, Hosgarten, In der Aich, Milrinald
Forest, Vnser Frawen Holtz, etc.

Marca Tarvisina.
I Have spoke of the County of Tirolis: it remains now that we should speak
of Marca Tarvisina. It was so named from the City Tarvisium, where the
Marquesses of Lombardy kept their residence, who were Governors of this
Country. Cassiodorus and others do call it Tarvisinum. It is called also
Venetia from the Venetian people. But now in the Country speech it is called
Marca Trevigiana. Concerning the bounds thereof, Leander writes, that Mincius,
Benacus, and the River Sarca do enclose it on the West: on the North the
Tarvisanian Mountains, which devide Italy from Germany: on the East the mouth
of the River Timavus, and part of the Hadriatick Sea: on the South the mouth of
Athesis, and the Melarianian, and Brigantinian Marshes: and the same Leander
affirms that these were the bounds of ancient Venetia, and not of Marca
Tarvisina, which was far straighter, and lay lengthwaies between the Rivers
Mincius and Alsa, and that beyond Alsa they were joined to Forum Iulium, and
besides that which is now called Marca Tarvisi^a, did contain some places of
the Cenomanians, etc. The Country is fruitful, the air wholesome, pleasant,
and temperate. It has pleasant Fields, which yield great store of Corn and
Wine, and other fruits. It has plenty of Metals, and good store of Cattle.
And it is adorned and enriched with so many gifts of nature, that it is worthy
to be accounted one of the principal Countries of Italy. Heretofore the
Euganeans dwelt here, the derivation of whose name if we seek it from the
Greek, may THE SECOND TABLE OF LOMBARDY.
Tarvisina Marchia et Tirolis Comitatus.
map be derived from their noble generous birth. The Venetians as Livie notes,
Lib. 1. did drive the Euganeans from home, from whom the whole Country was
called Venetia. The Cities of Marca Tarvisina are Verona, Vincentia, Patavium,
Venetia, Tarvisium. Of the former of which, namely, Verona, Vincentia, and
Patavium we will speak in their proper Table. Venice is a City which
contains about 60. small Islands, and it is seated in the innermost part of
the Hadriatick Bay, in the midst of the Lakes, which the Tide fills every
6. hours: the Sea flows on the East side, which that the violence and rage
thereof may do no harm, some other Islands do lie before it to restrain the
fury of the Sea. And although it be not fortified with walls, Bulwarks, or
Towers, yet it is strong by the natural situation. It is divided with many
Channels. There are Rivers in all the streets, which are joined together by
450. stone and wooden Bridges. The chiefest Channel is that which is called
Canal grande, three miles long, which devideth the whole City into two parts.
So that you may either go on foot, or by Boat, of which there are 8000.
through the City, they commonly call these Boats Gondelas. The compass of
this City is about 8. miles, which is famous for populousness, wealth, and
store of Merchandise: it has produced excellent wits, and most learned men,
and it is adorned with good Laws, and laudable Statutes. It does abound with
Corn which is brought thither out of diverse parts of the World, as also with
diverse sorts of Wine, among which is that generous sort of Wine, which is
commonly called Malmesy, and with other things, necessary to man's life, so that
it may be rightly called the Paradise of Delight. There are in it 64. Parishes.
There are also magnificent and sumptuous public and private buildings. The
chiefest Church is that which is dedicated to Saint Mark the Evangelist, which
is gilded in many places. And to omit other matters, there is an Armory within
the City, commonly called the Arsenale, which is about two miles in compass.
Here are made of Wood, Iron, Brass, Hemp, and Flax, all kinds of provision
for Ships, as Anchors, Guns, Cables, Ropes, Tackles, and Sails. Here are also
some Ensigns kept which were taken from the Turk, or Pirates, or Enemies, and
those Trophies which were taken at Naupactum in the year 1581. And also there
are the Praetorian Barges, and the Ship Bucentaurus, in which the Prince
accompanied with the Senate and chief men of the City, is carried every year
to the entrance of the Sea, where the Castle stands, and there after some
Ceremonies performed by the Bishop, he marries the Sea, and puts a Ring upon
it to show his perpetual dominion over it. There is also a public Library,
together with the Library of Bessarion Cardinal of Nicen, which at his death
he gave to the Commonwealth of Venice. Venice is very populous, so that there
are thought to be in it about 300000. Citizens. They are of three sorts or
ranks: the Patricians who govern the Empire and Commonwealth: the Citizens
who do bear under Offices: and the Artificers who use Mechanic Arts. And
besides these there are great store of Merchants and Strangers, which come
thither in diverse habits out of all parts of the World to traffic: as Turks,
Aethiopians, Slavonians, Arabians, Syrians, Cretensians, Cyprians, Macedonians,
Germans, Hungarians, Spaniards, Frenchmen, and others. The Venetian
Commonwealth was governed at the first by Consuls, afterward by Tribunes for
252. years: afterward in the year 707. it began to be a Dukedom. The Duke
commonly called Doge, is the head of the Commonwealth, and the Prince of the
Senate, and he can do nothing neither in time of peace or war without the
consent of the Senate, for he consulteth with them. The Senate make Decrees
which yet are published in the Dukes name. The Duke has certain stipends paid
him out of the public stock: and after his decease another is chosen by
suffrages and voices, out of the Senate. The Senate which is commonly called
Gran Co^siglio, is the Basis and Foundation of the whole State: the Members of
it are all Nobles, of 25. years of age, or above: who have free liberty to
speak: very faithful in Counsel, and very careful to preserve their
liberty, and enlarge their Empire, and very constant in adversity. There are
many other Magistrates besides the Duke, which here for brevity sake I omit.
This City is held to be the fairest and most flourishing City of all others,
the Theater of the World, and the common Mart for the whole Universe, the
Mistress and Conqueror over so many Enemies: the Queen of the Hadriatick
Sea, and the glory and honor of Italy. Although it has waged many wars,
and tried the varieties of fortune for the space of a thousand years, yet it
was never subdued by any foreign Enemy. I pass by the other Cities and
lesser Towns. The most famous Rivers of this Country are Plavis, commonly
called Piave, also Brenta, Bachilio, and Athesis, which is the greatest of them
all. There are Mountains in this Patavine Country, which neither belong to the
Alps, nor to the Apennine, so that in this respect there is no Country like it
in Italy. One of these Mountains is Gemula, the other Venda, and the Euganean
Hills so famoused by Poets. There are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium,
the Bishoprics of Mantua, of Cuman, of Tridentum, of Verona, of Maravia, of
Padua, of Vicentium, of Trevisium, of Ceneda, of Feltre, of Bellun. And so much
briefly concerning the County of Tirolis, and Marca Tarvisina.

THE THIRD TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH ARE DESCRIBED Pedemontana, the
Marquiship of Montisferrat, and the Dukedom of GENOA.
THe third Table of Lombardy follows, in which Pedemontium, the Marquiship of
Montisferrat, and the Dukedom of Genoa are described and delineated.
Ped^montium is the first, which is so called, quod ad pedem sit montium,
because it is at the foot of the Mountains, or the Alps, which do devide
France and Sabaudia from Italy: it is commonly called Piamonte. It is bounderd
on the East with Padus; on the South with the Ligurian Alps: on the West with
the Alps of France: on the North with Duria and Riparia. This Country is full
of fruitful pleasant Hills, which do yield excellent Corn, Wine, and other
fruits. And it has Mines of Iron near Turinum, and of Marble near ^aisana.
Here the Turinians dwelt heretofore, who were well known to Polybius, Livy,
and Plutarch; and also Strabo, Pliny, and Ptolemy do place them in the ninth
Country of Italy, and do make them to be of the stock of the Ligurians.
Afterward this Country began to be called the Taurinian Dukedom under the
Langbardians, who having reduced it into a Province, made it a Dukedom. After
them it came to be under the government of the Kings of Italy: and afterward
of diverse other Princes: especially of Sabaudia: and the Country of France: it
was much wasted in the time of the wars between the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and Francis King of France. The chief City of this Country is the
ancient City Taurinum, which Ta^itus, Pliny, and Ptolomy do call Augusta
Taurinorum. Antonius says in many places that this City was called Taurinorum
from the people, it is commonly called Turino. Stephanus the Gramarian would
have it so called from a Bull, which was the arms of the Massilians, whose
Colonie it was: it lies at the mouth of Duria on Padus, in a four square
figure, and has four Gates, and many fair Aedifices or buildings, and it
has plenty of all things. The chief Church is consecrated to Saint John
Baptist, besides which there are some 20. other Churches, or thereabouts, also
there is the Dukes Palace; and a famous University, in which Erasmus
Roterodamus was made Doctor of Divinity. This was one of the first Cities in
Italy, which had a Printing house: it is THE THIRD TABLE LOMBARDY.
PEDEMONTANA regio cum GENVENSIVM territorio MONTISFERNATI Marchionatu
map also a Bishopric. Near the Hill there is Rivoli, a populous Town: and a
little farther near the River Po there is the Town Carignano: A little higher
between the Rivulets and Aviliana there is the fair Monastery of Saint
Antonius Ravisinus: and a little from thence near the Monastery of Saint
Ambrose, there is Susa, which the most do reckon to be in Saubaudia. Near to
Po, six miles from the mouth of Sangonus there is a Town, which they call in
their Country speech Pinarolo, which is very rich, and has a sumptuous
Monastery: a little above there is Petrosa: and on the left side of the
Fountain Sangonus there is Pagellato, and Bricasse, on the right side of the
Mountain Bobius. Not far from the River Pelice, which runs into Po, there
is Villa Franca, where a Bridge does join both the Banks of the River Po.
There are also by the Springhead or Fountain of Padus, Revello, and Paisana,
and a little farther Critio: and a little farther Mambrin^, where the Valley of
Po begins. The Inhabitants do call it Valle di Lucerna, from a Castle which
is there of the same name.

The Marquiship of MONTIS-FERRAT.
NOw the pleasant and fruitful Country Montis-ferrat is to be unfolded which
is so called as Lea^der thinks as it were M^ns Ferax the fruitful Mountain,
in regard of the fertility of the little Hills which are in it: or from Ferro,
that is from Iron, by comparison, because as Iron does excel all other Metals
both for strength and hardness: so this Country does excel all other
Countries for plenty of sweet and pleasant fruit, as also for Wine. Merula.
Lib. 6. Antiqu. V^cecom. does describe Montis-ferrat in this manner, Mons est
perpet^is expansus jugis, totus amaenus and fructifer, omniumque rerum ad vitam
utilium fertilis, est colonis admodum frequens. Incipit diu^no fere itinere ab
Alpibus, planitieque seperatur, quae inter hos colles and Alps intercedit.
Nihil his incultum quidquam propter summam soli bonitatem oportunitatemque.
Lavam Tanarus, dextram Padus alluit, nec ullius alveum Regio egreditur. Quanto
magis autem ab amnibus abscedunt Colles, tanto majores amoenioresque Campi
inter eos panduntur, quos haud male Mesopotamiam queas dicere, quippe quod
amnibus utrinque sint inclusi. That is, it is one continued Mountain,
pleasant, and fruitful, and yielding abundance of all things necessary, and it
is full of Husbandmen. It begins almost a days journey from the Alps, and
it is separated from them with a Plain which lies between these Hills and
the Alps. It is all tilled in regard of the goodness of the soil. This River
Tanarus waters the left side, and Po the right side, neither do their
Channels reach further than this Country. But where the Hills lie farthest from
the Rivers, there are fairer and pleasanter Fields, which may be well called
Mesopotamia (...), because they lie in the middle between Rivers. The
Offspring of Palaeologa did first possess the Marquiship of Montis-ferrat,
even to the year 1534. when after the decease of George, the last of the
Palaeologians, the Emperor Charles the fifth declared the Duke of Mantua to be
lawful Heir of Montis-ferrat. The Marquiship was made a Dukedom in the year
1575. by the Emperor Maximilian, and the first Duke of Montis-ferrat was
William the third, Prince of Mantua. In this Country the Duke of Mantua has
three famous Cities, which are Casalis D. Evasij, which was made a City by
Sixtus the fourth, in the year 1474. it is a Bishops Se, and the Seat of the
Marquess of Montis-ferrat. It has two Castles: the old which was heretofore
the Marquesses Palace, and the new, which Vincentius Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua
and Montis-ferrat, built, which is commonly called La Citadella: Also Alba,
which Pliny calls Pompeja, and so calls the Albensians Pompejanians. It is
far bigger than Casalis. D. Evasij, but it has not so good an air, it was
heretofore subject to the Marquesses of Montis-ferrat, but now to the Dukes of
Mantua. That part of the Country is very fruitful which is commonly called
Laguvilla. The third City is that which is commonly called Acqui Acquae
Satyellorum, which Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. places in Liguria. A^toninus call it
Aquae: from the hot and wholesome Waters and Fountains which are here: for
there are in this City public Bathes with stone Tables, and steps to go
down into them. Beside the aforesaid Cities, there are Bassimana, Valentia,
S. Salvatore, Moncalvo, Alex^ndria, Nicaea surnamed Palea, Asta, Pollentia,
Ceva, and many others.

The Dukedom of GENOA.
THe Dukedom of the Genuensians, or the Country of Genoa was heretofore called
Liguria, yet not all but that part, which was beyond the Alps. There are
diverse opinions concerning the name of Liguria. Some, among whom is Paulus
^iaconus, do report that it was so called ab legendis Leguminibus from
gathering of Pulse: some from Ligo one of the fabulous Captains of Iapetus,
and Berosus, Caro, Fabius Pictor, and Semprocius suppose that it was so named
from Ligures the Son of Aegiptian Phaeton: Now it is commonly called Riviera
de Genoa, from Genua a famous City. It is bounderd on the West with the Alps
which divide Gallia Narbonensis from Italy: on the East with Etruria and Macra
or Marga which flows between them: on the South it is beaten with the
Ligurian Sea: on the North it is enclosed with the Apennine. This Country as
Strionnius writes, was heretofore barren, and had nothing in it worthy of
memory, but that it had great vast Trees, fit for building of Ships. But now it
yields good store of Wine, Oil, and other fruits. The Country Dianus does so
abound with Oil, that sometimes it makes 18. sometimes 20000. Jarres, which
they commonly call Barilas. Genoa is now twofold: the Eastern, and the
Western, which from the Metropolis, which stands in the middle of them both,
is called Riviera di Genova, di Ponente, and de Levante. Livie and others call
the chief City Genua, Stephanus calls it Genoa, and Luitprandius
Ticinensis, and the Writers of his age, Ianua; it is now called Genoa and
Genova, concerning the situation. It fronteth on Meridium, and the Island
Cirnus, the bank of it is opposite to the North, and so it has a gentle
descent into a Plain, being seated at the foot of the Mountains, and behind
a Trench or Bulwark does keep off the cold Northward, having neither a
Moutainous Situation nor a plain, but of a mixed kind. The Compass of it is
35955. foot, as the Bishop Nebianus reports. So that if we allow 7. foot to
a pace, the measure of the whole City will be 5. miles, but if we allow 6.
foot, then neither the Bulwark nor the Haven can come within this compass or
dimension. It has a fair Haven which lies to the South and Southwest, which
affoordeth safe harborage for Shipping. But concerning Genoa there are these
smooth Verses of Scaligers extent, in English thus.

The Asian wealth, and Eastern honors great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea does beat,
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colors I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alps I held and kept in awe,
And Afric trembled when my Ships it saw.
And the Venetian has fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he has found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spain
In your attempts, you take up arms in vain,
I conquer being conquered, for if I obtain
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.
Having viewed the Metropolis, we will show some of the other Towns and
Cities. Not far from Varus is that which Ptolemy calls Nicaea. Antoninus
Nicia, and now Nizza. It is a Sea Town, built heretofore by the Massilians,
and seated behind the Alps, partly on the Cliffes, and partly on plain
ground. Now it is strong, having a well-fortified Castle, and it is subject to
the Prince of Sabaudia. A mile farther above the Port or Haven of Hercules
Monaecus, Torbis, or Turbias is seated on the high Mountains. There are also
the Towns of D. Remi, or S. Remo, seated in a pleasant fertile soil, and
wonderfully terrified and adorned with Citterne-trees, Palme-trees,
Lemmon-trees, and others. Castellum Tabia is but a little Town, but famous for
good rich Appian Wines. Albigaunum is an ancient City, seated in a Plain,
500. paces from the Sea, which has an ill air, but very rich, and abounding
with all things necessary. Finarium also, or Naulum. Savona is an ancient
City, adorned with many magnificent buildings, and the compass of it is 1500.
paces. These Cities are on the Western side of Genoa: on the East side there
are Claverium, Sestri di Levanto, and others. The Rivers here are Varus which
devideth Province from Liguria, the latter being a Country of Italy, the former
of France. This River on the Western bank thereof which is toward France,
receives those Rivers which are commonly called in French Caremp, Lavaire, and
Esteron: on the Western bank toward Italy, it receives the Rivers La Lince
and La Vesubie. There are also by the Coasts of Liguria Paulon, now called
Pulion: Rutuba now called R^tta. There are also Merula, Porzevera, Ferisano,
Lavagna, Maera, now called Magra. Concerning the Ecclesiastic government you
may read in Mercators Table: the Bishop of Taurinium, under whom are the
Bishops Casalensis, Salutiarum, Montis Regalis, Novariensis, Lodensis,
Vercellensis, Ipporegiensis, Actensis, Aquensis, Albensis, Terdonensis,
Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vintimeliensis, Placentinus, and Papiensis, are
subject to the Archbishop of M^diolanum. There are under the Archbishop of
Genoa, the Bishop Bobiensis, Aprumacensis, or Brumacensis, Metenensis, or
Maranensis, Acoiensis, or Ampruniacensis, Nubiensis, in Corsica, or Nebiensis,
Naulensis, Albigaunensis, or of Arbenga, which is reckoned among the Suffragans
to the Archbishop of Mediolanum.

THE DVKEDOME OF GENOA^
THe Dukedom of Genoa which stretches forth to the Ligustick Sea, belongs
properly to the Transalpine Liguria. The Metropolis of it is the City Genoa,
the other part is divided into the Eastern and Western. The bounds of the
former is the Lunensian Haven, of the latter the Haven of Monaecus: This
Country has a rude stony soil, so that it brings forth nothing but that
which is forced out of the Earth with great pains. It was heretofore covered
over with woods, having a few Husbandmen, who did live rather by robberies than
tillage. Strabo the Geogr. Lib. 4. writes thus concerning L^g^^a. Qui Liguriam
habitant, ut plu^imum ex pecore victum agi^^^t, (...) potione, maritimis ex
locis ac montanis pastum quae names. That is those which inhabit Liguria live
for the most part on Ca^tle, their drink is Milk, and a kind of drink made
of Barley, they get their food on the Seashore and on the Mountains. These
Mountains afoord good Timber for building of Ships, and great Trees, which
(...) so thick that the Diameter of some of them is 8. foot. The (...) were
heretofore a very warlike People, who put the Romans to much trouble, and at
last could hardly be subdued. Whence Liv^^ calls them, Durum in armis genus,
a People hardy in the Wars, and Virgil says, Assu^tumque malo Ligurem, the
Ligurian is inured to trouble.

Genua the Mistress of Liguria is supposed to be the ancientest City of
Italy, and that it was built by Ianus, whom some suppose to be Noah, others
conjecture that it was so named from Genuus the Son of King Saturn. Paulus
Perusinus delivers that Genuinus an Egyptian and one of Phaethons Companions
who lay sick here, after he had recovered his health called it after his own
name Genua. Others devise other Fables, but it is the famousest Mart-towne of
Liguria, and it has i^creased much within these 400. years, and now it is
very strong and much feared. The Territories of this City did reach heretofore
even to the River Tanais. It had under it Theodosia a City of Taur^^a
hers^nesus, which is now called Caffa, as also Cyprus, Lesbus, Chius, which are
Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, and Pera a City of Thrace. It contended long
time with the Venetians concerning the Dominion and Empire of the Sea. In this
City there are 28. Patrician Families, out of which a Counsel of 400. men is
chosen, and the Duke is President thereof. It began to be established at Gen^a
in imitation of the Venetian Commonwealth about the year 1237. but afterward
being much troubled with the factions and discords of the Citizens, and being
enforced to obey foreign Lords, as the Mediolanians, Frenchmen, and Spaniards,
it lost much of her former power and authority* THE DVKEDOME OF GENOA^
GENOVESXIO
map and being now subject, it enjoys rather an imaginary than a free
Commonwealth. But to conclude, referring the Reader that desires to know
more, to Bracelius, Bizarus, Aug. Iustinianus, Fr. Leander Albertus, I think
it fit to set down Scaligers Verses.

The Asian wealth or Eastern honors great,
And all that Land the Euxine Sea does beat.
The Pisanian Armies, and the youth of worth,
And the French Colors I alone drew forth.
The subdued Alps I held, and kept in awe,
And Afric trembled when my Ships it saw,
And the Venetian has fled from the shot
Which in my Haven he has found too hot.
O France you are deceived much, and Spain,
In your attempts, you take up arms in vain:
I conquer if conquered, for if I obtain
Victory, or lose it, I am still the same.
THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY. IN WHICH ARE THESE Countries Romandiola, the
Dukedomes of Parma and Feraria, and the Marquiship of Mantua.
THE fourth and last Table of Lombardie does present to your view Romandiola,
and the Dukedomes of Parma, and Mantua. The first is Romandiola or Romanula,
which was so called by the Pope and the Emperor Charles the great. The bounds
of Romanula on the North are the Moors or Marshes of Verona, and Patavina,
even to the Mouth of the River Po, together with a part of the Hadriatick Sea:
on the East Isaurus together with Picenum, on the South the Apinnine, with
Etruria, concerning the Western bounds there are different opinions. Some go
no farther than the River Vatrinus on this side of Fo^^m Crrn^lij: some pass
over to Scultenna, now Panarium, and there they stay. We will follow the
latter, and make the length thereof to be 110. Miles or thereabouts between
Folia and Panarium: and the breadth almost 96. Miles, between the Apennine and
the Marshes before mentioned. Concerning the quality of this Country Leander
writes that it has a very good soil, yielding all kinds of fruits both for
delight and necessary use. Here are large fields planted with all kinds of
fruit bearing trees, pleasant Hills full of Vines, Olives, and Figgs, Woods
full of fruit, Meddowes full of grass, and Bushie thickets fit for hunting,
also many wholesome waters, many Salt Pits, both near the Shore side, and
within the Country, also Mettalls Mines, and innumerable other excellent
gifts of nature, which would be tedious to rehearse. There are some famous
Cities in this Country and many Towns. The chief are, that which Ptolemy and
other call Arminum, the Inhalitants do now call it Rimini, and the Germans
Rumelen. It was so so called from the River which waters it. Others have
other derivations. It abounds with plenty. The Haven was heretofore very
fair, large and capable of Shipping, but now it receives only small vessels
being filled and choked up with sand. There is also Cervia a Sea City,
heretofore called Phicoles. The Cernians for the most part are Salt-makers, of
which they make so great gain, that the Pope has yearly from thence 60,
thousand Crowns. There is also Ces^na, which Ptolemy calls Caeseni. Strabo,
Caesena, and now the most do call it Caesena and some Cesnadigo, and lastly
Cesna. It is now a very populous City, and in former time it was enlarged on
the West and Noth sides, by Bernardine Rubrius of Parma. There is a strong
Castle seated on a Hill on the South side of the City, which was built by the
Emperor Frederick the second: Sarsina is an ancient City at the foot of the
Apennine, where Plautus was borne. Ravenna which Strabo calls Raovenna and
Ptolomy Ravennai, is an ancient City. Concerning the situation whereof Strabo
writes much Lib. 5. There are under the Archbishop hereof, the Bishop
Adriensis, Comaclensis, Cerviensis, Foroliviensis, Foropompiliensis,
Vellimensis, or Fille, Cesenatensis, Saremensis or Sarsinatensis, Faventinus,
Imolensis, Mutinensis, Bononiensis, Reginensis, Parmensis, and Barcinensis.
There are very good Meddowes and Pastures by this City, which do yield grrat
stoare of Milk, Butter, and Cheese. Forum-Livij is now called Forli. It is a
City that excels both for Situation, and plenty, being seated between the
two Rivers Ron^us and Montonus, and has a good air. Forum Cornelij commonly
called Imolais seated by the River Santernus, the soil round about it is
fruitful, and yields great store of Corn, Wine, Oil, and other fruits.
Bononia is an ancient noble City, commonly called Bologna, it is seated at the
foot of the Apennine, by the River Rhene, and the Torrent Aposa runs
through the middle of the City: it lies all against the East, on the South
side it has Vine-bearing hills, on the other sides fair fruitful Meddowes.
The air is not very wholesome. The compass of it is 7. Miles. It has 12.
Gates, and Magnificent houses, and Noblemens Palaces. The Emperor Theodosius
did institute an Universitie here, in the year 423. Now we come to Ferraria,
concerning the name whereof there are diverse opinions. But it is most probable
that it was called from the Inhabitants of Ferrarida, which was beyond Po, who
were translated hither in the year 423. by the Decree of the Emperor
Theodosius: at what time it was a Village without walls, and afterward about
the year 658. it was walled about by Smaragdus, Exarchus, and by degrees it
was so much enlarged, that at length it became a noble City. The Bishopric
was translated hither by Pope Vitellianus about the year 658. and 12.
neighboring Villages made subject unto it by the Emperor Constantine the 2.
who gave it also many Privileges. It is now called Ferrara. And it is seated
on the Banck of the River Po which waters it on the East and South sides. The
air is thick, in regard that it is situate in the Marshes. It has strait,
long, broad streets, the most whereof the Marquess Leonell caused to be
paved with brick, and it is wonderfully beautified with public and private
buildings. There is a great Church, and two Castles, the one by the River, the
other over against S. Georges Church, which is the Dukes Seat: and both are
well fortified: it is populous, and abounds with plenty of all things, and it
is one of the pleasantest Cities in Italy, being the head seat of the
ancient and noble family of the Atestines. The Emperor Frederick the second
did institute here an University in contempt of Bononia. It has a great
Plain round about it but barren. I pass by the other Cities of Romandiola
and the lesser Towns.

THE FOVRTH TABLE OF LOMBARDY^
ROMANIOLA cum D. PARMsENSI.
map

The Dukedom of PARMA.
THE Dukedom of Parma is so called from the City Parma. The Soil is
pleasant, and bears excellent fruit and good Vines, it has also wholesome
waters, Parmizan.
and pleasant Meddowes, and it is very much commended for cheese and fleeces of
wool. This City of Parma from whence the Dukedom is denominated, was built
by the Tuscians, and as many other Cities in these parts, afterward it was
possessed by the Borians, and in Process of time the Romans were Lords of it,
who as Livy delivers Lib. 29. in the year 570. brought thither a Colonie. Mar.
Tul. in the last of his Philippicks, bewaileth that calamity which L. Antoninus
brought upon it: Afterward it was freed from the power of the Roman servitude:
and now it sometimes belonged to the Emperors, sometimes to the Popes, but it
was always joined in friendship with Bononia. It endured two whole years a
grievous siege which was laid against it by the Emperor Frederick the second
about the year 1248. because it took part with the Pope. But he being driven
away, it had afterward many Earls, as the Corregians, Scaligers, Atestians,
also the Galeatians, and the Sforzas, who were Vicounts: and lastly, the
Frenchmen, with whom the Pope of Rome did often contend for the Dominion and
Sovereignty over this City, who at last being aided by the Emperor Charles
the fifth, expulsed the Frenchmen out of Italy, and got the City. Now it has
Dukes, the first whereof was instituted by the Pope, namely, Peter Aloysius
Farnesius, the Son of Pope Paul the third, who within two year being cruelly
murdered; his Son Octavius was put in his place, and after his decease his
Son succeeded him. But Strabo and Ptolemy do place Parma in the Aemilian way,
five miles from the Apennine. It was so called from the River Parma: or as
others suppose, Quod Parmam, hoc est breve scutum, referat, that is, because it
resembles a little round Buckler or Target, which is called Parma. It has
fair houses, strait broad streets, and plenty of all things necessary. It is
very populous, and seated on a Plain: the air is very wholesome: so that
Pliny makes mention of 5. men of Parma, three whereof lived 120. years, and
two 130. years. The Winters and Summers are temperate. It has a strong
Castle, and many Palaces belonging to Princes and noble Families. In the
Marketplace which is very large there is a fair Fountain: and a Church built
in imitation of the Roman fashion: and a Bell hung on three Pillars: and a
Steeple like that at Bononia. The Suburbs are divided from it by a River of the
same name, and it is an Archbishopric. The Inhabitants are comely, noble,
Martial, courageous, and witty. Also the ancient and noble City Placentia
has a Duke as well as Parma, which Ptolemy and others call Plakentia, and
commonly Piazenza. It is seated near Po, from which it is distant about 1000.
foot, it stands in a pleasant soil, and glories in her fruitful fields,
and famous Citizens. The walls are new: the Bulwarks and Fortifications very
large and strong. It is also a Bishopric. It has a School for all Arts and
Disciplines. The fields round about this City in regard they are well watered
do yield Wine, Oil, Corn, and all kind of Fruits: for it has many Springs,
Rivers, and Rivulets, which do water the Pastures, and Meddowes.

The Dukedom of MANTUA.
THe Dukedom of Mantua is so named from the City Mantua. It was first
governed by the Thuscians, who built this City, afterward the French
Cenomanian did govern it, after whom the Romans obtained it. It endured much
misery under the Triumvirate. For when Cremona was left as a prey to the
Conquerours, it lost a great part of his Territory by his vicinity and
neighborhood unto it. Whence Virgil says.

Mantuavae miserae nimium vicina Cremona.
Mantua alas does stand too nigh,
Cremona oppressed with misery.
There succeeded after the Romans, the Goths, and Langbards: who being
expelled, it was reduced to the obedience of the Roman Empire, which afterward
decaying, it got liberty with many other Cities, which it enjoyed, until the
Emperor Otho the second gave it to Theobald Earl of Canossaw. There succeeded
after him his Son Boniface, and he dying without any Issue Male, his Wife
Beatrix, and his Daughter Mathilde succeeded, who much enlarged Mantua. That
City which Strabo and Ptolemy did call Mantua, is now called Mantoa. Diverse
have sundry opinions concerning the original of this City. Howsoever, the
original is most ancient. It is seated in the midst of the Marshes, which
the River Mincius flowing out of the Lake Benacum does make, neither can you
go unto it but by great high Bridges: hence in regard of the natural
situation it is accounted one of the strongest Cities of Italy. It is a fair
City, adorned with magnificent public and private buildings, and fair
streets.

THE COUNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.
HItherto we have viewed Lombardy: now we must describe the County of
Bressia, and the Dukedom of Mediolanum. The former was so named from the noble
City Brixia. It contains part of that Country, which the Cenomanians
heretofore possessed. And the Territory of Brescia is 100. miles long, from
Limon a Town near the Lake Benacum, to the Town Vrceanum. The breadth of it
is 50. miles from Moso even to Dialenges: and it is situate between the Lakes
Benacum and Sabinum. The soil is fruitful, and yields great store of
Wheat, and other kinds of Corn, as also great store of Wine, and Oil, it
has also Iron and Brass. And moreover it has Gold, Silver, Alum, Marble,
Porphiry, and an other kind of Stone enameld with black and green spots,
which they call Serpentium; Pliny calls it Ophites which is a kind of Marble
having spots like a Serpent, and many other Precious Stones: also the
Marchasita, which the ancients did call Pyrites, or the Fire-stone. And it has
abundance of all things necessary for the sustentation of man's life. Brixia did
always continue faithful unto Rome: especially in the Punick War, after
that overthrow which Hanniball gave them by the River Trebia. Cn. Pompeius.
Strabo brought thither a Colony with other Transpadanians, in the year 665.
and afterward Caesar the Dictator made it a City with many others. Afterward
it was subject to the Roman Emperors as long as the Roman Empire flourished.
But afterward Radagisus King of the Goths did waste it with fire in the year
412. and then it was ruinated by Attila Prince of the Hunnes, but it was
reedified in the year 452. by the Emperor of Martianus; afterward the
Langbards possessed it until Charles the great took Desiderius: after whose
decease the Frenchmen succeeded. Afterward the Emperor Otho a Saxon made it a
free City of the Roman Empire, in the year 1136. and not long after Henry
sacked it, threw down the Walls, and and deprived it of all Privileges: and
the Scaligers, Dukes of Verona, being aided by the Gwelfians took it. After
them there succeeded Vice-Counts, who were Princes of Mediolanum: by whom being
often vexed, it revolted unto the Venetians: from whom the Frenchmen took it,
and afterward it was restored to them again. That which Strabo and Ptolemy do
call Brexia, is now called Brescia. There are diverse opinions concerning the
original of this City. But Livies opinion is most probable which many follow.
For he notes that it was built by the Cenomanians: and by the Captains
Elitovius and Belovesus, when they came out of France, over the Taurine and
Julian Alps into Italy. Hence Pliny and Ptolemy do attribute the building
THE COUNTY OF BRESSIA, AND THE DVKEDOME OF MEDIOLANVM.
BRESCIA Episcopatus MEDIOLANU^ Ducatus
map of it to be the Cenomanian Nation, and Livie also, Lib. 32. mentions
that Brixia was the head City of the Cenomannians. It is an ancient, rich,
populous, large, and well-fortified City, having an impregnable Castle. and
fair buildings both public and private. Also the River Garcia slideth by it,
which some call Mela. It has a strong Castle which overlooketh the City,
which was fortified by the Venetians with a strong Garrison: it has also
magnificent Churches, wondrous great Monasteries, and a fair Hospital. In the
Captains Palace there are these Verses.

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiem, pacem, crimina, jura, Probos.
This place does love1, hate2, punish3, keep4, and reverence5,
Wickedness1, peace2, faults3, laws4, and good men's5 innocence.
There are many inscriptions upon Marble, and many Elogies of Statues, and
diverse Epitaphs both in the Churches, the Bishops Palace, and also in all parts
of the City and the Territories thereof. The Inhabitants are wealthy, neat,
Noble, subtle, and witty. It flourishes now for riches: so that it is usually
called Vrbis Venetae Sponsa, the City of Venice his Bride. It received the
Christian faith from D. Appollinaris Bishop of Ravenna. And it is a Bishopric.
Of which Scaliger thus.

Quae pingues scatebras specula despectat ab alta
Postulat Imperij Brixia magna vices,
Caelum hilarum, Frons laeta urbi, gens nescia fraudis,
Atque modum ignorant divitis uber agri.
Si regeret patrias animas concordibus oras,
Tunc poterat Dominis ipsa jubere suis.
Great Brixia that from a Hill does view
Those fruitful springs which do the ground bedew,
Complains of change of government, the air
Is pleasant, and the City is most fair.
The people are ignorant in all deceit,
The richness of the soil is very great,
And if dew concord could be here maintained,
Those who are now her Lords, she might command.
There is also in this Territory the Town Quintianum, situate 20. miles from
Brixia Southward, near the River Ollius. Also Reggiate, Bottesino, Vtele,
Novalara, with many others, it has also the Lake Be^acum, so called from a
Town, the ruins whereof are still remaining. Catullus calls it Lydius, from
the Lydians that is the Tyrrhenians, who as fame reports did sometime inhabit
the Country near unto it: it is called in Italian Lago di Garda: and in the
Germane speech Gard-se, from the Castle which is seated on the East bank
thereof. This Lake, as Alexius Vgonius writes to Cardinal Pole, does excel
all others for good fish: it is environd with pleasant Hills, and Springs do
every where break forth: here there are woods, and green Meadows, Vines,
Olives, Maple-trees, Bay-trees, and Cedars: and Towns full of all provision
do encompasse it round about, so that it wants nothing either for delight
and pleasure, or for use and profit. There is also another Lake called Sebinus
or Sevinus, now it is called Lago d'Iseo, from the Castle Iseus which is on the
bank thereof. This receaveth the River Ollus on the North, and casts it
forth again on the South. Lastly, there is also between Sebinum and Benacum
the Lake Idrinus, commonly called Lago d'Idro, or Idro Lago. It was so named
from the Castle Idrus: Some suppose it was so called from the Hydra, which
Hercules slew here, it has abundance of fish. It discharges it self into
Idrinus by diverse streams: the lesser Lakes are those which are called in
their Country speech Lago Cap. Lago Ru^cone, and others. The River Mella or
Mela does cut through the middle of this Territory. It still retains the name
of Mella even until this day. But yet it does not run by the City as we may
see, but by the Precincts thereof. The little Rivulet which glideth by the
City is now called Garza.

The Dukedom of MEDIOLANUM.
THe Dukedom of Mediolanum is 300. miles in compass. The soil is very
fertile and fruitful. Livie, Florus, and Polybius, do report that this
Country, with the most of the Transpadane Cities did yield themselves to the
power of the Romans, and became a Province, Marcellus and Cn. Scipio being
Consuls. And it is manifest that some of the latter Emperors, allured by the
convenience of the place, did make this City their seat of Residence, as
Nerva, Trajane, Hadri^n, Maximinian, Philip, Constantine, Constantius,
Iovianus, Valentes, Valentinian, and Theodosius. Trajane built a Palace here,
which still retains that name. But when the power of the Caesar's grew weak,
this City was wasted and spoiled by the incursions and inrodes of the
Barbarians: as the Goths, Hunnes, and Langbards. Whom when Charles the great
had droven out of Italy, this Country did put it safe under the protection of
the Kings of France, and afterward of the Germane Em^^rours. The most of which
were yearly crowned here with an Iron Crown, in the ancient and famous Church
of Saint Ambrose, as Le^nder proves by several examples. At length under the
reign of the Emperors Frederick the first, and the second, against whom it
continually rebelled, it had new Lords, which were the Vicounts Ga^^at^^, who
afterward in the year 1394. were created Dukes by the Emperor Wenceslaus.
Afterward they had the Dukes of Sfortia, by the suffrage and consent of the
Citizens, and by the authority of the Roman Empire: which the Galeatians could
never obtain. But their Line being extinguished, the Emperor Charles the
fifth was their Successor, who passed over this Principallity to the Kings of
Spain his Successors. The chief City is called by all Latin Writers
Mediolanum: Polybius, Strabo, Ptolemy, do call it Mediolanium, and Mediolana,
the Italians do now call it Milano, the Germans Mey-landt. Mediolanum was
built by the French Insubrians, as Livy, Trogus, and others do report; who
coming into Italy under the conduct of their Captain Bellovesus, and having
expulsed the Tuscians, they founded a City here: in the year, as some do
reckon, before the birth of Christ 339. and as others reckon, 380. Howsoever it
is most ancient. Isaac Causabone. Lib. 4. and Strabo do think that it was so
named from Mediolanium a City of the Santones in France. Some say that it is
derived from a Germane word, as it were May-landt, from the green fields,
which are as fresh and pleasant as the fields are in the Month of May: or else
it is called Midlandt, because it is the middle and Navell, as Iovius shows
of Insubrit, being enclosed with the River Ticinus: or lastly, it is called
Maegde-landt, or Meydel-landt, that is the Virgin Country, from Minerva who had
a Temple there, which was heretofore consecrate to our Savior, afterward to
the blessed Virgin, and now to Saint Tecla. Mediolanum is situate between
Ticinus and Abdua, not far from the Alps: having a temperate air and
climate. It is thought to be one of the greatest Cities of Europe, and it
flourishes for wealth and merchandising: it has fair buildings, great
Churches, and wide large streets: and it is well fortified with Walls,
Bulwarks, and an Armory, which do take up a great space of ground. It has
large Suburbs, some of which may compare with great Cities, being ditched and
walled about as the City is next to the Church which is call Domus, being
fairly and magnificently built, there is Saint Laurences great Church, which
was built upon the ruins of Hercules Temple. There are also in it seven high
channelled Pillars curiously wrought. There is also the strongest Castle which
is in this part of the world, and it is called Porta Iovia, it is impregnable,
and the fairest in all Europe. There is in the Suburbs an Hospital for
Strangers, or for the sick, by the way of Bernomatius, the foundation whereof
contains many Acres, it was begun by the Sfortians, but is not yet finished.
Also there is the Church of S. Gothard, in which are the Tombs, and Sepulchers
of many noble Vicounts. There are many ancient Inscriptions in the Cities, and
many other Monuments of Antiquity. It has an ancient University, where it is
thought that Virgil studied. And Leander writes that it has a famous Library.
There are so many diversities of Tradesmen, that it is a common Proverb. Che
chivolesse rassettare Italia, siruma Milano, which is to say, Mediolanum
scilicet destruendo, Italiam instrui posse. That is, if Millan were destroyed
all Italy might be furnished with all kind of Tradesmen and Artificers. It is
said that the King of Spain receives yearly from hence 80. thousand crowns.
The ridding and determining of civil and criminal causes belongs to the
Senate of Millan, in which there are 16. Doctors, and some Prelates and
Patritians of Millan. Millan is an Archbishopric, the Archbishopric whereof
has these Suffragans under him, Bergomensis, Brixiensis, of ^remona,
Landensis, Novaria, Vercellensis, Ipporegtensis, Vigleviensis, Astensis,
Aquensis, Albensis, Terdonensis, Saonensis, Albingaunensis, Vintimeliensis,
Placentinum, Papiensis, and Ferrara are exempted.

THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.
THis is the greatest and most potent Dukedom of all Europe, which heretofore
the Insubrians inhabited between the Rivers Abdua and Ticinus. The chief
Cities in it are Millan, Lauda, Ticinum, which is now called Papia, and
Novarra. The soil is every where fruitful, pleasant, and watered with many
Streams and Rivers: the chief City hereof is Millan built by the Frenchmen,
for when Tarqumius Pristus reigned at Rome, King Bellonesus having passed over
the Alps with a great band of Frenchmen, and having expulsed the Hetruscians,
he built a City in that place, which Leander says was called Subria, and he
called this City Mediolanum, or as some are persuaded Meydlandum, as it were
the Virgin Land, perhaps from Minervas Temple, who was worshipped in this
place, which is now consecrate to S. Tecla, whence Alciat thus.

Quam Mediolanum sacram dixere puellae
Terram: nam vetus hoc gallica lingua sonat.
Culta Minerva fuit, nunc est ubi numine Tecla
Mutato, Matris Virginis ante domum.
Mediolanum the Virgin Land they name,
For in the French it signifies the same,
'Twas sacred to Minerva, now they adore
Tecla, and the Virgin Mother heretofore.
Some think it was so denominated from a Sow that was half covered with
wool, which Alciat seems to glance at thus in his Emblemes, when he says.

Laniger huic signum, Sus est, animalque biforme
Acribus hinc setis, lanitio inde Levi.
Their arms a Sow, a creature most uncouth,
The One side bristled, 'tother woolly smooth.
So also Claudian in the marriage of Honorius and Maria.

-- ad maenia Gallis.
Condita lanigerae suis ostendentia pellem.
The wall built by the French, which yet do show
The skin and shape of their wooll-bearing Sow.
THE DVKEDOME OF MILLAN.
MEDIOLANVM Ducatus.
map

This Country was reduced to the form of a Province, and was subject to the
Romans, as Polybius and Livie report. And many Emperors taking delight in the
convenience of the place, did make the City of Millan their seat of
residence, and adorned it with many public Aedifices and Buildings; whence
Ausonius.

Mediolani mira omnia, copia rerum,
Innumerae cultaeque domus; tum duplice muro
Amplificata loci species, populique voluptas
Circus, and inclusimoles cuneata Theatri:
Templa, Palatinaeque arces.
All things at Millan are most wonderful,
There Is plenty, and the houses beautiful.
A double wall the City does augment,
The People in the Cirque take much content,
And in the Theaters they do delight,
There are Temples, and fair Palaces most bright.
But when the Emperor decayed, it was oftentimes vexed by the Huns, Goths,
and Langbards. It was taken and destroyed by Fred. Barbarossa. It was a long
time governed by Vicounts, John Galcatius was first created Duke by the
Emperor Wenceslaus, and from thence it descended to the Aurelians and
Sfortians, and at length Charles the fifth did bring it into his own Family.
In this City there is the royal Castle of Porta Iovia, the strongest in all
Europe. It is full of Artificers, especially Smiths, who forge out of Iron,
Swords, Brest-plates, Bucklers, and other Military instruments. Hence arises
that saying, Qui Italiam armis instruere totam velit, eum destruere Mediolanum
oportere; That is, He that would furnish all Italy with arms, must destroy
Millan. But I conclude with this eloquent Elogie of a Divine Writer.

This Land a people did first entertain,
From whom this Kingdom at the first began.
The French, Italians both all'yd did grow,
And gave new laws unto the ancient Po.
Then Germany joined in so great affairs,
And Fame her golden Trumpet now prepares,
Let one poor honor some poor Town advance,
While threefold honor does unto me chance.
THE PRINCIPALITIES OF VERONA, VICENTIA, AND PATAVIVM.
And the Territories of the chief Cities of MARCA TARVISINA are amply
described.
IN this Table the Territories of three chief Cities of Marca Tarvisina are
delineated and described, Verona, Vicentia, and Patavium. The first is the
Territory or Country of Verona. The length of it from the Town Bruchelius unto
the River which comes out of the Lake Bevacum, is 65. Miles: the breadth from
the Castle on the Frontiers even to Rivoltella is forty Miles. The soil in
some parts is stony, and therefore untilled, and some part of it is very good.
It has abundance of Wheat, Oil, Wine, Cattle, Wool, and other precious
commodities. It has also famous Quarries of Stone. And many wholesome
medicinal herbs, especially on the Mountain Baldus, whether Physicians do
often resort to gather them. The Tuscans are supposed to have built Verona,
others think that the French Cenomanians did build it: who being expulsed, it
was a long time subject to the Romans, and Cn. Pompeius Strabo, the father of
Magnus brought thither a Colonie. Afterward being wasted by Auila King of the
Hunns, it was afterward subject to many Tyrannies, first to the Kings of the
Goths: the Langbards did expel them, and the Frechmen under the conduct of
Charles the great did expel the Langbards: after whom the Berengarians being
droven out of Italy by the Emperor Otto the first, it enjoyed some quiet and
rest under the authority and Protection of the Roman Empire. Actiolinus
Romaninus having got it by force, did change the Praefectorship into a
Lordship, having expulsed Azo Atestinus, whom the Senate and People of Verona
had made Praetor. He dying obout the year 1259. the Saligerians by the
suffrage and common consent of the Citizens were entitled Princes of Verona
almost 128. years; who being droven out, and partly made away by poison, the
Galleatians got possession of it, and afterward the Cariensians, whom the
Venetians did drive out, under whose jurisdiction it constantly and peceablely
continues. The City which Ptol. calls Verona and Overona, does still
retain that name. The Germans call it Di^trichs Bern. It has a thin air.
It is like the City Basit in Heluetia, for situation, having many fair
buildings: it is seated on a plain level, both Southward, Eastward, and
Westward, but on one North side the ground rises a little, like a Roman
Theater. It is fortified, and encompased round about with the River Athesis.
There are diverse Monuments of antiquity, which do testify the ancient
magnificence and riches of this City. It has strait, large streets, paved
with stone, and about 35. Churches, the chief whereof is the ancient
Cathedral Church, and the Church of S. Anastasius; it has 10. Monasteries. On
the top of a rock there are two famous Castles of S. Peter, and S. Faelix. Also
an ancient Castle, which is commonly called Citadella. There is also a great
Amphitheater in the middle of the City. This City is a Bishopric. The
Inhabitants are magnificent, beautiful, comely, very witty, and prone to
learning. I cannot omit this one thing that when the Venetians did fortify
this City, they found certain hollow Caves, and when they dug in the
Mountains, they found Vrchins or hedghoggs of stone, also Oisters, Birds
bills, and star fishes which were as hard as any Stones.

The Territory of VICENTIA.
THe Country of Vicentia follows, the soil whereof as it is pleasant, so it
is fruitful, yielding great store of Wine, and other fruits, especially
Mulberries, on whose leaves Silke-wormes do feed. Not far from the City
there are two famous stone Quarries in the Mountain, which the Latins call
Cornelius, it is commonly called Covelo. There are also Marble Mines in the
Valdanian street. This City was built by the Tuscans, or as Trogus writes,
by the Frenchmen, afterward it continued faithful to the Romans, until
Attilas time who wasted it, and afterward it was subject to the Goths, the
Langbards, and lastly to the Kings of Italy. They being expulsed, it was
subject to the Roman Empire, until the reign of the Emperor Frederick the
second, by whom being sacked and burnt, it had afterward diverse Lords, as the
Carrasieni, of Patavini, the Scaligers of Verona, and the Gal^atians of Millan:
and also the Venetians. At length being infested and vexed by the forces of the
Emperor Maximilian the 1. it was restored at last to the Venetians. This City
Trogus, Pomponius, Tacitus, and others do call Vicentia. Plin. and Antoninus
do call it Vicetia: Aelianus Bisetia and Bitetia, Ptol. calls it Ovikenta, and
it is commonly called Vicenza. It is seated near the foot of a Hill, being
divided into unequal parts by the two navigable Rivers Rerone and Bachilione.
It is not very fair or beautiful, but populous, and abounding with plenty.
There are four things here worthy of noting, the Praetors magnificent Palace,
a Bridge of one Arch, the great Altar stone in S. Laurences Church, which is
of a wonderful length, and lastly the Theater, which is commonly called L.
Academia. There is also the Monastery of St. Corona, where there is also a
famous Library. The Inhabitants are of a lively disposition, prone, and apt to
learning, warfare, or merchandising, and Industrious, they live bravely and go
decently in apparel. It is a Bishopric. Moreover in the Territory of
Vicentia, there are these Towns, Morostica which is a famous rich Town. Also
Brendulum which is rich and populous. Also Le^cium both for wealth,
populousness, and largeness, may compare with many Cities of Italy. There
is also six Miles about Vicentia, toward THE PRINCIPALITY OF VERONA^
VERONAE VICENTIAE ET PATAVIAE DIT.
map the South, the Town and Castle Custodia, which was so called because
delinquents and loose persons, were kept there at work in great Quarries of
stone, to dig stones for building of houses.

The Territory of PATAVIUM.
THe Territory of Patavium follows, which we are to describe in this Table,
which is thus bounderd by Bernardinus Scardeomus: on the South the River
Athesis runs: on the North the little River M^so glideth: on the East the
gulf of Venice: on the West the Euganian hills, and the Country of Vicentia.
The compass and circumference of this Country is 180. Miles, in which there
are six hundred and seven and forty Villages. Caelius Rhodiginus writes that
Constantinus Palaeologus was wont to say, nisi secreta sanctissimis viris
affirmari in Orient Paradisum esse, arbitrari se non alibi eum reperiri posse,
quam in persuavi Patavina amaenitate. That is if holy men had not affirmed that
Paradise was in the East, he should think that it could not be found any
where else but in sweet and pleasant Patavium. The soil is fruitful,
yielding corn, fruit, and rich Wines, whence Martial, Pictaque Pompineis
Euganea arva jugis.

The Euganean fields which painted are
With hills that purple Vines do bear.
It affoordeth also great store of Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing. The
Inhabitants have a Proverb, concerning the incredible Plenty of this Country,
Bologna la grassa, Padova la Passa. This City was always joined in friendship
and amity with the Romans, as appears in Livie Lib. 41. and in M. Tullius
his Phillippicks. The Colonie brought hither was better conditioned than other
Colonies. For the Patavians had power to give their voice and suffrage, as the
Roman Citizens. It was taken and sacked with other Cities by Attila King of
the Huns, and an hundred years afterward by the Langbards, who burnt it, when
in the reign of Charles the great, it began to be partly under the Kings of
Italy, and the French King: partly under the Berengarians: but afterward it
became free in the reign of the Emperor Otho the first. The form of this
Commonwealth lasted, until Frederick the second, by whose command and
authority Actiolinus Romaninus possessed this City: after whom it had these
Lords, the Carrariensians, the Scaligerians, and the Galeatians, and about the
year of Christ 1404. the Venetians, whom it still obeys, and like a good
Mother, finding her self weak and infirm through age, she yields all her
right to her Daughter (for the Venetians were a Colonie of the Patavines) not
to be governed, but rather sustained and helped by her. Patavium is a most
ancient City, the flower and honor of all the Cities in Italy, Ptolemy
calls it Patavium, it is now called Padua. Ptolemy also in another place
calls it Baetobium. Some suppose it was so named in regard of the Vicinity
and neerenesse thereof unto the River Po, and the Marshes, and so called as it
were Padaveum: some derive it a petendo or from hitting, because Antenor the
builder of this City, Avem telo petiverit, did there shoot a Bird with an
Arrow. But Antenor is reported to have built it as he came from Troy. Thit
City is situate in a fruitful level soil, and it has a gentle temperate
air, it is happy both for the goodness of the soil, the pleasantness of the
Euganian Mountains, and the vicinity of the Alps, and the Sea. The River
Brenta flows by it. The compass of it is now twofold, and heretofore
threefold: the outward compass or circumference does contain 6200. paces,
with 6. magnificent Gates. The inward circumference 3000. paces, having a long
walk round about it. It is also fair and magnificent, abounding with all
things necessary, it is also paved, and well fortified with Ditches, Trenches,
and Bulwarks: it has magnificent, and sumptuous Aedifices, both sacred,
profane, public, and private. There are 23. Friaries, and 49. Nunneries.
There is a Palace which was built by the Emperor Henry, which is now a Court
of Justice, and the chiefest of note in all Italy, which is not supported with
any Pillars, but covered with Lead. Moreover there is the Court of public
counsel, with a Porch, it is supported with Marble Pillars, built of stone,
and covered with Lead, there are 5. great Marketplaces, 38. Bridges, arched
with stone, over the River Bronta. There are large Porches, spacious Courts,
three Hospitalls for the sick, and as many for strangers. There is also an
Hopitall for Orphans. It does contain 4000. houses. The Inhabitants are very
witty, apt and prone to warfare, virtue, and studies. Titus Livius, Cn.
Valerius, Flaccus, L. Aruntius Stella, and many others have graced Padua with
their birth. It has the famous University of Padua, which was founded and
instituted by the Emperor Charles the great, or as some think by Frederick
the second, which was much enlarged by Pope Vrbane the fourth, and perfected
and established by the most illustrious Commonwealth of Venice. There are also
many Libraries, well furnished with Greek and Latin Books, one at S. John's
in the Garden, another at S. Iustines, the third at S. Antonies. This Country
is so watered with Rivers, that to the great commodities and profit of the
Inhabitants, there is no Country Town which is above 5. miles distant from a
River.

FRIVLI, and ISTRIA, KARSTIA, CARNIOLA, AND the Marquiship of the VVindorians,
and the County of CILIA.
THere follows in Mercator, Forum Iulij, and Istria, with other Countries.
This Country was at first so called from Forum Iulij, the chief City, or as
some would have it, from Julius Caesar, who brought hither some Legions against
the Germans. The Italians call it new Friuli, the Germans Friaul: the
Venetians and others do call it Patria. It appears also in Histories that it
was called Aquilejensis. The bounds of this Country on the East are Istria: on
the North the Stony Mountains: on the West the Vindelician and Norician Alps:
on the South the Hadriatick Bay. This Country has a temperate climate, a
wholesome air, fair fields, well watered, and yielding abundance of all
kinds of fruits, the Meadows and Pastures flourishing and full of Cattle, it
has also Vines which yield excellent rich Wines. Woods it has which afford
good Timber, and excellent Hunting, and also Mountains full of Metals,
Marble, and other Precious Stones. The Euganians did first inhabit this
Country, afterward in process of time the Venetians, afterward the Frenchmen,
afterward it was under the Roman Empire, which declining, it was subject to
the Langbards. After them succeeded the Emperors, and after them the
Berengarians, who being destroyed and excirpated, it returned to the obedience
of the Roman Empire. The Emperor Oth^ gave a good part of it to the Church of
Aquilejum, and Conradus gave the other part with Istria. The Venetians at
length possessed it, about the year 1420. who still do govern it, although
the most part of it be subject to peculiar Earls and Lords. The Me^ropolis of
this Country is Vtinum, commonly called Vden^, the Germans call it Weiden.
Leander supposes that it is an ancient Town, and that Pliny makes mention of
it. Niger believes that it is that which Ptolemy and others do call Forum
Iulium. Howsoever it is a large City, magnificent, and abounding with plenty
of all things. The compass of it is 5. miles. The Venetians do now govern
the Commonwealth by Presidents sent thither, which they call Locumtenentes or
Substitutes. There are in it 16000. Citizens. There are also other Cities,
Aquileia, commonly called Aquilegia, the Germans call it Agler. It is situate
by the River Natison. The City was heretofore large and spacious, and
fortified with walls, and also beautified with Churches, a magnificent Theater,
and other public and private Buildings. It is now unfrequented, which was
heretofore very fair and populous. It remained faithful and constant to the
Roman Empire, until the time of Attila King of the Huns, by whom being
besieged and much distressed for FRIVLI^
FORVM IVLIVM KARSTIA CARNIOLA HISTRIA ET WINORVM MARCHIA
map want of Corn, at length it was taken and sacked, and 30000. men who lived
in it were put to the Sword, the ^est fled to the Island. Afterward it was
re-edified by Narsetes, and for a time it was under the power of the Langbards,
until the coming of harles the great into Italy, after which time it was
subject to the Kings of Italy, and afterward to the Roman Emperors. Afterward
it began to be under the government of Patriarchs, from them it came to the
Venetians, under whom it now continues in peace and tranquillity. But these
Bishops are subject to the Patriarch of Aquilegium, the Bishop of ^encordia,
Pola, Parentium, Triestinensis, or Tergestin^nsis, Coma lensis, or Petenensis,
Iustinopolitanus, Madrientis, of the New City, or Emonians. Seek the rest in
the second Table of Lombardy. Under the Bishop of Gradensis, are the Bishops of
Castellanium, or Venice, also Terce^^nensis, Equilensis, or Eusulanus,
Caprulensis, Clodiensis, of the New City* o^ G^ritia according to Leander,
which Ptolemy and Antoninus call ^u^^um Carnicum. Amasaeus Lib. of the bounds
of Venice, places G^ri^ia where No^eja was heretofore, Candidus calls it
Noritia. G^rilia has his Princes, which are subject to the Dukes of Austria.
It is a Town famous for wealth and nobility. There is also Portus Cru^^ius.
which Pliny calls Portus Roma^inus, or Spilim^ergum, which is well fortified
both by nature and Art; also Maranum which is very populous and rich. The Mount
Falcon is a noble rich Town. There is also the City Palma, and a round Castle
built by the Venetians in the year 15^3. under the foundation whereof there
was money laid with this Inscription on one side, Pasalo Ciconta Duce
Venetorum. An^ ^^m. 1^93. On the other side, Fori Idlij, Italiae, Christianae
side^ pr^pugna ^^^m. That is, the Fortress of Forum Iulium, of Italy, and the
Christian faith. lomit the other lesser Towns. These Rivers do appertain to
this Country. Romantinum, Tilaventum, Sontius, Frigidus* Natis^, A^a^^urus, and
others. The Inhabitants are very prone and apt to humane Arts, Merchandise, and
other honest studies.

ISTRIA^
AFter Forum Iulium follows Istria, well known to Latin and Greek writers,
which still retains that name, the Germans call it Hister-reich, as it were
the Kingdom of stria. Plin^^ shows that it was heretofore called Iapydia. It
resembles a Peninsula and lies for the most part between the two Bays
^ergestinum and Carna^ium, it is encompassed with the Hadriatick Sea, on the
North it is bounderd with the Carnician and Norician Alps: on the West before
it runs forth into the Sea, it has the River Formio, and the River Arsia on
the East. The breadth of it is eleven Miles, the compass of it 122. Miles,
from Formio aforesaid, even to the Fanatic Promontorie, or the innermost
corner of the Carnarian Bay. The whole Country is rugged, yet more hilly then
Mountains, which hills do yee^^ great store of wine, oil, and other fruits,
but little wheat or other grain^, (...) the fields P^s^in and Humagio. There
is a Mountain commonly called Maj^^, which is full of wholesome drugs and
herbs, and P^^sitia is do resort hither to gather them. Istria does yield
abundance of Salt. There are also stone Quarries. Marble is cut forth of the
Rovinian fields, which is called Istrian Marble, which is of great esteem
through all Italy. Moreover part of Istria belongs to the Venetians, and part
to the Austrians. Let us come to particulars. The first City that we meet
withal is Iustinopolis, which is a chief City of hersonesus. For so the
learned call it, which is commonly called Cab^ a' ^st^ia. It was so named at
first from the Emperor Iustine. Afterward it was called by a latter name,
because it lies in the entrance of the Country as you come from Forum Iulium.
It possesses a small Island, which is a Mile long, and of a little breadth
being divided from the Continent unto which it is joined by Bridges, which may
be drawn up. It has a Castle in the midst fortified with four Towers: It
belongs now to the Venetians. Five Miles off, there is another Castle, which
is joined to the continent with a stone Bridge. Afterward there follows
Vranum, which the Italians call Castellatium, and Castellerium, commonly called
Castelier. Fifty paces hence is S. Simon and Piranum is 5. Miles distant from
thence: and Salvorum as many: and Vina^um. From Vinacum it is two Miles to S.
Peregrine: and a Mile from thence to S. John della Corn; and as many to S.
Laurence commonly called de Daila: a Mile off is Daila it self, and three Miles
off is the new City, commonly called Aemonia. From the River Quietius it is
three Miles to Port Cerverius. Four Miles from thence is the City Par^nti^m,
which is now called Parenzo. The Town Orser follows, which in Latin is
called Vrserium. Lemus being passed by, we come to Rovinium: and afterward to
that Town which is commonly called Le Colorne, also to Portesuol, and Mutazzo:
and from thence it is three Miles to the Promontorie Cisanum, Muratio, and
Phasiana, and from thence it is two Miles to the Bandonian Valley, and as many
to Marcodainum: and it is three Miles from thence to Port Pola. Afterward there
is the Episcopal City Pola seated on a high Mountain, which still retains
his ancient name, a hundred Miles from Tergeste: and 220. Miles from Ancona
being divided from it by the Hadriatick Sea. The Rivers of Istria are Risanus,
Draconia, Quietus, Lemus, and Arsia. There are also woods which afforde very
good Ship timber. The Inhabitants are poor in regard the Venetians do
engrosse all traffic to themselves. We will speak hereafter concerning the
Marquiship of the Vindorians, and therefore I will here omit it. I have scarce
any thing to write concerning Karstia, and the County of Cilia: but I will add
something concerning Carniola.

CARNIOLA^
CArniola was so named from the Carnian people, as also Carinthia. Concerning
whom Valaterranus writes thus Lib. 2. of his Geographie. The Carnians are
beyond the Istrians, the Country is broad, beginning from Forum Iulium, and
reaching to the Mountains. The Country of Carniola although it be
Mountainous, as the other Countries of this Province; yet it has plenty of
Wine, Oil, Fruit, and Corn. But they make Carniola twofold: the dry which
wants water: and the moist, in which the River Sauus rises, and also
Naup^^tus which is now called Labatus, and many other Rivers. It is adorned
with the title of a Dukedom. The chief City is Labacum, which has the same
name with the River. Some do place Goritia in Carmola, which we mentioned
before in Forum Iulium. On the left hand banck of Sontius upwards, there are
two Fortresses, which the Venetians built heretofore to defend the River, and
to prevent the incursions and inroads of the Turks. Moreover there is a Lake
in this Country, which affords every year a harvest, fishing, and hunting.
The Inhabitants do call it Zircknitzerzee from the Town Zircknitz, which is
situated by it. But I will make a more accurrate description of it out of
George Wernherus: it is enclosed every where with Mountains, for half a Mile
together it is not very broad. Out of the Mountains there do issue certain
small Rivers, which are every one contained in their own Channells: on the
East side there are three, on the South five. The farther that they run the
more narrower they grow, for their banks are strait, until they are
swallowed up in the stoany passages of the Cliffes, which seem as if they were
cut out by humane Industry. So that where they find an open place the waters
do spread abroad, and make a Lake. These waters do as speedily run back as
they flow forward, not only in those narrow channells, but also through the
earth, which when the Inhabitants perceive, they stopp the greater passages,
and Concavities, and so go to fishing, which is both pleasant and profitable.
For the fish which they take here being salted is transported to other
Countries. Moreover when the Lake is dry they have a kind of harvest, for they
sow it and mow it before that it be overflowed again. It bears such
abundance of grass, that in twenty days it will be ready to cut. Who
therefore cannot choose but admire at these wonders of nature? But so much
cocerning these things, I pass to the rest.

THE BISHOPRIC OF TVSCIA
TUSCIA follows, which ancient Writers do celebrate by three special names,
Tyrrhenia, Etruria, and Tuscia: the latter of these three names it still
retains. For it is commonly called Tuscany. The bounds of it are on the South
the Nether Sea, or the Tyrrhene Sea: on the North the Apennine Mountain,
where there is a part of Vmbria, and Gallia ^ogata: on the West Liguria, from
which it is parted by the River Macra: on the East Tiberis. That part which is
nearer to the Sea, is plainer and pleasanter, but the inward parts are more
Mountainous; but in general it is as fair and delightful as any Country in
Italy. It has spacious flourishing fields, very fruitful, pleasant Vales,
Mountains, and Hills, which are adorned with fair houses, and Orchards
planted with Orange Trees, and Cittorne-trees. It has abundance of Vineyards,
which yield excellent rich Wine. The ancient Inhabitants were heretofore
generally called Tyrrhenians, Etruscians, and Tuscians. Afterward from Romulus
time the Romans began to war against the Tuscians, which war they
maintained a long time, so that matters being brought to a dangerous estate,
they were feign to send out a Dictator against them. But in the year from the
building of the City 474. the Vulsinensians and the Vulciensians the most
flourishing people of the Etruscians bebeing overcome by the Consul. Ti.
Coruncanius, they were added to the Roman Empire, and so the Empire was
enlarged on that side even to Ar^us. Neither had they afterward any just
occasion to war with the Tuscians. So that being thus subjected they
continued faithful to the Roman People. But when the Roman Empire began to
(...), they were oppressed with many calamities, by the Goths, the Langbards,
the Huns, and others. At length it came to pass that the greater part of
Etruria is now subject to the great Duke of Etruria, under whose government
there are these noble Towns, Florence, Pisa, Sena, Pratum, Pistorium,
Volatterra, Mons Politianus, Aretium, Cortona, Pescia, Piertia, Mons Alcinus,
Liburnum, Plumbinum, and many other Towns. That which they call S. Peter's
Patrimony belongs to the Pope. It begins from the River Pescia, and S.
Quirie, and so reaches to the Castle Caparanum in new Latium not far from
the River Li^us. Pontremulum near the Fountain of the River Marca belongs
to the King of Spain, which heretofore belonged to the Dukes of Millan, also
Pertus Herculis, Orbetellum Mons Argentarius, and Plumbini Arx also the
Carfenianian or Grasinianian Valley, which lies beneath the Apennine on both
sides of the River Sercia, in which there THE BISHOPRIC OF TVSCIA.
TUSCIA
map is the new Grasinianian Castle, with many other Castles and Towns, are
subject to the Duke of Ferrara. Sarzan by the River Macra looks toward Gen^a.
Massa and Carraria do belong to particular Marquesses, who are adorned with
their Titles. There are also other Towns which were subject to the Romans, as
Bracianum, of which the Ursi^es are Dukes. Moreover in Tuscia there are these
chief Cities: (...) very curious City, which Trogus, and others call Pisae.
The Inhabitants have a very good memory, because the City is seated in a thick
air. It lies between the Rivers Auseres, and Arnus, as Strabo, and Pliny do
note. Now Arnus runs by it which has three Havens. Dionysius Halic. Lib. 1.
does celebrate and praise the antiquity and nobility thereof. Others do
deliver, that it was usually accounted one of the 12. chief Cities of
Etruria, the Duke of Etruria, is often styled Duke of Pisa, and the Knights of
S. Stephen, who were instituted by this Duke, have a house in this City. The
Pisanians did build the chief Temple which they call Domus, or the House,
which is 540. paces in compass, and supported with 70. Pillars, and also they
built the Bishops house with, the spoils which they brought away after the
conquest of the Sarazens at Panormus. The soil round about this City is fit
for tillage; and so fruitful, that it feeds all Etruria, and sends Corn
to other Countries. The Wines are not very good: but there are excellent
Melons. There is also Leuca, of which Julius Sealiger says, Tuscis delitium,
Tuscilaus incluta Coeli: Luca is well known both to Latin and Greek Writers:
Strabo and Ptolemy call it Leuca. It is a fair City, and populous, seated on
a Plain, and environed on every side with Hills strongly walled, and well
paved, it is not very great, but full of Citizens, and has continual
traffic and trading. The Inhabitants are neat, wise, witty: who have a long
time kept their liberty, albeit their neighbors have often assaulted them.
Pistorium, now called Pistoja, is walled about and was much enlarged by
Desiderius King of the Langbards. At length the Florentines laid it to their
own Territory. Florence is the chief City and Metropolis of Etruria. It is
now commonly called Fiorenza, or Firenza. It is thought that Florence was so
called ab Flore from a Flower, in regard that the happy and flourishing estate
thereof resembles a Flower, or else in regard of the flourishing excellent wits
of the Inhabitants, or lastly, because it was derived from Rome the most
flourishing City. It is 6. miles in compass, and contains above 90000.
Inhabitants, it is seated on a level plain by the River Arnus, which cutteth
it into two parts which are united again, and joined together with fair
Bridges, it is paved, and adorned with fair streets, and on the East and North
it is encompassed with pleasant Hills clothed with fruit-bearing trees, and on
the West side it has a fair Plain. It lies in a middle Climate between
Aretium and Pisa, the former of these Cities does produce sharp wits, and the
other, men of a strong faithful memory. The arms of the Appennine do
fortify it against the invasions or incursions of enemies, it is very fair
and beautiful* insomuch that it is a common saying Florenza la bella,
totiusque slos Italiae; that is, Florence the fair, and the flower of all
Italy: there are here many sacred, and profane public Buildings, which for
brevity sake I omit. The Inhabitants are witty, grave, eloquent, and studious
of good Arts. They love to get money, and to that end they trade into foreign
Countries. The Women are very beautiful, and chaste, and their habit, as also
that which the men wear is very decent and comely Volaterra, which Ptolemy
calls Ovolaterrai, and the Itinerary Tables Aquae Volaterrae, is seated on a
steep rugged Rock. The walls are of Free square stone, six foot broad,
which are neatly and cunningly built without Mortar. This City has five
Gates, and at every one of them a Fountain of pure water. The walls do show
the antiquity thereof, as also the Sepulchers, Epitaphs in Etrurian Letters,
and ancient Marble Statues, and also carved stones which are dug forth
daily, and other things. That which Ptolemy calls Saena, and the Itinerarie
Tables Saena Iulia, is commonly called Siena, being distant from Rome 800.
Furlongs, and seated on a high ground, on this side Arbia, having as it were
three corners, of which that which looks Southward is broader than those
which are Eastward and Westward: it has a good wholesome air, but that it is
troubled sometimes with blasting winds. Many of the Poets do call it delitias
Italiae, that is the delight and pleasure of Italy, Saena is paved, having
strait long streets, and high Towers, and also many noblemens houses. The
Citizens are very courteous toward Strangers, much adicted to gain and
worldly affairs. That which Ptolemy calls Perusia, and Eutropius and the
Itinerarie Tables Perusium, the Italians do now call Perugia. It is seated on
a Hill of the Apennine, and fortified by the natural situation. It has many
fair Buildings both public and private, Viterbium stands in a fair
spacious place, and has Cyminian Mountains behind it, it is built of square
stone, and has many Towers. Among the public works there is a famous
Fountain, which springs continually. It has a good fruitful soil, which
yields abundance of Wine and fruits. There are also many Lakes in Etruria. As
that which Livie and others call Trasumenus, and Silius Trasimenus, and now it
is called from the City near unto it Lago de Perugia, that which Antoninus
calls Lacus Aprilis, is now called Fangosa Palude, the Sea-lake, or the
Salt-lake, or Lago d'Orbitello, is called in their language Lacus Vadimonis,
there are also the Ciminian Lake, the Volsiniensian, the Sabatian, the
Bientinian, and the Cianian. It has many Rivers, which are full of excellent
Fish, as namely, Laventia, Frigidus, Anser, Arnus, Cecinna, Cornia, Alma,
Brunus, Vmbro, Osa, Albengia, Floris, Martha, Minio, Eris, Vacina, Sanguinaria,
Aron, and some others. It has also wholesome Bathes, and other waters endued
with wonderful virtue. Here are diverse Mountains, as also the Mountain
Ciminus, well known to Livie, Vibius, and Virgil. That which Pliny calls
Soractis is now called Monte de S. Silvestro. Orosius also places the
Fessulanian Mountains in Etruria. The Cortonensians also are there on the
North side of the Lake Transumenus. The Woods are the Volsinian wood, the
Ciminian wood, and Maesia. It has also diverse Libraries, as at Pisa by the
Dominicans, at Luca by the Franciscans, six in the City of Florence, and one
at Saena, and Perusia. Moreover Livy and Diodorus do report that the Etrurians
are the strongest, richest and best governed Nation of Italy. It appears by
ancient Writers that they were always much adicted to ceremonies, insomuch
that they were the first that invented Sacrifices, Divinations, Southsayings,
and Auguries, and so delivered them to the Romans, as Tully in his Book of
divination and others do note. Mercator does reckon these Bishops in Tuscany,
Nepesinus, Castellanensis, Montis Falconis, Viterbiensis, Suavensis,
Castellanus, Vulteranus, the Archbishop Senensis, Fesulanus, Zarzanensis,
Sutri, Ortanensis, Cornetanensis, Tuscanensis, Clusinus, Aretinas,
Pientinensis, Pistoriensis, Binensis, Corthonensis, Civitatensis,
Balneorigensis, Vrbevetanus, Castrensis, Perusinus, Grossetanus, Lucanus,
Florentinus, Arch, Lunensis: the Archbishop of Pisa under whom are Messanensis,
Civitanensis, and other Bishops in Corsica.

THE MARQVISHIP OF ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedom of SPOLETO.
THE Marquiship of Ancomitana was so called by the Langbards from Ancone a
famous Mart Town, where the Marquesses of this Country had their seat of
residence. Livy and others do call it Picenum. There confineth on the
Marquiship of Ancomitana, on the South the Sabinians, Vilumbrians, and
Vmbrians, with the Apennine Mountain: on the West Gallia Cisalpina, with the
River Isaurus; on the North the Adriatic Sea. Concerning the Eastern bounds
there are diverse opinions. Pliny makes them to be the Rivers Ate^nus and
Ancon: and Ptolomy the River Matrinus with Ancon. The modern writers the
chief whereof is Leander, does make the River True^tum to be the bounds and
limmits between them and the Preturiarians. The Country of Picenum according
to Livy, is very fertile, but yet it has greater store of fruit than corn.
The best wine is made at the Town called Sirolum, which Plinny calls
Ancon^tanian Wine. This Country is for the most part under the Popes
Jurisdiction: there are these Towns in it Ancona, Recanatum, Fanum D. Mariae
Laureti, Camerinum, Fanum Fortunae, Tolentinu^^, ^^mum, Macerata, and some
others Towns: also Eugebium, Coligum, ^orum ^e^^rronij, S. Leo, Senogal^ia,
V^binum, and some others. The chief City is An^ona, which Ptolomy calls
Ancon. It still retains that name, which was first given to this City,
because the Country bends here like an Elbowe. It is opposite to the
Promontorie Cumeras, and it is enclosed on the North with the Sea and the
Haven: moreover it is well fortified with Gates, Bulwarks, and Walls: It has a
Port or Haven which is strong both by Art and nature, and has a convenient
entrance into it, and is able to receive many ships, which was built by the
Emperor Traian. The City has twelve Fortes, which are all well furnished
with ordinance. It is famous in regard that Graecians, Illyriaus, Pannonians,
and all Europe do trade and traffic here, it is very populous, and the
streets are long and strait. The soil round about is fruitful, yielding
Wine, and other commodities. There are also Firmium, now called Firmo, an
ancient City. Ricenetum, Reccanolo, or Recunati, which the Italians do now
call Ricanati, is a famous Mart-towne, in so much that Merchants out of all
Europe and Asia do come thither twice a year to Faires. Some ruinous pieces
of Helvia Ricina may be seen as you travel along, among the rest there is a
great brick Amphitheater on the bank of the River Potentia and other carcasses
of great Buildings. Auxinum is an ancient Episcopal City, commonly called
Osmo. Livy calls it Oximum. Many Epitaphs and Elogies which have been found
here of late do show the antiquity thereof. Fabrianum in Latin called
Faberiana, is a Town THE MARQVISHIP OF ANCONITANA, AND the Dukedom of SPOLETO.
MARCHA ANCONITANA cum SPOLETANO DUCATU
map very full of Shops, which are so distributed, that every street has
several shops, so that one street has all Smiths, and another all Shopmakers,
and another Papermen. Sevogallia is an Episcopal City, which as it appears
by Polibius and others was first called Sena, afterward Senogallia: it is now
called Sinigaglia, or Sinegalia: it has a thick air. Parvum is watered on the
West with the River Misa: being fortified with a thick brick wall, with a
Ditch and Bulwarks. But yet in regard it is so near unto the Sea it wants
fresh water, so that they are feign to use that which is brought thither. Fanum
is an Episcopal Town not very great, situated on a Mountain, commonly called
Fano, Tacitus and Ptolemy do commonly call it Fanum Fortunae, for there are
still many ruins remaining of that sumptuous Church which was dedicated to
Fortune. Here is a Marble Arch of costly and curious workmanship, which is
thirty Cubits high, and thirty broad. On the top whereof which is fallen down,
there was an Elegy engraven in praise of the Emperor Constantine. The River
Argilla runs by it Forum Sempronium, now called Fossumbrunum, or
Fossumbruno, is an Episcopal Town, in which there are many tokens of
antiquity, for besides Aquaeducts, paved ways, pillars and other things, there
are many marbles thrown down with ancient inscriptions, which have been
gathered by others. Pisaurum is an Episcopal City now called Pesaro. A famous
Mart-towne of Italy, rich in Merchandise, beautiful, and adorned with fair
houses. Vrbinum is situate on a high unlevell Mountain between the same
Rivers, it is a neat City fairly built, and has a fruitful soil round
about it, and it is adorned with a fair Library, which is furnished with many
excellent Books. In Picenum by the side of the Mountain Victor there is a
famous La^e, which they call Nursinum. The common people do affirm that evil
spirits do swim in it: because the water do continually leap up and fall
down again, to the great admiration of those who are ignorant of the cause
thereof. These Rivers do water it, Truentus, commonly called Tronto,
Castellanus, Asonus. Letus mortuus, Tenna, Chientus, Flastra, Letus Vivus,
Asinus, Potentia, Muson, Esinus, Misa, Sontinus, Cesanus, Metaurus, Cantianus,
Boasus, Argila. There are these Mountains, Furcas, Pescas, and Auximus so
called from the City Auximum, and Corvus, whence many Rivers together with
Albula and Truento do run through the Marrucinians, the Praecutianians, and
the Marsians. But the Apennine Mount in this place where it hangs over this
Country is highest. Here are these Bishoprics, Asculanensis, Firmianus,
Camerinensis, Auximanensis, Humanas, Anconitanus, Esinensis, or Exinas,
Senogaliensis, Fanensis, Pisaurensis, Forosemproniensis, Calliensis, Vibinas,
or S. Leonis, Maceratensis, Racanatensis.

The Dukedom of SPOLETO.
THe Dukedom of Spoleto commonly called Ducato di Spoleto, is so called from
the City Spoleto, which was heretofore the Palace of the Dukes of Lombardy. It
was heretofore called Vmbria. It may be clearly collected out of Strabo that
the bounds of Vmbria were heretofore very large, who make the Apennine
Mountain, and the Hadriatick Sea to be the bounds thereof. Some do make the
length of it to be from Ravenna to Tiberis, which is a 1650. Furlongs, or 1128.
Furlongs and an half. The Country is here full of high rugged Mountains, and
there garnished and trimmed with Hills, which do yield great store of Wine,
Oil, Figs, and others fruits, and then again it opens into fertile and
fruitful Plains. The Cities of the Dukedom of Spoleto are Eugubium, which
is seated at the foot of the Apennine, and there lies a pleasant fair Plain
before it. Some would have it to be that which Silius calls Inginium: Cicero
Iguvium: Ptol. Is^vion. It is an old Town, and of great Antiquity. It is now a
populous Town, and the Inhabitants do live by dressing and spinning of Wool.
The soil is partly Mountainous, partly Champion. And it has every where great
store of Corn. Neuceria also cleaves to the side of the Apennine, the
Itinerarie Tables do call it Nucerium. commonly Nocera, and in their language
Fulignum or Fuligno, it is above an hundred and threescore Furlongs from
Perusia. Sibus Italicus calls it Fulginia. Timia is divided with a little
poor stream. In the Market place there are three Palaces: in one of which
there do dwell the 7. men called Fulginates, before whom all civil
controversies are brought, who bear that office for two years: in the other
the Praetor who judges of more weighty causes, and his office lasts six
months: in the third is the governor, who has chief power under the Pope.
Assisum was so called from the Mountain Asts near unto it, Ptolemy calls it
Aesisium, Strabo Aesium, it is commonly called Ascesi, and S^si, it has a
Bishop. Here S. Francis was borne, who instituted the Order of Minorite Friars,
and it has a sumptuous Church. Here is also a well-furnished Library. Mons
Falco is a new Town seated among pleasant Hills, and very populous, B. Clara,
who founded the Order of S. Clares Nuns, was borne here. There is also
Spoletum, from whence Vmbria was called the Dukedom of Spoleto. It is commonly
called Spoleto, Strabo and Ptolemy do call it Spol tium. It has an unequal
situation, partly on a Plain, and partly on a Hill, on which there is a strong
Castle built out of the ruins of an Amphitheater. It is now a fair City,
abounding with plenty of all things. There is besides many other ancient
Edifices, as the foundation of an Amphitheater, and the old Church of Concordia
without the City, and there are pieces of Aquaeducts, which were cut out of
the Apennine, and partly conveyed to the City through brick Vaults and
Channels. Ceretum is a new Town but populous, from whence the Ceretain are now
called Errones, or wanderers, who travel through all Italy under the pretense
and color of sanctity and religion, and get their living by diverse Arts. The
Castellanian Bridge, or Ponte Castello was built by the Ceretanians. Here John
Pontanus was borne, a famous, learned man. Conissa is a new Town seated on a
Mountain, but very populous. That which Strabo calls Interamna, and
Antoninus Interamnia, and the Irinerarie Tables I^teramnium; is commonly called
Terni, or Terani: it abounds with all things necessary, and is very populous.
The River makes the soil very fruitful. Vernaccia has excellent Wine. Tud^r
is an ancient City situate on a pleasant Hill, adorned and garnished with
Figs, Olives, Vines, and other fruits. It has these Lakes Floridum, Velinum,
Cutiliensis. And besides Inginium which Strabo mentions, it has these
Mountains, Eugubinum, Floridum, and others. There are also the Crustumenian
Mountains, out of which the River Asia flows with a deep Channel. There is
all Fiscellus which Pliny calls the top of the Apennine, whence the River Nar
issues from two Fountains; it is now called Monte Fiscello. There is also a
part of the Apennine, which is called Mons Victor, where it lifts up his high
top above the Castle Arquata, and seems to exceed it self in height, and
thence it is called Mons Victor, because it exceeds the rest in height. The
Inhabitants are more warlike then the other people of Italy. The Bishop
Ariminensis is subject to the Archbishop of Ravenna. There are these
Bishoprics in the Dukedom of Spoleto, Assisinas, Fulginas, Nucerinus,
Eugubinus, Spoletinus, Tudertinus, Ameliensis, Narniensis, Interamniensis.

CAMPAGNA DI ROMA, HERETOFORE CALLED LATIVM.
NExt Latium offers it self to be described, which is a Country of Italy much
celebrated and praised by all Authors. It is thought that Latium was so callen
from Saturnus, who flying from his Country in his locis latebat, hid himself
in these parts. Varro thinks that this Country was so named, because it lay
hidden among the high steep Rocks of the Alps, and the Apennine, the Sea,
and Tiber. Others say that it was named Latium from King Latinus, some derive
it from the Latitude, because there is no Country between the Mountains and
the Sea, that has a greater Latitude then this. It is now called Territorio
Roma^um or Campagna di Roma. The most do make the bounds of Latium on the North
the Apennine Mountain, and the River Anio: on the East Liris: on the South the
Tyrrhene Sea; on the West the River Tiber, which does encompasse the Tuscians,
Sabinians, Marsians, Samnites, Praegutianians, and Campanians. It is a very
fertile Country, except in some places near the Borders, where it is stony and
mountainous, and has many Marshes, which do make the air thick and
unwholesome. The Sicilians, the Aborginians, the Pelasgians, the Arcadians, the
Auruncians, the Volscians, the Oscians, the Ausonians, and others did first
inhabit it. So much briefly concerning Latium in general: now our method
requires that we should describe it in particular, beginning from that City
which was heretofore the Compendium or Epitome of the whole world. This City
shows her self in ancient Latium, as soon as you have passed out of Etruria
over Tiberis. It still keeps her former name. It is situated in a soil not
very fertile, right against the South, and has an untemperate air and
climate. It was three miles in compass, which was the compass of ancient
Rome, but now it is far less. It has 360. Towers on the walls, and
heretofore 750. There are the 14. Quarters and Regions of the City* but their
names are changed. It is watered with the River Tiber and Almo. There are also
in many places the ruins of Fountains, and Aqua ducts, or Conduites. There
are diverse Marketplaces, and seven Hills within the walls. Whence some do
call Roma Septicollis, because it is seated seven Hills, Varro calls it
Septimontium, and Statius Sc^^mgemina. Moreover there are in this City above
300. Churches. There are four Vaults under earth, where when the Emperors did
persecute the Christians, they hid themselves. There were, and are 28.
Churchyards or burying places. There are five public Hospitals for Strangers
of all Nations, and 20. several Hospitals for several Nations, besides an
University. And there are Seminaries and Colleges of all Nations instituted by
Pope Gregory the third. There are many public Libraries, three in the Vatican,
one of choice Books which is shut, and another which is not kept so close, and
a third which on Holy Days is open two hours for all comers. There are also
other Libraries in S. Mary's Church, and the Church of the Altar of Heaven, S.
Martins, S. Augustines, and other where is. There are also diverse Gardens and
Palaces in this City which belong to the Pope, and the Cardinals. There are
both public and private Conduites, Bathes, Triumphant Arches, Amphitheaters,
Theaters, Cirques, Galleries, Pillars, Spires, Colosses, or great Images,
Pyramisses, Horses, Statues, and many other such like antiquites, which our
intended brevitie will not permit us to number or describe. He that beholds
these things, and compares them with ancient Rome, may worthily say, Qui
miseranda videt veteris vestigia Rom^,
Ille potest merito dicere, Roma fuit.
He that the ruins does of Rome behold,
May justly say that this was Rome of old.


And so much concerning Rome from whence as you go Southward, the Town which
the Latins and Greeks call Ostia does offer it self, which has an
unwholesome pestilent air, but the soil bears great store of Melons. So
leaving Ostia, I will take a view of the other chief Towns of Latium, which
are seated by the Sea. Neptunium is situate on a more fruitful soil, where
the Citizens have leisure to Hawke and Fish. There is also As^ura which is a
memorable place, both by the unworthy death of M. Tullius Cicero, who was
slain there as he fled from Antony: and also by the fatal death of Corradinus
the son of the Emperor Frederick the second, whom Charles Eculismensis put
to death. There is also Taracina or Tarracina, which Strabo calls Taracina,
Ptolemy Tarraecina, Stephanus Tarracine, and Antoninus Tarracina. In the
Volscian language it was called Auxur. It is a small Town but neat and
populous. The walls are made of square stone without Mortar or Cemont, the
soil round about is fruitful and pleasant, abounding with Oranges, Citternes,
Lemmons, and such like fruit. Cajeta, which Strabo calls Cajatta, and now
Gajetta, is a well fortified City having an impregnable Castle on the top of a
Mountain, which in former time, the Frenchmen being expulsed, Ferdinand King
of Arragon and Naples, did wall it about. Spartianus reports that there was a
famous Haven here, which was much renewed and re-edified by Anton. Pius. But
now there is none. The next is Velitra, which Strabo calls Belitra, and
Stephanus Belitre, or as some do write Belletri, it is an ancient Town of the
Volscians, fair and populous, and it is a Bishopric, it has a delightful
Situation, and a pleasant Prospect, and it is walled about. That which the
Latins and Graecians do call Alba, the ancient Writers do surname it longa
Alba, or long Alba, in regard of the Situation. It is now called Savello, if we
may credit Leander, others do call it Gandolffi, or S. Gandolffo. It was built
by Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, 30. years after Lavinium CAMPAGNA DI ROMA,
OR, LATIVM^
LATIUM nim. Campagna di Roma
map was built, but now it is desolate. Now let us describe the more Northern
parts of Latium by the way Valeria Tiburtina. Here the first is that which
Ptolemy calls Tiber, Strabo Tibura, and now Tivola. It is a City by the River
Aniene being 150. Furlongs distant from Rome, having a temperate air, and a
wholesome situation in regard it has great store of Waters and Springs, and it
is a Bishopric. Maruvium by the Lake Fucinum, was heretofore the chief City
of the Marsians, now there are some ruins only remaining, which are commonly
called Marvo. The Latins and Strabo do call it Alba. And Strabo reports
that the Romans were wont to assign Alba, because it was situate in the
innermost parts of the Country, and was well fortified, as a Prison for those
which were to be kept in custody, but now it is fallen down, and ruinate.
Praeneste, which Strabo calls Praenestus, Ptolemy Praenestum, and now
Pilastrina, had heretofore a very pleasant and delightful situation on a
bending Mountain by the River Venest^is, in so much that when the Roman
Empire flourished, the Emperors did often make it their place of retirement
and recreation. There is a Castle on the top of the Mountain, and it is now a
Bishopric. Tusculum was famous heretofore, which they suppose by the ruins
yet remaining was not far from Frasca^a. There are more Towns in this noble
part of Italy, which for brevity sake we omit. There are also Lakes in Latium,
as the Lake Hostia, which is commonly called Stagro. Between Marinus and long
Alba there is the Alban Lake, which Livy mentions, Lib. 5. it is now called
Lago di Castle Gangolfo: there is also the Nemorensian Lake, which is now
called Lago di Nemo: the Lake Iuturna, or Regillus now called Lago de S.
Prassode: the Lake Fucinus, now called Lago di Marsos, Pliny also describes
the Pontine or Pomptine Lake in Latium, which is now called the Lake Aufente.
There is also the Fundane Lake, the Tiburrine, the Coecubian, and the Simbruine
Lakes. The Rivers are Tiber, which I have delineated in the general
description, and diverse other Rivers, which having lost their names do run
into the Sea with it. The other Rivers of Latium as they were anciently called
are Numicius, Loracina, Stura, Nymphaeus, and Vfens. Moreover besides the 7.
Hills aforesaid whereon Rome is seated. Albanus is most famous in all Greek
and Latin Writers. The Mountain Caecubus which reaches to the Cajetan Bay,
is noted for bearing excellent rich Wines. There are also the Mountains
Vestinus, Algidus, Aventinus, Lepinus, Catillus. Halicarnassaeus does mention
the Ceraunian Mountains of Latium. The Woods are Feronia, Jupiters Wood,
Diana's Wood, the Wood Naevia, the Muses Wood, the cold Wood, the Wood Albuna,
the Wood Angitia, and the Wood Furina. The people of this Country even until
these times, except it be in the Cities, are rude, rustic, stout, and strong
of body. Mercator does thus describe the Ecclesiastic government. Rome is the
Mother Church, in which the Pope resideth, and has under him within the City
5. Patriarchall Churches, which are these, the Church of S. John of Lateran, S.
Peter's Monastery, and S. Paul's Monastery within the walls of the City, S.
Mary's Church, and S. Laurences Monastery. There are 8. Bishops assigned to
govern these Churches, the first and chiefest is the Pope, the rest are under
him, as the Bishop Ostiensis, who is Patriarch of Campania, and does consecrate
the Pope, unto whom is joined Velletrensis, or Valeriensis, Portuensis,
Sabinensis, Tusculanensis, Praenestiensis, and Albanensis. There are also
assigned for the government of the same Churches 28. Cardinals, namely, by the
title of the holy Cross of Jerusalem, by the title of S. John and Paul, by the
title of S. Stephen, in Celio-Monte: by the title of S. Susanna: by the title
of S. Peter, by the title of S. Prisca: by the title of S. Siriack: by the
title of S. Marcellus: by the title of S. Balbina: by the title of S.
Grisogoni. S. Marcellinus, and Peter, S. Anastasia: S. Clem^nt, S. Potentiana,
S. Martin on the Mountains: S. Praxedis: S. Marcus: S. Laurence: S. Mary: S.
4or. Coronatorum: S. Sabina: S. Nereus, and Archileus: S. Sixitus, S. Eusebius:
S. Vitalis: the 12. Apostles Church: S. Laurentius: and S. Cecilia: unto which
are adjoined 18. Cardinals as Deacons. Without the City there are in Campania,
the Bishops, Agnaninus, Alatrinensis, Fundanus, Tiburtinus, Sagninus,
Terracinensis, Verulanus, Feretinus, Soranus, Aquinus. Moreover, the Pope has
under him in other parts of the world four Patriarchall Churches, unto which
all other Churches in the same parts are subject: as the Church of
Constantinopole, of Alexandria, of Antioch, of Jerusalem.

ABRVZZO, AND TERRA DI LAVORO, A PART of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
IN this Table two Countries of the Kingdom of Naples are to be described,
Aprutium and Terra Laboratoris. The former or Aprutium, the Italians do now
call Abruzzo. The bounds thereof on the West are the Sabinians and Picentians,
with the River Truentum: on the North the Hadriatick Sea, on the South the
Picentinians, Campanians, Martians, Aequicolians, dwelling on every side of the
Apennine Mountain. The Country has a very wholesome air, and is very
populous, pleasant, and commodious toward the Sea, but the inward parts are
Mountainous. Besides other commodities it has abundance of Saffron, and it
breeds great store of Cattle. The chief City of this Country is Aquila.
They report that the Langbards did build it, and afterward Charles Martell, or
as some think, the Emperor Frederick the second did wall it, and fortify it,
and did call it Aquila, or Eagle, because the Emperors Standard had an Eagle
in it. And this City in short time was so much enlarged, that it is now the
principal City in all this Country. Moreover, there are the Towns Guastum,
or Amontum in Italian Guasto di Amone, which Pliny and Mela call Histon^um, and
Ptolemy Istodium without an aspiration. Laucianum is a famous Mart-towne,
whether every year in the Months of May or August, Italians, Inluricians,
Sicilians, Graecians, Asians, and Merchants from other parts of the world do
come to traffic. Soulmoon, which Ptolemy calls Sulmo, and Strabo Soulmon, is
now called Sulmona, as Leander witnesses, and some do call it Sermona. It is
a fair City, both for beauty, populousness, and abundance of waters, and
famous, because Ovid was borne here. Chieti commonly called Civita Cheto, is an
Archiepiscopall City. Asculum is an ancient City, which Antoninus calls
Asculum, and Pliny calls it the noble Colonie of Picenum. It stands in a
plain open soil, being well fortified with strong walls. On one side there is
a high Mountain with a Castle seated on it, on the other side it is fortified
with the River Truentus. It is called now by a more fortunate and auspicious
name Beneventum, though at first it were called Maleventum, from the rushes
which it suffered a malo Vento, or from evil fierce winds. It is commonly
called Beneventi. This City has a very convenient and pleasant situation, and
an excellent fruitful soil round about it. Sora is near unto the River
Lirus, being populous, and adorned with the title of a Dukedom. There is also
the Town which Ptolemy calls Aquinus, where the great Philosopher Thomas
Aquinas was borne. It retains still that name, but it is almost fallen down,
yet the ruins do show the ancient largeness thereof: and it has the title
of a Country. I omit the description of the other Towns for brevity sake. The
Rivers here are Phinternus, ABRVZZO^
ABRUZZO et Terra di LOVORO
map which devideth Samnium from Apulia, commonly called Fortore. The Fountain
whereof issues out of the Mountain Tifernus, not far from Bovianum. And it
discharges it self into the Hadriatick Sea near the Lesinensian Lake. There
are also Trintus, which Pliny notes is full of Havens, also Asinella, Sentus,
Sangrus. There are also the Rivers Morus, Feltrinus, Pescara, Aternus,
Rafentus, Orta, Liberata, Salmus, Plumba, Vomanus, Turdin^s, and others.
Moreover, there are also among the Samnites Mountains so high, that they do
exceed the Apennine Mountains. Among which is the Virgins Mountain, famous
for S. Mary's Church which is built thereon. Majella is a very great Mountain,
having a very difficult ascent, and full of rugged cliffes and Rocks. The top
of it is continually coverd with Snow, yet it has many green Meddowes, and it
sends forth many Rivers, and has very spacious woods, which are full of
wild beasts, especially Bears, and it has many rugged cliffes. There are
also the tops of the Apennine, which they call Montes Tremuli, or the trembling
Mountains.

Terra di Lavoro.
THis Contry is now called Terra Laboris, or Terra di Lavoro, that is the Land
of labor. It was heretofore called Campania. The bounds thereof, as we may see
in Strabo, Ptolemy, and others, are on the west the River Lirus and Latium: on
the North the Samnitian Mountains: on the East the River Silarus, which
parts it from Lucania, and a part of the Samnitians Country: on the South the
Tyrrhene Sea. Truly Campania is Campus, or a Field, into which nature has
powered forth of her own bosom, all the delights, pleasures, and delicacies,
which any place can afford. So that it may be rightly called the Paradise of
Italy, for fertility and fruitfulness. Diverse people did heretofore govern
this Country, which Strabo mentions Lib. 5. and Pliny Lib. 3. Cap. 5. as
namely, the Opicians, Ausonians, Oscians, Cumanians, Tuscians, and Samnites,
whom the Romans last of all subdued. So much briefly in general concerning
Campania, now I come to a more particular description thereof, and first of the
Cities. The Metropolis or mother City of Campania and the Kingdom of Naples
is called in Coins Neapolis or Naples. Which name it still retains, and is
commonly called Neapolis. It takes up a great space of ground being
magnificently built between the Sea and the foot of the pleasant Hills: being
fortified with Bulwarks, Towns, and Castles, by Charles the fifth, so that it
is now impregnable. It has Ditches, which are 80. feet deep, 8. Gates, and
spacious Marketplaces. There are great store of common Condiutes, out of which
the water is conveied through an hundred Pipes. The figure of it is long, and it
bends like an half Moon. The compass of it heretofore was 3. miles, but
now the Territories thereof being enlarged, it is 5. miles about. It has a
gentle pleasant air, and scarce any Winter. This City has many fair
Churches, and private Buildings, and a strong impregnable Castle, with an
University which was instituted by the Emperor Frederick the second, unto
which Students do come out of all parts of the Kingdom. There are also some
Libraries, the chief whereof is S. Dominicks Library. The Country round about
it and the neighboring Hills are pleasant and delightful, and do yield good
store of Corn, Wine, diverse Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, and all delicacies, both
for necessity and pleasure. I omit many things concerning this City for
brevity sake. There are also other Cities, as the old and new Capua, the
ancient is known to all Latin Writers, and the beauty, fairness, and
magnificence thereof is praised by all men. Great ruins thereof may be yet
seen a mile from new Capua, near S. Mary's Church. New Capua was built out of
the ruins of the old, which stands now on the left bank of Vulturnus, 22.
miles from the Sea, on a plain well inhabited, but not much frequented: it
has strait streets paved with stone and high buildings, on the East and North
the River Vulturnus does water it, and from thence it runs Westward. There
is a fair stone bridge over the River. There is also Teanum surnamed
Sidicinum, it is called in Italian Theano, and it is a Bishopric. There is
also the Town Calvus which is a Bishopric: Virgil calls it Cales. Strabo
and Ptolemy, and other Grecians Cuma. But now it is fallen down, and buried in
ruins, yet the foundations of some fair buildings may be discerned. There are
also Aversa, Casert, a Nola, Summa, Puteoli, and other lesser Towns. The
chief Lakes of Campania are the Lucrenian, and Avernian. There are also in
Campania the Lakes Linterna, Popeja, and Statina. The Rivers are Lirus which
receives on the right hand Fibernum, Cosa, Alabrum, Trerus, and others. On the
left hand Casinus, Melfa, and Omnes. The next to Lirus is Vulturnus, which
receives many Rivers and Torrents, among the rest, on the right hand it
receives Cusanum, and Correctam, on the left hand Freddus, Pratellus,
Sabbatus, Isclerus, and others. Also Glanis, Sebetus, Linternus, Sarnus, Furor,
Ebolis, Silarus. The Mountains that belong to this Country, are Gaurus,
Massicus, Falernus, and others, as Vesuvius, Pausilypus, Misenus, Culma,
Christ's Mountain, Taburnus, Tifata, Planus, Astrunus, and Trifolinus. Moreover
in the Kingdom of Naples there are these Principalities and Dominions. Namely
10. Principalities, as Ascolt, Besignano, Evoli, Melfi, Mefetta, Monchercole,
Squilaci, Sligliano, Sulmona, Verosa, And 23. Dukedomes, namely, Andri,
Amalphi, Ariano, Asu, Boyano, Castrovillari, Gravina, Martina, Montalto,
Monteliano, Nardo, Nocera, Popoli, Rocca di Mondragone, S. Petro in Galatina,
Seminara, Sessa, Somma, Sora, ^agliacozzo, Termoli, Terra Nova, Trajetto. There
are 30. Marquiships, 54. Counselors of State, 11. Lords, 403. Titular Barons.
The Archbishops and their Suffragans in this Table are taken out of the Roman
Province. In Aprucina and Marcicana, there are these Bishops, Aquilensis,
Forcanensis, Marsicanus, Valvensis, or Sulmonensis: Theatinus, Adriensis,
Pennensis, Aprutinus, or Teranus. The Archbishop of Beneventum under whom are
these Suffragans, Telesinensis, Agatha, Alphiensis, or Alepharensis; Mons
Marani, Avellinensis, Vicanensis, Arianensis, Bojanensis, or Rojanensis,
Asculanensis, Nucerinus, Tertibulensis, Traconensis, Vulturanensis,
Alarinensis, Ferentinensis, or Florentinensis, Civitacensis, Termelensis,
Lesinensis, Frequentinensis, Triventinensis, Biminensis, Vadiensis, or
Gadiensis, Musanensis, S^ Mariae. The Archbishop of Naples, under whom are
Nolanus, Puteolanus, Cumacensis, Acerranus, Iscalanus. The Archbishop of Capua,
under whom are Theanensis, Calvensis, Calmensis, Suessanus, Venefranus,
Aquitanensis, or Aquinatensis, Iserniensis, Casertanensis. The Archbishop
Amalfitanus, under whom are Capri^ane^sis, Scalensis, or Camensis, Minorensis,
Siteranensis. The Archbishop of Salerne, under whom are Aquensis,
Palicastrensis, Nusautanensis, or Nuscanensis, Sarnensis, Acervensis, or
Acernensis, Maricensis. The Archbishop of Su^rentine, under whom are Lobrensis,
Serpensis, Aquensis, or Equensis, or Vtanus, Castellimaris, or Stabiensis. And
let so much suffice concerning this part of the Kingdom of Naples, I pass to
the other part.

PVGLIA PIANA, TERRA DI BARRI, TERRA DI Otranto, Calabria, and Basilicata.
The other part of the Kingdom of NAPLES.
NOw we must view the other part of the Kingdom of Naples, in which the first
Country is that which the Italians do call Puglia Piana, from the large
spacious fields there of. It was heretofore called Apulia Daunia. It is bounded
on the East with Apulia Peucetia, and the River Aufidus: on the South with the
Apennine, together with the Hirpenians, and Samnites: on the West with the
Frentanians, Caracenians, now called Apru^ians, and Phiternians: on the North
with the Hadriatick, and Jonium Sea. The soil is very fruitful, yielding
abundance of Wheat and Corn. Here are both Cities and Towns, as
Manfredonia, a fair and populous City, being situated on the bank of the
Bay, which lies in the hollow winding of the Mountain Garganus, and it has
an invincible Castle by the Shore side. Leuceria is an Episcopal City; which
Ptolemy and Suetonius call Neuceria: the ruins yet remaining do show the
spaciousness of it. Troy is a rich City, having a fruitful Soil about it.
Asculum is a City, which is adorned with the Title of a Dukedom: Appianus
Alexandrinus calls it Asculum, it is commonly called Asculo, and surnamed
Sattriano. There are also Salpe, or Arpi, which Pliny mentions, which was
sometime called Argos Hippium, and afterward Agrippa: and two Cities, which
became a Proverb, Apina and Trica, etc. The Rivers are Aufidus, now called
l'Ofanto. Also Candilaris, and Cervaria.

So much concerning Apulia Daunia: the next Country which is to be described is
Peucetia: now it is called in Italian, Terra Ba^iana, or Terra di Barri, from
the chief City Bario. This Country for fertility of soil, and plenty of
choice fruit, may compare with other parts of Italy. But yet there are some
places which are full of Boggs, and Waters. The chief City is Barium, which
Pliny calls Barion, it is commonly called Barri. It is an ancient City, and
so fair and populous, that it is the chief City of the whole Country, which
is called from thence Terra ^ariana. There are also Monopolis, which is a new
City adorned with the title of a Marquiship, which is not very great, but
fair and beautiful, and full of magnificent Buildings. The soil round about
it yields great store of Oil. Polonianum or Polignano is an Episcopal
City, which although it be seated on a high stony Rock, yet it is fair and
populous. Mola has many houses, but inhabited with rustic people. The
Marquess Polinianus built a Castle there for the defense of the Coast.
Iuvenatum, or Giuvenazzo, is an Episcopal City, seated in a fertile soil.
Marfette or as some write it, Morfitta, or Melfatta, flourishes with the Title
of a Principality. Vigiliae commonly called Bisegli is an Episcopal Town
seated by the shore, on high Rocks: Tranum is an Archiepiscopall City*
commonly called ^ra^i. It had fair Buildings, but now for the most part it is
desolate. There are Woods of Olives and Almonds, which do reach from this Town
even to Tarentum. Barulum is commonly called B^l^ta. Ostu^a is a populous
City, seated on a little Hill. C^lium, or (...)* which Pt^lomy calls Cilia,
and Horace Verusia, or Venusium, where (...) was borne is now called Venesa.
There are also Canusium, (...) Biletum, and other Towns.

Next to Apulia we must describe the Country of the Salenti^i^^, which i^ also
called Iapygia, Massapia, and Calabria. The Italian^ do now commonly call it
^erra d' Otranto. This Country has on the South ^arentum, and the Sea even to
the Salentinian Promontory: on the Eas^ the same Promontory, with the Jonian
Sea: on the North it is watered with the River Hidruntes* even to Brundusium:
on the West it has Asalta, Peucetia, and a part of great Greece. This Country
has a wholesome air, and a clear fair Climate except on that Co^^t, which
reaches from the Hydruntine Lake to Brundisium, where there are Marshes in
those places which are near the Sea. The Country is fa^t and fruitful, and
the chief City which names the Country is H^drun^um, which Strabo, Ptolemy,
and others do call Iareus. Mela calls it Hydrus: it it now called Otrante.
It is an ancient City, having a sweet mild air, a strong Castle, built by
Alph^nsus the second and a large spacious Haven. The soil is pleasant and
fruitful. The other Cities are Gallipolis, now called Callipolis. Others call
it Callipol^, as it were the fair City. It has a strong situation: for it is
seated on a Rock or small Island, which is encompassed every where with the Sea.
and it is joined to the Continent with a s^one Bridge. Castrum is a City much
frequented by Merchants, who co^^ thither to buy Oil. Brundusium, or
Brundisiam, which Ptolemy call Breundesium, Steph. Brentesium* and Benjamin
Barnedis. is now called B^^disi. It has a gentle air. It had heretofore a
famous Haven. (...) of which the Romans did formerly pass safely into Greece,
b^^ now it is filled up, so that a Galley can hardly come up into it. The City
is fortified with a strong Castle. The City Oria is seated on (...) looking
toward ^arentum, and has a strong Castle. That Town^ which Ptolemy calls
Aletium, is now called Leze, and Leccie. It is the prime City of the
Salentinians, in regard that the Royal Coun^ell of Apulta is held here, and
because all the Nobility of this Country have houses here. Vxent^m, now called
Vgento, Vsenti, or Ogento, is a very small City,

Calabria is so called from the Calabrians, who as it appears in Ptolemy, did
possess a part of great Greece from the Salentinians to the Jonian Sea, about
the Promontory Iapygium. It is a Country of Italy which being stretched forth
in the farthest borders thereof like a tongue, does lie between the higher and
lower Straites. It does plentifully produce all things that may serve for
necessity, or delicacy, as Wheat Barley, and other kinds of Corn, also Wine,
Oil, Sugar, Manna, (...), Wax, Salt, Figs, Oranges, Lemmons* and other
excellent fruits: also Gold, Silver, Wool, Cotton, Saffron, Silk* PVGLIA
PIANA^
Puglia Piana Terra di Barri Otra^to etc
map Hemp, and what not? Calabria is twofold, the lower which was heretofore
the Seat of the Brutians, which is how called the lower Calabria, and the
higher which was heretofore great Greece. The bounds of the lower Calabria are
on the West Laus the Lucanians: on the South the Tirrhene and Sicilian Sea: on
the East it is enclosed with part of the Hadriatick Sea: on the North with
great Greece, and the River Crathus. Strabo Ptolemy, and other Graecians do
call the Metropolis, or Mother City hereof Consentia: it is now called
Consenza. It is seated by the bending of the Apennine, and it contains 7.
Hills, on which the most part of the houses are situate. The other Cities are
Manthia, Fredus, Belmontium, Sancta Euph^mia, Fanum Rhegium, Tropia, Castrum
Villare, Altomonti, Turranom, Rugianum, Marturanum, Nicastrum, Briaticum,
Hippo, and that City which was called Vibo Valentia. The bounds of the higher
Calabria which was heretofore called great Greece, are on the East the
Adriatic Sea: on the South the River Alex and the Brutians: on the West the
River Crathis, with the Apennine, and the Lucanians: on the North the Tarentine
Bay with Apulia. Here is the ancient and noble City Tarentum, which Appianus
Alexandrinus calls Tarantum: Strabo and Ptolemy, Tarus: now it is called
Taranto, Lucius Florus says that it was heretofore the chief City of
Calabria, Apulia, and all Lucania. It is situate in the innermost part of a
Bay, which is called from the City, the Tarentine Bay.

There remains in this Table Lucania to be described, which is now called
Basilicata, but from whence it is uncertain. The bounds thereof on the West
are the River Silarus, which bounders Campania: on the South the Tyrrhene See:
on the East Laus the Brutians, and great Greece: on the North the Peucetians in
Apulia, with a part of Hirpinia. Livy shows that it is all Mountainous and
rugged. But now perhaps it is more inhabited than it was formerly, yet in many
places it is very desolate, in regard of the hard uneven ways, and the
dreadful hideous woods in which many robberies are committed The Towns here
by the Sea are Paeslum, which Virgil mencioneth Lib. 4. Georg.

Biferique Rosaria Paesti.
The Rose-Gardens of Paestum, where
Sweet Roses do grow twice a year.
Servius makes Paestum a City of Calabria, where Roses do grow twice a
year. Acropolis is a Town 12. Miles from the mouth of the, River Silarius,
having an excellent air. The name shows that it was built by the Graecians;
as the most of the other Towns in this Country. There is also Pisciotta, which
Pliny, Mela, and Ptolemy do call Buxentum. Palicostrum is a Noble City and
adorned with the title of a Dukedom. In the middle of the Country there is the
Town Padula, which is honored with the title of a Marquiship. The City
Capacia was heretofore very populous, and rich. I omit the other Towns.
Moreover in the other part of the Kingdom of Naples there are these
Archbishops, the Archbishop of Regiensis: under whom are Lucrensis,
Cotroniensis, Cassanensis, Cathacensis, Neocastrensis, Giracensis, Tretetensis,
Vibonensis, Squilacensis. The Archbishop of Consentinus, under whom is
Maturanensis. The Archbishop of Rosania has no Suffragans. The Archbishop of
S. Severine, under whom are Ebriacensis, Strangulensis, Gencocastrensis,
Gerentinensis, S. Leonis. The Archbishop of Larcatinus under whom are
Mutulensis, Castellanensis. The Archbishop of Brundisinus, under whom are
Astrinensis. The Archbishop of Hidrontinus, under whom are Castrensis,
Gallipolitanus, Liciensis, Vgentinensis, Lucensis, Nerto^ensis is exempted. The
Archbishop of Barensis, under whom are Betontinensis, Calphajanus,
Invenacensis, Rubentinensis, Salpensis, Cauriensis, Baterensis, Conversanus,
Minerviensis, Polignercensis, Cathericensis, Lavellinensis. The Archbishop of
Tranensis, under whom are Vigiliensis, Andrensis, and Penensis. The Archbishop
of Sipontinus, under whom are Vescanensis excepted, Trojanensis excepted,
Melphiensis, Monopolitanensis, and Rapolensis are excepted, Cannosanus under
whom are Auranensis, Sarranensis, Montisviridis, Laquedonensis, S. Angeli de
Lombardis, Bisaciensis. The Archbishop of Acheronti, under whom are
Potentiensis, Tricariensis, Venusiensis, Graviensis, Angelensis.

THE ISLANDS CORSICA, AND SARDINIA^
CORSICA was so called from Corsus, who was Lord of this Country. The Graecians
called it Kurnon from Cyrnus the son of Hercules: Ovid names it Teraphne, as
Villanovanus writes. On the West and North it has the Ligustick Sea: on the
East the Tyrrhene Sea: on the South Sardinia. It is not above 120. Miles long,
although Strabo makes the length thereof to be 160. Miles, and Pliny 150. who
also makes the breadth thereof to be 60. Miles: and Strabo makes it 70.
Miles, which appears to be true by measuring it with a pair of Compasses.
The compass of it according to Pliny is 320. Miles, but according to Maginus
325. which he says that he found out by measuring it exactly. This Island is
hard to come unto, being enclosed on every side with inaccessible dangerous
cliffes, and Hills. Within likewise it is for the most part Mountanous, and
therefore it yields no great store of Wheat and Pulse; which grow but in
some few places, where the Country opens it self, and is watered with Rivers,
which make it fruitful. That part which looks toward Etruria is indifferent
plain, having a fruitful Soil, which bears excellent sweet fruits. This
Island has excellent wines, of chief note, which the Romans much esteemed,
they are called from the place Corsican Wines. Here is great store of Honey,
Rosen, Oil, and Figs. But Servius notes in his 4. Book of Geogr. that the
Corsian Honey is bitter, which comes to pass by reason that there are great
store of Ewe trees, from whence the Bees do gather Honey. And Ovid believed
that it was venomous. This Country only does produce the Precious stone
Catochites, which Democritus the Abderite used when he contended against the
Magitian. Rhenus concerning Corsica says thus.

Hanc solam perhibent Catochitem gignere terram:
Corporibus lapis hic sen glutine tactus adhaeret.
Pliny, Lib. 37. Cap. 10. and Solinus Cap. 9. do report the like. But Pliny
doubts of the truth thereof. Here is also Allom: and there are Iron Mines
near the River Bivincum, in the County Nebiensis. There are also Saltpits,
commonly called della Roya, not far from the Haven of S. Florence: and near
Niolum there are deep Valleys, which are always covered with Snow, under
which they say there is great store of Crystal. There is also, as Pliny and
Diodorus witness, great plenty of Box, and Eewe trees. It breeds diverse
kinds of living THE ISLANDS CORSICA, AND SARDINIA^
map CORSICA
map SARDINIA
Creatures, especially lusty Horses, and great Hounds, and also a kind of
beast called Mufmo, which Pliny says, is a kind of Ram, they call it now
Mosoli: which beast is not found in any part of Europe, except in this Island,
and Sardinia. It has a hide and hair like a Heart, and Horns like a Ram,
which are not long but do bend backward about his ears, and are so hard, that
if he should fall down 50. foot high among the rocks, and alight upon his
head, it would not hurt him; it is as big as an Heart, and feeds only on
grass, being very swift of foot, and the flesh of it is very pleasant in
taste. Moreover this Island is full of sheep and Oxen: It was heretofore
inhabited by the Phocensians, then by the Ligurians, and afterward by the
Romans, who brought thither two Colonies, the Marian, and the Alerian, which
do still continue. The Barbarians possessed the rest: afterward when the
Romans invaded them, they brought a great Company of Slaves from thence to
Rome, of which they made no great commodity, for they were such brutish
people, that albeit they were bought for a small price, yet their Masters
repented them of their bargain. After the Romans the Sarazens succeeded, and
after them the Geonoa's: then the Pisanians, and now it belongs to Genoa. It
is divided now into two parts: they call the Eastern part the innermost side,
and the Western side the outermost side. That part which is nearer to Italy is
called Cismontana, or on this side the Mountains, and that which runs out
toward Sardina is called Vltramontana or beyond the Mountains. Pliny
witnesses that there are 33. Cities in it, which also Martianus Capella does
note out of him. But it apeareth by Strabo that they were rather Castles then
Cities. There is now the Town Bastia, in which the chief Governor lives,
and has a Garrison to defend him. There is also the City Nebbium which
Ptolemy calls Cersunum. It is watered with the Rivers Gelone, Tavignano,
Sagona, Bavono, Tegiamo, and some others. The Mountains also are clothed with
woods which do yield Rosen. The chief Mountains are Illia Orba: also the
Mountain Cheparteno, the Mountain Tenda, the Mountain Gualango, and the
Mountain Russus. In the Sea between Corsica, Sardinia, there is Corrall
gathered. This Island has two great Havens, which are able to receive great
Ships, in S. Florences Bay. There is also S. Bonifaces Haven, which Ptolemy
calls the Syracusan Haven. The Inhabitants of Corsica both were, and are
accounted very poor men, that live by stealing and robbing: and altogether
unletterd. There are these Bishops in Corsica, who are Suffragans to the
Archbishop of Pisanum, namely, Aciensis, Alariensis, Sagonensis, and
Civitanensis. and the Bishop Nubiensis, or Nebiensis, who is subject to the
Archbishop Ianuensis.

SARDINIA.
SARDINIA was so named from Sardus the Son of Hercules. Timaeus called it
Sandaliotin, because it resembles the shape of a shooe-soale. Mirsilus and
Chrysippus called it Icha^sa, because it is like the soale of the foot. Which
Manilius intimates when he says.

Sardiniam in Lybico signant vestigia plantae. It is now called Sardegna. On
the East the Tyrrhene Sea does beat upon it, on the South the Affricke, on the
West the Sardian; on the North the Sea that flows between it and Corsica.
This Island has an ungentle air: and therefore Q. F. does admonish M. Cicero
to have a care of his health, and to remember that although he were now in
health, yet he was in Sardinia: and in his Epistles he says that one
Tigellius a Sardinian was a man more pestilent and contagious than his Country.
All the Island abounds with fruit, Wheat, Wine, Mines of Silver, Cattle,
and all things necessary. There are such store of Horses, that many run
wild, and have no owners; they are lesser than ours, but full of metal,
strong and nimble. It affoordeth much Hunting, so that the Country people do
live only by it. For this Country has abundance of Boares, Hearts, Does, and
another kind of Beast which they call Muflo, which we have described before in
the description of Corsica. But Sardinia has no Wolves, nor any other
harmefull beast, nor Serpent, and therefore Silius says.

Serpentum tellus pura, ac viduata Veneno,
Sed tristis coelo, ac multa vitiata palude.
This Country is from poysond Serpents free,
But many noisome Marshes in it be.
But the Soligunda in Sardinia is as offensive and hurtful as Serpents are in
other Countries. It is a little creature like a Spider. L.S. calls it
Solifuga, because it shunneth the daylight. It lives much in the Silver
Mines, for this soil is very rich in Silver Oar. It creeps closely along,
and if any one sit upon it unawares, it infecteth him. There is also a strange
Sardinian Herb, which Pausanias says, is like unto Parsley: which if it be
eaten, it does contract and draw together the Visage and mouth, so that they
dye as it were laughing. Strabo writes that the Spaniards make poison of it,
which being drunk, does dispatch them without any pain, and hence grew the
Proverb Sardonius risus, or the Sardinian laughter. The chief City of
Sardinia is Calaris, commonly called Cagler. It is situate on a Mountain near
the Sea, looking toward Afric, and it has a fair Haven. This City is
adorned with many privileges: it creates Con^^l^* who have power to punish
delinquents without authority from the King: and it has power with the peoples
consent to make new laws. In this City the reliuqes of S. Augustine were
kept, until Heliprandus King of the Langbards did translate them to Papia. In
this City the viceroy of Sardinia resideth, together with many Barons, Earls,
and diverse rich men. Mela and Pliny do make mention of the City Sulchitana.
There are now also the Cities Oristagnum, which is a Metropolitan City,
situate on a Plain, not far from the Sea. It was heretofore called the
Country of trees, but now it is called the Marquiship of Oristagnum. There is
also the City Sassaris which has a pleasant soil watered with many Springs,
and abounding with diverse sorts of fruits, but it is weakly fortified. Algher
is a new small City, but yet populous and strong, and adorned with many fair
aedifices and buildings: the inhabitants whereof are almost all Tarraconians.
Sardinia has also other Cities, and Towns, which for brevitie sake we omit.
It has many pleasant Rivers which are not deep, so that in summer time you
may pass over the bards. There are many Magistrates in Sardinia. The chief is
the Viceroy, who has all the Kings authority: and according to their ancient
laws none but a Spaniard can bear this office. The King does assign and
appoint him one assistant, who is Doctor of both Laws, whom they call there
the Regent. Moreover he has other Counselors, who dispose and order all
matters, and this Court is called the Kings audience. Heretofore it was a
privilege of the Kingdom that no man could bear this office longer than
three years, and then another succeeds in his place. But now one continues
in that office as long as the King pleases. Concerning the manners and
dispositions of the Sadinians: they are strong of body, and inured to labor,
except it be some few who are given to effeminacy and wantonness. Many of them
do keep Cattle, and are contented with poor fare and water. Those that
dwell in the Towns and Villages, do live peaceably and quietly together. They
love strangers, and do use them kindly. They live from hand to mouth, and go
in a poor habbit. And which is strange, there is not one Artificer in all the
Island, that can make either Swords, Daggers or other weapons, so that they
fetch them out of Spain and Italy. Mercator mentions these Bishops. The
Archbishop Claritanensis, under whom are these Bishops, Sulcitanus or
Sulciensis, Doliensis, Suellensis. The Archbishop Turitanus, under whom are
these Bishops, Sorrensis, Plotanensis, Ampuriensis, Gifacensis, or Girardensis,
Castrensis, Othanensis, or Othricensis, Bosanensis, or Bossa. The Archbishop
Alborensis, under whom are the Bishops of Vssellensis. S. Iustia, Terra Alba,
Civitatensis, and Gastelliensis are excepted.

THE KINGDOM OF SICILIE^
SICILIE is next to be described, which excels all the Islands of the
Mediterranean Sea. Thucidides calls it Sicania from Sicanus, who, as Solinus
and Capella do write, came with a band of Iberians into that Country before
the Trojan wars. Many do call it Trinacria, and especially the Poets, in
regard it has 3. Promontories. Or else because it resembles a Triangle or
three cornerd figure, for it runs forth diverse ways with three
Promontories, and so is like the greek letter Delta, which bears this shape
D. These three Promontories are Pelorus, Pachynus, and Lilybaum. The Graecians
did call it Sicelia. But some suppose, -- Trinacria quondam
Mutavere, situm: rupit confinia Nereus:
Italiae pars una fuit, sed pontus and aestus
Victor, and abscissos interluit aequore monteis.
Trimacria has her situation changed,
And now the Sea their borders has estranged,
Heretofore it was a part of Italy,
From whence it is now divided by the Sea.


And hence Rhegium Rhegium is so called from (...), which signifies to break,
because Sicilie is here broken of and divided from Italy.
is so called in Italy, because Sicilie is there divided from Italy: On the
North it has the Tyrrhene Sea; on the East the Hadriatick and Ionian Sea; on
the South the Afric Sea, and on the West the Sardinian Sea. Thycydides
writes Lib. 6. that the compass of Sicile is about 8. days journey, and yet
it lies but 20. furlongs from the maine land or continent of Italy. Moreover
this Island does excel for the wholesomenesse of the air, the fruitfullnesse
of the soil, and plenty of all fruit, and other things, which are necessary
for the use of man: For it lies in the 4. Climate, which for the gentleness,
and temperatenesse of the air, does exceed the six others. So that Sicilie
produces the best fruits. So that Marcus Cato calls it the Stoarehouse of
the Commonwealth, and the Nurse of the Roman People; and Strabo the Barn of
Rome. In the Sunensian fields, where the ancients do feign that Proserpine was
took away violently, which they call the Navell of Italy, the Corn yields
so great an increase, insomuch that one bushel of Wheat sowed yields an
hundred, which field they call therefore Camp dallo cento Salme. The Leontine
field is not inferior unto this, concerning which Cicero says in his third
Oration against Verres. Quid Vina commorabo optimi saporis adorisque? What
should I mention the fragrant pleasant Wines.? Pliny (who was most diligent and
curious in reckoning the best sorts of Wines) does affirm that there is
excellent good Wine made in Sicilie. And he says that there is the Balincian
Wine in Sicilie, which tastes like Methegling, or Wine mingled with honey. So
that they suppose the Balincian Wine is that which they call Muskadine, which
is very sweet. For both Alps Muskadine whence so called, Muskadine whence so
called.
that is Bees, and Muscae that is flies do haunt these Grapes, which are
therefore called Muskadine Grapes, out of which a sweet pleasant wine is
pressed which they call Muskadine: though some suppose that it was so called
because it smells like Musk. So that the Wine of Sicilie may be rightly
esteemed the best, for it is as good as the Italian Wine, and as pleasing to
the Pallat, and will keep as long. Moreover Sicilie has great store of Oil,
Sugar, Saffron, Honey, Salt, all sorts of fruits, and excellent Silk. Besides
Sicilie is rich in Mettalls: for it has Gold, Silver, Iron, and Allom. It
produces also Precious stones, as the Emerald, the Achates, the Berill, the
red Marble stone, the Jasper, and it has great herds and flocks of Oxen and
Cattle. There is excellent hunting of Does and Boares, and Hauking at
Partridges and Quails, which they commonly call Francolinas. And Falcons, who
are enemies to all flying foul, are taken here. The fierce Lestrigonians did
first possess this Country, afterward the Sieanians, a Colonie of Spaniards,
and lastly the Trojans and Cretensians came hither. Afterward the Graecians did
invade it, then the Romans, and after the division of the Eastern, and
Western Empire it was subject to Constantinople almost 200. years. But in the
reign of the Emperor Justinian, the Goths invaded this Island, who 17. years
afterward were expelled and droven out by Belisarius. Afterward the Saracens
did possess it, under Michael Balbus, and held it 400. years. The Normans
succeeded them, and afterward the Langbards, Suevians, and Germans: but they
being droven out by Clement the 4. the Frenchmen possessed it 16. years.
Afterward it was subject to the Aragonians, until the reign of King
Ferdinand, after whose decease the Kings of Spain were also Kings of Aragon,
and Sicilie. Pliny reckons that there are 72. Cities in it. But now there
are 173. Cities and Towns, as Maginus witnesses. The Metropolis or mother
City of the Kingdom is Panormus, which Ptolomy and others do call Palernum,
it is now called Palermo. It is an ancient City, and a Colony of the
Phoenicians, as appears by some Epitaphs written in Caldean letters. It is
thought that it was built in Abraham's time, being seated in a pleasant
fruitful soil. It looks Northward, and is washed with the Tyrrhene Sea,
having high walls, which were built by King Frederick. Near the Sea there is a
Castle, which has been much enlarged, which they call Castrumad Mare, or the
Castle by the Sea. There are also three Gates of the ancient City yet
standing, and the old Walls, with many Towers built of four square stone.
There is a Church at Panormus consecrate to S. Peter, which was built by
Rogerius King of Sicilie, which excels both for beauty, and costly building,
all the ancient and new Churches in THE KINGDOM OF SICILIE^
SICILIA
map Italy, so that learned men and travelers that come to see it do much
admire it. The greater Church of this City is of a kind of a networke
building, carved with diverse figures and Images, and built by Gualther the
second Archbishop of that name, which was founded in the year 1185. where the
bodies of the Kings, and Queens, and Dukes are buried and interred. There is
also a public School, and an Hospital for strangers. It would be tedious to
rehearse the other fair buildings, and aedifices which are in this City. The
other Cities are Siracusa, which was heretofore a great City, which the
Orator thus describes in his 4. Oration against Verres. You have often heard
that Siracusa is the greatest and fairest of all the Grecian Cities. And so
it is, O Judges as you have heard. For it is strongly situate, and has a fair
coming to it both by Sea and Land, and it has Havens which are enclosed on
every side with bvildings, which having diverse entrances, do at last meet and
flow together. Where a part of the Town, which is called the I Will, being
disjoined by their meeting together, with a strait Sea, is joined together
again with a Bridge. It is so great a City, that they say it does consist of
4. great Cities, one of which is the Island aforesaid: which is encompassed
with two Havens, at the Mouth of one of which there is King Hierons Palace, in
which the Praetors now dwell. There are many Churches in it, but especially
two, which do far exceed the rest, one consecrate to Diana, and the other
to Minerva, which was a fair Church before Verres came thither. In the
farthest part of the Island, there is a Fountain of sweet water, which is
called Arethusa, which is very great, and full of fish, which would be coverd
with the waves of the Sea, but that it is walled about with stones. But there
is another City of Syracusa which is called Acardina, in which there is a
great Marketplace, a fair Gallery, and Counsell-house, a great Court, and a
Temple of Jupiter Olympus, and many private Aedifices. There is a third City
which is called ^yche, in which there is a great School, and many Churches,
and it is well inhabited and frequented. The fourth City is that which because
it was last built, is called Neapolis, or the new City, in which there is a
great Theater, and two great Churches, one consecrate to Ceres, and another to
Bacchus, and a fair Statue of Apollo, which is called Tennites. But not all
the beauty of this City is decayed, and only some ruinous parts of the Town
are remaining. Messana is a City by the Sea side, the Inhabitants whereof were
first called Messanians, and afterward Mamertinians, which Herodotus and
Thucydides do mention. There is also Catina, which is called Catana, where
Charonda the Lawmaker was borne, and it has now a famous School. Taurominium
is a City built by the Zanclaeans, it is now called Taormina. There is also
Leontium, where Gorgias Sophista was borne. Agrigentum is an ancient City,
which heretofore the Carthaginians raced, and Megalus and Feriscus re-edified
it again. There are also Augusta which was heretofore called Megara: also
Castrogianum, heretofore Ennea: Drepanum, Monreale, Heraclea, and many other
Cities. It is watered with many Rivers, in which, as in the Lakes there are
good store of Mullets, Eeles, Tenches, and Trowts. And in the Sea there is good
fishing for Tunyes, not only at Pachynum, but also at Panormum, and Drepanum,
and all that Coast which lies by the Tyrrhene Sea. There are also Sword-fishes
taken in the Massonian Sea. Lastly, there is excellent good fishing in the
Sicilian Sea, for there are great store of Mullets, which the Grecians call
Trichias, and Sophronius and Cicero do call them Barbels, and also great store
of Lampreys. But the Cicilian straites are narrow, dangerous, and rough, and
are called by the name of Scylla and Charybdis. The chief Mountains Aetna and
Eryx. Aetna by Pindarus is called the Pillar of Heaven. Silius Italicus calls
it Tiphoeum. It is now called Monte Gibella, or Mongibello. Eryx is much
memoriz'd for Venus Chapel, which was built by Aeneas. In Sicily are the
Archbishops Panormitanus, under whom are the Bishops Agrigentinus, Masarensis,
Milevitanus, or Maltensis. The Archbishop of Montis Regalis, under whom are
Siracusanus, and Cothanensis. The Archbishop of Messanensis, under whom are
Cephaludensis, Pacensis, Lipariensis, Marcus and Militensis, now Milaza.

STIRIA, COMMONLY CALLED STIRMARCK, which was made a Dukedom by FREDERI OR
BARBAROSSA.
In it there are many Countries, among the which is WARASDEN; by the River
DRAVUS and LEBNAW, by the River MURA.
STIRIA commonly called Stirmarck, was without doubt so called from a Bull or
Steer, to which opinion Aegidius Tschudus subscribeth: where he reports out
of Pliny, that Caro does affirm that the Lepontians and Salassians were of the
Taurick Nation: but these Tauriscians were Frenchmen, who in the ancient French
wars seated themselves beyond the Alps, of which Polybius Lib. 2. of the
French war writes thus. Those that are called the Transalpine French, do
dwell by the Alps on either side of Mountains, on that side which looks
Northward, and toward the River Rhodanus, but on that side which lies toward
the plain ground, there are the Tauriscians, the Agonians, and many other
barbarous people, from whom the Transalpines are only distinguished by their
different habitation* and therefore called Transalpines, because they live
beyond the Mountains. But after these Tauriscians departed hence, they sought
themselves other habitations, and possessed the Country, which is now called
the County of Goerts, and so coming into Stiria, they left their name unto
that Country. For a Bull in the Germane language is called a Stier. And so they
spread and dispersed themselves into Austria, and Hungary. Some affirm that
Stiria was heretofore called Valeria, in honor of Valeria the Daughter of
Dioclesian, as Marcellinus does report. Volateranus thinks that it was called
Iapidia: for so he writes in the 8. Book of his Geogr. The next unto this
Iapidia, which they now call Styria, though Pope Pius thinks it should be
called Valeria, by according to Rufus his description, do think that Valeria
should be rather called Croatia, between Danubius and Dravus. The last
Marquess was called Ottocarus, whose Daughter Lupold Duke of Austria married,
who by the Emperor was made Duke of Stiria. Afterward his Line being extinct,
the Governor of Hungary sent his Son to govern his Country, but he living
loosely, and having laid intolerable taxes and taxations on the Stirians, was
droven out, and Ottocarus the King of Bohemias Son was called in, who did
usurp the Dukedom of Austria, and got Carinthia in the year of Christ 1269.
but he could not keep it long. For he grew so arrogant, that he contemned the
Emperor, and would not do homage for the STIRIA OR STIRMARCK.
STIRIA
map Lands which he held in Bohemia unto the Emperor Rudolphus Habsburgius:
the Emperor at Augusta called a Counsel of the Princes of Germany, and cites
Ottacarus to appear at his peril and to answer concerning those Provinces of
the Empire which he unjustly possessed, as also concerning his contempt against
the Emperors Majesty. Ottacarus laughs at the Citation: and sends no body to
the Counsel to answer for him. In the mean time Ambassadors being sent from
the States of Austria, came to Augusta to the Emperor, and the Counsel of
Princes there assembled, and there having grievously complained before Caesar
and the Princes of Ottocarus his injury and cruelty, they showed that he had
gotten Austria by an unjust Title: and that he had repudiated and divorced his
lawful wife Margarite, the Inheretrix of Austria, and kept a Whore, and at
length poysond his own wife: and that he took away the lawful Inheritance of
Austria from Agnes Badensis, and her Daughter Elizabeth, with her Brother
Henry: and that he had murderd many of the Noblemen in the City of Vienna, and
had butcherd many innocent people: and that he had secretly divided Austria,
Stiria, Carniola, and the Marquiship of the Vindorians, which were in the
Emperors gift, and that he might hold Austria by the aid of a foreign
power, and lay the yoke of servitude on the people, he did therefore revolt
from the Empire and Caesar, etc. It was hereupon decreed by the Princes, that
Ambassadors should be sent to Bohemia. But they in stead of an answer giving
reproachful speeches to Caesar, and the Princes of the Empire, they decreed
and agreed that Caesar should make wars against them, and should have their
aid therein. He having levied a great Army goes into Austria. On the other
side Ottocarus marches forth with no less forces, but he doubting the event
of the war, and fearing Caesar's wisdom and force, by the intercession of
two Noblemen, made a peace with him, and restored back Austria, and did homage
unto Caesar for Bohemia, and the other Provinces which he held of him: and
while he did his homage, he kneeled before the Emperor, and the whole Army,
which matter being taken in dudgeon by his wife, and some factious spirits,
they violated the peace, and entered Austria with a great Army. On the other
side the Emperor Rodolphus marches forth with his Army of Germans, and his
auxiliarie Hungarian forces, and so joining battle with Ottocarus not far
from the Town Marcheccus, he overcame him, and slew him, afterward he invaded
Bohemia, and with fire and sword enforced the young man Wenceslaus the Son of
the deceased Ottocarus to seek peace, and prescribed him conditions according
to his Imperial pleasure. But he made his eldest Son Albert Duke of
Austria: and afterward by the common consent of the Princes of the Empire, he
was made Duke of Austria and Stiria. Stiria is distinguished into the higher, by
the turning of the River Mura, and the lower near the confluence and meeting
of Dravus and Mura, which is next unto the second Pannonia, or Hungary, whence
that place is called am Hungerischen. The chief Cities of Stiria are Bruga,
by the River Mura, and also Grazium, Viana, commonly called Voytsperg, by the
River Kaynacha. Also Wolspergum by the River Lavandus. Marchpurg is a
Metropolitan City on the left bank of the River Dravus, and on the same side
there is Petovia, or the Petovian Colonie, where the Roman Legions were
seated. Beyond the River is Warasinuns, which they call the Varian Castle,
there is also Rachelspurg seated on the left bank of the River Mura, where the
Country of Savaria begins. In this Country also there is Cilia on the bank
of the River Savus, which seems to be an ancient City, for there are many
Inscriptions of Roman names in it. The Townsmen say that it was built by
Sulla, and that it was called Sullaces, but on no ground as Volaterrarus says.
For perhaps it was that City, or built out of the ruins thereof, which
Ptolemy places not far from home, and calls Celia. In the Dukedom of
Styria there are more Counties, among which are Warasden, by the River Dravus,
and also Lebnau, by the River Mura. Stiria is watered with these Rivers, Dravo,
Lavanda, Sackan, Sulmo, Raynacho, Mura, Martza, Arrabone, Veystritza,
Lausintio, and infinite many Torrents, and Rivulets, which at length do all
run into Danubius. Here are no particular Mountains, for they are all called
by one general name the Norician Alps, whence they are called by the name of
Alps, as Rauch Alben, Subalben, Saw Alben, Schwaberger Alben. In the confines
of Austria, Carinthia, and Stiria, there is the Mountain Taurus. The Mountain
Gesacus does hang over the River Mura, which is now commonly called Der
Schockel, and Sattli, Mansenperg, Wemsperg, and near unto the River Salzis it
is called Ina Sawrussel, that is, os porcinum, or Hogs mouth, and Deifelsteig,
that is, the Devils Praecipisse. Below the River Mura it is called in Gaistal,
Stainperg, and Kainacher Alben: and somewhat lower are the Mountains
Kreiczpergus: and toward the East Radel and Plaitzperg. Beyond Dravus Southward
is the Mountain Claudius, which is now called Dracimperg. Vadianus relates,
that it was a current report at Vienna in Austria, that a Mountain began to
burn in Stiria, whereupon the Emperor Maximilian sent Messengers who found it
to be true. And it is probable that this happened about the year of Christ
1520. at what time Vadianus writ thus much. Moreover the aforesaid Mountains
are every where clothed and crowned with woods. The Stirians are a rustic
people, and some of them have such swellings about their necks, that it
hinders their speech, and women that give suck do cast it behind their
back, that it may not hinder their Children from sucking. Ortelius does report
that he saw at Frisachium, while he traveld from Vienna to Venice, in the year
1558. a man that had a Chin that was as broad as his shoulders, and it hung
down upon his breast. The Inhabitants do think that the air and water are
the cause of this swelling. The Stirians do use the Germane speech and habit,
except it be those that dwell by the River Dravus.

SCLAVONIA, CROATIA, BOSNIA, WITH PART of DALMATIA.
AMONG the Countries which are presented in this Table Sclavonia is the first,
which was so called from the Sclavonian Nation, who did heretofore inhabit by
the Maeotick Lake. Pliny called it Illyricum, from Illyricus the Son of
Cadmus, or as some think of Poliphemus. Ptolemy, calls it Illyis, and Stephen
Illyr^a. Ptolemy does stretch it forth from Istria even to the confines of
Macedon* by the Sea shore, and does make it extend to Pannonia and Maesia.
Pomponius Mela, and Dionysius Alexandrinus do describe it to be larger, for
he makes Illyria to contain all the coast of the Hadriatick Sea, from
Tergestus even to the Ceraunian Mountains, and places it beyond Danubius. For
Mela reckons Danubius among the Rivers of this Country. But Pliny makes the
Rivers Arsia, and Visius to be the bounds thereof. And the most do follow
Ptolomies description, who says that Illyris where it looks toward Macedon,
does contain Dalmatia, and Liburnia, which Lazius does call Crabates: and
others Croatia. Pinctus calls it Contado di Zara. The length of it from Arsa
to Dranus is 380 Italian Miles. In some parts it has a pure wholesome air,
but in other places not so wholesome, by reason of Moorish exhalations and
vapors. This Country, as Strabo witnesses is very pleasant: it has strong
Havens, a fertile Soil, and full of Vines, unless it be upon the stony
rockie cliffes, or on that side which lies toward Paennonia, where it is cold,
and coverd with snow. Florus in his book of the first P^nicke war, writes
that the Illyrians grew so licentious, that they slew the Roman Ambassadors
like sacrifices, and burnt the Captains of the Ships, and to disgrace them
the more, at the command of a woman who as he writes was called Teuta. Again
the Illyrians being hired by King Perses, began to set upon the Romans behind
their back, but Scorda which was the head City of the Nation being rased, they
straightway yielded themselves. Pliny writes that the coast of Illyria was
more frequented than the Islands, when on the contrary, the coast of Italy over
against it is very impetuous and stormy. The chief Cities and Towns of
Illyri^ are Senia, commonly called Segna, being seated on a Plain by the Sea,
which is often troubled with the North wind. Iadera is now the chief and
strongest Metropolis of the Liburnians. Also Zara commonly called Sebenicum,
Ptolomy calls it Sicum. It is situate in the Bay Scardonicor near the Sea, at
the foot of a Mountain, where there is a Castle. It has fruitful fields,
but it is thinly inhabited, by reason that the Turks do continually vex it.
Spalatum and Salena is celebrated by Ptolomy and Strabo. There is also Salona,
which is a Haven of the Dalmatians, which has few inhabitants, because it is
so near unto the Turk. Tragurtum now called ^ran is divided from the
Continent by SCLAVONIA
SLAVONIA croatia Bosnia. Dalmat.
map a small arm of the Sea. Epidaurus is an ancient City, by the ruins
whereof there is Ragusium commonly called Ragusi, the Turks call it Pobrovicha,
it is a small City with a strong Castle: here is a famous Mart for all
Turkish commodities, the Commonwealth is governed by good laws, the Citizens
are rich. This Country is watered with two chief Rivers Savus and Dravus,
which do run into Danubius, Beyond the Mountains many lesser Rivers do
break out into the Hadriatick Bay, as Edanius, Ticicus, Naron, Rhizon, and
Drinus. The Illyrians or Sclavonians do dwell in wooden houses, thatched,
unless it be some Towns upon the Coast where they live civiller. And so much
concerning Illyricum or Sclavonia in general. But Sclavonia which our table
does exhibit, is only a part of that Illyricum, unless we make it to be
Plinyes Sclavonia. It contains the Marquiship of Windorum, and the County of
Zagabria.

CROATIA.
CRoatia is a part of Illyricum toward Hungary, which we described in the
beginng. Rufus and Volaterranus call it Valeria: others Liburnia. It joyneth to
Istria on the East by the Fanatic Bay, and is situate between the Rivers
Cuspa and Savus, and the higher Maesia. The Metropolis of this Country is now
called Bigihon, and sometime Fumlum. It has many other Cities at Zeng,
Wackat, Turnaw, Modrish. But the Turk by his invasions made this Country
known, having broken the league with the Christians, had a great desire to
join this Country to his Kingdoms and Provinces, that so he might more
conveniently invade Italy and Germany, whereupon at the beginning of Summer in
the year 1592. the great Turk sent an Army into Croatia, under the conduct of
his Bashawes and Captains. The Soldiers being terrified at the approaching of
this army, the Bashaw of Bosnia took the strong Fort Hrastovitza by
treachery. And afterward the fury of his Soldiers being not appeased
therewith, he laid siege to Wyhitz, a strong walled City: the Soldiers
having neither munition nor victuals, yielded up the Town by surrender, and
the Turk afterward contrary to his promise put them all to the Sword, and many
inconveniences followed after this surrender, which I omit. Moreover in the
year following, which was 1593. The Turk glorying in his many victories, and
Towns which he had taken, had a great desire to get the strong City
Sissegkum: and so raising an army he besieged it. But the Germans considering
what great detriment and loss, not only Germany but all Europe should
sustain, if the Turks should take it, they levied an army, and so passing
over the River Savus, they intended to relieve the City. The Turkish horsemen
who were 8000. or some say 10000. made haste to possess themselves of the
other Banck of the River Savus by the Bridge which was built before, that so
they might hinder the Christians approach, where joining battle with the
Christians, the Turks were put to flight, and fled to the Bridge, which the
Carolostadien Soldiers had first possessed. The Turks were at last all cut
off, and a great many drowned in the Rivers Savus and Kulpa. The other part of
the Turkish Army fled, the Bridge being cut down, so that they could not
retire to the rest of their army. And so on the 22. of June in the year 1593.
this City was freed from this strait siege.

BOSNIA.
THe Eastern part of Liburnia they now call Liburnia, from the Bessi, a people
of lower Moesia: who afterward being expulsed by the Bulgarians, did remove
into higher Maesia, and by changing the letter e for o, they were called
instead of Bossis Bossi or Bosni: and afterward Bosna, and Besnia. There have
been the like changes in other names, as Melita, now called Malta, Langones
and Lingones, Scandia and Schondia, etc. Iaitza is a City of Bosnia, seated on
a high hill, and encompassed with two Rivers. These Rivers do flow at the
foot of the Mountain, and so having encircled the City, do join together,
and run both into Savus. It was the Metropolis of Bosnia, and it has a
strong impregnable Castle. This Country also has other chief Cities,
especially Schwonica, and Warbosayne, which is now the Metropolis, but not
walled about. The River Milliatzka does devide it into two parts, etc.

DALMATIA.
IT remains that we should speak somewhat of Dalmatia, a part whereof is
described in this Table. It was so caled from Deliminium the Metropolis of this
Country. Heretofore Dalmatia was a potent Kingdom, and the Dalmatians were
heretofore strong and rich, and confident in the situation of their Country.
They lived for the most part in Woods, and so were much given to robbing. The
Cities are Salanum, and not far from the borders of this Country, the City
Apollonia is situated by the Sea side, near unto which there is a Rock which
sends forth flashes of fire, and beneath it hot water and Brimstone does
boil forth, especially when the Rock blazeth and burns. The Ecclesiastical
government according to Mercator is in this manner. There is the Archbishop
Iadra, who they now call Zara. Under whom are Anzara, Vegla, Arbe: also the
Archbishop of Spalato, nuder whom are the Bishops Tragurium, of Teniensis Tina,
Sardona, Temnensis, Nenensis, Nonensis, Almisa, Sibinicensis, Farensis. The
Archbishop of Ragusine, under whom are Stagnensis, Rossonensis, Tribuniensis,
Bacensis, Rosensis, Bidnanensis, Budva. The Archbishop Antiberensis, under whom
are the Bishops of Dulcinium, Suacinensis, Drinastensis, Polastrensis,
Scodrensis, Sardensis, Surtanensis, or Acutarensis, Arbensis.

VVALACHIA, SERVIA, BVLGARIA, ROMANIA.
VALACHIA was so called from the Flaccians, a Nation of the Romans. For the
Romans having overcome the Getes, brought thither a Colonie under the conduct
of one Flaccus, whence it was first called Flaccia, and afterward Valachia. The
Alps and a continued ridge of Mountains do devide it from Hungary and
Transylvania. It has on the East a Lake full of Fish, which the River Pruth
makes: on the South it is bounded with Danubius; and on the West it touches
upon Transylvania, by the Town Severine, where there is Trajans Bridge, which
had 34. Piles. On the North it is bounderd with the small River Hoina and
Ister, and so the Country bends over against the Island Pauce well known to
Writers, which they now call Barillana. But Valachia, although it be
encompassed with high Mountains, yet it yields all things necessary.
Moreover, it is rich in Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Salt. Neither does it
want Vineyards, but it has diverse kinds of Cattle, especially excellent
Horses and Ginnets. Here is the Town Teniovizza where the Vaivode resideth.
There are also other Towns, as Braila, and Trescortum, not far from which
there is Brimstone dug, of which they make Candels, as of wax. The other
parts of this County do consist of Villages, the Rivers Hierasus, which the
Inhabitants call Pruth, Hoyne, Danubius, and others.

SERVIA^
SERVIA, which Lazius calls the higher Maesia, is a Country between Bosnia and
Bulgaria. Some suppose that this was the Triballians Country: and that these
people came hither, at the declining of the Grecian and Roman Empire.
Cuspianus and Volaterranus do write that the Trojans did inhabit Servia and
Rasica. The chief City of Servia was Sinderovia, which some do call
Spenderoben, and other Simandria, or Semendria, the Turks do call it
Semender, and the Hungarians Zendrow, which lies not far from Belgradus by
the banks of Danubius, and it was taken by the Turkish Emperor Amurath, in
the year 1428. and reduced into a Sangiacate under the Beglerbeg of Buda.
There are also the Towns Vidina, which the Turks call Kiratovum, which is
seated by the Mountain Argentarus. Also Novogradum on the borders of Servia,
which some do call the new Mountain, it has an impregnable Castle. There is
also the black Mountain, in which there are Silver Mines. There are also
Samandria, and Prisdena, where the Emperor Justinian was borne. Also
Stonibrigadum, and Belgradum, heretofore called Taurunum.

VVALACHIA^
WALACHIA SERVIA BULGARIA Roman.
map

BVLGARIA^
BULGARIA is so called as it were Volgaria, because certain people coming
from Volga about the year of our Lord 566. did possess this Country. Some
think that this Country is the lower Maesia. It lies between Servia,
Romania, and Danubius. This Country for the most part is Mountainous, and it
runs out on the back side of the Mountain Haemus toward Danubius, and
Romania whence the middle part of the Country is ragged, and the steep parts
of it are full of solitary Woods. The Metropolis of this Country is Sophia,
which Niger thinks to be that Town which Ptolemy calls Vibiscum. Here the
Beglerbeg of Greece resideth, whom the Turks call Rumelt Beglerbeg, who has
21. Sangiacates under him. There is also Serrajum a famous City of Bulgaria.
And Nicupolis which is governed by Sangiacks. Near this City there are some
ruins of an admirable Bridge, which the Emperor Irajan built over Danubius,
when he warred against the Getes.

ROMANIA^
ROMANIA is next to Bulgaria, which was so called from the chief City
Constantinople, which was called also Roma ^^va, or new Rome. It was heretofore
called Thrace, either from Thra^es the Son of Mars, or from the Nymph Thrara,
or rather, a feritate seu temeritate, from their wildness or rashness. It is
parted from Macedon by the River Strymon; on the North is the River Haemus, on
the other sides the Sea washes it. This Country has neither good air, nor
soil: and except it be that part which lies toward the Sea, it is cold and
unfruitful. But by the ^ea it has fruit, and Corn. It has few Apple trees,
and but few Vines, which unless they be defended from the cold, the Grapes of
them do seldom come to maturity or ripeness. It has these Cities Abdera
where Democritus was borne* also Nicopolis, Philippop^lis, Hadrianopolis,
Trajanopolis, Selymbria, Perinthus, and many others. The Metropolis or Mother
City is Bizantium, which was built by Pausanias, now they call it
Constantin^ple, from Constantine, who made it the seat of his Empire. The
Turks call it Stampolda, as it were a large City. It is seated by an arm of
the Sea, and it has Pera over against it, which they call Galata, which was an
ancient Colony of the Genuensians. There are diverse Monuments of Antiquity in
this City, some of which were brought thither from Rome. The chief are the
Church of Sophia, which was built by the Emperor Justinian. The Palace of
Constantine. St. Lukes Church. A new Castle, a Colossus, a place to ride
Horses, and many old Steeples. Two Rivers do water it Cydrus, commonly called
Machl^vam, and Barbises, also Chartaricon. The compass of this City is 13.
miles. And there are in it 700. thousand Inhabitants. This Country has but few
Rivers but those very famous, as Hebrus, Melanes, (...), Arsas, B^^^n^^, and
N^sla. It has these Mountains, Haemus, Rhodope, Orbelus, Pa^geus, and
Messapus, these Countries are now subject to the Turk, who has a Palace at
Constantinople. Of whose power, and government I will speak briefly. There are
about 200. whom the Turk every 4. years does command to gather through Greece,
Walachia, Bosnia, and Anatolia, and his other Territories all the Christian
Male Children, out of every Family, as a tenth due unto him, which they bring
to Constantinopolis, Pera, and Adrianopolis, and deliver them to Citizens to
bring them up, and the less hopeful they put forth to Country people in
Bursia, and Caramania. All these are called Azamogla, or Iamogla, that is,
innocent Infants, that know nothing, and when they are 8. years old, 50. of
the handsomest and hopefullest of them are placed in the Emperors Palace at
Constantinople, which is called Saray, and there they are instructed in
learning and rudiments of war, until they have attained to 20. years of
age. Out of these beside other Officers of the Court the Janitzaries are
chosen, of whom there are 12000. who are the Turks Guard. Out of the
Janitzaries 3000. Spachoglani are chosen, who go on the Princes right hand,
and do every one keep 4. or 5. Horses for service. Hemus is a very high wood,
so that from the top thereof you may behold the Euxine and Adrian Sea. The
Inhabitants of this Country are yellow of complexion, long hayrd, courageous,
fierce, and cruel: they are great drinkers, and do love Wine.

GREECE, WHICH CONTAINS THESE CHIEF COUNTRIES, ALBANIA, MACEDON, EPIRE,
ACHAIA, and MOREA.
GREECE follows which is a famous Country of Europe, and the Fountain and
mother of learning. The Inhabitants did call it Hellas. But these that do now
inhabit it do call it Romechi, and the Turks Haromeli. Leunclavius calls
it Rumelia: and the 70. Interpreters Ihobel, and Iava. But Greece has several
bounds assignd it. It reaches properly from Ep^e by the River Achelous. On the
East it has the Aegean Sea: and thus Greece is properly bounderd. Which Pliny
does intimate, who says, that Greece begins from the Istmus, and again he
says, that Gre^ce is joined to Peloponesus with a short neck of ground.
Sometimes also Pel^ponesus and Thessalia are comprehended in Greece. So L.
Aemilius Paulus, when he travaild through Greece, he went to Delphos through
Thessaly, from thence to Lebadia, then to Chalcides, afterward to Aulides, and
from thence to Athens, then to Corinth, Sicyon, Argos, Epidaurus, Lacedemon,
Megalopolis, Olympia: and so having traveled through Greece, he returned to
Amphipolis. Homer calls the Phtiotae only Graecians. Herodotus makes a
difference between the Thracians and Pelasgans. But now we call Greece all the
Country, which lies Westward, and is washed with the Jonian Sea, on the South
with the Libian Sea: on the East with the Aegean; on the North it is parted
from Thrace, Mysia, and Dalmatia. This Country did heretofore excel other
parts of Europe, both for the temper of the climate, and fertility, and Herds
of Cattle. This is that Country which flourished along time, and was a famous
Empire for Learning, Arts, and warlike Discipline. It was first free, but while
it affected Sove^^^nty over others, it was it self brought into servitude, for
now it is under the Turks Dominion. And heretofore Cyrus, afterward Xerxes,
and other Kings of Persia did vex it. Afterward the Macedons governd it, and
then the Romans, after the division of their Empire it was subject to
Constantinople, until the Goths, the Bulgarians, and Sarazens did waste and
destroy it, and now last of all the Turk has brought it all into miserable
servitude, except some Islands which are subject to the Venetian, namely,
Cor^yra, Cephalenia, Zacynthus, Crete, and other little Islands. Greece had
heretofore many flourishing Cities, as Athens, La^^demon, Delphos, Argis,
Mycenis, Corinth, and many others, the most of which are ruinate, and decayed.
Here are 32. great Rivers, as Strymon, Chabrius, Eched^us, A^^^s, ^rigo^,
Lydius, Alia^m^n, GREECE^
GRAECIA
map Pha^ybus, Feneus, Spe^chius, Pa^yassus, Apsus, Lous, Celidnus, Thyamus,
A^h^r^n, ^^a^h^hus, A^h^lous, Ev^^us, Ilissas, As^pus, Ism^nus, Cephisus,
^oag^^us, ^^^us, Sus, Peneus, Alphejus, Selas, Pa^ysius, Eurotas, and ^nachus.
The Sea^ are called the Jonian Sea, from Ionia who was a Queen in the farthest
parts of Italy, as Soli^us affirms: or as Archidamus thinks, from I^nius a
King of the Illyrians, or from the Jonians who were drowned in passing that Sea.
It was called before the Cronian and Rhaean Bay, and the Cretian from the I Will
Creete, as ancient Writers do witn^^se, it is now called Mar di Candia, or the
Gandian Sea. There is also the Carpathiam Sea, so called from the Island
Carpathus, which lies by the Eastern Promontory of Creete. The Aegaean Sea,
as Fest^^ and others do write, was so called from Aegeus the Father of
Thel^us, who cast himself into it. I omit other opinions. Valerius Flaceus
calls it Aego^, and Aegeon, Thu^ydides calls it the Greek Sea, and the
^ropeans do call it by a Greek name Archipelagus: The Turks call it the
white Sea. The Romans did heretofore call this Sea by two names as Pliny
witnesses, namely, all that which touched Maced^n and (...), the Macedonian
Sea; and that which touched Greece, the Grecian Sea: Ptolemy calls it Myrtoum,
or the Myrtoan Sea, being a p^^^ of the Aegean, which bears on Caria a
Country of Asia the less^: C^staldus calls it Mar d^ Mandria. Strabo, Pliny,
and others do place it between Pel^ponesus, and Attica. It was so called from
Myrthus the Son of Mercury, who as Solinus and Isodorus report was cast into
this Sea by O^n^maus, or as Pliny thinks, from a small Island, situate not
far from the Town Carystum. The most do call it the Icarian Sea, from the
fable of Icarus. It is now called Mar di Nicaria, as Cast^ldus writes. It has
also diverse Mountains, as Bertiscus, Athos, Olympus, Ossa, Pelion, Citerius,
Othris, Oeta, Pindus, Aroceraunij, Stimphe, Calidromus, Carax, Pa^nassus,
Hel^^on, Cithaeron, Himettus, Stimph^lus, Pholoe, Cr^^us, Zarex, Minthe,
Taigetus, and others. Moreover Athens famous for Arts and Disciplines was in
Greece. So that Diodorus Siculus calls it the common School. Cicero Lib. 4.
Epist. Famil. calls it the famousest University of Europe, whether Romans
and other Nations did repair to study Philosophy and the Greek tongue. Cicero
does often commend Greece for Arts, Eloquence* good wits, and plentiful
speech, so that the Romans got the knowledge of Philosophy, and other Arts and
Sciences from them. And Flaccus sings thus.

Graijs ingenium, Graijs dedit ore rotundo
Musa loqui. --
The Muses gave the Graecians wit.
And eloquence of speech to it.
GREECE has yielded these famous Scholars, Nus^us the Poet, Solon, Socrates
the Prince of Philosophers, Xenophon, Plato, Isocrates, Demosthenes,
Thucidides, and many others. Concerning the Graecians religion, Idolatry
reigned amongst them, so that they had an infinite number of Gods and
Goddesses. Augustine Lib. 3. of the City of God, affirms according to Varros
opinion, that the Romans and Graecians together had above 3000. gods, of which
there were 300. Jupiters. Every one had his Lar or Household god. And they had
Tutelary gods for every affection of the mind, and for defense and protection
from danger, and every god had distinct and peculiar Ceremonies, Prayers,
Priests, Sacrifices, and Offerings. The common people do not now keep their
ancient fashions. For they let their hair grow long, and do only cut the
forepart of their hair, and do wear a double thick Hat. They use but little
household stuff as the Turks: neither do they lie on Fether-beds, but on
Flock-beds, or Beds stuffed with Wool or Toe. They never mingle any wine with
water, and women are not present at their drinking feasts and meetings, neither
do they sit down at Banquets. But the Heathenish Greeks have an ancient
custom in bewailing the dead. The Greek Christians do differ in Religion
from the Romans, and do call themselves the Eastern Church. They have four
Patriarks, the Patriarchs of Constantinople, of Alexandria, of Jerusalem, and
Annoch. These are created by the Metropolitan Bishops, as the Popes are by the
Cardinals, and they are famous for their sanctimonious, holy, modest, and
religious life. Their yearly revenue is 400. crowns, which is begged in the
Churches which are under their government. For the Clergy men have no
Inheritance. They may marry one wife, but no more, they acknowledge only two
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. They communicate in both kinds,
both in Bread and Wine. They hate Purgatory, and detest graven Images, and do
not shave their hair. But the richer Graecians, and men of Authority, do
wear Princely apparel. Those that are under the Venetians do go in habit
like to Venetians. Those that are under the Turks, do go like Turks. The
Governor of Greece is called V^omeli Beglerbey, that is, King of the Roman
Princes, for he governs all those Countries which the Turk has in Europe,
which are subject to Constantinople. He has 40. Sangiacks, under him, who are
Captains of the Horse troops chosen out of the Spachoglans, and they are
Governors in the chief Cities of the Provinces, to keep them in peace and
obedience, and they have 150. Sobasci Cimmeriotae, or more, who are
Vice-governours under them of lesser Towns. Under these Sangiacks there are
30000. Spachi, every one of which maintains 3. or 4. Horses for service. And
these Spachi are distributed through the Flamboler, that is, the bands, which
do contain 200.300, 400. or 500. Horsemen. The chief of the Sangiacks is the
Governor of Modena, who is President also of all Morea, who upon the
Beglerbeys command is to bring forth a thousand Horse, who are bound to serve
him for wages. Also the Governor of Bosna brings 900. Horse, and the
Governor of Thessalonia brings forth 500. Horse, an hundred whereof he has
always in a readiness, the rest he sends when the Turk demands it. There
are also under this Beglerbey, 20000. Horsemen who are subject to the
Sangiacks, who are called the Tymariots, because they have stipends out of the
Tymar, which is the Emperors Exchequer. And also 40000. Akengi, or Acconti,
that is, Scouts or light Horsemen, who being free from any taxes or
contributions, do serve without wages, and are supplyd with victuals by the
chief Cities through which they pass. There are also many Feudataries who are
called Mosselin, out of which there are sometime raised 60000 Horsemen, and a
great number of Footmen. It would be tedious to rehearse all matters, neither
do we intend it, wherefore we return to the more special parts of Greece.

MACEDON, EPIRE, AND ACHAJA, WITH which ALBANIA is described.
SOME have divided Greece in another manner. But we will follow Mercator, who
does accurately describe the parts thereof in three Tables. But in this Table
he sets forth 3. Provinces of Greece, Macedon, Epire and Achaja, afterward
Morea, and in the third and last place Candia. The first is Macedon, being a
large Country, and so called from King Macedon the son of Orsiis, some say
that it was so denominated from Jupiter and Thia, or as Salinus thinks, from
Ducalions Nephew. It was heretofore called Emathia, as Pliny and Trogus do
witness. Livy writes that it was first called Paeonia, afterward Aemonia,
Solinus calls it Edonia, and Pieria. Trogus writes that it was heretofore
called Baeotia. Stephanus and Hesychius do write that a part of it was called
Macetia, and from thence Eustathius reports that the whole Country was so
called. It is also called in the Book of Machabees, Cethim, where we read
that Alexander went out of the Land of Cethim. It is situate in the middle of
two great Seas, the Jonian Sea on the West, and the Aegaean on the East: on the
North it has a part of Dalmatia, and the higher Maesia: on the South it
touches Epirus and Achaja. The Country is every where fruitful; and
encompassed with great Mountains; and the borders thereof toward the Jonian
Sea are plain and woody: for that part which is called Albania is well known
to be large, fruitful, and pleasant. Moreover, it is very rich in Gold and
Silver, and as Aristotle witnesses, a kind of strange Gold was heretofore
found here, there is also Brimstone dug out of the Earth. Moreover Macedon
does produce a Precious stone called Paeantides, which does help women to
conceive, and bring forth children, as Solinus writes. This is that Macedon
(says Pliny) which heretofore had the Empire of the whole World, that is, that
Country which passed over Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Albania, Cappadocia, Syria,
Egypt, Taurus, and Causasus: this Country had Dominion over the Bactrians,
Medes, and Persians, and possessed all the East, this conquered India, following
the steps of Bacchus and Hercules, this is that Macedon, in which ou^ Emperor
Paulus Aemilius in one day took 72. Cities and sold them. Such was the change
of Fortune. Macedon contains many Countries, among the which Thessaly is the
chief, which Castaldus calls Comenolitari. There are also many fair Cities
in Macedon. The chief now are Thessalonia, which was and is now frequented by
diverse Christian Nations, and Jews, who have there 80. Synagogues. The
Sangiack of Macedon resideth here. He at the command of the Beglerbeg, as often
as the Turk sets forth any Army has 500. Horsemen well appointed, an
hundred whereof he keeps near him to defend his own borders. Near unto
this City is Siderocapsa famous for Gold Metal. And Pella where the Kings
Treasure is kept, and 3000. of the Kings Mares are kept to breed, as Pliny and
Strabo do witness. Stagira was the Town where Aristotle was borne. Also
Apollonia where Augustus Caesar learned the Greek tongue. Dyrrachium which was
heretofore called Epidaurus, is in the Country of Brundusium: also Aulon,
Croja, and Cavalla. The Rivers of Macedon next to Strimon, in the borders of
Thrace, are Axius, Erigonus, Aliacmon, and Peleus. It has these Mountains,
Pelion, Ossa, Pindus, Nimphaeus, and Athon. Athos is a great steep rugged
Mountain, which casts a shadow even to the Island Lemnos: it is planted with
Vines, Olives, Bay-trees, Mirtle-trees, and Apple Trees. Now it is inhabited by
the Colojerians, who are so religious, that even the Turks do abstain from
this part alone, and do often give the Monks gifts, and benevolences.

EPIRVS^
EPIRUS is a Country of Greece, as Ptolemy and others do call it. Martianus
Capella writes that it was heretofore called Chaonia, Grabillius affirms out
of Dionysius and Thrasibulus that it was called Oricia and Dodona. Leander and
Erythraus do write that it is now called Albania, Richerius, and Aeneas
Silvius Larta. Castaldus says, that it was called Ianna. This Country is
bounded on the East with the River Celydnus, or Pepylychnus: on the North it
has Macedon. This Country in many places is Woody and barren, but by the Sea
Coast it fruitful. It produces great store of living creatures, except Asses,
but it is has fair large Oxen, and great Dogs, and also Sheep. Virgil. 1.
Georg. does commend Epire for Horses.

India mittit Ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei,
At Chalybes nudi ferrum, virosaque pontus
Castorea, Eliadum palmas Epiros equarum.
India her whitest Ivory does send,
The soft Sabaeans Frankincense does lend,
The naked Chalybes dig Iron forth,
And Pontus has that precious stone of worth,
Which usually is called the Bezars stone,
Epire has the best Mares to breed upon.
The Molossians first possessed this Country as Trogus reports. But in the
Trojans time Ulysses governed it. After whom it came to Achilles, who much
enlarged his Empire. Afterward it came to the Romans, and afterward to the
Emperors of Constantinople, and by their grant and donation to the Despotians,
which were a family in Epire. But Amurath the Turk at last having droven out
the Christians, did subject it to himself. Here are the Cities Dodone, famous
for the Oracle of Jupiter Dodonaus. Also Nicopolis built by Augustus in memory
of MACEDON^
MACEDONIA. Epir. et Achaia
map that victory, when in a Sea Fight he overcame Marcus ^ntonius and Queen
Cleopatra. It was heretofore a great City and populous, now it is called
Prevesa. Ambracia is now called Laria from a River of that name. Here was the
Palace of Pyrrhus of Epire, and the Country of Cleombrotus Ambraciota, who as
Cicero relates, having read Platoes Book of the immortality of the Soul,
being weary of the miseries of this life, did case himself down from a high
place. There is also Ac^^um, which Gerbelius makes to be a famous City of
Acarnania. It was heretofore a Colony of Augustus, now it is called ^apo
Figul^. Strabo, and Virgil do call Buthrotum. Pliny calls it Colonia.
Sophianus calls it now Butrinto. There is also Leucas, where Apollo has a
Chapel, and a Grove which has power to mittigate the flames of Love, and
Strabo does report that the Poetesse Sappho did first come out of it full of
poetical inspirations, as Ovid does mention in one of his Epistles to Sappho.
The Rivers of Epire are Acheron, which Livy calls Acheros. Strabo Achelous,
Sophianus Aspri, Niger Catochi, Kyriacus Ancomtanus calls it Geromlia. The
Ceraunian or Acroceraunian Mountains are very high, and fearful to the
Mariners. For as soon as cloud^ do begin to arise from thence, Tempests do
immediately follow. There is also the Mountain Stymphe, out of which the River
Arachtus follows, as Strabo witnesses, the Inhabitants as ^ell^nius
relates, do go forth of their Country in troops in the Summer time, in
regard of the barrenness of the soil, and so do remove to some other place,
namely, into Macedon, Romania, and Nat^lia, where they work under the Turk
for hire and wages, sometimes they reap Corn, and so after Harvest is done,
they return again in Autumn with their Wives and Children. But they are
Christians, and have a peculiar speech different from the Greeks: yet they are
of the Greek Religion, and because they are neighbors to the Graecians,
therefore they understand the Greek.

ACHAIA.
THere remains in this Table Achaja, which is a Country of Greece. Ptolemy
calls it Hellades. Pliny in his Epistles calls it Maera-Graecia, or mere
Greece. It is bounderd on the North with Thessalia, near the River Sperchus,
the Maliacan Bay, and the Mountain Ceta, on the West with the River Achelous,
beyond which the Country of ^pire begins: on the East it bends somewhat
Northward, and is washed with the Aegean and Mirtoan Sea, even to the
Promontory Sunium, which is now called Cape delle Colonne: On the South it has
Peloponesus, over against it, which is joined unto it by our Isthmus. I find
in Writers that here are 9. Countries which are D^rus near Parnassus. Aetolia
by the River Evenus. This latter is plain and fruitful toward the North, but
r^gged and barren toward the South. It has many ancient Cities, one of the
chief whereof was Ca^^d^^, which is now ruinated with the rest. Ev^nus a most
clear transparent River does flow through this Country, which afterward runs
into the Sea. The Country of the Locrians and Opuntians was rugged, the chief
City whereof is Amphissa, There is also in this Country Naupactus, which some
do place in Aetolia. Phocis is by the Mountain Pernassus. The City thereof
is Delphos, where there was the sumptuous Church and famous Oracle of Apollo.
Beotia lies among the Mountains, in a moist moorish place, but fat and very
fruitful. There is also the City Asera at the foot of the Mountain Helicon,
where Hes^d was borne. And Orchomenus famous for Tiresias Oracle. Also Thebes
which as Pliny witnesses, was sometimes equal to Athens, where many famous
men were borne, but now these Towns lie buried in their own ruins. There is
also Cheronaea where Plutarch was borne. Also Plataea memorable for a famous
victory which the Graecians obtained under the conduct of Pausanias, against
Mardonius. Tanagra was a most superstitious City. And Aulis where the Greeks
assembled themselves before their coming to Troy. Attica is a barren woody
Country. The chief City is Athens, which needs no commendation to make it
famous. Euripides calls it the Grace of Greece, or the Compendium and Epitome
of Greece. Cicero does much praise this City, in his Oration for Lucius
Flaccus, Lib. 2. of Laws, and in his Dialogue de Partitione. There was also
Marathon well known by Miltiades his famous victory. And Eleusis famous for
Ceres sacrifices, which were therefore called Eleusinian. Stephanus calls
Megaris a rugged Country. The chief City hereof is Megara seated by the
Isthmus from whence the Country was so called. The most famous Rivers of Achija
are Ismenus a River of Baeotia, which waters the City of Thebes. Also Cnopus
which Strabo calls Asopus. Homer surnames it flowery Cnopus. Also Evenus which
before as Apollodorus and Strabo do witness, was called Lycormas. It is a River
of Aetolia. The most famous Mountains are Parnassus, which Lucan Lib. 4.
calls Mons Phoebo Bromioque sacer, A Mountain sacred to Apollo and Bacchus.
Which Claudian and Lucretius do situate in the middle of the World. There is
also Helicon which Pliny calls Musis natale, the Muses birth place. The
Mountain Hymettus is famous for Honey, Marble, and all things medicinable.
There is also Citheron, which Lactantius calls so from Cithara a Harp,
because this Instrument was often played on in this place, and Poets Verses were
frequently sung here. There are these Bishoprics in this Country. The
Archbishopric Philippensis, under whom are Citrensis, and Veriensis: Also the
Archbishop Laricensis, under whom are Dinutriensis, Almurensis, Cardicensis,
Stdoniensis, Dinucensis. The Archbishop Neopatensis, under whom is
Lariaetensis. The Archbishop Thebanensis, Iorocemensis, Castoriensis, The
Archbishop Athenensis, under whom are Thermopylensis, Davaliensis, Salonensis,
Nigropontensis, Molgarensis, Roonensis, Eginnensis. The Archbishops
Corcyrensis, and Duracensis.

MOREA, HERETOFORE CALLED PELOPONNESVS.
SO much concerning the chief Countries of Greece, which are in the Continent:
Morea and Candia are next to be unfolded. The former Ptolemy, Strabo, and
Steph. do call Peloponnesus, it is a Peninsula, but now it is happily called
Morea from the incursions of the Moors. Heretofore as Apolloderus and Pliny
do witness, it was called Apia and Pelasgia. Strabo delivers that it was
Argos, and afterward Argos Achaicum: and Orosius Lib. 1. cap. 11. says that it
was called Achaja. And also Apulejus in his 6. Book of the golden Ass.
Eustathius did also call it Pelopia, and Stephanus Inachia. And in Eusebius
Chronicle it is called Aegialia. It was called Pelopon^esus from Pelops a
barbarous man, who coming out of Asia reigned here. For Pelopis signifies an
Island, whereas it is not an Island, but a Peninsula* and as Mela writes it is
most like to a Plantine leaf, being as broad as long. The Perimeter or
compass of it is 4000. Furlongs, unto which Artemedorus adds 400. It is
joined to the continent by an Isthmus or neck of Land, the breadth whereof is
40. Furlongs. Many have vainly attempted to cut through this narrow tongue of
ground, as Demetrius, C. Caesar, Caligula, Nero, and others: but being
frustrated of their purpose, they made a wall there which they called
Hexamilium. Amurath the Turk threw it down, and the Venetians re-edified it
in the year 1453. in 15. days space, but the Turks afterward did raze it
down to the ground. In this Isthmus there was heretofore the Temple of
Neptune, where the Isthmian sports and Plays were celebrated. Pel ponnesus
has on the East the Cretian Sea: on the West the Jonian or Hadriatick Sea: on
the North it has the Corinthian and Saronick Bay, between which is the
Isthmus: on the South it has the Mediterranean Sea. This Peninsula is the
Castle and chief part of all Greece, and Pliny says that it is not inferior
to any Country. For it has plenty, and abundance of all things which serve
rather for pleasure or necessity. It has fruitful Plains and Hills, and it is
full of Bays and Havens which do make many Promontories. The Elians, the
Messenians, the Achivi, the Sicyonians, the Corinthians, the Laconians, the
Argives, and the Arcadians did heretofore inhabit Pel^ponnesus. And this part
of Greece was famous heretofore through the whole world for the Commonwealths of
the Myceneans, Argives, Lacedaemonians, Si^vonians, Eliensians, Arcadians,
Pylions, and Messenions, out of which there came many famous Princes, as
Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ajax, and others. For this Country in regard of the
situation, and Majesty thereof did govern all the other parts of Gree^e. But
now all Pel^ponnesus is under MOREA^
MOREA
map the Turks Dominion, as also the rest of Greece, although it were
valiantly defended by some Earls of Greece, whom they call (...), or Lords,
and also by the Venetians. But now a Sangiack does govern (...) ^rea under the
Turk, who is more potent than all the rest, who ^^^deth at Modonum, and at the
Beglerbeys of all Greeces command he i^ to bring a thousand Horse into the
Field at his own cost and charges. This Sangiack is called by the Barbarians
Morabegi, whose yearly revenewes in this Province 700000. Aspers, that is, 14.
thousand Crowns. But it appears in Ptolemy and other Authors, that all this
Country was divided into 8. Provinces, which are Corinth, Argia, Lacon^a,
Messenia, Elis, Achaja, Sicyonis, and Arcadia. Corinth is seated in the
Isthmus, it was so denominate from the chief City which was first called
Ephyre. Cicero does worthily call it the light of Greece. It has a Haven on
either side, the one whereof looks toward Asia, the other toward Italy, so
that the convenient situation made it soon grow famous, and the Isthmian
Plays which were celebrated here. Acrocorinthe was seated on a Mountain 3.
Furlongs and a half high, and under it was Corinth 40. Furlongs in compass.
On the top of the Mountain there was a temple dedicated to Venus: near which
was the Fountain Pyrene, which did first spring up as the Poets report, from a
stroke of Pegasus his hoof, who was the winged Horse of the Muses. This City
was razed by L. Mummius, because they had discourteously entertained the Roman
Ambassadors, after it had been builded 952. years by Aletes the Son of
Hippotes, as you may find it in Pater^u^us. Argia follows, which Ortelius
calls Romania. The Cities of this Country are Mycenae, where Agamemnon had
his Palace, whence Ovid calls it Agamemnons Mycenae, it was famous for the
ancient temple of Juno, whence Juno was called Argiva. They report that the
Cyclops did wall it about. Not far from hence was the Lake Lerna, where
Hercules killed the Lernaean Hydra, or rather did scatter and kill the Thieves
that did rob in those parts. The City Argo^ was built as some report by Argus.
Nauplia now called Neapolis is a strong City of Romania, Epidaurus is in the
innermost part of the Saronian Bay, a City famous for Esculapius temple. Next
to Argia is Laconia. The Metropolis or Mother City whereof is Sparta, which
was also called Lacedaemon, and now Misithra: it was heretofore a great potent
City, being not fortified with walls, but by the valor of the Citizens,
neither does Pomponius praise it for magnificent Buildings, but for Licurgus
his Laws and Discipline, in which it contended with Athens, as Thucidides
notes in his 8. Book. Leuctra may be known out of Plutarch by that sad and
tragical History of Scedasus Daughters. There is also Epidaurus which is now
called Malvasia. Messenia reaches from the Mountain Taygetus and the River
Panijsus even to Alpheus. The chief City of it is Messene situate by the Sea,
it is now called Mattegia. Aristomenis was the Country where renowned Messenius
was borne, who as Pausanias reports, being ripped open after he was dead, had
a hairy Heart. There is also Methone, now called Modon, where the Turkish
Sangiack did sometimes keep his residence. Corone is now called Coron. Pilus
was the Country, where Homers eloquent Nestor who lived three ages, was borne.
And Ciparissi is now called Arcadia. Elis is situate between Messenia, Achaja,
and Arcadia. The Cities are Elis through the middle whereof Peneus and Alpheus
did run, famous for Jupiters temple. Olympia was famous for the solemn
Grecian Plays, which were called Olympian games, and for the sumptuous Temple
of Jupiter Olympius, which by the offerings and gifts of potent Princes and
other men grew so great and beautiful, that there was no Church in all Greece
that could compare with it for magnificence and riches, for Jupiter was
religiously reverenced here. Cipselus the Tyrant of Corinth did consecrate and
set up a golden Jupiter at Olympia of massy gold. Afterward Phidius the
Athenian did set up a great Image of Jupiter of Gold and Ivory, being 60.
foot high, which work was reprehended by other Artificers, because the Image
was not proportionable to the Temple. For whereas this Jupiter sat in an Ivory
Throne, and yet touched the top of the Church with his head, it must needs come
to pass that if this Ivory god being weary of sitting would rise up at any
time, that he must throw down the top of the Church. There is also Pisa.
Achaja which Ptolemy calls Propria, reaches from the Promontory Araxus, even
to the Sicyonian, from whom it is divided by the River Sus, on the South it
has the Mountain Stymphalus, on the North the Corinthian Bay. There are also
the Cities Dyme, which they now call Charenza, whence they call the Araxean
Promontory Capo di Chiarenza: there is also the famous City Patrae which is
now called Patras. The City Aegium in former time was called Vostiza or
Bostizan, and it was raced by the Turks. Aegira was heretofore a chief City,
being seated on a rugged steep Hill, which is now ruinate, and called
Xilocastro. And in the Crissaean Bay there are Helice, Bura, and Pellene.
Si^^nia is situate between Achaja and Asopus: the chief City thereof is
Sicion, the ancientest of all the Greek Cities, and built in Abraham's time,
being full of Churches, Altars, Statues, and Images. There was also Phlius,
which happily is that which they now call Vasilicon. There remains Arcadia
which is a Mediterranian Country in Peloponnesus, being every where encompas'd
with the Sea. Which was so great that they seemed to shadow and obscure the
beams of the Sun. a (...), i. e. ab obstipando vel obseuran. lo. Pl^.
In this Country there is the City Megalopolis, where Polibius a grave and
wise Writer was borne. It is now called Leontari. There is also Stimphalus,
whence the Stymphalian Lake, and the Stymphalian Birds. There are also Lilaea,
Mantinea, and Psophis. But the chief Cities of all Peloponnesus, Ovid Lib. 6.
Metamorph. has thus briefly described and Epitomized.

Finitimi Proceres coeunt, urbesque propinquae
Oravere suos ire ad solatia reges:
Argosque and Sparte, Pelopejadesque Mycenae,
Et nondum torvae Calidon invisa Dianae,
Orchomenosque ferax, and nobilis aere Corinthus,
Messeneque ferox, Patraeque humilesque Cleovae,
Et Melea Pilos, nec adhuc Pitheia Tr^ezen,
Quaeque urbes aliae bimari clauduntur ab Isthmo.
The neighboring Princes met: the Cities near
Entreat their Kings the desolate to cheer
Renowned Mycenae, Sparta, the Argive State
And Calydon, not yet in Dian's hate;
Fertile Orchomenos, Corinthus, famed
For high-priz'd Brass, Messene, never tamed;
Cleovae, Patrae, Pylos, Nelius crown;
And Throezen, not as then Pitheus Town,
With all that two-sea'd Isthmus Straites include:
And all without, by two-sea'd Isthmus viewed.
The most famous Rivers are Asopus, which Theverus calls now Arbon, also
Penejus, which Thevetus and Niger call Igliaco: there is also Alpheus which the
Inhabitants call Rophea, and as Niger says Orphoa: the Italian Mariners call
it Carbon: and 140. streams and Rivulets do run into this River. There is
also Panisus which Niger calls Stromio, but Castaldus and Mercators tables
call it Pirnaza, which is the greatest River of all Peloponesus. The water
whereof does heal (as it is reported) all diseases belonging to Children and
Infants. Eurotas is now called by Stephanus and others Basilopotamo, but Niger
calls it Iris; whose banks are full of Bay-trees: and Inachus, which
S^phianus and others do now call Planizza, but Niger calls it Iris, whose
banks have also great store of Bay-trees. I omit the other Rivers. The
Mountains are Stimphalus the highest Mountain of Arcadia, which Dominicus
Niger calls Poglici. Xitias Niger calls it Pholos, Mela Cillenius, Strabo
Cyllene, it is the highest Mountain in all Arcadia. There is also the
Mountain which Mela calls Menalius, Ptolemy Cronium. Also Grevenos, which
Niger calls Zarex, and Gemistus Zaraca. That which Ptolemy and Strabo call
Minthe, Niger calls Olonus. Pausanias calls it Evan, from Evoe, a noise
which Bacchus his Priests did use: because it is reported that Bacchus and
those women that followed him did use this acclamation or cry. That which
Pliny, Pausanias, Vibius, and Stephanus do call Taigotus is a Mountain of
Peloponesus in Laconia, near unto the River Eurota. From the top whereof there
is so fair a prospect, that you may behold all the Peninsula, and every famous
City in it. This Mountain does breed many wild beasts, being consecrate to
Bacchus, Apollo, Diana, and Ceres. In Morea there are these Bishoprics: the
Archbishop of Corinth, under whom is Argivensis: The Archbishop Patracensis,
under whom are the Bishops Coloniensis, Mothonensis, Coronensis, Amiclensis,
and Androvillensis.

CANDIA WHICH POPE BONIFACE of MONTIS-FERRAT, sold unto the VENETIANS.
WE are come at length to the last Table of Europe, in which Mercator does
delineate and paint forth Candia, with some small Islands near Greece. Ptolemy
calls it Crete which is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. It is now commonly
called Candy. On the North the Aegean Sea does bear upon it: on the South the
Lybian and Egyptian Seas: on the West the Hadriatick Sea: on the East the
Carpathian Sea. The form of it is long: on the East the Promontory Samonium
shoots forth, on the West there is the Promontory Criu Metopum: on the North
there is a third Promontory, which Stra. lib. 10. calls ^imarus, now it is
called Capo Chesis. The length is 270. miles, the breadth 5^. The compass of
it 588. The Country is every where rugged and Mountainous, but it yields good
store of Corn and Grass. The soil is very fruitful, and there are abundance
of trees. Pliny also witnesses that whatsoever grows in Creete, is better
than any of the same kind that grows otherwheres. It bears Vines, Olives,
Oranges, Figs, Lemmons, Cittrons. Malmesie is made only in this Country, and
so is transported from thence to Venice, and other parts of the world. This
Wine as Bellonius witnesses, the ancients did call Pramium. But Volaterranus
thinks that those wines which they called Arvisia, are now called Malvisia or
Malmesie, by the addition of one letter, and he adds that those kinds of
Vines, were brought out of Arvisium, a Promontory of the Island Chios, into
Creete, whence they were heretofore called Arvisian Wines. It bears also and
produces Honey, Wax, Cheese, Saffron, store of Gum and Bitony, peculiar only
to Creete. In the whole Island there is neither Wolf, Fox, Serpent, or any
harmefull creature except Spiders. In regard whereof the Flocks and Herds of
Cattle do feed securely and safely in the Meddowes, especially Sheep, which
they call Striphoceri. But it produces diverse living creatures. And Authors
do report of Creete. That it has no Owls, and that they dye if they be
brought into this Island. Jupiter did first govern this Island, then Radamarth,
afterward Minos and the Graecians. The Romans power over it began from
Metellus, who was therefore called Creticus. Afterward the Constantinopolitans
did possess it. Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and Emperor of Constanti^ople gave
it to the Marquess of Montis-ferrat, who sold it to the Venetians in the year
1194. for a great sum of gold: and so it is still under their Empire. Ancient
Writers do report that it had heretofore an hundred famous Cities, and Pliny
mentions aabout 40. The most noted City is Gnossos, where Minos had his
Palace, whence came the Gnossian Bow, and the Gnossian Dart^. Cortina
follows, whence came the Cortynian habit, as Claudian says in his Book of
the rape of Proserpine.

Crispatur gemino vestis Cortynia cinctu.
Her Cortynian Garment then
With a double Girdle was girt in.
And also Phestos. Proxima Gnossiaco jam quondam Phaestia regno. Also Cidon
whence the Cydonian Bow, and Cydonian Horn. Also Dictinna, Ma^ne^hala,
Licastos, Lictos, Holopixos, and others. But now as Bellonius witnesses, it
has only three Cities of any note, which are Candy, heretofore Matium, the
chief City of the whole Island, from whence the Island is denominated. The
second City next to Candy, is Canca, heretofore Gidon. The third is Rhetimo,
which the ancients called Rhetim^a. This latter has an inconvenient Haven, but
Canca and Candy have convenient Havens. There are no Navigable Rivers in the
whole Island. Yet there are many great Rivers in which Beans do grow of their
own accord. On the Northern shore there are M^^^^otamus, S^asinus, Cladilis,
Epicidanus, Giffo, Divotro: on the West there is Na^^ul^ar: on the South
Limens. Crete has great store of a kind of Fish as big as Mullets on the
Coast which are called Sca^us, being very rare in other Countries, which
ancient Writers do often mention, and the Romans did account them great
dainties, and a very dainty Dish. The chiefest Mountains are three, Ida, which
the Inhabitants call Psilori: Leuci which Pliny calls Cadissi, now de Madara:
and Dicta which is now called Sethia. They are so high, that all the Winter
time they are covered with Snow, but yet Cypress trees do grow here and there
among the Cliffes. The Mountain Ida is the highest of them all. It beholds
the Sun before the Sun rises, for as Lucretius says.

-- Idaeis fama est e montibus altis
Dispersos igneis orienti limine cerni.
They say the Idaean Mountains are so high,
That ere Sun rise, the Sun we may epsy,
Whose scattered beams within the Eastern skies
Are seen before the Sun it self do rise.
It has abundance of rare Herbs and Plants, which Bellonius lib. 1. cap. 7.
does reckon up. Many do mention the Labyrinth in Crete which was built by
Daedalus, of which as also of the Italian Labyrinth Plin. lib. 36. cap. 13.
witnesses that there is now nothing remaining. Wonderful therefore is the
stupidnesse and ignorance of the Inhabitants, who do still show at the foot
of the Mountain Ida, a new Labyrinth in stead of that old one: but it is no
wonder that the Cretensians CANDIE^
CANDIA
map Corfu
map Zante
map MILO
map NICSIA
map SCARPANTO
map should Cretissare, that is, should be Liars. For the Inhabitants whether
by the influence of the Heavens, the quality of the soil, or their own
disposition, are naturally given to evil. They were heretofore Liars,
deceitful, greedy, covetous, and gluttonous Drinkers, idle, and not adicted to
any trade or course of life, but much given to drinking and Banqueting. But
now, as Bellonius reports by the instinct of nature* they delight from their
childhood in the Scythian Bow, and therein do follow their ancient custom.
For they report that they heretofore adored Diana: and therefore they exceeded
the Turks themselves for shooting, also they are nimble and stout in
Sea Fights. For the Cretensians were the first that were strong in Shipping and
Bows, whereby it is to be understood that they were the first Graecians that
followed these studies. For as the Philosopher has it Cap. 8. Lib. 2.
Politic. This Island naturally belongs to the Principality of Greece, and is
better seated than any other. For it lies in the Sea over against Greece. And
one part of it lies but a little distant from Pel ^^^n^sus the other part
lies not far from a part of Asia which is above (...)* and not far from
Rodes. Wherefore King Min^s was governor of the Sea, and held other Islands in
subjection: and upon others which had been long uninhabited he planted
Colonies. There were these Bishoprics in it. The Archbishop of Crete or Candy
under whom are these Suffragan Bishops; Kirokensis, ^r^h^densis, Cerap^rensis*
^^^inensis* Mil^^^^amiensis, Ar^ensis, ^alamoniensis, Agrensis, Rissamensis.
The Archbishop Atridensis, under whom are ^asensis, Sc^^ulensis, Napr^nens^s
Ma^gar^^ensis. The Archbishop ol^^niensis, who has these Suffragans under him,
^elenensis, Sudensis, M^n^vasiensis, ^a^isiensis, Mar^^^^itaniensis. The
Archbishop V^spreniensis, under whom are these Suffragan Bishops, Vephiliensis,
Matrehensis, Cersonensis. And so much concerning Cand^a: there are some Islands
yet to be described* which lie round about Greece.

C^rfu which Ptolemy calls Cor^ira is a fair Island, being strong both by Land
and Sea. It is 2. miles distant from Epi^us, where the Sea is straitest, but
where it is broadest 20. miles. It is 97. paces in length, as Pliny witnesses.
The Climate is very temperate and gentle: so that there are whole woods of
Citterne Trees, Orange Trees, and those kinds of fruits. The soil is
fruitful, having abundance of Vines, Olives, Apples, and other sorts of
fruits, here is also great store of Honey. Put it has no good Corn in regard
of the Southern winds, which dryes it so much, that it withers before it come
to Maturity and ^^penes^e. It is now subject to the Venetians, who defended it
valiantly against the fury of the Turks. It has a City of the same name. The
Inhabitants are Graecians.

Z^^^^t^us commonly called Zante. Pliny places it between Cephale^^a and
A^ha^a. It is 36. miles in compass. This Island brings forth great store of
Corn, but especially Raisons, Wine, and Oil, out of which the Inhabitants do
yearly make 15000^. Crow^^^. They are Graecians and subject to the Venetians.
It has a Town of the same name, with a Castle seated on a Mountain, which
hangs over the Sea: it is full of Woods, and it is much commended for the
wholesomnesse of the air, the fruitfulness and the fertility of the soil.
The Mountain it self is called Elatos.

Milo is an Island which was anciently called Melos, which is in the Cretian
Sea. The compass of it is 80. miles. It has fruitful Fields, which do yield
Corn and Oil, but little Wine. In this Island a Mine of Silver is also found,
and the Onix stone.

Naxus is an Island which Sophianus and others call Nissia. It is 80. miles in
compass. And it is reckoned among the fruitful Isles. It has great store of
Wine, and there is a kind of Marble found in it, which the Graecians and Pliny
do call a Carbell, having spots like a Serpent. The stone also Smirillus
wherewith Glasiers cut their Glass, which Pliny calls Smiris is found here.
Some think that there are veins of Gold here, which are not found out by
reason of the Inhabitants sloth and idleness. Here is also a kind of Waspe,
which if it sting any one, he dies presently afterward: also here are great
store of Bats. It was heretofore subject to John Quirinus a noble Venetian.
Afterward to Duke Job Crispus, whom Selinus the Turkish Emperor drove hence.
But now it is inhabited by Turks and Jews.

Santorini, or Santorino, or Therosia, which is an Island in the Aegean Sea,
according to Strabo and Ptolemy, has the figure and form of an horned Moon,
although it had another shape before it was burned, and that the Sea divided it
into two parts, between which some Rocks do lie. It is fruitful and has
convenient Havens. The Inhabitants live by fishing. And it is subject to the
Turk.

Scarpanto was heretofore called Carpathus, or according to Homer, Cra^^thus.
Hence the Carpathian Sea. It is situate in the middle between Crete and Rhodes.
The compass of it is 60. miles, or as some will have it 70 miles. It is rugged
and full of Mountains, in which there are Mines of Marble. It had heretofore
four Cities, and therefore it was called Tetrapolis, as Eustathius has it
upon Homer. It has many Havens which are not very great, nor safe. The
Inhabitants speak Greek, and do embrace the Grecian Religion: but they are
subject to the Venetians.

But let so much suffice concerning Europe. Now we enter upon the other parts
of the world, and first of Afric, which in our devision is next to Europe.

BARBARY, IN WHICH ARE THE KINGDOMS OF TVNIS AND EGYPT.
IN Afric, which with Ptolemy we make to be the second part of the World,
Barbary does first present it self to view, The Country whence so called.
being a noble Country of Afric. It was so nominated either from the
Inhabitants murmuring speech* which the Arabians call Barbar, because the
Numidian speech (...) such to the Arabians; or from their frequent deserts; for
Bar sig^if^ in their language a Desert. It ^eacheth from Egypt even to the
Gaditane strait* The Situation
and does contain both the Mauritania's, namely Ting^t^na and Casariensis,
properly called Afric, also Cyrena^ca, Marmarica* with the farther Lybia.
Late Writers of Afric do make the bounds of it on the East to be the Deserts
of Marmarica, (which is now called ^^cha) which reaches to a part of the
Mountain Atlas, now called Mejes, which part Strabo describes under the name
of Aspis: on the South it has the Mountain Atlas, which lies from the East
to the West, even to the Sea, which from thence is called the Atlantic Sea: on
the West it has the Atlantic Sea: on the North the Mediterranean Sea. The
Air and Climate of this Country is various and different. The (...) ^f ^he
Soyl^*
In the Spring the air is gentle, mild, and clear; in Summer the heat is
most vehement, especially in the Months of June and July, but in Autumn it is
somewhat cooler: in the Winter the cold is somewhat sharp, especially about
December and January* but it is but in the morning only, so that no man is
compelled through cold to come to the fire. The end of Autumn, and all the
Winter* and a good part of the Spring, has great store of impetuo^s and
violent winds and storms. And sometimes they are troubled with Hayle*
Lightning, and fearful Thunder: and in some place^ there is thick Snow. This
Country yields great store of Dares and Pomegrants, but it has but little
Wheat, so that the Inhabitants for the most part do make Barley bread. It
has also great store of other fruit, as Cherries, Figs, Apples, Pears,
Prunes, Peaches, Apricotts, Quinces, Olives, and the like. It has abundance of
Oil, Honey and Sugar, and great store of Herds of Cattle and wild beasts.
For this Country does breed Dragons, (...)
Elephants, Goats, Bulls, or wild Oxen, and the like; also Lions and Libbards:
it has also Wesils which are as big as Cats, but that they have not such
great jaws, and great store of Apes. The Phaenicians and others who came out
of Asia or Egypt did first inhabit this Country: afterward it was subject to
the Romans, then to the Grecian Emperous, and afterward to the Vandals
Sarazens, and Arabians, now it is partly subject to the Turk, and partly to a
S^riti^ of it^ own: also the King of Spain has some Castles BARBARY^
BARBARIA
map in it. There are four Kingdoms in Barbary, the Kingdom of Morocco, of
Fesse, of Teleusinum, and Tunis, unto which some do add Barca. We will
entreat of the two former, namely, Morocco and Fesse in the following Tables,
but of the other we will entreat here. The Kingdom of Teleusinum which they
call Tremisen, is Mauritania Caesariensis. The length of it from the West to
the East is 380. miles. The breadth of it is narrower being 25. miles, namely,
from the Deserts of Numidia, even to the Mediterranean Sea. The most part of
this Country is unhabited, dry, and rugged, especially Southward. But the
Coasts by the Sea side are somewhat more fruitful and fertile. There are few
Cities or Castles in it. The Metropolis is Teleusina, which was heretofore a
great City, but now it is for the most part ruinated. In the same Country
there is also Algiers, a great City and well fortified. This City did first
revolt from the King of Telusia^um, and paid tribute to the King of Bugia:
afterward it revolted from him and received Ferdinand King of Spain to be
their King. And at last it was taken by Barbarossa, and added to the Ottoman
Empire, it is famous for the Shipwreck of Charles the 5. for the sad captivity
and slavery of the Christians, and the excursions of the Turkish Pirates. It is
now so fortified, that it is thought to be impregnable. Castaldus supposes
that Ptolemy did call this Salden, but Ortelius and our Mercator do think
that that which Ptolemy called Salden, is now called Tadelis: ^ovius thinks
it to be Iulia Caesarea, and others Crita. There are also the Cities
Mersalcabir, Messagran, Mustaganin, and others. This Kingdom has two famous
Havens, the one the Haven of Horamus, or Orania, with a strong Castle, the
other of Marsa Eltabirus, whether great store of Merchants Ships do resort,
especially from Italy, both which the King of Spain got some years ago, to
the great detriment and loss of this Kingdom. The Kingdom Tunitanum does
contain Afric the less, and a great part of Numidia. For it reaches from
the River Major, which Maginus supposes to be that which Ptolemy calls Audum,
even to the River of the Country of Mesrata.

AEGYPT^
EGYPT is a noble ancient Country, which was first inhabited by Misraim the
Son of Chus, Nephew to Cham, and Nephew once remoov'd to Noah. Wherefore in
Osiris sacred rights, it was called from Cham Chemia, in stead of Chamia, as
from the other Misraim, for the Arabians do still call it Mesre. The Turks
call it Elquibet or Elchebit. The bounds of it on the West beyond Nilus are the
Deserts of Barch, Libya, and Numidia, with the Kingdom of Nubia. On the South
it is enclosed with the Bugiensian Country, and Nilus, where Nilus bends his
course from the West Eastward. Pliny does bounder it with the City Syene,
which is now called Asna. On the East it has the Deserts of Arabia, which lie
between Egypt and the red Sea. On the North it is enclosed with the
Mediterranean Sea, which is there called the Egyptian Sea. It seldom raineth
in Egypt, and Plato says that it was never seen to rain in Egypt, so that
the air is continually serene and clear, whence happily it was formerly
called A^ria. The Country is wonderful fruitful, being full of men, and all
kind of creatures. The River Nilus, which runs through the middle of it, and
does overflow it every year, does so moisten, and fatten it, so that it is
wonderful fertile, and fruitful. The fruitfulness of the Soil.
Writers have left many Elogies in praise of the fruitfulness of this Country.
Iustine affirms that there is no Country more fruitful than it. For (says
he) there is in Egypt great store of Wheat, Pulse, Barley, Oats, Beans, and
other kind of Grain; and also excellent Wine. It has also pleasant Pastures,
but has but little Oil and Wood. Besides wild beasts, of which this Country
has abundance, it does breed great store of tame Cattle, as Buffes, Oxen,
Camels, The variety of living creatures.
Horses, Asses, Rams, and Goats, all which are of a great size, as B^l^^i^s
witnesses, in regard of the temper of the air, the abundance of Fother, and
the sweet Grass which grows there, by the overflowing of Nilus: among the
rest there are very fatt great Rams, which have a great thick tail that
hangs down to the very ground, and dew lappes hanging down under their
neck as Oxen have and their wool is black. Moreover all Egypt did heretofore
flourish under diverse Kings of diverse names, even to the Ptolemies: for there
were few Pha^^es. But the Ptolemies reigned a long time, even to the Roman
Empire, which declining, Egypt was governd by the Agarenes of Arab a felix,
the Prince whereof was called the Sultan, and those that followed him were also
called Sultanes, being all Mahometans, they reigned many years until they
were expulsed by the Turks. But now Soliman the great Turk does possess all
Egypt, and leaves there a President, who is called the B^xa of Egypt.
Alexander of Macedon did devide it into Praefectureships of Towns, whereof
Herod^tus reckons 18. Strabo one more, and Ptolemy 46. Pliny 50. who also
adds that some of them had changed their names, so that it is not to be
imagined that there were heretofore so many Praefectureships of Egypt as are
nominated in Historians, seeing there might be many names of one and the same
Praefectureship. Leo Africanus says, that the Mahometans did devide it into
three Provinces. Sahid the higher, or Theb^^s, from the borders of Bugia, even
to Cairus: Errifia which is the Western part from Cairus to Rosettus: and
Maremina which i^ the Eastern part. It is supposed that there were 20000.
Cities of Egypt under Amasides. Diadorus witnesses that in his time there
were ^000. The most famous were Syene, Thebes, which was also called D^^p^lis,
Ten^yra, Heliopolis, Memphis, Babylon, Alexandria, Pelusium, and (...) which is
now called Asna. Thebes was built by King Busiris, being in compass 140.
Furlongs, as Herodotus reports, it had 100. Gates with other public and
private Buildings, but now it is ruinated* (...): was so called and denominated
from the Island of Nilus: the Inhabitants are called ^entiritae, who by nature
are enemies to the Crocodile: concerning which you may see more in Strabo and
Pliny. Heliopolis was heretofore the City where the Priests dwelt, and the
place where Strabo the great Astronomer and Philosopher lived. Memphis
heretofore called Arsinoe, was a royal City, where Nilus first devideth it
self into two parts, and makes the form of the Greek letter Delta. They
call it now Cairum, or Alcair. This City is built in a triangular or
three-cornerd form, being above 8. miles in compass. The Turks, the
Egyptians, the Arabians, the Hebrews and others do inhabit it. Bellonius
places Babylon a little above Cairus, and the ruin of many famous Buildings
are yet remaining. It is now a little Town of the Christians. Alexandria was
heretofore a noble fair City built by Alexander the great, upon the
Mediterranean Seacoast, and seated pleasantly. The Turks do call it
Scanderia. Pelusium is called now Damiatum, which is a potent rich City,
famous for the convenience of the Haven, wherein many Ships may ride, being at
the Pelusiacian mouth of the River Nilus. This Country is divided, watered, and
made fruitful by the River Nilus, which is the fairest River in all the world.

AEGYPTUS
map

THE KINGDOMS OF MAROCCO and FESSE^
THat part of Barbary which was heretofore called Mauritania Tingitana, does
now contain two Kingdoms, namely, The Country whence so called.
of Marocco, and Fesse, of which we will now speak in order. The Kingdom of
Marocco was so called from the chief City thereof Marocco. It lies between
the Mountain Atlas, and the Atlantic Ocean, in a triangular or three cornerd
form. The fruitfulness.
It is a pleasant Country abounding with all kind of Fruit and Grain, as
Oil, Honey, Sugar, and other fruits, as also Dates, Grapes, Figs, Apples,
and diverse sorts of Pears. It has also great Flocks and Herds of Cattle:
and many Goats, The variety of living creatures.
whose hides are called Marocchini, and the hair of them are good to weave a
kind of cloth which they call Camelottes. Lastly, this Country produces all
things which are necessary for food, or to delight the smell, or recreate the
sight. The Provinces hereof are Hea, which on the East is enclosed with the
River Essivalus, on the South with the Mountain Atlas, on the West and North
with the Ocean, it is a rugged Country, Mountainous, Woody, rich, and
populous. It has not such plenty of Wheat as of Barley and Millet. But there
is very little fruit, which arises rather from the slothful idleness of the
Inhabitants, than the indisposition of the Climate or Soil. But there is great
store of Honey, on which they live for the most part, but they cast away their
Wax, not knowing how to use it, here are few Cities, The Cities.
but many strong Towns, Villages, and Castles. Susa has on the North the
Mountain Atlas, and the Town Hea, on the East the River Sus, it is a
fruitful, pleasant, and rich Country. It has abundance of Wheat, Barley, and
Pulse, and in some parts great store of Sugar, although the Inhabitants know
not how to boil it, or use it: in other parts it has diverse fruits, as Eggs,
Grapes, Peaches, and Dates: it has no Oil, which is yet brought hither from
other places. There is Gold in the Mountain Ilalemus. The chief Town in this
Country is Taredantum, which the Mores do call Taurent, a fair Town, built
by the ancient Affricans. It contains about 3000. houses, and the Inhabitants
are of a more civell behavior. Here the English and French Merchants do live,
and do exchange Iron, Tin, and Lead for Sugar. There is also Messa, under
which three lesser Towns are contained, which are distant a mile one from
another, it was built near the Sea Coast by the ancient Affricans. Teijeut is
a City built heretofore by the Affricans on a fair Plain, by the one side
whereof the River Sus runs. It is divided into three parts which are about a
mile distant one from another, and being conjoined they do make a triangular
or three cornerd figure: Tedsi is a great City, founded heretofore by the
Affricans, and seated in a pleasant soil: and Tagavost the greatest City of
all this Country. The Country of Morocco has a triangular or three cornerd
form, the bounds thereof on the West are the Mountain Netisa, on the East the
Mountain Hadimeus: on the North it is extended even to the confluence and
meeting of the River ^ensi^t and Asifinual. This Country as Leo reports, is
well inhabited, and abounds with Herds of Cattle and wild beasts. It is a
continued Plain, not much unlike to Lombardy, those Mountains which it has,
are cold and barren, so that they bear nothing but Barley. In this Country
there is the City Marocco, which some think to be that which Ptolemy calls
Bocanum Hemerum. It is accounted one of the greatest Cities of the world. For
it is so great, that in the reign of Prince Halis the Son of Josephus, it
contained above 100000. houses, and it had 24. Gates. But this great famous
City has been so harassed and wasted by the Arabians frequent inrodes and
excursions, so that now there is scarce a third part of the City standing.
There are also in this Country other lesser Towns, as Elgiumuha, a little
Town, seated on a Plain, near the River Sesseva, and built by the Affricans.
Tenezz^ is a strong City, built heretofore by the Affricans on that side of
the Mountain Atlas which is called Ghedmina, Delgumuha is a new City seated
on a high Mountain with a strong Castle. Imizmizi is a fair City seated on a
Rock: Tesrast is a small Town seated on the bank of the River Asiselmel:
also Agn^et and Hanimmei. Guzzula is seated on the North side of the Mountain
Atlas, and on the East it joyneth to Hea. This Country does yield great store
of Barley, and Cattle, and it has Mines of Brass and Iron. The Towns here
and Castles have no Trenches or Ditches: the Villages are fair, populous, and
rich: and all the Country is well inhabited. Duccala is a Country which
begins on the West from the River Tensiftum, it is bounderd on the North
with the Ocean, on the South it is enclosed with the River Habiel, and on the
West with the River Hammirabith. There are few walled Cities in this Country.
Among which is the City Azaefi situate on the Ocean shore. The Affricans built
it: there is also Conte which was built by the Goths, and Tit built by the
Affricans: Elmedina is the head City of all this Country: Centopozzi is a
small Town: There are also Subeit, Temaracost, Terga, Bulativan, Azamur, and
Meramer. The Country of Hascora confineth on the North on Duccala: it is
bounderd on the West with the River Tensiftus, and on the East it is divided
with the River Quadelhabit from the Country of Tedeletes. There are many rich
populous Towns which belong to this Country* as the City Alemdin which is
built in a Valley encompassed with four high Mountains, in which there dwell
both Noblemen, Merchants, and Artificers: Tagodast is seated on the top of a
Mountain, and environd with four other Mountains: Elgumuha is built on a
high Mountain between two other Mountains which are as high: and Bzo is an
ancient City seated on a very high Mountain about 20. miles from Elgiumuha
VVestward. Tedles is a Country not very MOROCCO^
MARACCHI REGNUM
map large, it is bounded on the West with the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, on
the South it joyneth to the Mountain Atlas, on the North it is bounderd with
the confluence and meeting of the Rivers Servi and Omirabih, so that the
Country lies in a triangular or three cornerd figure. There are some Towns in
it, the chief whereof is Tesza, built by the Affricans, and well inhabited.
There are also Esza, Githiteb, and others. The chief Rivers of this Kingdom
are Tensift, and Omirabih, which issuing out of the Mountain Atlas, do run
into the Ocean. But Tensift rises in the Country of Morocco, and is enlarged
by the receipt of many Rivers, the greatest whereof are Sifelmel and Niffis. But
Omirabih does break forth among the Mountains, where the Province of Tedles
confineth on the Kingdom of ^esse. On the shore side in some places there is
found great store of Amber, which is very cheap there, so that the Portugals
and other foreign Nations do transport it into other Countries. Here are
many Mountains, as Nisipha, Semede, Sensana, and others. The most whereof are
cold and barren, so that they bear nothing but Barley. In this Kingdom there
are no great store of Churches, Colleges, nor Hospitals. In the City of
Morocco there are many Churches, and one of the most curious and magnificent is
that which stands in the middle of the City, and was built by the aforesaid
Halis. There is also another built by his successor Abdul Miomem, and enlarged
by his Nephew Monsor, and enriched which many Pillars brought thither out of
Spain. He made a Cisterne under this Church, which is as big as the Church,
he coverd the Church with Lead, and made leaden Pipes at every corner, to
receive and convay the rain water into the aforesaid Cisterne. The Tower or
Steeple of stone like unto Vespasians Roman Amphitheater, is higher than the
Steeple of Bononia in Italy, the steps which go up into it are very broad, and
the walls thick. This Tower has three Belfries or Turrets, on which there is
another little arched Tower built. And this has three Turrets one over
another, and they go from one to another by a wodden Ladder. If any one look
down from the highest Tower he will think that men of great stature are no
bigger than children of a year old. And this Tower has a golden Moon for a
Weathercock, and three golden Globes, so fastened upon Iron, that the greatest
is placed lowest, and the lesser highest. There is also a strong Castle in this
City, so that if you beheld the spaciousness thereof, the Walls, Towers, and
Gates, built of Tiburtine Marble, you would think it a City. It has a Church
with a high Steeple, on the top whereof there is a Moon for a Weathercock, and
under it three golden Globes or Balls one bigger then another, which do weigh
in all 130000. Crowns. Within the Walls of this City there are Vineyards,
Date-trees, spacious Gardens, and Corne-fields. For the Arabians frequent
incursions, and in rodes do hinder them from ploughing the ground without the
walls. The Inhabitants of this Kingdom are in some parts more civil, and in
some parts ruder and void of civility. They eat Barley bread not leavened nor
baked in an Oven, and sometimes they make meat of Barley meal, Milk, and
Oil, or Butter. Many of them do use no Tables, nor Table-cloathes. They are
clothed with a kind of cloth made of Wool like Carpeting stuff, they wear a
great deal of fine cloth about their heads, yet the forepart of their head is
bare, none wear Hats or Caps but old men, and learned men, they wear no
Smocks, and in stead of Beds, they have hair Blankets in which they wrap
themselves. They shave their beards before they are married, but afterward they
wear them long.

THE KINGDOMS OF THE ABISSINES AND CONGVS.
THE Kingdom of the Abissines is called Aethiopia, which Ptolemy places
beneath Egypt. The Moors do call the Prince thereof Asiela Bassi, The
Country.
and in the Ethiopian language he is called John Belul, that is, High and
Precious, not Presbyter, as some are of opinion. He glories that he is
descended from the stock of David, and this is his Title. N. N. The supreme
Governor of my Kingdoms, the only beloved of God, the Pillar of Faith,
descended of the stock of Judah, the Son of David, the Son of Solomon, the
Son of the Pillar of Sion, the Son of the seed of Jacob, the Son of Mary,
the Son of Nahu according to the flesh, the Son of the Saints Peter and
Paul, according to Grace, the Emperor of the higher and lower Aethiopia, and
of my large Kingdoms, Jurisdictions, and Territories; King of Noa, Caffares,
Fatiger, Angola, Baru, Balignaca, Adea, Vangua, and Goyama, where there are the
Spring-heads of Nilus, etc. He is without doubt one of the greatest Monarchs
of the world, whose Territories do lie between the two Tropickes, even from
the red Sea to the Ethiopian Ocean. And that we may describe the bounds of his
Empire more accurately: on the North it has Egypt which is subject to the
Turks: on the East the red Sea, and the Bay of Barbery: on the South it is
encompassed with the Mountains of the Moon, on the West it is bounderd with
the Kingdom of Congus, the River Niger, the Kingdom of Nubia, and the River
Nilus. In which bounds are contained ancient Aethiopia, below Egypt.
Troglodite, and the Cinnamon-bearing Country, and part of the innermost Libya.
The Country in general (as appears by those who have taken a late view of it)
is most fruitful. The fruitfulness of the Soil.
There is a double Summer, which almost lasts all the year, so that in some
Fields they are sowing, and in others they are mowing at one and the same time.
And in some parts Corn, and Pulse is sowed every month. This Country has but
little Wheat, but plenty of Barley, Millet, Vetches, Beans, and other Pulse.
It has abundance of Ebon wood and Indian Pepper, Cinnamon, and Ginger. It has
also great store of Sugar Canes, but they know not how to boil and refine the
Sugar. Here are many Vines, but they use no Wine except it be in the Kings or
the great Patriarks Court. It has also great store of Oranges and Lemmons, and
also great store of Honey. For Bees do breed even in their houses. So that
they make such store of Wax, as serves all the Country to make Candles,
without Tallow or Suet. This Country has also Hemp and Flax, but the
Inhabitants have not the Art to make Linen THE DVKEDOME OF THE ABISSINES^
ABISSINORUM REGNU^
map cloth of it, and therefore they make their cloth of Cotton wool, of which
there is great store here. They have Metals, as Gold, Silver, and Brass: but
they have not the art to refine it. Moreover, this Country has all kinds of
Beasts and Birds, The variety of living creatures.
as Elephants, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Rhinocerites, Apes, and Hearts, (which
is against the opinion of the ancients, who deny that Afric has any Hearts)
also Oxen, Sheep Goats, Asses, Cammels, Horses, and they are oftentimes much
troubled with Locusts. This Country was heretofore governd only by Queens. So
that we read in the Old Testament that the Queen of Sheba of the South, came
to King Solomon to hear his admirable wisdom, about the year of the world
2954. This Queens name was Maqueda. The Ethiopian Kings do believe that they
are descended of the Stock of David, and the Family of Solomon. And therefore
they are wont to style themselves the Sons of David and Solomon, and of the
holy Patriarcks, because they are come of their Seed. For they do feign that
the aforesaid Queen Maqueda had a Son by Solomon, whom they called Meilech.
And afterward he was called David. He according to their fiction, when he had
attained to 20. years of age, was sent by his Mother to his Father Solomon,
that he might instruct him in all profitable and wholesome learning and
wisdom. Which as soon as Meilech or David had attained unto, he chose many
Priests and Earls out of every one of the 12. Tribes, and so returning back to
the Kingdom of Aethiope, he took upon him the government thereof. And he
brought in with him the old Law and Circumcision. These were the first
beginnings of the Jews Religion in Aethiopia, and they say that until this
day there are none admitted to any Office in Court, or Canonical place,
unless he be descended from the Jews. And by them the knowledge of God was
propagated in Aethiopia, and took root, and so was derived and spread abroad
by succeeding ages. For the Aethiopians had the Books of the Prophets, and
went to Jerusalem to adore and worship the true God of Israel. Which may be
understood by the story of Queen Iudiths Eunuch, who is properly called
Judith. For he 10. years after the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
came 240. miles journey to Jerusalem. And when he had there worshipped God, and
was returning home sitting in his Chariot, he read the Prophet Esaiah. And so
Philip one of Christ's Disciples by Gods command was sent unto him. And when
they came both to the City Bethzur, three Miles from Jerusalem: there the
Eunuch spyed a Spring or Well at the foot of the Mountain, with the water
whereof he was baptized by Philip. But as soon as the Eunuch returned into
Aethiopia, he baptized the Queen, and a great part of her household and people.
From which time the Aethiopians began to be Christians, and always afterward
professed the Christian Faith. There are few Cities in all this Empire, so that
they dwell in Villages. The chief Kingdoms belonging to the higher Aethiopia,
which are for the most part subject to Prester John, are these following. The
Kingdom of Barnagues, which is enclosed with the River Abanthus, and the red
Sea: the chief City is Beroae or Barnae, which Ptolemy calls Colone: here the
Viceroy lives, who pays yearly to the King of the Abissines an 150. Horses
for a trib^te, with silk and other commodities, and 1000. Ounces of Gold to
the Turks Bashaw. Tigremaon which is next unto the River Marabus, and the red
Sea, does pay yearly to the King 200. Horses, which are brought out of Arabia.
Unto this Kingdom the Kingdom of Tigrai is subject, in which there is the
City Caxumo or Cassume, which was heretofore the Seat (as appears by their
Annalls) of the Queen of Sheba; and afterward of Queen Candaces. The Kingdom
of Angote has no money, and therefore they use in stead thereof pieces of Salt
and Iron. Amara is so called from the Mountain in which the Emperors Sons
are kept with a strong Garrison, that after the Emperors decease the Heir may
be brought out. There are two memorable Rivers in this Kingdom which do glide
through Aethiopia; Abanhi, which Ptolemy calls Astapus, and Tacassi which
Ptolemy calls Astraboras, into which many other Rivers do run. The Fountain
of Abanhi is the great Lake of Barcena, lying under the Aequinoctiall, in which
there are many Islands. This Lake Ptolemy calls Coloe Palus, or the Lake Coloe.
The Inhabitants do profess the Christian Religion, The manners and belief of
the Inhabitants.
and the chief Articles of their Faith are these. They believe in one God
Creator of Heaven and Earth, distinguished into three Persons. God the Son
begotten of the Father from all Aeternity: who for our sakes took flesh upon
him, was dead, and rose again; and God the Holy Ghost proceeding from the
Father and the Son. This is the sum of their Religion. They do join the
Old Testament with ^he New, so that they follow some Judaicall, and some
Christian Rites and Ceremonies. On the eight day they circumcise all their
Infants both Male and Female. But they think that Circumcision avails
nothing to salvation, but only Faith in Christ Jesus. But they baptize their
Male children on the 40. day, and their Females on the 80. day, unless the
weakness of the child do require haste. They every year baptize them anew,
both those that are come to ripeness of years, and also Infants, saying these
words. Ego te baptizo in nomine Patris, Filij, and Spiritus Sancti. That is, I
baptize thee in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And they
do religiously keep this custom from their Ancestors, not to extenuate or
weaken the first baptism, but that they may have absolution from their sins
every year. They receive the Lords Supper sub utraque specie, or in both
kinds, both the Lay People and the Clergy. They do not esteem or use
Confirmation and extreme Unction as a Sacrament. They keep the Sabbath and the
Lords day without doing any work according to the ancient manner of the
Christians. They hold that the chief use of the Law is to show us our sins,
and they believe that we can be saved by no other but Jesus Christ, who
fulfilled and satisfied the Law for us. They love and reverence Saints, but
make no Invocation unto them. They do much honor Mary the Mother of Christ,
but yet they do not worship her, nor implore her help. The Clergy and the
Priests are permitted to many as well as the Lay People. And they punish all
kind of Lust and Fornication. They have a Patriarch who is President of all
their Churches, who is a man of approoved honesty, grave, well learned, and
ancient in years, whose Office it is to keep the Clergy in concord and
union, to defend the Ecclesiastic Discipline, and to excommunicate rebellious
persons. The Election and choosing of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons
belongs only to the King.

GVINEA, WITH THE ISLANDS OF St. THOMAS, OF THE Prince, and the Good-yeere.
THE Kingdom of Guinea is in that Country, The Country whence so called.
where the Ganginean Aethiopians are, whom Orosius, and Ethicus do mention, as
Ortelius witnesses. The Inhabitants do call it Ghinui. It is the Blackmoores
Country. The Blackmoores are called the Inhabitants of the Black River, which
flows through the middle of the Country, and like Nilus does fertilize the
Fields round about it. This River does increase as Nilus does in the month of
June, 40. days together, all which time you may go by Boat into Countries
near unto it. And the Earth is so dunged with mudde and slime, so that it
yields a great increase. About the River there are large Plains, but no
Mountains or Hills. There are also many woods, in the which there are
Elephants. There are also many Lakes, which are caused by the overflowing of
the River Niger. The Air is wholesome, in so much that those who are sick of
the Spanish disease, if they come unto that Country, do certainly recover
their health, and grow well. These Blackmoores have a diverse kind of speech
according to the Soil and Climate. Their religion is also diverse: In the
Mediterranean parts they are Christians, Mahumetans, and Heathens. But those
that dwell by the Sea Coast do worship Idols. There are three Kings of the
Blackmoores, Tombuti, Borni, and Gaogae. The Gualatians also have a King of
their own. They are all Cole-black. The Situation.
The Kingdom of Guinea is seated between Gualata, Tembutum, and Melli, The
temper of the Air.
and it reaches from the River Niger, to the Ethiopian Ocean. The Air of
Guinea is not agreeable to our bodies, both in regard of the untemperatenesse
of the Climate, and by reason of the rain, both which do breed putrefaction,
and Worms. But it has abundance of Barley, Rice, Cotton, Gold, Ivory, also
Sheep and Hens. The f^^^^fulnesse of the Soil
There is also a kind of Spice which casts like Pepper, which the Portugals
call Melegneta. And another Spice as strong again as Calicut Pepper, which the
aforesaid Portugals do call Pimiente del Rabo, which it is unlawful to sell,
l^st they should thereby bring down the price of common Pepper. It has no
fruit but Dates, and the Inhabitants are feign to fetch them out of Numidia or
Gualata. They have great store of Elephants and Apes, and Birds, especially
Peacocks, and Ash Color Popinjays or Parro^s. And they have certain small
Birds, which do curiously ^^ild themselves a nest which hangs in the boughs
of the Trees. Th^^ have neither Castle, Town, nor City. But they have one
great Village, in which the Princes, Priests, Doctors, and Merchants do dwell:
the others live scatteringly here and there. About Caput Lupi Conzalui the
Inhabitants do adore the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth, upon which to spet
they account it a h^inous offense. They do out and lance their flesh, and
afterward they paint it with a certain colored Ointment: which they think to
be very comely, but to us it seems a fearful spectacle. When they salute
their Prince, they fall down upon their knees, and clap their hands together:
but in common salutations they cry Fui^, Fut^, Fui^. They do not drink all
Dinner time, but when they have dined they drink water or wine that comes
out of the Date Tree. But yet this Date Tree does not bear Dates, but is a
Tree different from it, which sends forth a kind of Juice at all times of
the year. They cut the body of the Tree, and receive the bleeding juice which
distilleth from it into a Vessel, and drink it till they are drunk, for it
is a liquor that is purer than any Wine, it is of an ashie color, and they
call it Mignolum. This Tree will yield but two or three measures in one day.
This Tree bears Olives, the Oil whereof has a threefold virtue, it smells
like a Violet, tastes like an Olive, and if it be powered or laid upon meat,
it dies it like Saffron. The men and women do both go bare-headed, some have
Hats made of barks of Trees, or of the Indian Nut. Some of them do bore holes
through their upper Lip, and their Noses, and do wear pieces of Ivory in
them, and do think it becomes them very well. And some do wear Ivory and
Fishes Shells in their Noses and Lips. They make their Aprons of the Barks
and rindes of Trees, and with them they hide and cover their secret parts: also
they wear the skins of Apes, and Monkies which are fastened together with a
little Bell. They paint one eye red, and the other blue. The richer sort of
women do wear great Rings of Iron, Copper, or Tin upon their Thighs. And
they delight very much in their foolish ill-favored barbarousnesse. Their Gold
coin has no Inscription on it, and they use Iron money upon ordinary
occasions, and for petty matters.

The Island of S. THOMAS.
THE Island of S. Thomas is next to be described, which the Portugals discoverd
on S. Thomas day, and upon this occasion they called it the Island of S. Thomas.
It is situate under the Equator, being almost round. The Diameter of it is 60.
miles. When this Island was discoverd it was full of great Trees, whose boughs
did grow upward. It has never any plague, the Air is warm and wholesome, but
few Christians do live here to 50. years of age, so that it would be a wonder
to see one there with a white beard. But the native Inhabitants do live until
they be an hundred years old. The days and nights are always equal. In the
Months of March and GVINEA*
GVINEA
map IS. THOMAE
map September they have many great showers of rain, which do moisten the
ground, but in the other months the fruits are watered, and refresht with the
dew that falls upon them. This Island has a stiff clommy soil, of a red
duskish color. It does not bear Corn, Vines, or any Tree that has stone
fruit: but it bears Mellons, Cowcumbers, Gourds, Figs, and great store of
Ginger, and especially Sugar, for which they do bring in Wine, Cheese, Corn,
Hides, and other necessaries. But this traffic has ceased since that certain
worms began to eat the roots of the Sugarcanes, so that now scarce 6. Ships
do go from thence loaded with Sugar. It has also great store of Millet,
Rice, and Barley, and great plenty of Lettice, Colworts, Cabbages, Rape-rootes,
Beete, Parsley, or wild Alexander, and other Garden herbs. And besides it
has a root which grows in the West Indies in the Island Hispaniola, which is
there called Bata. The Negroes of this Island do call it Ignama, and do plant
it as a very choice and special herb. The outermost bark is black, the
innermost white, and it is long like a Rape-roote, and has many branches
spreading from the root. It tastes like Chestnuts, but more pleasant and
sweet. They commonly roast them in the ashes, and sometimes they eat them raw.
The Spaniards have brought hither Olive Trees, Peach-trees, Almond-trees, and
other kinds of Trees, which being planted were fair and pleasant to behold,
but they never bear any fruit. There is in this Island a strange kind of Crab,
which lives in the Earth like a Mole, of a Seawater color, which casts up
the Earth, and does gnaw and consume all things near it. There are also in
this Island great store of Birds, as Partridges, Starlings, Blackbirds, green
singing Sparrowes, and Parrots. The Portugals built a City in it which they
called Pavosa, by the River, in which it is thought that there 700. Families,
besides the Bishop and other Clergy men. It has a good Haven, and a wholesome
River, and the Sea affoordeth good fishing. And which is wonderful, there are
great store of Whales, which are sometimes found on this shore, and on other
shores of Afric. In the middle of the Island there is a woody Mountain,
which is always coverd with such thick Clouds, in so much that water does
run out of the woods, and water the Sugarcanes: and the higher the Sun is,
the Sky round about that Mountain is the more cloudy. The Inhabitants are
partly white, and partly black. And it is very strange that the black people
are very much troubled with Gnats, Lice, and Fleas: but the white people have
neither Lice, nor Gnats, nor Fleas in their Beds.

The Princes Island.
NOt far from hence 3. degrees beyond the Aequinoctiall, is the Princes
Island. Which is so named, because the Prince of Portugal has the revenues of
this Island. It is well inhabited, and yields great store of Sugar. And there
grows in it a kind of Date-tree which we mentioned before, out of which
there comes a juice which they drink.

The Island of the Good-yeere.
THE Island of the Good-yeere, or de Annobon, was so called, because it was
discoverd at the beginning of the New-yeere. It is situate 3. degrees Southward
beyond the Aequinoctiall, and it is inhabited: there is good fishing by the
shore side: and flying fishes are sometimes seen here. Here are also great
store of Crocodiles, and venomous Creatures. And let so much suffice to have
been spoken concerning Guinea, and these Islands, together with Afric. And
now to conclude, I think it meet to set down that which Aeneas Gazaeus a
Greek Writer does report in his Theophrastus, or Book of the immortality of
the Soul, or Resurrection of the dead, who affirms that to his great
amazement he beheld the Martyrs, and Priests of great Libya, when their
tongues were pulled and cut out by the Tyrants command, yet they spoke aloud, and
with a cheerful courageous heart declared the wonderful works of God. He
that desires to know more, let him have recourse to Salust in his Jugurthine
War: and the Voyage of Hanno an Affrican, which he shall find in Arrianus:
and Iambolus his Voyage in Diadorus Siculus. Also Herodotus his Melpomene. Of
the Modern Writers let him consult with Aloysius Cadamustus: Vascus de Gama:
Francis Alvares, who viewed Aethiopia: John Leo, who describes it the most
acurately of them all, and Ludovick Marmolius, also Livy, Sanutus, and others.
Concerning the River Nilus the greatest in all the world, you may read the
Letters of John Biptista Rhamusus, and Jerome Fracastorius. We come now to Asia
the third part of the World.

THE TVRKISH EMPIRE*
IN Asia, unto which we now are come, the Turkish Empire has the first place.
Mela in his first Book makes mention of the Turks, The Names.
and so does Pliny, Lib. 6. Cap. 7. And it is not to be doubted but that
Nation which is now grown so great by our sloth and dissension was both named
and originally descended from them. Postellus thinks that the Hebrews did
call them Togarma. They do call themselves Musulmanni, that is, the
Circumcised, or as some do interpret it, the Right Believers. But they will
not be called Turks, for they account that name very reproachful, which in the
Hebrew language signifies Banished men, or as some do interpret it, Spoilers or
Wasters. The Empire of the Ottoman Family which is very large and potent, does
contain many Provinces and Countries of Europe, The Situation.
Afric, and Asia. In Europe it extends and stretches it self near the
Sea shore of the Hadriatick Bay from the borders of Epidaurus, now called
Ragusus, and so encompassing all the Aegean Sea, and also Propontis, and a
great part of the Euxine Sea, it is bounderd with the City Theodosia, situate
in the Taurican Chersonesus, which they now call Caffa; which space of ground
contains 8000. miles. In the Mediterranean parts it reaches from Iavarinus a
Town of Hungary, which the Inhabitants call Rab, even to Constantinople, which
is seated in the borders of Europe. In Afric Turkey does contain all the Sea
Coast from the Town Bellis de Gomera, even to the Arabian Bay, or the red Sea,
except some few places which are subject to the King of Spain. It does also
extend it self very far into Asia. The Country for the most part is
fruitful, and yields great store of Wheat, The fertility.
Barley, Oats, Rye, Beans, Millet, and other kinds of Pulse. It has
abundance of Rice, Hemp, and Cotton. It has also Vineyards. It yields also
great store of Pompions, Mellons, Cowcumbers, Nuts, Apples, Pears,
Pomegranats, Oranges, Chestnuts, Figs, Cherries, and other fruits; but not in
every Kingdom. For there are some places, as in Cappadocia and Armenia the
less, where none of these fruits do grow, by reason of the intensive and
excessive cold. It has also veins of Gold, Silver, Iron, Brass, and Allom.
It does breed diverse kinds of living creatures, and great store of Cammels,
Mules, and other Cattle. The Turkish Horses and Mastiffes are much esteemed.
The variety of living creatures.

The ancient government.


The Turkish Empire began thus. Ottoman their first Emperor was a Tartarian,
and a Soldier to the great Cham, a stout man, and strong of body. He leaving
the Tartarians under the color of some injury, began to lie in THE TVRKISH
EMPIRE^
TURCICUM IMPERIUM
map weight about the Mountains of Cappadocia. At first he had but 40.
Horsemen with him; but afterward many guilty persons, allor^d with the hope of
booty and the consciousnesse of their wicked deeds, flocked unto him: by whose
aid and assistance he began to attempt openly, what he formerly intended, and
so possessed himself of Cappid^^ia, P^ontus, Bithyma, Pamphilia, and Cilecia,
all rich Countries. This was done about the veere of our Lord 1300. After him
succeeded his Son Or^hanes. He by the same Arts, but with greater strength of
wealth and riches, preserved and enlarged the Empire which he had received from
his Father, and made great use of the present opportunity, the Christians being
at that time in dissension amongst themselves: whereby it came to pass that
he conquered Mysia, Ly^a^ia, ^hr^g^^, and ^aria, and also he besieged and took
Nicaea: and enlarged his Kingdom even to the Hellespont. At that time the
Palaeologie^s contended with Cae^a^uzens. But he knowing before hand that if
he should savor him, he should be called into Eur^pe, he past it over, and
sh^^^d posterity a way how to vex Europe. In his latter time he was killed in
a battle against the Tartarians, after he had reigned 21. years. After him
succeeded his Son Amurath, who was cunning in simulation and disimulation,
courageous, hardy, and not inferior to hi^ Ancestor^ for Military affairs. He
cunningly nourished those aforesaid dissentions between the Graecians, who
being wearied and tired with continual war, having hired Ships of the
Genoa^s (behold the tr^^ herousnesse and covetousness of men) did pass over
our of Asia into Thrace, in the year 1363. he took Callipolis which is seated
in the Che^sonesus, after which a great part of Thrace yielded it self.
Afterward he overcame Mysia, the Bessians, and Triballians. Afterward having
taken Adrianopolis, and thinking to get ^ervia and Bulgaria, he was stabbed
with a dagger by Servius Servant to Lazarus the Lord of Servia whom he had
took prisoner in the Wars. He left two Sons, Soliman and Bajazet. Bajazet
after his Brother was slain, obtaining the government, purposed to conquer and
subdue all Thrace. He was a man of a sharp wit, and an aspiring mind, bold in
attempting diligent in contriving* stout in suffering, acute and wise in
foreseeing oportunities and occasions, and resolute in executing. Insomuch that
having subdued all Thrace, he purposed to attempt Constantinople, but first he
thought it good to possess himself of Thessaly, Macedon, ^h^cides, and Attica*
and afterward the Prince of Bulgaria being slain, he subdued the Mysians (who
are now called Servians) the ^^^rians who are called Bosnensians) and the
Triballians (now Bulgarians.) And now having besieged Constantinople eight
year, fearing the coming of the Hungarian and French Army, which the Emperor
brought with him, he raises his Siege, and meets with them at Nicopolis,
where joining battle with them, he got the victory, the most part of the French
Captains being either slain or took Prisoners. Bajazet growing proud with
this good success, marches again to Constantinople, and besieged it two
years together, so that the besieged were ready to yield, but that Tamerlaine
the great Cham of the Tartars had purposed and resolved to waste all Asia with
fire and sword, to race the Cities, and take all the pillage he could get,
and so being terrified with his approach he left the City, and so carried his
Army to the borders of Galatia and Bithynia, where they met and fought until
it was deep in the night. But Bajazet being too weak, was overcome, and being
taken Prisoner, he was bound with Golden Fetters, and so carried in a Cage
through Asia. And long afterward he dyed in Asia, after he had reigned 13.
years 6. months. He left these Sons, Calapinus, Moses, Mahumet, and
Mustapha. Calapinus dyed suddenly, whose Son Orchanes was murdered by his
Uncle Moses, and Moses by his Brother Mahumet. This Mahumet overcame all
Valachia, and Macedon, and carried the Turkish Colors even to the Jonian Sea:
he built himself a Palace at Adrianopolis, and after he had reigned 17.
years, he departed this life in the year of our Lord 1422. After him Amurath
the second got the Empire. He being brought into Thrace by the aid of the
Genoas, in a Battle overcame his Uncle Mustephus, whom the Graecians did
favor more. He raced and demolisht the ancient City of Thessalonica, which
was then a fair City, pleasant, rich, and well seated, which the Venetians
then held. And when he understood that the friendship of George Lord of Servia
would be much availeable unto him both to set and establish his own
affairs, and to weaken the Christians, he sought by all means to win him to
his side, and moreover he married his Daughter. And now being confident in his
own strength, he besieges Belgrade. There were slain at this Siege 7000.
Turks. After him there succeeded Mahumet the second. He having established
his government by the murder of his Brother, took Constantinople in the year
1458. on the last day save one of May. Two years afterward he marched to
Belgrade, but there having lost many of his men, he departed from thence
wounded. Afterward he possessed himself of Bulgaria, Dalmatia, and Croatia,
with all Rassia. He took also Trapezuntes and Mytilenes, with some other
Islands of Aegean Sea. He took also Eubaea and Theodosia, now called Caphas.
He governed the Empire 32. years. Bajazet the second waged war with the
Venetians; and took from them Naupailum, Methona, and Dyrrachium. And having
depopulated and wasted all Dalmatia, he dyed by poison. His Son Selymmus
invaded the Empire. Who having took Alcair the strongest City of Egypt, and
the Sultane being slain, he added all Alexandria and Egypt to his Empire, and
took Damascus. Solomon the only Son of Selimus succeeded his Father, and
took Belgrade the strongest Fortress, and Bulwark not only of Hungary, but
of all the Christian World. He took Rhodes, Strigonium* and ^uda, and other
Cities, and he besieged Vienna in Anstria, and at length dyed at Zygethus, in
the year of his reign 47. Selimus the second succeeded after him, who made a
Truce with the Emperor Maximilian for 8. years, and took Cyprus from the
Venetians. He possessed himself of Tunetum and Goleta, and dyed in the year
1575. After whom succeeded Amurath, and after him Mahumet the third, who began
his reign with the murder of his 18. Brethren. He has 4. rich Cities in
these Territories, Constantinople, Alcairum, Aleppo, Taurisum. Constantinople
was heretofore called Bizantium, of which we have spoke in Thrace. For it
excels all other Cities. The Turks have a great care to build spacious
Meschites or Temples, and Carbarsara or Hospitals, also Baths, Conduits,
Bridges, Highways, and other public works, which the Turks do build very
fair. The Church of Sophia in Constantinople is the fairest of all the rest,
which remains still, as Bellonius witnesses, and does far exceed the
Roman Pantheon, where all the gods were worshipped. I omit the Turks royal
Palace, and many ancient Monuments for brevity sake. The Ottoman government is
Lordly. For the Turkish Emperor is so absolute a Lord within his own
Dominions, that the Inhabitants are his Slaves and Subjects: neither is any one
Master of himself, much less Lord of the House which he dwells in, or of
the Land which he tilleth, except some Families in the City of Constantinople,
to whom Mahomet the second in reward of some service did grant that Privilege.

THE HOLY LAND^
THis famous Province of Syria, was heretofore called the Land of Chanaan the
Son of Cham, who possessed it. The Country whence so callod.
It was called also the Land of Promise, or the promised Land, because God
promised it to our Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This Country when the
ancient Inhabitants were beaten out, and the Israelites came in their place,
began to be called Israel and Iudaea. Ptolemy and others do call it
Palaestina, from the Palaestines a people of great note, who in the sacred
Scriptures are called Philistines: the Christians do call it the Holy Land.
This Country is situate in the middle of the world, The Situation.
between the Mediterranean Sea and Arabia, on which side beyond the River
Jordan it is encompassed with a continued ridge of Mountains, and so it
reaches from Egypt, as Herodotus will have it, or as others from the Lake
Sirbon, even to Phaenitia. The bounds thereof are these; it has on the East
Syria and Arabia: on the South the Desert of Pharan, and Egypt: on the West
the Mediterranean Sea: on the North the Mountain libanon. The length of it
reaches on the North to the City of Dan, seated at the foot of the Mountain
Libanon (which was afterward called Caesarea Philippi and Paneas) and so on the
South to the City Bearsebach, situate in the Tribe of Simeon over against the
great Desert which is about 67. miles, every mile being an hours journey. But
the breadth which is to be taken from the Mediterranean Sea on the West to
Jordan on the East side, does contain in some places 16. and in other places
18. miles. Of all Countries it is chiefly commended for the wholesomnesse of
the Air, and temperature of the Climate, for the Winter is not too cold, nor
the Summer too hot. And all Writers both sacred and profane do praise it for
the fruitfulness of the Soil, the abundance of all kinds of fruits, The
fertility of the soil.
and the plenty of all things necessary for the sustentation and delectation of
man's life. Moses concerning this Country prophesi'd thus to the Israelites,
Deuteronomy. Cap. 8. Verse. 7. For the Lord thy God brings thee into a good Land, a
Land of Brooks, of Water, of Fountains, and depths, that spring out of
Valleys and Hills, a Land of Wheat, and Barley, and Vines, and Fig Trees, and
Pomegranates, a Land of Oil, Olive, and Honey, a Land wherein thou shall eat
Bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any thing in it: a Land whose
Stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills thou may dig Brass, a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey. Josephus also and Pliny do praise the fertility
of this Country. But of all those things which serve either for delight or
medicinable use, the Balsame is especially commended, which God heretofore gave
to this part of the World, but now it wants it, also the Aromatic sweet
Spices, and Mastix, and two kinds of Nuts, the one called Almonds, and the
other Pistack Nuts. In the Mountains also there is Iron and Brass. It has
abundance of sweet Springs, and pleasant Meddowes which are clothed with
Flocks and Herds of Cattle, which do yield great store of Milk. And here is
good hunting of Boares, Goats, Hares, and Hawking after Partridges, Stares,
and other Birds. Moreover, the Land of Chanaan had 31. Kings, which were
Philistines, but after Israelites entered into this Country, the most part of the
Philistines and ancient Kings were slain and droven out. And the Children of
Israel were governd by Captains about 450. years, until the Prophet Samuel.
Neither did they rule by Succession, or Election, but it was a kind of
Aristocracy, where the Seniors in every Tribe did govern, but afterward at the
request of the people, God changed this form of government into a Kingdom,
and this government continued many years. For in process of time the
Israelites suffered many calamities, until at length they lost their Kingdom.
For both sacred and profane Histories do witness, that this Nation had been
subject to diverse changes, and had been vexed continually with wars, either
through the disposition of the people, who could neither endure their own nor
others government, or through their sins which provoked Gods anger toward
them, or through the felicity and happiness of this Country which tempted
Strangers to invade them. Sometimes they were overcome, sometime carried away
into captivity, so that they were unfit to live either in prosperity or
adversity. Sometimes they were under the yoke of servitude, and in bondage to
their neighbors, and sometimes to remote people far off, as the Egyptians,
Chaldaeans, Medes, Persians, Macedons, and Romans: and they never ceased to
tread down and overthrow themselves, and their Commonwealth by their evil
counsel, until at length they fastened and nailed the Son of God, and the
Savior of mankind, with their wicked hands to the Cross, than which there
could be no greater sin or impiety. After that there ensued new calamities
and miseries. For Titus Vespasian having conquered Iudaea took Jerusalem, and
carried away many thousand Jews into Captivity, and many of them being slain
by famine, pestilence, fire, and sword, he wasted and destroyed the Temple and
all the sacred and profane buildings, in the year from the birth of Christ
73. which Christ himself while he lived here on Earth had foretold. Aelius
Adrianus did re-edifie the City, but he changed the Situation thereof. And
the old Temple of Solomon lay ruinate and wasted, even until the year 363.
when Julian the Apostata gave the Jews leave to re-edifie it, who being
dismayed by a miracle desisted from their enterprise, and left it off again. In
the year 615. Chosr^es King of Persia took the City, and put 90000. men to
the sword: but he being overcome and taken by Heraclius was punished for his
cruelty. In the year 636. Haumer Prince of the Sarazens subdued all Iudaea THE
HOLY LAND^
PEREGRINATIO ISRAELITARU^ IN DESERTO
map and it continued 450. years under the power and dominion of the Sarazens.
But in the year 1097. when it was decreed in the Counsel of Clarimont in the
time of Pope Urban the second, that a Voyage should be made to recover the Holy
Land, Godfr^y of Boloyne having raised a great Army of Christians, which
consisted of 300000. Foot, and 100000. Horse, did beat out the Sarazens. In
the year 1185. Saladine King of Persia did restore the Sarazens to their first
estate. But not long after the Christians invaded them again. And the Sarazens
invaded them again in the year 1217. until at length after diverse mu^ations
and changes, the Turks got possession of it in the year 1517. This Country
contains Idumaea, Iudaea, Samaria, and Galiley. Idumaea begins from the
Mountain Cassius, or according to others from the Lake Sirbon, and stretche^h
Eastward even to Iudaea. There are these Cities in it, Maresa, Rhinocorur^,
Raphia, Anthedon, Ascalon, Asotus, and Gaza. Iudaea is the most famous part of
Palestine, being situate between the Mediterranean Seas and the Lake
Asphaltites* and between Samaria and ^dumaea. It was so called from Judah
which was the chief Tribe, in which there were many Cities and Towns, but
the fairest of them all was Jerusalem the Metropolis of Iudaea, and the most
famous City in the World. In Ptolemies time it was called Ae^ia Capatolia, and
now the barbarous Inhabitants do call it Coz or Godz, or Chutz. There are also
other Towns and famous places in Iudaea, beside Jerusalem, as Jericho, Ioppe
which is now called I^ffa: Stratoes Tower, afterward call Caesar's Tower, also
Bethlehem; Chebron, or Hebron, before called Arbee* and Mambre, and
Cariatharbe, that is, the City of four men. And the Town Macherus with a
strong Castle beyond Iordane. ^ere were also Sodom and Gomorrah, which were
destroyed for their abominable wickedness. Samaria follows which is situate
in the middle between Iudaea, and Galile. It was so called from the Metropolis
of the same name, which Amri King of Israel built, it is now called Sebaste:
here are these Towns Sichem, afterward called Neapolis, also Capernaum,
Bethsaida, and Chorazin. Galiley is situate beweene the Mountain Liba^us and
Samaria; and it is divided into the higher and the lower: the higher is
otherwise called the Galiley of the Gentiles, near to Tire. The lower is
situate by the Sea of Tiberias, or Genezareth. The Cities in it are Naim,
Cana, Nazareth, and Gadara. Butthe whole Country is situate between two Seas,
and the River Iordane. It has many Lakes which are Navigable, and have great
store of good Fish. But the River Iordane which the Hebrews call Iarden,
runs through all the length of this Country. This River as Hierome writes,
issues from two Fountains, not far distant one from another, namely, ^or,
and Dan, and afterward these two forked streams joining together do make the
River Jordan. It has two chief Mountains Hermon on the East, and Tabor on
the West, which are very high, and all the other Mountains are but arms and
parts of them. For Ebal, Bethoron, and Misha, or Maspha, and Be^el by Hermon:
Gelboe, Gerizim, Sarona, and lastly Carmel near to the Sea, are but part of
the Mountain Tabor. There are also these Mountains, Mount Sion, Mount Moriah,
Mount Olivet, Mount Calvary, and others. It has also many Woods, Wildernesses,
and Groves. Here are many fair buildings, and especially at Jerusalem. But of
all those works which were famous in ancient time, the chief is Mons Domus,
and the Jebusians Tower, into which King David carried the Ark of the Lord,
and there is continued until Salomons Temple was built and consecrated, of
which there are some ruins yet remaining, where it is thought that Christ
supped at the time of the Passover. There are also some Monuments of David and
the Kingdom of Judah. There was also David's House, which is still preserved,
and called by the name of David's Tower. Here also some ruins of Mello at the
farthest part of the Mountain Moriah. Here was Salomons famous Temple, which
was 7. years building, and had 50000. men working daily at it. Concerning the
magnificence and stateliness whereof you may read in Lib. 1. of the Kings,
Cap. 6.7. and Chron. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. and 4. Concerning their Laws and Customs
for brevity sake I will add nothing, but refer the Reader to the Books of
Moses, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.

ASIA THE LESS, WHICH IS NOW CALLED NATOLIA.
The Country whence so called.
ASIA the less so called to distinguish it from the greater, is now to be
described: for so the Romans when they made a Province did call it after the
name of the Continent. The Turks do call it now Natolia, or A^atolia, as if
you should say the East Country, from the Greek word (...), which signifies
the East, which Peter Bellonius shows in his learned observations of his
travels. And it is called of late the greater Turkey. Marius Niger delivers that
the Low-Country-men call it new Turkey, and the Barbarians Rom, namely, the
Northern part, which contains Bithynia, Galatia, and Cappadocia. But they
call the Southern Country, in which are Licia, Cicilie, and Pamphilia,
Cottomanid^a. The Situation.
The bounds of this Country on the East is the River Euphrates, on the South
the Mediterranean Sea; on the West the Aegean Sea, or the Archipelagus of
Greece: on the North it is washed with the Euxine Sea, and the greater Sea. It
contains therefore all that Chersonesus, which lies between the Euxine, the
Cilician, and Pamphilian Sea. The breadth of it according to Pliny is about
200. miles, namely, from the Isacan Bay, now called Golfo de Lajazzo, and the
Amanian Haven, even to Trapezuntes which is on the Sea Coast, in which he
consents with Herodotus, who says that the Isthmus of the lesser Asia is 5.
days journey. This Country is not inferior to any other both for the gentle
temperatenesse of the air, and the fertility and goodness of the soil. Which
Cicero witnesses in these words. The Custom and Revenues of other Provinces,
The ^emper of the Air
O Citizens, are so small, that we are not content to undertake the defense of
the Provinces for them: But Asia is so fat and fruitful, that it excels all
other Countries, both for the fertility of the Fields, the variety of Fruits,
fair Pastures, and diverse commodities, which are exported from thence. So that
it was heretofore enriched with fruitful Fields, fatt Pastures, and
Gold-bearing Rivers. Besides it has all things that can be desired, wanting
nothing, but is content with her own commodities. It has great store of Wine
and Oil. But it has one shrewd inconvenience, which is, that it is often
troubled with Earthquakes, so that Cities are over-throwne by them: as in the
reign of Tiberius Caesar 12. Cities in Asia fell down in one night, as Pliny
reports, Lib. 2. In this Asia there were heretofore the great Kingdoms of
the Trajans, of Craesus, Mithridates. Antiochus, of the Paphlagonians,
Galatians, Cappadocians, and others. It was first governed by Cyrus King of
Persia, The ancient government.
afterward the Macedons, and Alexanders Captains, together with Syria, Egypt,
and Babylon did devide it amongst themselves, afterward it was wasted by the
Romans, and then by the Turks, so that it has now nothing memorable in it:
and it is all subject to the Turkish Emperor. Here are no Nobility THE LESSER
ASIA^
PEREGRINATIO PAULI In qua and omnis loca querit^^ fit (...) in actis et
epistolis Apostolorum et Apocal^psi. describunt^^
map by blood or descent, but all are equal, and the great Turk uses them as
slaves, who has here his Beglerbeys and Sangiacks in diverse Countries, and
Provinces. Natolia contains these Countries, Pontus, Bithynia, Asia, properly
so called, Lycia, Galatia, Pamphilia, Cappadocia, Cil^cia, and the lesser
Armenia. Pontus and Bithynia, were heretofore divided and parted by the little
River Sagaris flowing between them, afterward they were reduced into one
Province, which is now called Birsia, or Be^sangial. It was heretofore
Mithridates his Kingdom. The chief Cities are Chalcedon, Ni^^media, Cerasus,
Prusa, by the Mountain Olympus, where the great Turk kept his residence
before he took Constantinople. There is also Nicaea and He^a^lea in Pontus.
Asi^ properly so called, is now called Sabrum, or Sacrum, it is bounderd on the
East with Galatia, on the North with Pontus and Bithynia: the other parts are
washed with the Sea. It contains also within it self Phrygia, Lydia, both
the Mysia^s, Caria, Aeolides, Ionia, and Dorides. Phrygia is twofold, the
greater and the lesser, the greater lies Eastward, in which there are few
Cities, but more Villages. There is also the City M^da^um near Sangarius,
which was so called from Midas his Palace. There is also Apamaea the greatest
City in Phrygia, not far from the River Maeander. Also the Town Docymeum,
and the City Synnada. There is also Pessinus. In the lesser Phrygia or Troad^s
there were Iliam* or Troy, which is so often mentioned in Homer and Virgil.
Also Pergamus which King Attalus from a Castle did enlarge and change into a
City: here Apollodorus the Rhetorician, and Galen were borne. Bellonius
reports, that among the ruins of Troy there are fragments and pieces of
Marble Sepulchers, foundations of Walls, old Towers, and Colossusses yet
remaining. There are also in this same Country the Promontory and Town Sigaum,
in which there is Achilles Tomb. Lydia or Meonia has the City Sardeis, where
Craesus his Palace was. Mysia near the Hellespont bordereth on Troas. In this
Country there is Lampsacus, a Colony of the Patians, and Abydus of the
Melesians. Caria is situate between Ionia and Lydia, the Metropolis hereof was
heretofore Miletus, which now they falsely think is called Malaxo: for the
ancients did call it Mylassa, which Pliny calls the free City, Lib. 5. Cap.
21. There is also Magnesa near the River Maeander. On the shore was Ionia
near the Island Chius, in which heretofore was that famous City Ephesus.
Aeolis is between this and L^sbu^, whose Cities by the Coast side are Myrina,
Cuma, now Castri; and Phocaea, now called Foglia Vecchia. Dorus is by the
Carpathian Sea in the Chersonesus, the chief City whereof is Halicarnassus,
here the Historians Herodotus, and Dionysius were borne, and Mausolus had his
Palace here. Galatia, which is also called Gollogreece, is so called from the
Frenchmen, who mingling themselves with the Graecians, did heretofore possess
those parts, which lie by the Euxine Sea, between Pontus and Cappadocia. The
Cities in it are Ancyra, now called Anguri, famous for waterd Chamlot which is
made there of Goates-haire. Sinope was Mithridates his Country: Amisus now
called Simiso. In this Country is Paphlagonia, which is now called Roni.
Cappadocia which is now called Amasia, and it reaches from Galatia to
Antitaurus: on the South is Ciliciae: on the North the Euxine Sea. The length
of it is more than 300000. miles Here was sometimes the flourishing Kingdom of
the Amazons, whom Titianus, as Isid^^^s witnesses does elegantly call
One-breasted Amazons. The Cities and Towns herein are Trapezus, Themis^yra,
Amas^a, where Strabo was borne, Iconium and Maza. Lycia is next to Caria. It
has these chief Cities Pa^ara and Telmessum. Pamphilia follows which is
parted by the River Cataractes from Lycia. In it there were these Cities Sida,
Attalia, and Aspendum. It is now together with Cilicia called Caramania. The
Metropolis of Cilicia is now called Hama, the ancients called it Tarsus, here
S. Paul was borne, being an ancient University by the River Cydnus. Strabo does
much commend it. There is also the Town Adena and Heraclea by the Mountain
Taurus. Armenia the lesser reaches even to Eu^hrates, but on the West it is
bounderd with Cappadocia. The Rivers are Iris, which is now called Casalma^h,
also Halis, Ottom^ngiu^h, Parthenius, Dolap, Sangaris, Sangri, which do all
run into the Euxine Sea. Into the Propontick Sea these Rivers do run,
namely, Ascanius, Rhindacus, Aesopus, and Granicus; and into the Hellespont
these Rivers, Simois, and Scamander, which is also called Xanthus. Into the
Agaean Sea these Rivers do run, Ca^^us, Hermus, Caistrus, Maeander, which as
Pruseus reports, makes a hundred windings and turnings. Lastly, there do
run into the Mediterranean Sea these Rivers, Calbis, Xanthus, Limyrus,
Cataractes, and others. The Seas are the Euxine Sea, the Aegaean Sea, and
Pamphylian, the Propontis, the Hellespont, the Icarian, the Myrtoan, and
Rhodiensian Seas. And these Seas are very convenient, both for importing and
bringing in all kind of Merchandise, and also for fishing, by which they reap
much profit. The chief Mountains are Horminium in Pontus and Mysium, which is
also called Olympus. The Synnadican Mountains are famous for Stone-Quarries,
there is also Ida in Phrygia which is memorable for the ancient contention of
the Goddesses for the Golden Ball, and Paris his judgment which he gave
there, also Gold-bearing Tmolus in Lydia, Argaeum in Caeppadocia, Amanum, now
called Monte Negro in Cilicia, on which there do grow high Cedars and and
Juniper, also the Mountain Sabina, which has great store of Plants. There are
also Dindyma and the Mountain Chimaera, which flameth like Aetna, and the
flame thereof as Pliny witnesses is increased by casting on water, and
extinguished or quenched with dunge. There is also the Mountain Taurus which
begins here, on the top whereof there are Lions, in the middle of it which
has pleasant pastures, there are Goats, and at the bottom Serpents. Whence
the Poets do feign that it is a Monster which vomiteth and spitteth fire,
having a head and breast like a Lion, a belly like a Goat, and the tail of a
Dragon, and that Bellerophon was sent to kill this Chimera. There are also
other Mountains as Antitaurus, and Scordiscus, which for brevity sakes we
omit. I come to the public works. There was heretofore in Ionia in the City
of Ephesus the Temple of Diana, the most famous and most magnificent Temple in
the World, and accounted one of the 7. wonders of the World. Here were also
many Hospitals for Strangers, and for the sick, which they called Carbachara.
Moreover, there are no Innes or places of Receipt for Travelers, in all those
Provinces of which are subject to the Turk, except it be those public Houses;
which were built by diverse means, but this was the most usual. The Turkish
Nobles when they were grown rich, being willing to do some pious work in
their life time, did out of their Zeal build such Houses, for they had no
kin to bestow it on, and therefore thinking that should do a good work for
the public good, by raising such Structures and Buildings, they did therefore
build either some bridge or an Hospital called Carbachara, unto which there
was a Temple adjoining, and next to it a Bath.

THE ISLAND OF CYPRVS, WITH THE ISLANDS STALIMENE, CHIVS, MITYLENE, NEGROPONTE,
CERIGO, AND RHODES.
CYPRUS is one of the greater Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, which was so
called either from Cyprus the Daughter of Cynica, or from the Cyprus tree,
which is proper to this Island. It lies in the middle of the Issican Bay
between Silicia and Syria: on the East it has the Syrian Sea, and the Issican
Bay, which is commonly called Golfo de Lajazzo, on the West the Pamphilian Sea:
on the South the Egyptian Sea: on the North it looks toward Cylicia, which
is now called Turcomannia, according to others Caramania. The compass of it is
427. miles, the length of it 200. as Bordonius witnesses. It has for the most
part an unpleasant, and unwholesome air, in regard of the exhalations and
uprores which arise from the Lakes. Yet the whole Island is very fruitful. For
it produces all things necessary both for necessity and delicacies: as Wheat,
Barley, and other kinds of Grain: also excellent Wine that may compare with
Crete Wine: also Oil, Sugar, Honey, Salt, Oranges, Citrions, Lemmons, Dates,
and other excellent fruit. Also Gold, Cotton, Wool, Saffron, Coriander seed,
Silk, and what not? also Emralds, Crystal, Iron, and Allome: and especially
such great store of Brass, which it is thought was first found there, so that
it was called Brazen Cyprus. There is also a kind of stuff made of Goats
hair, which is called Chamlot. Diodorus Siculus. Lib. 16. writes that 9.
Kings did govern this Island, which were all subject to the King of Persia. It
had also Greek Tyrants. We read that heretofore it had 15. famous Cities,
which are now for the most part decayed and ruinated. The chiefest of them were
Paphos, now called Bapho: also Palae Paphos, where the Inhabitants do affirm
that Venus came first out of the Sea: there is also Sali^i^^ which is seated in
a pleasant Bay of the East shore, from whence there is a convenient passage to
Syria. It was afterward called Const^n^^^* and Epiphanius was Bishop thereof.
There were also the Cities Amathus and Ceraun^a. But now the chiefest are
Nicotia and Famag^^^. But out of the Mountain Olympus, there do run two
great Rive^s Ly^us and L^pethus, the former runs Southward, the latter
Northward. The other streams may be rather called Torrents than Rivers,
because they are sometimes dry, and then the Inhabitants do want water
extremely. There are diverse Mountains in this Island, but the highest of them
all is Olympus, which they call Trohodon* which is beautified with all kind of
trees, and has many Monasteries on it, in which the Calojerians dwell. The
compass of it is 54. miles.

STALIMENE.
LEMNOS is an Island of the Aegaean Sea, which the Turks and Italians do now
call Stalimene: it is over against Thrace, between the Chersonesus of Thrace,
and Ath^n a Mountain of Macedon, the compass of it is 100. miles. On the East
side it is dry and barre^: but between the South and the West the Fields are
very fruitful, and do bring forth Wheat, Pulse, Pease, Beans, Wine, Flax,
and Hemp. The Lemnian Earth is dug forth now, as heretofore with many
superstitious Ceremonies, and that every year on the 6. day of August, but not
at other times. For it is forbidden upon pain of death, that none come to
dig of it, either secretly or openly. The place out of which it is dug is
called Vulcanes Mountain. This Island has abundance of Bay-horses, which go
softly, and do neither pace nor trot. It has also Serpents. Here were
heretofore the Cities Myriva and Ephestias,. But now the latter is ruinate and
desolate, and called Cochino. The other is a small Town, seated on a Peninsula
which is joined to the Island by a small Isthmus or tongue of Land: it is now
called Lemnos.

CHIOS^
(...) graece, Snow.
THe Island Chios was so named, either from the Snow, or from the Nymph Chion.
Heretofore it was called Aetolia as Ephorus reports. It is situate between
Samos and Lesbus, over against Erythra. The compass of it is above a hundred
miles. Chios has excellent good Wine, so that as Strabo reports there are
Clusters of Grapes which do weigh 6. pound. It has also good Figs, and a
kind of Marble which was much esteemed at Rome. And it alone of all the rest
bears Mastick. And heretofore it was so fertile and fruitful, that it was
called the Storehouse or Barn of Rome. It has also great store of tame
Partridges, which run up and down the Fields, and the Streets. Here are 36.
Towns. The chief City is ^hia, which has a convenient Haven for Ships to
ride in. It is all Mountainous. It has these Promontaries Posidium, Phanaeum,
Arvisium, from whence come Arvisian Wines, which are now called Malmesies. In
this Country THE ISLAND OF CYPRVS.
map CYPRUS
map Stalimini.
map Chios
map Mitilene.
map Negroponte.
map Cerigo.
map Rhodus.
map ton the Tragedian, Theopompus the Historian, and Theocritus the Sophister
was borne. And some suppose that Homer was borne here* Cicero in his Oration
for Archias says, The Colophonians do say that Homer was their Citizen, the
Chians do challenge him to be theirs, the Salaminians do account him theirs,
and the Smyrnians reckon him their Citizen. And therefore they dedicated a
Chapel to him in their Town. And many others do contend and strive for him.

MITYLENE.
LESBUS or Mitylena, which is now called Metelin from the chief City, lies
over against Phrygia, and is distant from the Continent 7. miles and an half.
Some report that the compass of it is 168. miles. And others say 130. miles.
It has a wholesome air, fruitful fields, and good fruits. Here it the best
Corn. It yields the best Wine, which is more esteemed at Constantinople than
other wines, and for the most part it is of a pale color between red and
white. Here is also Marble, which is bluer than a Touchstone: here is also the
Precious stone called Achates, which being worn, cheareth the heart, and
drives away care and sorrow. It does breed strong lusty Horses. but of low
stature. Heretofore there were 5. Towns in it, Ant^ssa, Pyrrha, Eress^s,
C^ravi, and Muyl^n^, now Metelino, being the Prince-Towne of the whole Island,
which has a Castle and a pleasant fruitful soil, but now it is for the most
part ruinated and fallen down. This Island has two convenient Havens.

NEGROPONTE.
EUBOEA now called Nigropontus, or Nigroporte on the South thrusts forth the
Promontory Geresto, and Capha^eum: on the North Caeneum, it is no where broad,
and yet the narrowest place is two miles over: but it is long, and lies over
against ^ae^tia, and is separated from the shore by a narrow strait. Heretofore
it was joined to Bae^tia. The compass of it is 365. miles. This Island has
abundance of Corn, Pulse, Wine, Oil, and Trees fit for Building of Shops.
The Metropolis was heretofore ^hal^is now it is called Nigr^p^n^e after the
name of the Island. It is famous for the death of A^ist^th who dyed here for
grief, when he could not find out the cause of the flowing and ebbing of the
Sea 7. times by day, and seven times b^ night Although Suia^s reports that he
dyed not for grief^ but that he was poisoned, and L^ert^us says that he died
by sickness. There are also the City Eretria, where Simonides the Lvrick Poet
wa^ borne: there is also Cha^istu^ which Stephanus calls Chironia and Aegea,
now it is called Garisto, which was famous heretofore for Marble, there are
also Heliaea, ^irrha, Nesos, O^^halia. Strabo writes that there are two Rivers
in this Island Cerus and Neleus* which are of diverse natures. For if beasts
drink out of one of them, their hair grows white, but if they drink of the
water of the other River, their hide and hair grows black. There is an arm
of the Sea, which Livie calls the Euborian Bay, which is a violent Sea, and
flows and ebb^th 7. times by day and 7. times by night, with such a violent
course, that no Ship can sail against it. There is also the Mountain
^apha^^us* famous for the Shipwreck of the Graecians as they returned from
Tr^y* and for the death of Pa^amedes at Troy, the Son of E^ripides N^^plius
King of the Eubaean Island.

CERIGO.
PTOLEMIE calls it Cythera. Pliny heretofore called it Porpyris: and ^u^^a hius
calls it P^rphyrusa, from the great store of Porphirie Marbles which i^ in
the Mountains: It is now called Cerig^^^ is the first Island of the Aegaean Sea
on the West over against the La^onick (...). It (...) it from the shore of
Peloponnesus 5. miles, and it is 60. miles in compa^se. It has a Town of the
same name, and many Havens, which are not safe and secure, for there are many
Rocks which lie scatteringly round about this Island.

RHODES^
THERE remains in this Table the Island of Rhodes. This as Pliny witnesses
was heretofore called Ophtusa, Asteria, Aethraea, Trin^^hia, Corimbia,
A^abiria, and Macarta. It is distant from the continent of Asia 20. miles. The
compass of it is 140. miles. It has a temperate and gentle Air: and it was
consecrate to the Sun, because there is no day wherein the Sun does not
shine upon it. The soil is fruitful, and the Meddowes fertile, and it has
great store of fruit Trees, of which many are always green. It has now but
one strong City of the same name, which is situate in the Eastern part of the
Island, partly on a steep Hill, and partly on the Sea Coast. It has a fair
and safe Haven, and it is well fortified with a double Wall, thirteen high
Towers, five Castles, and other Forts and Bulwarks. And it has an University
which heretofore was as famous as that at Massils, Athens, Alexandria, and
^arsus: and it had a brazen Colossus of the Sun, which was seventy Cubits
high, which after it had stood 56. years, it was thrown down by an
Earthquake, and when it lay on the ground it was a wonderful sight to behold.
For a man of a good stature could not fathom or embrace his Thumb. And the
Fingers were greater than most Statues, and when it was broke, his Belly did
gape like a great Cave. This Colossus was making twelve years, and three
hundred Talents of Brass went to the making of it, and within there were great
stones laid, that might make the work stand firm. The Sultan laded 700.
Camels with the Brass of this Statue.

THE KINGDOM OF PERSIA, OR THE EMPIRE OF THE SOPHI.
THE Persian or Sophian Empire, as it was renowned heretofore, so now also it
is very famous. The Country
The Inhabitants are Persians. They are called also Ayami, or Azamij, from the
Kingdom of Azamia, which some think was heretofore called Assyria: they were
called Persians from Persides, and Cheselbas from the red Cap or Hatt which
they used to wear. They were called Sophians from Prince Sophos. The Kingdom
of Persia is situate between the Turkish Empire, The Situation.
the Tartarians, the Zagatheans, the Kingdom of Cambaia, and between the
Hircanian or Caspian Sea, and the Persian Bay. It has thereof on the East the
Indies and the Kingdom of Cambaja, from which it is separated and parted by
the Mountains and Deserts: on the North are the Tartars, near the River
Albianus or Oxus, the rest is enclosed with the Caspian Sea: on the West are
the Turks near the River Tigris. and the Lake Giocho: on the South it is
washed with the Persian Bay, and the Indian Sea, which is a large space of
ground, for it contains 38. degrees of longitude from the East to the West.
And from the South to the North 20. degrees. Concerning the temper of the air
of Persia, Q. Curtius, Lib. 5. writes thus. There is no whole-sommer Country
in all Asia: for the air is temperate, here a continued shady Mountain does
qualify the heat thereof: and there it is joined to the Sea which does
cherish it with a temperate warmth. But this Country is not all of one quality,
nor of one soil. That part which lies toward the Persian Bay, in regard it is
watered with Rivers: and also that part toward the Caspian Sea, having pleasant
Rivers, and a mild gentle Air, are both happy and fruitful, and do yield
all kinds of fruits, and do breed all kinds of living creatures. It has
abundance of Wheat, Barley, Millet, and the like Grain, and also Metals and
Precious Stones, and Paulus Venetus witnesses that it has great plenty of
Wine. The other parts are desolate by reason of the heat and dryness.
Moreover the Persians were at first an obscure Nation, but they grew famous
afterward by their King Cyrus, who having gotten the Empire Media and Lydia,
joined it to Persia, and so having conquered Asia, and subdued all the East, he
left it a fair and flourishing Kingdom. Cambyses succeeded his Father, who
added Egypt to the Empire, after whom Persia continued in one Estate until
Da^ius reigned; who being conquered by Alexander of Maced^n, lost his life
together with his Kingdom. It was governed by Kings 230. years, as Q. Curtius
affirms. Lib. 4. and the Prophet Jeremiah does assent unto him at the 9.
Chapter of Daniel. But now the Persian Empire which is subject to the great
^ophy, is accounted one of the most potent Empires of all the East, which
though it were sometimes oppressed by the Sarazens, and sometimes by the
Tartars, yet it grew up again in the reign of King Ismael. The Countries
which are subject to the Persian Empire are these, Media, Assyria Susiana,
Mesopotamia, Persis, Parthia, Hyrcania, Marg^a^a, Bactriana, Par^pamissus,
Aria, Drangiana, Gedrosia, and Carmania. Media is now called Servan, which is
situate between Persia, and the Hyrcanian Sea, it has on the East Hyrcania
and Parthia; on the West the greater Armenia and Assyria. It is divided into
the greater or the Southern, and the Northern Atropatia. The latter is
colder, and therefore less inhabited. The chief City is Sm^chia, there are
moreover these Cities, Derb^nt, Eres, Sechi, and Giavot. The greater is more
inhabited: it has also the City Tauris which is placed at the foot of
O^ontis, being 8. days journey distant from the Caspian Sea. The compass of
it is almost 16. miles, in which it is supposed that there are 200000.
Citizens. The Ancients did call it E^batana, where the Kings of Persia do
dwell in Summer. In the same Country there are Turcomian, ^aru, Sus^an,
Nassiva, Ardavil, and Marant. Assyria which is now called Arzerum, has on the
East Media, on the West Mesopotamia: on the North Armenia, on the South
^usiana. It had heretofore these Provinces, Arrapach^tes, Adiabena, and
Sittacena: the City Ninive is by Tigris, which is 60. miles in compass.
Susiana is now called Chus or Cusistan: it was so named from Susis a chief
City, which is 15. miles in compass* and was so called from the Lillies which
grew there, as Atheneus notes, for Susum in the Persian language signifies a
Lilly. Mesopotamia, which in Scripture is called Padan Aram, is now called
D^arbecha, it is situate between the Rivers Euphrates and Tigris, whence it
was so named, because it lies (...), or in the middle between two Rivers:
this Country has a diverse situation: part of it the Rivers do fertilize or
make fatt: part of it is dry and barren, and without Grass, or Trees. The
chief Cities are O^pha, which is 7. miles in compass, and Ca^amil which is
far greater than it being the Metropolis of Mesopotamia, which Selimus the
Turkish Emperor took from the Sophi. Merdin is the seat of the Patriarch of
Chaldaea: and Mosus of the Patriarch of the Nertorianians, whose authority
reaches even to the Indies and Cathaja. In Persidis, which they call now
Farsi, or Parsitum, there is the chief City Siras, which was heretofore
called Pers^polis, which was the Seat of the Magi. Pliny calls it the head
City of the Persian Kingdom, and Q. Curtius the royal Palace of the East.
Hyrcania which is now called Grigta, or Cor^a, or Dargame^t, is next unto the
Caspian Sea, which is therefore called the Hyrcanian Sea. It has these Cities
Hyrcana, which the Scythians call THE KINGDOM OF PERSIA^
PERSICUM REGNUM
map Carizath, also Besta, and Mesandra. Margiana which is now called Iselbas,
is bounderd on the North with the River Oxus. The chief City is Iodion, which
was anciently called Antiochia. Bactrina, now called Batter, or Charassa, is a
part of Tartaria. The Cities are Bactra, which is now called Bochara, and also
Istigias. Paropamissus is a part of Bactriana by the Mountain Paropamissus, it
is now called Candahar, or Amblestam. The chief City is Candabar which is a
famous Mart Town. Aria is so called from the Metropolis thereof Eri, which is
13. miles in compass. Carmania which is called Circa, or Chermaine reaches to
the Indian Sea, even to Gedrosia, having many Cities and Havens. The
Metropolis is Chirmain. There are also in Carmania these Kingdoms, Ma^ram,
Era^a, Guadel, and Paran. Some do falsely suppose Gesia to be Guzarate, seeing
Guzarate is the Kingdom of Cambaja. Babylon is situate between the Persian
Bay and Mesopotamia, and on the right and left hand it is enclosed with the
Deserts of Susia, and Arabia, is was so named from Babylon the chief City
thereof. Chaldaea joins to it. In Chaldaea was the City Vr, which Josephus
calls Vra, from whence Abraham being admonished by God removed and went to
Haran in Mesopotamia. This Kingdom has many Rivers, as Canac, Araxes, and
^i^us, which do water the Southern part of Media. In Assyria is the River
Tigris. In Susania the River Enelaeus: Mesopotamia has the River Euphrates: In
Margiana Oxus, Arius and Margis. Bactria has the Navigable River Ochus, and
others: in Aria are the Rivers Arius, Toncletus, Arapenes, and others. It has
also diverse Mountains, as Orontes in Media, and the Mountain Coronus in
Hyrcania. Also the Mountain Taurus which cutteth through the middle of Persia,
which has diverse names given it by the people that dwell near it. It has
also many woods, especially Parthia is very woody, and the Northern part of
Hyrcania which has great woods, which have store of Oaks, Pinetrees, and
Firre-trees, and are full of wild Beasts, as Tigers, Panthers, and Libards.
Also Aria is full of Woods and Mountains, as also all Persia. Concerning the
public works, there are many stately and magnificent Buildings in this
Kingdom, and especially in Babylon. As that magnificent Bridge in the City of
Babylon, which the Queen Semiramis built over Euphrates, concerning which see
Munster, Lib. 5. who also in the same Book describes a strange Garden which
Semiramis caused to be planted. In the City Susia was the Castle Susa, in
which the Kings of Media dwelt, which as Cassiodorus reports Memnon built
with stones laid in Gold in stead of mortar: this is one of the 7. wonders of
the world. But of these things enough, I come to their manners. They created
their Kings out of one Family. He that did not obey the King had his head and
arms cut off, and his Carcass was afterward left unburied. They had all of
them many Wives, and many Concubines, which they kept for Offspring sake, that
they might have Children by them. They never consulted of weighty matters but
when they had their Cups about them, for they supposed that they could then
determine better of matters than when they were sober. Acquaintance and equals
did salute one another with a kiss^. The (...) ^^rious did show reverence by
outward gestures. They buried their dead bodies in the ground, and anointed
them with wax. It was counted a heinous offense to laugh or spet before the
King. Concerning the burying of their dead others do write the clean
contrary, namely, that the Persians did bring forth the bodies of their dead
without the City into the Fields, and there cast them forth naked to be
devourd by Dogs and ravenous Fowls. And moreover that they would not suffer
the bones of the dead to be buried or interred. And when any Carcass was not
presently devoured by the Fowls and the wild Beasts, they accounted it an
unlucky sign, superstitiously believing that that man had a wicked impure
soul, and therefore worthy of Hell, and his neighbors did lament him as a man
who after this life had no hope of Felicity. But if he were soon devoured by
the Beasts, they judged him happy. But now the Persians are more soft and
gentle in their manners and behavior then either the Turks, the Tartarians,
or the Sarazens. They are by nature liberal, and do love civility: and they
reverence Learning and Arts, but especially Astrology, Physic, and Poesy.
They use Parents and Brethren with much respect: and Nobility of blood is
greatly esteemed: wherein they differ from the Turks, which make no
differences of blood or dissent. Moreover, they do entertain and use
strangers courteously: but yet they are very jealous. So that they suffer not
their Wives to come in a strangers sight, though in other matters they use them
with great respect, contrary to the manner of the Turks, who use their Wives
like slaves. The Persian women are very fair. They do addict themselves to
Mechanic Arts, and especially weaving of Silk stuffes which are transported
through all Syria, and other Eastern Countries. They did feed heretofore on the
fruit of the Turpentine Tree, and on Acornes, and wild Pears: their daily
food after running, or other exercises of the body was hard bread, their drink
was water. They get much by buying and selling of Pearls, and sweet Spices,
but especially of Silk, of which here is great store.

TARTARIE, OR, THE GREAT CHAMS EMPIRE.
TARTARIE is a very large Kingdom: for besides a great part of Europe, it
contains all Sarm^^a in Asia, with Scythir and Serica, which they now call
Cathajo. It was so called from the River Tartoro, which waters that part
which we call Magog, and the Inhabitants Mo^gull. It is situate in the North,
on the East it has the most potent Kingdom of China; on the South India, the
Rivers Ganges and Oxus, on the West the Caspian Sea and Poland, from thence it
confineth on Moscovie, and on the North the freezing Sea, which part is thought
to be undiscoverd and unhabited. The Air and Climate is very intemperate, and
there is such horrid Thunder and Lightning in Summer, that many have been
slain by it: now it is very hot, and by and by cold, so that thick Snowes do
fall down. And there are oftentimes such violent storms of wind, that they
will blow men off from their Horses, and stay them as they ride, and overturne
Trees by the roots, and do much other harm beside. It never raineth there in
Winter, but often in Summer, but so sparingly, that it does scarcely moisten
the Earth. But yields good store of Wheat, Rice, and other Fruits: and it
has abundance of Silk, Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper, Cloves, Rhucbarb, and Sugar:
also Musk. Pitch, and in some places Gold and Silver. In some places Wine is
made, but all the Province of Cathaja has no Wine. There is also a black kind
of stone which is dug out of the Mountains, and serves for Fuel; and they
are wont to lay them on their fire, for want of wood. Moreover here are great
store of Oxen, Goats, and Swine, and especially an incredible sort of Horses,
and Cattle. We read in the Tartarian Epistles that the Tartarian Emperor does
keep 10000. white Mares, whose Milk serves him for drink. And moreover that
he keeps 20000. Huntsmen, and 10000. Falkoners. And that this Country is full
of Foul, as Pheasants, Craves, and the like. In that part of Tartary which the
Zavolhensian Tartarians do possess, they report that there is a kind of seed
like to the seed of a Mellon or Pompion, but not so long, which if it be
sowed, a Plant will spring and grow up, which they call Boranetz, that is, the
Lamb. For it grows almost three foot high in the figure and shape of a
Lamb, which it resembles both for the feet, the hoofes, the ears, and the
whole body except the horns. And in stead of horn it has strange hair like
horn. It is covered with a thin skin, which the Inhabitants TARTARIE:
TARTARIA
map do pluck from it, and cover their heads with it. They report that the
inward pith of it is like the meat of a Crabfish: and that if it be wounded or
cut, blood will run from it. It is very sweet, and the root having put forth
of the ground, will grow up as high as ones middle. Beside this is more
wonderful: as long as it has other herbs growing round about it, so long it
does live like a Lamb in a pleasant Pasture, but when they are gone it does
wither and dye, which has been often tried. And which is most strange, Wolves
and other ravenous beasts do most desire it. In the City Quelinfu there are
Hens, which in stead of Feathers have black hair like Cats, but yet they lay
excellent Eggs. They do call the first Emperor of Tartary, who got the
Kingdom and established Laws therein Changius Canes, or Cham. Paulus Venetus
calls him Cinchis. He lived in the year of Christ 1202. Before him this
Nation lived barbarously, without manners, laws, or civil government, being
of no notes in Scythia, and living by keeping of Cattle. The other Princes
descended from this Changius. He quickly enlarged the Empire, from the Country
of Syn^ and the Ocean even to the Caspian Sea. His Son was Iocucham, who
begot Zaincha the third Emperor, whence some did call B^thi. He wasted
Russia, Poland, Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary. Bathi begot the fourth Emperor
Temi^ Cutlu, who was that Tamberlaine, who is well known in Histories for his
extreme Tyranny, who wasted all Asia, and entered even into Egypt. He overcame
the Turkish Emperor Bajazet, and having took him prisoner, put golden fetters
on him, and carried him in a Cage through Asia. The fifth Emperor begotten by
Temir Cutlu was Temir Gzar, who fighting against the Christians in Prussia, was
slain there. The sixth Emperor begotten by Temir Gzar was Macmectzar. His
Son Amectzar was the seventh Emperor. He begot Sziachmet the eighth
Emperor. Tartary is divided into many parts, the lesser which lies toward
Europe between Boristhenes and Tanais, and contains the Taurican
Chersonesus, of which we have spoke in the description of Europe. Also Tartaris
deserta, in which there are many Kine: Zagatar which is Scythia within Imaus:
Cathaja, with the Kingdom of Tangut, which is the ancient Scythia beyond
Ima^s: and lastly ancient Tartaria which was unknown to Ptolemy. The Metropolis
of this Kingdom is Cambalu, by the bank of the River Polisangus, which is 24.
miles in compass. There are 12. Gates, and as many Suburbs. It is a Mart
Town, and very rich in Pearls, Gold, Silver, and Silk. They report that
every day a thousand Carts laden with Silks, and brought hither out of China,
besides other commodities. Moreover there are many famous Cities, as
Samarcauda built by Tamberlaine: Caindo, is a City famous for Merchandising,
in the farthest part of Tartary, and many others, which for brevity sake I
omit. There are many Lakes in Tartary, so that it would be tedious to reckon
them, but yet we will name some of the chiefest. In the Province Caniclu, there
is a Lake in which there is such store of Pearls, that they would be of no
esteem, nor nothing worth, if every one might carry away as many as he listed.
Where it is forbidden on pain of death, that no man shall presume to fish in
this Lake for Pearls, without leave and license from the great Cham. This Lake
also is full of fish. There is another Lake in the Province Caraim which is
very full of Fish, being an hundred miles in compass and others. It is watered
with many Rivers, among which is the great River Pulisachnis. This River
runs into the Ocean, and many Boats laden with commodities do come up it.
There is also the River Caromora, which is so broad, and deep, that it has no
Bridge over it: but yet it rowleth into the Sea: There is also Quiantu, which
is half a mile broad, and very deep and full of fish: also Quian which as
Paulus Venetus writes, is thought to be one of the greatest Rivers in the
world. For the breadth of it in some places is 10. miles, in others 8. miles,
and in some 6. miles. The length of it is 100. days journey: I omit other
matters, and so pass to the public Works and Buildings. The first is a fair
great Marble Palace, beautified with Gold, which was built by the great Cham in
the City Ciandu. And there is another in the same City, and another in the
City Cambalu, built very curiously, and it is about 4. miles in compass,
every Quadrangle containing a mile. It has a very thick wall, which is 10.
paces high. The outward superficies of it is white and red. In the four
corners of the wall there is a fair great Palace, which is in stead of a
Castle. And so likewise in the middle of the fore walls there is a fair Palace
built, so that there are 8. Palaces in all. In these they keep their Armor,
their warlike Furniture, their Ordnance, their Bows, Arrows, Quivers,
Spurs, Bridles, Lances, Bowstrings, and other things necessary in war, and
every several kind of Armor is laid up and kept in several Palaces. But in
the middle of them, or the innermost Court is the Kings Palace, in which the
King dwells. This Palace has no Chambers, but the lower Pavement thereof is
raised 10. hand breadths from the ground: The roof is very high, and adorned
with Pictures, the walls of the Court yards and dining-roomes, do glister with
Gold and Silver. At the first entrance there are fair Pictures to entertain
the eye, and warlike Histories drawn forth with gold and lively colors. The
great Cham has twelve Barons in his Court, who are Governors of his 34.
Provinces: and it is their Office to appoint two Rectors or Governors in every
Province, and they are to provide things necessary for the Kings Army
wheresoever it be, and they acquaint the King with their purposes, who by his
authority confirms their determinations. Malefactors are punished in Tartary
after this manner. If any one has stolen some small matter, which does not
deserve death, he is beaten 7. times with a Staff or Cudgel: and has 17.
blows or strokes given him at a time, or 27. blows, or 47. according to the
quality of his offense: until at last they come to an hundred and 10. stripes
or strokes. And some do die upon this beating. But if any one have stolen a
Horse or any other thing that deserves death, he has a Sword thrust through
him. But he that will buy out his life, he must restore nine times as much as
that which he stole was worth. If any man or woman be taken in adultery they
are put to death by the Law. The Tartarians are divided into Hordes, which
words signifies amongst them a Tribe or Company. And as they live in several
Provinces far distant one from another, so they are as far distant and
different one from another in their manners and kind of life. The men are of a
strong square set stature, having broad fat faces, dark hollow eyes, having
great rough Beards, but the rest of their hair is shaven: they are strong of
body, and bold in courage, and can endure want and labor: when they are on
Horseback, if they chance to be hungry or thirsty, they cut their Horses
veins, and so drink his blood. It is a profane ard barbarous Nation, who
make war their right, and strength and power their law. Many of them have no
houses, but do live in Carts. And because they wander from place to place,
they do usually direct their course by the Stars, and especially by the
North Pole. They do not tarry long in one place, for they think it a great
unhappiness to continue long in the same place. They have on use of money, and
therefore they exchange one thing for another. They say that they are
Ismaelites, and received the law of Mahomet in the year 1246. The Tartars do
feed on gross meat, and especially on flesh, and that raw, or half sod, and
on Milk, and Cheese, but they abstain from Hogs-flesh. They drink Mares
Milk, which they do so temper, that it is like white wine, and is a savory
well-tasted drink. They feed very sluttishly, for they neither use
Tableclothes or Napkins, neither do they wash their hands, bodies, or
Garments. They drink also Water and Milk, and a kind of Beer made of Millet.

THE KINGDOM OF CHINA^
CHINA is a large and potent Kingdom. The Inhabitants do call it Tame, and
themselves Tangis. Ptolomy calls them Sinas, which Ortelius likes of, whom
the most do follow, or their neighbors the Cathajans, which Mercator does
more approve of. All this Country is situate by the Eastern Ocean, and it is
thought to be the farthest Country Eastward. The bounds thereof on the East
are the Eastern Sea; on the South the Province of Cauchinchina; on the West
Brachmana: on the North the Tartarians, a warlike Nation, from whom they are
divided by the Mountains, and a long Wall, which do reach 500. miles. The
Historians of China do report that this Wall was built long since by a King
whose name was Tzinzous, after that by his wisdom he had freed the
Inhabitants of this Country from the Tyranny of the Tartars, which they had
endured 93. years. This Country by reason of the goodness of the air and
soil, and the industry of the people is very fruitful. For the men are not
slothful but laborious, so that they scorn to live idly. Whence it comes to
pass that every corner of this Country does produce and bring forth something.
They sow the dry ground with Wheat and Barley. The plain wet moorish places,
with Rice, which they sow four times every year. The Hills and Mountains
have abundance of Pine-trees, between which they sow Millet and Pulse. So that
every place and field bears some fruit: and there are every where Gardens
full of Roses, and diverse kinds of flowers and fruits. They have great store
of Hemp and Flax, and Woods of Mulberry Trees, for keeping of Silke-wormes.
Moreover there is great store of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and other Metals,
also Precious Stones, Pearls, Musk, Sugar, and Rheubarb: and that is thought
to be the best which is brought from thence through Persia by Land: for some
think that the Sea does take away much virtue from it. This Kingdom also does
produce and yield a medicinable kind of wood, which the people of China do
call Lampala, and we Radix Chinae, or the China Root: and it is commonly used
through all the Indies, against Impostumes, the Palsy, and the French disease.
The Root of it is hard and heavy, and of a white color. There are infinite
store of Cattle on the Mountains, and in the Meadows. The Woods are full of
Boares, Foxes, Hares, Cunnies, Sables, Martines, and other beasts of the same
kind, whose skins are much used for lining of Garments. So that it is both
pleasant and profitable hunting of them. There are also great plenty of Birds,
especially water Foul, and such great store of Ducks, that in Canton which is
one of the least Cities of this Kingdom, 10. or 12. thousand Duckes are spent
in one day. And though this Country have great store of Foul, yet they make
them increase by this means. In the Spring time they lay two or three thousand
Eggs in the Sand, by the heat and warmth whereof young Duckes are hatched.
And they do the same in the Winter time but then they do not lay their Eggs
in the Sand, but under a Wicker Basket or Pannier, on which they strew warm
ashes, the heat whereof in some few days does hatch the Eggs. This Country
is under one King and Monarch, whom the people call Lord of the World, and
son of Heaven. There are in it 250. chief Cities, whose names do end in
Fu: which signifies a City: as Cotonfu, Panquinfu. And their Towns, which are
many do end in Cheu. There are innumerable sort of Villages which are
inhabited, by reason of their continual tillage and Husbandry. All the Cities
are situate by the bank of some Navigable River, and fortified with strong
walls, and deep ditches. There are many pleasant Lakes, as the round Lake in
the Province of Sancius, which was made by an Inundation in the year 1557.
which is memorable in regard that 7. Cities, besides Towns and Villages, and
a great number of people were drowned in it, only one Boy saved in the body of
a Tree. The Rivers and the Seas are full of Fish. And this Country because it
bordereth on the Sea, and has many Navigable Rivers, is very populous both by
Sea and Land. The Gates of their Cities are very magnificent and stately
built. The streets are as strait as if they were made by a line, and so broad,
that 10. or 15. men may ride together in a rank, and these are distinguished
and severd one from another with triumphall Arches, which do grace the City
very much. The Portugals do report that they saw in the City Fuchus a Tower,
which was built on 14. Marble Pillars, which were 40. hand breadth high, and
12. broad. This is such a curious, beautiful, and costly work, that it far
exceeds all the proud and magnificent structures in Europe. They have fair
Temples both in their Cities and in the Country. The King of China has a
Governor under him, who is as it were a Viceroy, whom they call Tutan. He
judges and determines all suites and controversies within the Kingdom, and is
very severe in administering Justice. Thieves and murderers are kept
continually in prison, until they dye with whipping, and with hunger and cold.
For though they are condemned to dye, which is for the most part by whipping,
yet the execution is so long delayed after the sentence is given, that the most
part of those which are condemned do die in prison. Hence it comes to pass
that there are so many prisoners in every City: So that there are sometimes a
thousand Prisoners in the City Canton. Theft (than which no crime is more
hateful in these parts) is punished with whipping and cruel stripes. And this
is the manner of their whipping. They set a man with his face bending
downward, with his hands bound behind him, and then they whipp him on the THE
KINGDOM OF CHINA^
CHINA
map thighs with a whipp made of Reeds and Canes, which gives such a vehement
stroke, that the first blow will make the blood spring forth, and the second
blow will so torment the malefactor, that he cannot stand upon his feet. Two
Beadles do whipp him on both his thighs with such vehemence, that the most of
them do dye at the 50. or 60. stroke for all their sinews are broken. The
Portugals report that every year above 2000. men are put to death in this
manner. Their whipp is 5. fingers thick, and one broad, which they wet
continually with water, that it may be more flexible, and may give the stronger
blow. It is lawful for the men to have many wives, one of which they keep at
home, and the rest in other places. They punish adultery with death. In the
Cities there are no Brothells, for all the whores are banished into the
Suburbs. They celebrate their Nuptial Feasts, and weddings, at the time of the
new Moon, and commonly in the Month of March, which is the first day of their
new year. And they do keep these Festivalls with great solemnity, and for
many days together, with Organs, Music, and Comicall Plays. The Chinoans
have for the most part broad faces, thin beards, flat Noses, and little Eyes:
yet some of them are well favored enough. Their color and complexion is like
the Europeans, but they are somewhat brown, and swarfie that dwell about
Canton. They seldom or never go out of their own Country, neither do they
admit any stranger to come into the innermost parts of their Country: unless
the King give him leave. They are as stout drinkers, as the Germans and
Dutchmen. Concerning the Religion of this Country, they believe that all
things were created, that all things here below are governd from above, and
from the Heaven: which they believe to be the greatest of all the Gods, whom
they express by the first Character of their Alphabet. They do worship the
Sun, the Moon, and the stars, and the Devil (whom they painte in the same
manner as the Europaeans do) least he should do them harm as they say. The
Chinoans are so neat in making all kind of household stuff, that they seem
rather the works of nature then of Art. The use of Ordinance, and the Art of
Printing is here of such antiquity, that they know not the first Inventor
thereof. The Portugalls do write much concerning their sagacitie and
craftiness, and that they have Coaches, which will go with Sails, which they
know so well how to guide, that they will make them in a short time carry them
by Land whither the list. Neither can I omit their clear white kind of Potters
ware, which we call China ware, which they make in this manner. They mingle
Sea snales or Periwinkles, with egge-shells, and putting some other things to
them, they beat them till they become one substance. Then they lay it under
the ground, and there they let it lie to season and ripen 80. or 100. year,
and they leave it to their heirs as a precious treasure, so that they commonly
do come to use that which their Grandfathers first laid to ripen. And it is an
ancient custom observd amongst them, that he that takes away the old must lay
new in the place. Here is much commerce and trading especially for sweet
spices and ^ilkes. For out of Malacca, Bengala, and other places, Pepper,
Saffron, Musk Nutts, Cassia, and other kinds of sweet Spices are brought
into China. But their chiefest trading is in Silk. For John Barrius in his
Decads of Asia does write that at the City Nimpo, which some do call Liampo,
that he saw some Portugals in three months space, that carried away by
Shippin 166000. pound weight of silk. Also Antonius Pigiafetta does afirme,
that Musk is brought from hence into other parts of the World: and Andreas
Corsalis says, that Rheubarb and Pearls, are brought from hence.

THE EAST INDIES.
THE Indies is the greatest Country in Asia, it is so called from the River
Indus. Ptolemie devideth it into two parts, namely India on this side Ganges,
and India beyond Ganges. It is thought that the latter is called in the sacred
Scriptures Hevila, or as some write Havilah, or Evilath, and the former Seria.
But we read in Marius that the Inhabitants do call it Macyn or Magin: others
that follow Mercator do call it Mangi and China. John Barrius affirms that
the Inhabitants do call the former ^ndostan. It is the largest Country of all
the world. Pomponius writes that a ship may sail 60. days and nights along
the coast of it. But it is bounderd, (according to Pliny and Strabo) on the
West with the River Indus, which divides Persia from India: on the North is
the Mountain Taurus: on the East it is encompassed with the Eastern Ocean: on
the South with the Indian Ocean. The Country has a wholesome gentle air, yet
it is so great that it has a different climate in many places; for in some
places it is hott namely toward the Equator, and in other places temperate
enough and rather cold toward the North. But the Country it self in general
both for the Situation, the air, and the fertility of the Soil, does far
exceed other parts of the world. Here new Stars do rise and set, and here
are two Harvests in a year and two Summers, and the Winter is in the middle
between them, and the Estesian or East winds do cool and qualify the
heat. Although this Country for the most part has no Wheat, yet it yields
plenty of Pulse, and other grains, and especially of Barley, and Rice. It does
also bring forth diverse other fruits, as Pepper, Franckincense, Myrrh, Ginger,
and in the most Southern parts Cinnamon, Spicknard, and other Aromaticks and
sweet spices, as Arabia and AEthiopia. There are also Honey or Sugar Canes.
Besides it has many Druggs, and roots of trees, some of which are wholesome,
and some hurtful. What should I speak of their Mettalls, stones, and
Mineralls. For there is great store of gold and silver in the Country, as also
of Brass, Iron, and Copper as Diadorus witnesses: But Plinny says that it
has neither Brass nor Lead, but instead thereof, Precious stones and
Pearls, which the Sea casts up upon the shore. For it has abundance of
Berills, Adamants, Carbuncles, and Pearls. Here is silk enough to furnish all
the world. Here are greater beasts than in others parts of the world, as Oxen,
Cammels, Lions, Dogs, and Elephants. There are great store of Elephants. And
great Dragons in the Wilderness, that are as big as Elephants, and do fight
continually with them. And Dogs as fierce as Lions. And great store of
Serpents, which the Inhabitants do roast and eat, and a kind of THE EAST
INDIES^
INDIA Orientalis
map Ants, which they eat with Pepper as we do Crabfishes. Here are white
Apes, and Cameleons, which were heretofore thought to live by air. Moreover
there are diverse sorts of Birds not known to other Nations, besides great
store of Hens, Pheasants, and Partridges: and also Parrets of diverse colors.
Plinny writes thus of the Indies. The Indians alone of all nations were never
droven out of their Country, they had from Bacchus to Alexander the great 153.
Kings, in 6402. years, and 3. months. And Strabo writes that never any but
Bacchus, Hercules, and Alexander got the victory against them, although Cirus
and S^mirami^ assailed them often. But leaving these matters let us pass to
the Cities. The companions of Alexander the great do write, that there were
5000. Towns in that part of India which they conquered, and every one as big
as Co, whence you may easily collect the vast largeness of this Country. The
chief City is Calechut, which is the famous Mart of all the East. There are
also other Citttes, The Cities.
as Cambaja, Dec^n, Batticalla, Canonor, and many others. There are also many
great Lakes. In the history of Alexander there is a mention made of a Lake, The
Lakes.
which has great old wood in it, here Alexanders army was like to perish for
thirst. But the greatest Lake of all is Chiamy, which is 400. Miles in
compass, and is 600 Miles distant from the Sea. Hence many chief Rivers do
issue: the next unto this Lake is ^incuthay and others. The Rivers.
Here are many great Rivers. It is reported that Alexander the great did sail
every day 600. Furlongs in the River Indus, yet he could but sail over it in
5. months and odd days: and yet it is lesser than Ganges. It rises out of
the Mountain Ca^sasus which is called Paropamissus, and now Naugocrot, and so
having run 900. miles it discharges it self into the Southern or Indian
Ocean. In which compass of ground it receives 20. Rivers, but the famousest
are Hydaspes, which brings 4. others with it, and Cantabra, which brings
three with it. Some say that the Rivers Ganges do issue from unknown Springs,
as Nilus, and that it waters the Country round about as Nilus does: some say
that it rises out of the Scythian Mountains, and that 19. Rivers do run
into it: Some say that the Springs thereof do break forth with great
violence: and so rolling down through the Rocks, it runs first through the
Plains, and from thence glideth gently forward, and that it is 8. miles broad
in the narrowest part of it: and in other places 100. Furlongs broad, and is no
where less then 20. yards deep. This River in the Scriptures is called
Phison. But now Geographers do seek for it. For some suppose it is that River
which flows into the Bay of Bengala, perhaps in regard of the affinity
between their names, for the Inhabitants do call it Guengua. But our Mercator
shows by good probable reasons that Ganges is that River which is called Rio
de Cantaon. Next to these Rivers, there are the Rivers Mandona, Chaberis, Ava,
Campumo, Menam, Menon, and many others. Megasthenes reports that there are
60. Rivers in the Indies, many of which do overflow their banks in the Summer
like Nilus, which is the chief cause of the fruitfulness and fertility of
this Country. It is said that Ganges has Crocodiles as well as Nilus, also
Dolphins, and Eeles 30. foot long, as Pliny witnesses. Moreover the chiefest
part of the East Indies lies over against the Southern or Indian Ocean, by
the Shore or Sea Coast: which although for the most part it has Havens, yet in
many places it is so environd with Islands, Rocks, and Sands, that it is
dangerous sailing that way. Solinus says that the Indian Seas have Whales as
big as 4. Acres of ground. There is also a kind of Fish called a
Whirle-poole, which are very great, and will lift themselves above the Hatches
of a Ship, and will so spout Seawater out of their spouts, that the weight of
it falling down again is ready to overset Ships. Here are many Mountains,
The Mountains.
so that it would be troublesome to reckon them, many of which have no green
things on them. Imaus, Emodus, Par^pamissus, do join together being parts of
Caucasus. The Woods.
The Woods in the Indies as Solinus writes are so thick that you cannot shoot
an Arrow into them: their Orchards have Figge-trees which are 60. yards about.
And the shadow of their boughs do reach two Furlongs. Their leaves are like an
Amazonian Bucklar. Their Apples are very sweet. The Marshes have a kind of
Reed which is so thick that being cleft, and hallowed, it does serve for a
Boat to sail with. The Indies have only the Ebon-tree, and on the Rocks
there are some Trees, which do sweat forth Frankincense. It has also another
Tree that bears Indian Nuts. All this Nation was divided heretofore into 7.
orders or ranks, Their government.
the first was the Philosophers: the second the Husbandmen: the third the
Shepherds: the fourth the Artificers: the fifth the Soldiers: and the sixth
the Epophors or Spies, who inform the King of all things done in India. The
seventh were public Counsels, being few in number, but famous for Nobility and
wisdom. For out of them they were chosen to be of the Kings Counsel, and to
judge of doubtful matters. Moreover the Captains and Princes were chosen out
of them. Concerning their Laws and Statutes: the most of them have unwritten
Laws: and some of them written, in which as in their contracts and bargains
they are very plain, neither are they litigious and desirous of controversies.
For they know not what belongs to Bonds and Morgages, and they lend without
witnesses or sealing of Bonds, even upon their own words. He that is found
and convinced do have borne false witness, has the tops of his fingers cut
off. He that depriveth another of any members, is not only punished in the
same member, but his hand is also cut off. But if any man deprive an Artificer
or Tradesman of his hand or eye, it is death. Nobility of blood is much
esteemed among them, and that anciently. The most of them have noe learning,
but do all things by memory. The Gymnosophists who are called Brachmani, are
their Priests: and they toe study Astrology, Philosophy, and Physic. And
besides these, there are also the Abduti, who are very abstainous for a time,
and afterward they think they may freely commit all manner of wickedness. The
Indians do all wear long hair, their chief bravery consists in Precious
Stones, and their habit is various and different. Some do go in Linen or
Woollen: some are clothed with Beasts skins, or Birds Feathers, some go naked,
and do cover only their secret parts. Their bodies are black, which is not
accidental but natural arising from the quality of the seed of which they are
begotten. They are of a great large stature. They have many Wives which they
buy of their Parents for a pair of Oxen, and some they keep to be their
slaves, others for issue sake and pleasure, and unless they enforce them to be
chaste, they may lawfully play the Harlots. Artificers and Tradsmen are in
great esteem in the Indies, for they are not only free from tribute, but they
have corn allowd them by the King. And there is great trading here in many
places, especially for sweet Spices Precious Stones, Cotton, and Silk.

THE CHIEF ISLANDS OF THE EAST INDIES, AMONG WHICH ARE THE FAMOVS MOLVCCO
ISLANDS.
THERE follows in our method the Molucco Islands with others, which are famous
through the World for abundance of sweet Spices and especially Cloves. There are
five Islands which are comprehended under this name, Ternate, or Tarante, Tidor
or Theodori, Motir or Muthil, Machian or Mare, and Bachian or Bachianum. They
lie under the Aequinoctiall between the Islands Celebes and Gilolo. The
greatest of them is scarce 6. miles in compass: and all of them are not above
25. miles in compass. The Air is very unwholesome, and many Merchants that
come to trade, do die here. The soil is dry, and spongie, so that it
presently drinks in all the rain that falls, before it can run into the
Sea. It does bring forth many Aromaticks and sweet Spices, as Nutmegs, Mastick,
Aloes, Saunders, Cinnamon, Ginger* Pepper, and Cloves, of all which it has
wonderful great store. It yields no kind of food, but that which is gotten
by exchange of these commodities. There are also in the Molucco Islands such
great Canes, that the Inhabitants do make Tons and Hogsheads of them. The
Clove Tree grows out of the Rocks, and afte 4. years growth, it bears
fruit. The Leaves of this Tree both for shape and thickness are like the
leaves of a Bay Tree. The Blossoms do put forth like Fennel seed, and are
like the Blossoms of an Orange Tree. The Fruit as soon as the Blossom is
fallen off, buddeth forth like a Nail, whence it is called a Clove from
Clavus, which signifies a Nail, because a Clove is like a Nail. At the first
they are red, but afterward the heat of the Sun makes them wax black: and
they sprinkle them with Salt Water to harden them and make them last the
better. And these Trees grow thick together, like a Wood. The Inhabitants do
part these Trees among themselves, and do hide the fruit of them, that they
may sell it to Merchants. In these Islands there is a kind of Bird called
Manucodiata, about the bigness of a Magpie, and half a foot long: The head
of it is not round but flat like a Swallows, and it has a long forked tail,
but no feet, so that it flies continually, and lives by the air. On the
fore part of the head it has feathers as small as an hair. It is of a fresh
bright green color, like the green feathers of a wild Ducke, or an Emerald.
Under the throat it has small short feathers, which are yellow, or of a
Citron or Orange color, and the breast is brighter. The uppermost part of the
neck from the head is coverd with thick feathers, of a sooty color, which
reaching to the tail, do spread abroad, and are there of a lighter color.
The belly of it is of the same color, and it is as big beneath as above. The
wings of it being spread forth, are half a foot in breadth. And the feathers
are underneath of a Box color, and those about are white and half speckled
with black. The Quills of the Feathers do not stick in the wings, but stand
off from them, so that the wind and air may pass through them. If this Bird
light there they superstitiously believe that it is sent from Heaven or from
Mahumets Paradise. And they make so great account of it, that Kings think
themselves safe in Battle by the protection thereof, albeit according to their
custom they place themselves in the forefront. The chiefest of these Islands
are Tidor and Ternate, the last of which has two convenient Havens. The
Inhabitants of these Islands are Heathens, and do worship the Sun and Moon
as Gods: they ascribe the government of the day to the Sun, and of the Night
to the Moon, and they say that the Sun is a Man, and the Moon a Woman, and
they call them the Father and Mother of the other Stars, all of which they
account to be the lesser Gods. They do salute and reverence the rising Sun
with certain Verses, and also the Moon when it shines by night, and do pray
unto her for Children, that their Cattle may prosper, and the Earth may be
fruitful, and such other matters. But they reverence Piety and Justice, and
especially they love Peace and Quietness, and do hate Wars. These Molucco
Islands were discovered by CHARLES the fifth, concerning which I will discourse,
because it is worthy of memory. When there arose a dissension between the
Portugals in the East, and the Castellanians in the West, both striving to
enlarge their Princes Territories: that the one might not hinder the other, the
new world, by the authority of Pope Alexander the sixth, and others, was
divided into two parts: and Articles and Conditions drawn between them, that
whatsoever should be discoverd by any voyage made from the Islands of the
Atlantic Sea, which are commonly called the Hesperides toward the East, should
belong to the Portugals: and whatsoever was discovered Westward should belong
to the Castellanians; so the latter discovered America: and the former the most
parts of the East, and in process of time the desire of gain drew them on so
far, that it is said they encroached on the part which was adjudged to the
Castellanians: which controversy cannot be decided unless Ferdinando
Magellanus be made Judge thereof. For he being a Portugal and hating his
Prince Emanuel, because he had not rewarded him for the service he had done
him, showing that the Moluccoes by the former division did belong to the
Castellanians, and being sent in the year 1519. by Charles the fifth, to
discover the aforesaid Islands by a new way, he so cast and framed his voyage,
that having sailed from Spain 52. degrees Southward, and then bending his
course Westward, he sayld round about by the lower Hemisphere, and so at last
his Ships arrived in the East at the Molucco Islands which he sought. And so his
companions sailing along the upper Hemisphere by the Coasts of Asia and Afric
returned into Spain, having sailed round about the World. But Magellane
himself was slain as he was fighting against the Barbarians before the
discovery of the Moluccoes: and after some of his company had THE ISLANDS OF THE
EAST INDIES.
INSULAE INDIAE orientalis
map found out the Moluccoes, the other Ships being dispersed abroad, and
took, there was but one Ship only that returned safe into Spain loaded with
sweet Spices: and great Pearls, which are found in some of the Islands, some as
big as a Turtles Egg, or a Hens Egg, or a Goose Egg. Truly these Mariners
are more worthy of eternal memory, than those Argonauts who sailed with Jason
of Th^ssaly, Prince of the Argonauts to Colchis. And the Ship it self, which
returned safe and well home after so many perils and dangers, is more worthy to
be placed among the Stars, than that old Ship Argo. For this sailed only
from Greece by Pontus. But Magellanes Ship sailed from Spain Southward, and
then by the lower Hemisphere Westward, and so having sailed round about the
world, returned Westward through the upper Hemisphere into Spain. So much
concerning this; let us now proceed to other matters.

The MOLUCCO Islands.
GILOLO or Gilolum which is also called Batochina, is one of the Islands which
they commonly call Del Moro. The Climate here is intemperate, and the Air
hott. It has abundance of Rice, and of the pith of a kind of Tree, which is
called Sagu, of which they make bread: and out of the same Tree they get out a
kind of juice, which they drink in stead of wine. It has great store of
wild Hens. And the Sea near unto it has great store of Crabs, which taste
like Mutton. The Inhabitants are Barbarous and cruel, and as heretofore so
now, they will eat man's flesh. The Island Celebes with some others, which are
comprehended under the same name do lie Westward from the Moluccoes. There is
the I Will Ambon, which names the Islands near unto it. It is 500. miles in
compass. But it is rugged and barren, and the Inhabitants thereof are
Anthropophagi, or Men-eaters, and Pirates: Bandan are about 7. small Islands,
which are situate on the South side of the Molucco Islands, in the seventh
degree of Southern Latitude, others do place them in 6. degrees and ^. They
are called Bandan, which is the greatest Island, and does name all the rest,
also Mira, Rosolargium, Ay, Rom, Netra, and Gunuape the least of them all,
which burns continually, and is unhabitable. These Islands have Nutmegs and
Mastick growing upon one Tree. The Nutmegge Tree, is a tall spreading Tree,
like to our Oak. The Nut has a threefold shell or covering. The first is
thick to defend it against the weather. The other is a thin skin like a Nut,
which encompasses a third shell: this thin skin is the blossom of the Nutmeg,
which the Spaniards call Macis, and we Mace, being an excellent and wholesome
kind of Spice. There is Ginger in all these Islands, of which there are two
sorts, wild, and planted Ginger which is better than the other: it has a
leaf like Saffron, the root has a sweet smell, but being tasted biteth like
Pepper, and hotter then Pepper. Cinnamon, which Herodotus reports is sometimes
found in Birds Nests, and especially in the Phoenix Nest, is the Bark of a
Shrub, which is like a Pomegranate Tree. This Bark when it gapeth and cleaves
with the heat of the Sun is took off from the Tree, and so being hardened in
the Sun, it becomes Cinnamon, and because it is long like a Reed or Cane it
is commonly called Canella or Cinnamon rind. The Island Timor is situate in the
10. degree of Southern Latitude. It has great store of yellow and white
Saunders, with which the Ilanders do trade for Iron, Hatchets, Swords, and
Knives. Mercator calls the Island Borneo, which Ptolemy calls the Island of
good Fortune. It lies between Cambaja and Celebes, and Calamianes is next
unto it. The Southern part of it is under the Aequinoctiall Line, the rest
lies Northward. It is the greatest Island in that Ocean, and some do report
that the compass of it is three months sail, others report that the
circumference of it is 2200. mile. It abounds with all things necessary, and
it yields Camphire, Mushroms, Adamants, and little Horses. There are many
Havens in this Island and fair Cities, as Cabura, Trajaopura, Tamoarates,
Malano, and Borneo, which is the chief of them all: in which there are 25000.
Inhabitants. It is situate in a Moorish Fennish place by the Sea side, like
Venice. The Turk is their King, unto whom they must not speak but by an
Interpreter.

THE ISLAND OF IAPAN.
THIS Island Marcus Paulus calls Ziprangri, Maginus heretofore called it
Ghryse, and Mercator the golden Chersonesus: but they call it commonly Iapan.
There are three chief Islands, as Peter Maffejus witnesses, some other
scattering Islands which lie by them, and are separated from them by arms of
the Sea which flow between them. The first and the greatest is called Iapan,
which is divided into three and fifty Signiories or Lordships: the chief
whereof are Meaci, and Amaguncij. The second is called Ximo, and it has 9.
Lordships, the chief whereof are Bungi, and Figen. The third is Xicoum which
contains 4. Kingdoms. The length of the whole Island as some do report is
almost 200. leagues: but breadth is not so much, for it is no where above 30.
leagues broad, and in some places but 10. There is no certainty concerning the
compass of it. It lies Northward from the Aequinoctiall from the 30. degree,
almost to the 38. degree. On the East it has new Spain; on the North Scythia,
or Tartary, on the West China: and on the South a great Sea between it and
undiscovered Lands. It has a wholesome Climate, but it has much cold and
Snow, neither is it very fruitful. In the month of September they do reap
their Rice, and in some places they do reap Wheat in May, neither do make
Bread of it, but a kind of Pudding. The Inhabitants do dig diverse sorts of
Metals out of bowels of the Earth, which makes other remote Nations come to
trade with them. And this Island has such store of Gold, that as Marcus Paulus
Venetus witnesses, the Kings Royal Palace was covered, with streets of Gold,
as we cover Houses with Lead or Brass. They have Trees for delight and bearing
of fruit like ours. And in many places there is great store of Cedar Trees,
which are so tall and thick, that Carpenters make Pillars of Churches of them,
and Masts for Ships of great burden. The Japonians do not keep Sheep, Hogs,
Hens, nor Geese about their Houses, But in the Fields and Meddowes there are
whole Droves of Oxen and Horses: and the Forests and Thickets are full of
Wolves, Connyes, Boares, and Hearts. And it has diverse sorts of Foul, as
Pheasants, Duckes, Ring-Doves, Turtle-Doves, Starlings, and Moorehens. Iapan
was heretofore subject to one Emperor or Governor, who was called Vo or Dair,
until he growing ^ffeminate with long peace, and addicting himself to
pleasure and idleness, began to be contemned and despised of his own Nobles,
and especially the Cubi, for so the two chief Noblemen were called, who
afterward slew one another. But he is counted the chief of the THE ISLAND OF
IAPAN.
IAPAN I.
map Japonians, who governs Meacum, and the Lordships near unto it, which
Country they call by one common name Tensa. The Tyrant Nobunurga did sometime
possess these parts. He being killed in his Throne by Conspirators, and his
Children either expulsed or murdered by faction and force, Faxiba one of the
chief Dukes succeeded after him. The names of the Cities.
But now Taicosana or Taico is the Monarke of Iapan. The chief City of Iapan
is Meacum, which is a great City, being 21. miles in compass, but now a third
part is decayed by the Ilanders civil Wars. Here the chief Magistrates of
Iapan dwell. There are besides the famous City Ossacaia, which is potent,
free, and the richest City as some suppose in all the East. Here are a great
many Merchants which resort hither from every place, of which the meanest is
worth 30 thousand Crowns, and the other are incredible rich. Bungum is is a
chief City, and well seated, in which there is a great number of Christians.
There is also the City Coya sacred to one Bontius, whom they call Combodassi.
All the Princes are buried in this City, or if otherwheres, yet they send one
of their teeth at least to be buried here; so much do they reverence this
place. Fiongo is a City 18 leagues distant from Meacum. This City in
Nobunungas time was for the most part wasted. And an Earthquake in the year
1596. overthrew a great part of it, and afterward the greatest part of that
which remained was burnt. There is also the City Amangasaqui five leagues from
the Sea over against Sacai. It has also Vosuquin, Funaium, and Tosa, which are
all fair Cities, and others, which for brevity sake I omit. The Havens.
Here are many Havens, among which Ochinofamanus, in which a great number of
Ships do lie at Road. And it has many Mountains, Mountains.
but especially two which are very high, the one of which does daily cast forth
flames of fire, on the top whereof the Devil, though a clear transparent
cloud does appear to men: the other is called Figenojama, which is very high,
so that it is some leagues above the clouds. Their public works.
They do build magnificent Temples, and sumptuous Friaries and Nunneries, and
proud Palaces. We have formerly out of Paulus Venetus mentioned the royal
Palace, which was coverd with sheets of Gold. And it is reported also that the
Halls and Parlors were coverd in the same manner. Neither are they now less
sumptuous and magnificent in such kind of works. Taico or Taicosama who was
Monarke hereof did build a Court here, which he coverd with a thousand rich
Carpets with silk Fringes, and every one of these Carpets were 8. lands
breadth long, and 4. broad. It was built with very precious wood, and so gilded
within, that it may seem incredible. Before this Court in a fair Plain, he
commanded that a Theater should be raised for acting of Comoedies. I pass by
other matters for brevity sake. The private Buildings.
The most have wooden houses in regard they have frequent Earthquakes, and
some have houses built from the ground of stone, very neately and curiously. At
Meacum those three men live, who have the chief power through the Island, and
are the prime men of all the Kingdom. The first, who is called Zazo, Their
manner of government
is like the chief Priest to look to Church matters. The second is called
Voo, who looks to the conferring and bestowing of dignities and honors. The
third called Cubacama, looks to matters of peace, of war. But the people of
this I Will are divided into five Orders, the first are the Magistrates and
Governors, which they call by a common name Toni, although the Toni there are
several degrees of dignity, as we have Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls.
The next Order is the Clergy, whose heads are shaven, and do live a single
life. There are diverse sects of them. And there are some who like the Knights
of the Rhodes are both Soldiers and Churchmen. But they are called by one
common appellation or name Bonzij. The third order consists of the Citizens,
and the other Nobility. The next are the Merchants and Tradsmen, and the last
are the Husbandmen. All kinds of Delinquents and Malefactors are punished
either with banishment or death. They are commonly executed with a Sword: but
in some places these Thieves that are taken, are carried through the City on a
Hurdle, and so executed out of the City. In matters of religion they do
miserably err, for those aforesaid Bonzij are their Tutors in religion, and
their two Gods are Amida and Xoca. And they have other Gods also to whom they
pray for future blessings, which they call Fotoques. And they have other
inferior Gods which have power to give them health, children, wealth, and
those things which appertain to the body: these they call Camis. Here are
diverse Schools in many places, which we call Academies. Their School*
There is a School in the Town Banoum, where they solemnly take Degrees from
the Rector or Governor thereof. And amongst the rest there is a Seminary of
Jesuits, in which the Japonians do learn the Portugal language, and the
Europeans the Japonian language. Moreover the Japonians do use Printing. Their
Manners.
And generally they are a witty, crafty people, and have good natural gifts,
both for judgment, dociblenesse, and memory. Poverty is no reproach nor
disgrace to any one. They hate cursing, stealing, and rash swearing. They are
of a tall lusty stature, and comely of body. They are strong and lusty, and
able to bear arms until they be threescore years old. They have but little
beards; but they wear their hair after diverse fashions, the youths do pull
off all the hair on the forepart of their head, and the common people do pull
off half the hair on their heads. And Noblemen do pull off all, except it
be some few hairs which are left at the hinder part of their head, and it is
held an affront for any one to presume to touch them. They lay fair Carpets or
Quilts upon the ground, and upon them they sleep, Their manner of feeding.
and dine upon them, kneeling on their knees, and sitting on their thighs. They
have as great a care of cleanliness as the Chinoans, who by the help of two
stalks which they use at meals, do neither let any thing fall by, nor have
no need to wipe their fingers. They come to supper without shoes, that so they
may not foul the Carpet with treading on it. The poorer sort especially by the
Sea side do live by Herbs, Rice, and Fish: the rich have great set Banquets:
at every Dish the Guests Trenchers are changed which have no Napkins belonging
to them but are made of Cedar or Pine wood, and are a hand-breadth thick. Their
meat is served in, in the form of a Pyramid, besprinkled with Gold, with
Cypress boughs sticking in it. Their Traffi^^.
And sometimes Foul with gilded Bills and Feet, are brought in whole in great
Dishes. Here the Portugals do trade, for here are found great store of
Pearls, and Rubies, and other Precious Stones, and also Gold which do make
the Island very rich.

THE ISLAND ZEILAN.
THE Island Zeilan or Ceilon the Arabians do call Tenarizim and Ternasseri,
that is, the Land of Delight, The Island.
and the Indians Hibernarum. This Island Ptolemy calls Taprobana, as Barrius
and Corsalus do witness, The Names.
which Varrerius does also affirm. And Ortelius in his Treasury of Geography
does consent unto him. But our Mercator thinks it to be Nanigeris, Ptolemies
Greek Books do call it Pamigenesis; unto whom other do agree. But I leave
the matter undetermined and indifferent between both. This most excellent
Island Zeilan lies 10. The Situation
degrees from the Aequinoctiall not far from the Promontory Comorinus. The
compass of it is 240. leagues, or as some say 700. mile: the length of it is
78. leagues, 240. or 50. miles. The breadth of it is 44. leagues, or 140.
miles. This Island although it lie in the Torrid Zone, The Climate.
yet it has so temperate a Climate, and so wholesome an air, The Fertility.
that for that respect it excels all the Provinces of the Indies: and some
have thought that Paradise was here. The air is very mild and gentle, and the
Summer nor Winter is never too violent. The Soil is fruitful and always
green, and full of Flowers. So that we may say with the Poet concerning this
Island.

Hic Ver purpureum, Varios hic flumina circum,
Fundit humus Flores. --
Here both the Spring, and Earth sweet flowers yield,
Which by the Rivers grow in every Field.
The Trees are always loaded with blossoms or fruits, as Oranges, Citrons,
Lemons, and other fruits. It bears also Dates, and sweet Spices, as Cinnamon,
Cloves, Pepper, and the like. But the Date tree alone does afford the
Inhabitants meat, drink, and boats. They call the fruit Coquin, and the
bark Cayro. Boats are made of the bodies of these Trees, Sails of the
leaves, Ropes of the bark, the thinner slenderer parts whereof they use in
stead of thread to sow their Sails withal, and to bind the beams and
plankes together, without the help of any Iron Nail, and when they have made
a complete Boat, they load it with the fruit of the same tree. But there is
little store of Rice which is therefore brought thither out of the Kingdom of
Malabar, and Coromandel. It has Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals,
which the Kings will not suffer to be dug forth, but do preserve them as
matters of State and Regality. And some think, because the desire of getting
this Gold should not provoke others to invade them. It yields also Iron,
Hemp or Flax, and Brimstone, and Ivory. And there are many Pretions Stones in
this Island, as Rubies, Hyacinths, Saphires, Chrysolites, and those which are
commonly called Ochi di gatta. There are great store of all kind of wild
beasts, as Hearts, Mules, Boares, Hares, Cunnies, The variety of living
creatures.
and the like, and Elephants, which they sell by measure as we do cloth. For
these are the best Elephants in the West Indies, and as Hugo Linscotanus
relates other Elephants of other places do reverence and worship them. But
seeing we are fallen into discourse of Elephants, I think it not impertinent
to speak something concerning this beast. The Arabians do call an Elephant
Fill, and his tooth Cenafil, the Aethiopians Itembo. It is a very docible
understanding beast, and of a gentle tractable nature. It seems to go
slowly, yet no man can go so fast. And some report that Elephants have been
found, who in the night time would bewail their evil fortune with s^ghes and
tears. They live 200. years. The Male Elephants have great long teeth, but
the Females lesser. It is a jealous beast, and it will be so mad and furious,
for jealousy, that it will neither eat nor sleep. Christopher Acosta does
relate a memorable History concerning the Elephant, which I will here insert in
Iustus Lipsius his own words. There was an Elephant in the City Cochin, who
having not his meat brought him at his set hour, cries out and brayes. His
Master excuses the matter, and shows him that the Brass vessel wherein his
meat was usually put did run out, and therefore he could not bring it in a
broken cracked vessel. And so tells him that if he will eat he must carry it
to the Smith ^o be mended. He obeyes, takes it in his Trunck, and carries it
to the Smith. The Smith either through negligence or to make sport with the
beast, mends and stops it badly. The Elephant brings it back. His Master sees
the fault and is angry. He rayles at him being absent, and chafes at the
Elephant and makes him carry back the brazen vessel again. He does so, and
in a grumbling manner flings it at the Smith. He speaks him fair meaning to
cozen him again, and taking his Hammer makes a show as if he meant to stop and
close up the leakes, but he would not be deceived again: for he takes the
brass Kettle and carries it to the River, dippes it in, and fills it with
water, to try it. He seeing it run out and leake, being very angry runs
back to the Smith, and brayes at him aloud. The neighbors flock together, and
among them the Viceroy. The Smith strives to mittigate the Elephants anger
with fair words, and at last takes the Vessel and mends it very well. But the
Elephant would not trust him, goes back to the River, draws up water with it,
and when he saw that it held water, he turned himself to those that stood
near him, and showed them it, and called them as it were to witness what he
had done, and so at last went home: So much I have thought good to insert, for
variety sake, which is the best prevention for saciety in reading. Moreover
there is great store of all kind of Birds, as Peacocks, Hens, Doves, etc. One
King reigned here heretofore, but he being made away, the Empire was divided
among many THE ISLAND ZEILAN^
CEILAN insula
map Princes. There are now 9. Kings of this Island. The chiefest of these is
Colmuchi, unto whom the rest do pay an annual tribute: these are the Kings
Ianasapitan, Triquinamale, Batecolon, Villassem, Tananaca, Laula, Galle and
Cande. John Hugo reports in his Itinerary Cap. 14. that a certain Chyrurgion
being a potent man of the Kingdom was called ^aju, being wise, and of an
excellent wit, and skillful in warlike affairs, but faithful to none. The
Cingales, as the same Writer reports, were enemies to him hating his so great
Tyranny, and yet were constrained through fear to show obedience to him. He
being also a cruel enemy to the Portugalls, the year before the departure of
the aforesaid Hugo from India, besieged the Columbo Castle: but in vain, for
it was relieved by the Portugals. In this Island there are 8. Cities, the
chief whereof is Colmuchi. Here many Ships are laden with Cinnamon, Elephants,
and Precious Stones. The Portugals have a Castle here which they built by the
Kings permission. The Haven is large and safe. Moreover it has 6. chief
Havens, besides others of less account. The Island is very Mountainous, and
there is a high Mountain which the Inhabitants do call Pico de Adam. For the
Indians do verily believe that Paradise was there, and that God there created
Adam, and moreover they say that the print of our first Parents feet may be
yet seen, being above two hand-breadths long. Ludovick Patritius writes from
the relation of one Mercator a Mohammedan, that there is on the top of this
Mountain a certain Cave, in which all the Inhabitants of this Country did
dwell in memory of our first Parents: for the Inhabitants do report, that Adam
after his fall, did there with penitence, tears, and continence, redeem and
ransom himself from his first fault. The same Author does report that there
is another very high Mountain, at the foot whereof Carbuncles are found,
which are commonly called Rubies. Here is such great store of excellent
Cinnamon, so that they have whole Woods of Cinnamon trees. The Inhabitants of the
Sea Coast are for the most part Mahumetans: the Mediterraneans Gentiles, (whom
they call Cingales) they are of a white color, a large statute, and great
bellies sticking forth, for they love to feed their bellies. But they are
weak, cowardly, and unfit for matters of War. The same Ludovick writes that
they do not use Ordnance, Gunnes, nor Iron: but their arms are reeds, so
that they are seldom slain in the wars. But they are uery ingenious, and
do make many curious works of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Ivory. And now they
make Musket Barrels, as if they were cast by some Artificer. The aforesaid
Linscotanus does often tell us, that an Image of the Cross was presented to an
Archbishop, which an Artificer of Zeilon had made of Ivory, being an Ell long,
and so cunningly he had wrought it, that the hair, the beard, and the face of
it, did resemble a living man, and likewise the stature: so that the like has
not been seen in Europe. So that the Bishop having put it in a Chest sent it
to the King of Spain, as a precious Jewel worthy to be esteemed of so great
a King. They are excellent Actors, and have a graceful and comely speech and
utterance and so do travel through all India* to the great admiration of the
beholders. Their food is Milk, Butter, Cheese, Their food.
and Rice: Their drink is the juice of Date trees. Their Garments beneath the
Navell are of Silk and Cotton, Their Habit.
for they do not cover their upper parts. But that they cover their head with
a thin kind of Stuff. They wear Earerings of Gold, and Precious Stones, and
Golden Girdles embroydered with Precious stones. This Island is very fit for
trading, in regard it has many Havens, and an overflowing abundance of all
things.

And let so much suffice concerning the Island Zeilan, and of Asia the third
part of the World, we proceed to America, which is the fourth, the last, and
greatest part of the world, being joined together by a famous Istmus, and so
divided into the Northern and Southern America.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLANDS OF THE WEAST-INDIES.
IN the West Indies as they call it, there are many Islands some greater and
some lesser. The greater are called S. John's Island, Hispaniola, Cuba, Iamayca.
The lesser are of two sorts, some of which are commonly called Stotavento
situated Southward: the other called Barlovento do lie Northward, and were
first discoverd by Columbus. The chief of the Majorick Islands is S. John's
Island, S. John's Island.
or the Rich-mans Haven, the length of it is 45. leagues, and the breadth of it
20. or 26. leagues, and has abundance of all things which are in Hispaniola.
It has a wholesome air, and not too hot, for it rayneth there all our Summer
time, namely, from the Month of May to September: in August there are cruel
tempests, commonly called Huracanes, when the North wind spoils that which
has been sowed. There is a Town in this Island at the North side, situated
Eastward in 18. degrees of Latitude. And it has a Castle on a Hill, in which
the Governor, and other public officers do dwell. Hispaniola.
The Inhabitants did call Hispaniola before the Spaniards came thither Haitij,
it resembles the leaf of a Chestnut Tree, being situate in 18. and 20. degrees
Northward toward the Aequinoctiall Line. The compass of it is 400. leagues,
and it lies length-wayes from the East Westward. Heretofore it was full of
native Inhabitants, very fruitful, and divided into many Provinces, but now it
is exhausted by the Spaniards tyranny. The Metropolis and head Town thereof is
S. Dominico, which Columbus called Nova Isabella, or new Isabell. There are
also other less Towns, as Zeibo, Cotuy. The Silver Haven, Christ's Mountain,
and also the Town of S. James, and others which the Spaniards do inhabit. The
Island Cuba follows, Cuba.
which has on the North Terra Florida, on the West New Spain, on the South
the Island Iamayca, it is 200. leagues long, and 45. broad. The Metropolis is S.
James his Town, in which there is a Bishop, the next unto it is Havena, which
has a good Haven, and is the chief Town for trading in the whole Island,
there are also other Towns, as Baracoa, Bayamo, or S. Saviors Town. There is
also Iamayca, Iamayca.
which Columbus called S. James his Island, the compass of it is 120. leagues,
and it is 50. long, and 25. broad. It is as fruitful and pleasant as any other
Island, and the Inhabitants are sharp witted. It has two chief Towns
Orestan, and Sevilla, in the latter there is a Church and Abbey. The lesser
Islands are divided into Leucayae and Cambales. The Leucajan Isles are those
which look Northward toward the rich Port, and the other greater Islands. The
Canibals lie THE ISLANDS OF THE WEST INDIES
The YLANDES of the WEST INDIES
map South-West toward America, and the most of them are inhabited by Canibals,
or Men-eaters, the names of these Islands are these, Anegada, Anguilla, Antigua,
Barbados, St. Bartholmews, St. Christophers, d'Esienda, S. Dominico, S.
Estasia, Granada, Guadalupe, S. Lutia, the White Islands, Maregalante, St.
Martine, Mantinina, Montferrat, Redonda, Saba, S. Crucis, Sombrera All Saints,
S. Vincent, the Virgins Island, and also the Islands called the Bermudas from
their first Discoverer, which lie in 33. degrees of Northern Latitude, and are
3300. English miles in length, they have abundance of Cedar, and the English of
late have begun to plant Tobacco in them.

THE ISLANDS CVBA, HISPANIOLA, JAMAICA, S. John's Island, and Margarita.
THE Islands Cuba, Hispaniola, Iam^ica, S. John's, The Country.
and Saint Margarites, are next to be unfolded and described according to the
order of our method. The Island Cuba was so called by the Inhabitants and the
Spaniards do call it Fernandina and Ioanna: also Alpha and Omega, if we
believe Peter Martyr. On the West it is parted with the Sea from Iucatana, on
the East with the Sea from Hispaniola, Situation.
on the South is Iamaica. The length of it from the East to the West is 300.
miles, or rather Spanish leagues, and it is 15. and in some places 20. in
breadth. The Tropic of Cancer cutteth through the midst of it. Those that have
seen Cuba do liken it and resemble it to a Willow leaf, because it is longer
than broad. The Climate.
The Country is very temperate* but in some places coulder, and it has a kind
of course Gold, and it is very rich in Brass. It brings forth great store of
Madder for Dyers. Also great store of Sugar, Wheat, Corn, and other fruits,
and Herbs. Moreover it bears Cassia, Ginger, Mastick, Aloes, and Cinnamon.
Serpents, of which there are a great number, are counted great dainties. The
variety of Creatures.
And the woods do breed and feed great store of Hogs and Oxen. It has 6.
Cities, the chief whereof are S James Town and Havana, the former was built
by James Valasius, and is a Bishops seat. It is the Mart Town and Haven for
the whole Island: here the Kings Ships do usually ride, until the time of the
year, and the wind standing fair, do promise them a good voyage for Spain.
There are now some Galleyes in it which defend all the Coast from Enemies. This
Island has many Gold-bearing Rivers, the water whereof is sweet and pleasant to
drink. The Rivers.
It has also many sweet and salt Lakes, so that there is plenty of Salt here.
The Country is rugged, high, and Mountainous. The Mountains.
And the Mountains have veins of Gold in them. There is also in the same
Island a Mountain not far from the Sea, out of which there runs good Pitch
for Ships. Gonzalus Ovetanus does describe another strange thing in this Island.
That there is a Valley between the Mountains, that is, two or three Spanish
miles long (the ancients did call it the Stone field as that in Gallia
Narbonensis) which has such a number of round stones, that many Ships might be
laden with them, being naturally made in such a Sphaericall round form, that
nothing can be made rounder with a pair of Compasses. The people of this
Country are content with the bounty of nature, Their manners.
neither do they know what belongs to mine, or thine, or money, but have all
things in common, even as nature bestows the light of the Sun and water on
all men equally: therefore their Gardens are open and unfenced, and nature
teaches them that which is right without laws. They went commonly naked. And
in their marriages they observed a strange kind of custom: for the
Bridegroom did not lie with his Bride the first night, but if he were a
Gentleman, a Gentleman did supply his place, but if the Bridegoome were a
Merchant or Countryman, than a Mercbant or Countryman did supply their
places. The men did repudiate and put away their Wives for any light cause. But
the Women could not put away their Husbands for any cause: the men were very
lustful and obscene. The Spaniards found it well inhabited with people, but
now it is inhabited only by Spaniards, because the native Inhabitants are all
dead partly by famine, and labor, and the veneriall disease, and besides after
that Cortes had subdued and planted himself in this Island, they carried the
most part of the Inhabitants into new Spain, so that there is scarcely one
Indian now upon the whole Island.

HISPANIOLA.
The Country.
THe Inhabitants did heretofore call this Island Haity, and Quisqueja, and
afterward also it was called Cipangi. The Spaniards called it after their own
name Spaniola, or Hispaniola and from Dominick, St. Domingo, The names.
or St. Dominicks I Will: and built a City in honor of him, which is the
chiefest City of the Island. The compass of this Island is 1300. miles, or 350.
leagues. The length is 500. miles, the breadth of it in respect of the many
Bays and Promontories is various and different. Situation.
Peter Martyr calls it the Mother of all other Islands. The middle of the
Island is distant from the Aequinoctiall Line almost 19. The Climate.
degrees. It is long Northward, and the breadth of it is from East to West. It
has a temperate air, so that the trees are continually green: and it is more
pleasant and fruitful than the rest. They say that here are Sugar Canes that
are higher and thicker than any where else. Besides this is an Argument of the
fertility thereof, for wheat being sowed yields an hundred fold increase. At
Valentia in Spain one Cane will scarcely fill 7. Pots: but in Hispaniola one
Cane will fill 20. or 30. Moreover this Country does yield Cassia, Ginger,
Mastick, Aloes, and Cinnamon. It has also great store of Salt. There are rich
Mines of Gold and Silver, and other Mineralls, especially of a blue kind of
color. Before the Spaniards coming, there were only three kinds of beasts,
The variety of Creatures.
but now it is so stored with beasts that have been brought thither, so that
great store of Hides and Skins are yearly transported from thence into Spain.
There are many Cities in this Island, the chief is St. Dominico at the mouth
of the River Ozama, where the Bishop and the Viceroy are resident. There are
other less Cities, as St. John's, Meguma, Portus Platae, the Kings Port,
Canana, Xaragua, and others. For there are in this Island many Rivers, Lakes,
and Springs very full of Fish. But there are 7. great Rivers which afford most
pleasure and commodity to the Inhabitants, CVBA, HISPANIOLA, etc.
map HAVANA PORTUS
map IAMAICA
map I. S. IOANNIS
map I. MARGARETA
map CUBA INSUL
map HISPANIOLA
map which running out of the high Rocks which are in the middle of the Island,
do spread abroad diverse ways. Iuna runs to the East, Attibunicus to the
West, Iacchus to the North, Natabus to the South, and that the Island is divided
into four parts. Moreover there is in Bainoa a great Lake, the Indians do
call it Hagveigabon, and we the Caspian Sea, which is enlarged every where with
infinite Rivers, yet it never emptieth it self, but is devoured in its hollow
Channel: it is conjectured that the spongie Rocks do receive and let in the
Seawater by Subterranean passages, because many Sea Fishes are found there,
and the water tastes salt. Moreover there are other lesser salt Lakes in this
Island. And besides the aforesaid Lakes there is a great salt River which
runs into the Sea, although it receives many Rivers and Fountains of fresh
water.

IAMAICA^
IAMAICA which they call now the Island of St. James, lies 15. leagues Eastward
from Hispaniola, and 16. degrees from the Aequinoctiall Line. On the North it
is near to Cuba. On the South it looks to St. Bernards Islands and
Carthagena, on the West it has Fordura. The temper of the Air.
The compass of it is 600. miles. This Country has a pleasant temperate air,
also it has Gold, and great store of Sugar and Cotton, The quality of the
Soil.
and also diverse kinds of living Creatures. It had heretofore great store of
Inhabitants, but now the Natives are either killed or dead, so that there are
two Cities only inhabited: the chief whereof is Sevill, or Hispalis, in
which there is a Church and an Abbey, of which Peter Martyr Anglerius of
Mediolanum was Primate, a man very diligent in handling the affairs of India.
The other is called Oristan, here are many Rivers and Fishfull Lakes. The
people do differ in nothing, neither in Laws, Rites, nor Customs, from those
of Hispaniola, and Cuba, but only it is reported that they were more cruel.

St. JOHN'S Island.
The I Will.
SAint John's Island, commonly so called from the rich Haven, and heretofore
called Borichena or Borica, has on the East the Island of the holy Cross, The
Names. The Situation.
and many small Islands. On the West and the North the Island of S. Dominico, on
the South the Promontory of the maine Land, from whence it is distant 136.
miles. The Island lies length-wayes, and is 12. or 17. mile broad, and the
greatest breadth of it is 48. Germane Miles. It has abundance of Fruit,
Cattle, and Gold. Moreover this Island is divided into two parts, namely the
Northern and Southern part. The Northern has great store of Gold: the
Southern has plenty of fruit, and Foul. The chief City in it is St. John's
City, which has a very good Haven. S. John's City.
Here are some Rivers, among which Cairabonus is the greatest, which runs
Northward, and though they have all golden Sands, yet the Northern side
thereof as we said before, has the best Mines. The Southern part has better
Havens, and more fruit, it produces Maiz, and other things necessary to life.

MARGARITA.
THe Island Margarita, or the Island of Pearls, is called by another name
Cubagua, it is 10. miles in compass, and it lies 10. degrees and* from the
Aequinoctiall Line, being every where plain and barren: having neither trees
nor water. So that they want water so much, especially when the wind stands
contrary, so that nothing can be brought from Cumana, that sometimes a Hogshead
of Wine is exchanged for a Hogshead of Water. It has great store of Connies,
Salt, and Fish. But especially it has great store of Pearls. The Inhabitants
are of a Swart color, thin hayred, and without Beards, fierce and cruel.
They feed on Oysters, out of which Pearls are gotten.

VIRGINIA AND FLORIDA.
The Country whence so called.
VIRGINIA and Florida do follow in our method. Virginia as some suppose was so
called from the Earl Viguinus, but he that set forth a Journall or
Commentary of Sir Francis Drakes Voyage in the West Indies in the year 1584.
says that it was so called from Elizabeth Queen of England. The Inhabitants
do call it Wingandocoa. It is very fruitful, The fruitfulness of the soil.
and bears plentifully whatsoever is necessary for the sustation and
delectation of man's life: as Wine, Oil, Beans, which the Inhabitants call
Okindgere, and Pease, which they call Wickanzenr, also Pompions and Melons,
which they call Macocquer: also diverse Herbs besides Chestnuts, Walnuts,
Straberies, and other excellent Fruits: also Allome, Pitch and Tar,
Turpentine, Iron, Copper, Silk, Flax, Cotton, Pearls, and many other things.
But especially it has great store of Virginy Wheat, which the Inhabitants do
call Pagatowr, and the West-Indians Maiz: which is to be wondered at because
they use a mean kind of Husbandry. For they know neither Plough nor Harrow,
neither do they make Furrow or plough the ground, nor break the clods after
they have sown the seed as we do, but they turn up the earth with a wooden
Shovell or Spade, and so in the little Furrows they set the Grain with a
setting stick as we do Beans, which being coverd with earth will sprout
forth wonderfully. In some parts it has diverse kinds of Beasts, as Bears,
Lions, Wolves, Conies, and those which the Inhabitants call Saquenuckot,
Maquowoc, and Squirrels. It has moreover diverse Birds, as Indian Cocks and
Hens, Doves, Partridges, Cranes, Swans, Geese, Parrots, Falkons, and Hawks.
The Towns here are very small, containing only 10. or 12. Houses, they build
them round with Stakes and Poles set in the Earth, with a narrow coming in,
Princes, and Noblemens Houses have a Courtyard and some few Houses round about
them. The Cities by the Shore side are these: Pyshokonnock, or the Women's
City, also Chipanum, Weopomiock, Muscamunge, and Mattaquen, and Oanoke, which
the English called the blind City, also Pemeoke, Phycoake a great City,
Chowanaoke, Sequotam, and others. The Rivers which water it are Occam, Cipo,
Nomopano, Neus, and others. In four Months of the year, February, March,
April, and May, here is good fishing for Sturgeons, and Herrings. Here are
also good Trouts, Scate, Mullets, and Plaise, and many other kinds of Fish. It
has also Woods which are full of Connies, Hares, and Foul. But the Woods are
not such as be in Bohemia, Moscovy, or Hyrcania, VIRGINIA.
VIRGINIA et FLORIDA
map which are barren and do yield nothing, but they are full of high tall
Cedars, Pines, Cypress Trees, Mastick Trees, and many other odoriferous Trees.
The Inhabitants are of a middle stature, just in their dealing, they believe
the Immortality of the Soul, but they delight in dancing, and immoderate
drinking, as the other Americans do, but yet they abstain from man's flesh.
They do hunt wild beasts every day. And their Arms are Bows and Arrows.
They believe that there are many Gods whom they call Mant^a^, but of diverse
kinds and degrees, and that there is only one chief God that was before all
ages, who they say, when he purposed to create the whole world, did first
create the other special Gods, that he might use them as assistants, and
helpers both in creating and governing the whole World. And then he made the
Sun, the Moon, and the Statres, as the lesser Gods to be assisting to the
chief Cods. They say the waters were first created, out of which the Gods did
create all kinds of creatures visible and invisible. Concerning mankind, they
affirm that the woman was first created, which by the help of one of the Gods
did conceive and bring forth children, and this they say was the first
original of all mankind. But concerning the manners and nature of the
Inhabitants and the other commodities and wonders of Virginia, you may see more
which John Wytts Description, and Thomas Harriotts Relation, Theodore Brius
has written of them in a particular Book, and has cut them forth in Brass
Figures.

FLORIDA.
FLORIDA (that I may by the way speak of the Etimologie of the name) was so
called because it was found to be full of Da^e trees, The Country.
which the Spaniards call in their language Pascua de Flores. This name was
given to it by John Pontius of Legion. Situation.
Others as Thenatus have another original of the name, namely because it is
green and flourishing, and the River spread and decked with green Flowers, but
the Reader may approve of which derivation he shall please. The Inhabitants
do call it Iaquasa. This Province has large bounds, on the East Ba^^ma, and
the Leucajan Isles, on the West it touches the bounds of the Province of
Mexico, on the South it looks toward Cuba, running out in manner of an
Isthmusa 100. miles, and where it is narrowest it is 30. miles broad. Above
Florida Northward are Canada, Virginia, Avanares, and New France. It is a very
pleasant and fruitful Country. And the Inhabitants are very careful of their
Corn, for they sow Maize in March, and June, and 3. months afterward they
reap it, and gather it into their Barnes, and afterward every one has a share
according to their necessity and dignity. It has also diverse other kinds of
Fruit, as Mulberries, Cherries, Chestnuts, Grapes, Medlars, and Prunes, which
are fair to sight, but ill tasted. They have also Roots called Heart, of
which when they want Corn they make bread. It has diverse kinds of living
creatures, The variety of living creatures.
as Hearts, Hines, Goats, Bears, Leopards, Woolves, wild Dogs, Hares, and
Connies. Neither does it want Foul, as Peacocks, Partridges, Parrets, Doves,
Wood-Pigeons, Turtles, Black birds, Starling, and others. There are also diverse
kinds of serpents, and a kind of beast like an Affrican Lion. And it has a
strange kind of beast like a Fox, which has a kind of a Sack or Satchell
under his belly, which he can open and shut, so that he puts his young ones
into it, and runs away with them when he sees any danger. This Country
after John Pontius had discovered it, lay a while untouched, and no man looked
after it, in regard of the fierceness of the Inhabitants, Their ancient of
government
until in Process of time Ferdinand Sottus, obtained this Province of the
Emperor Charles, and so sailed thither with a great company of Soldiers in
the year 1534. but he having no care to make a Plantation, wandered up and
down to seek out veins of gold, which he believed he should do, but being
deceived therein, he dyed for grief, and all his Soldiers and company were
all slain and killed by the Indians. Afterward the Frenchmen, in the time of
Charles Nononus, with their Captain John Rhibaldus, sailed toward Florida,
but they had an improsperous voyage. Another as unfortunate voyage the
Frenchmen undertook with Captain Landonier in the year 1562. and built there
Charles his Fort, which shortly after the Spaniards took. Two years afterward
Dominicus Gourgnesius, with a Fleet of 3. Ships, and 150. Soldiers, and 80.
Sailors, did revenge the Frenchmen, took Charles his Forte, and leveld it with
the ground. But in his return understanding that the King was angry at that
which he had done, he attempted nothing more, neither is there any mention of
any voyage which the Frenchmen afterward made in Florida, and so the Spaniards
had free possession of those Countries. The more famous Provinces of Florida
which were discoverd by the Spaniards, are the Country Panuca, which confineth
on New Spain, the Inhabitants whereof are warlike people, and cruel in War:
they sacrifice their captives to Idols, and do eat them. The men do pluck of
their Beards, that they may seem more beautiful, and they have holes bored
through their Noses and Ears, neither are they married before they are 40.
years old. Next to this is the Country Avanares, and the Province of
Albardaosia, the Inhabitants whereof are most crafty, and do differ in manners
from the other Indians. There is also in Florida the Country Iaguazia, the
Inhabitants whereof are so swift of foot, that they will out-runne and catch
Dear, and they will run a whole day and never be weary. There are also other
Countries and Provinces of Florida, as Apulchia, Anthia, Samovia, and others.
All the Country is watered with diverse Rivers and Streams and therewith
moystned: and in the Mountain Apolchicis there do great Rivers rise, which
have Gold and Silver sands, which the Inhabitants do gather, and bring it
down the River to the Sea Coast to sell it. The chief Rivers are Porto Real,
which signifies the Royal Port. The mouth of this River is 3. miles over, and
has two Promontories, the one whereof looks Westward, the other Northward:
also Rioseco, Fl. Magnus, or Grandis Garumna, Charenta, Ligeris, Anona,
Sequana, Ay, Serravahi, Majus, and others. The Country is plain, and it has
few Mountains, among which the Apalchician are the chief. About the River
Porto Real there are many woods full of Oaks and Cedars, in which there are
many Hearts, and wild Beasts, and also many Indian Peacocks are found. The
Inhabitants are of a crafty cunning disposition, and prone to war and seeking
revenge.

THE DESCRIPTION OF NEW VIRGINIA^
IT is wonderful how much this Province and the Colony therein increased from
the time that the Englishmen began first to inhabit it: so that almost all
parts of it are found out and discovered. And that these things may appear
more clearly, we think it fit to join to this Description Captain Smiths
last Voyage into this Country. These Provinces therefore expressed in this
present Card, have on the North a high Mountain, at the foot whereof there
dwell a people called Sasquesahanoug. On the North-west it has the
Massawonecks, on the West the Manahoacks, on the South-west the Monacans, on
the South the Mongoags and Chanons, between Afric and the North the
Virginian Sea, and on the West certain high Mountains do show themselves, on
which certain rude barbarous people do live called ^uskarawaocks, Tockwoghs,
and Aquanachukes. The River Pouhatan waters this Country, which rises in the
Country of the Monacans, and so running toward Afric it falls into the
Ocean. Near the Promontory Wiffins another lesser River does empty it self
into the Sea, as also the Rivers Payaunkata, Cappahonock, and Parwomeck, which
are full of Fish, and are inhabited round about. There are also other Nations
toward the North, but not known. These Countries Captain Smith in the year
1608. did discover with one Brigantine or Galloone, who met two Indians, who
brought him from Capo Charles to Acc^umack, whence he sailed to the great Bay
Chesapeack, about which there dwelt diverse people who warred one with another,
who entertaind him in several manners. But his chief desire was to find out
the veins of metal, which he attempted in vain. Ponuhatan is a little
Village consisting of 12. Houses or rather Cottages, being situate on a
pleasant Hill, the Lords of which place were called by the same name, as also
the neighbor Nation, who entertained him well, without any show of Hostility.
Wherefore when Captain Newport came thither with a new supply, he would needs
go visit Po^hatan at his house at Weromoco, who being courteously entertained
he found him sitting on a Straw Mart, and resting his head after his Country
manner on a fair Pillow, and Maids as fair as the place could afford did
sit at his head and feet, and 20. Concubines did watch at each side of the
Palace. But he himself having his head and breast painted red, wore a chair
of white Corrall. And when the Captain had given him one of his Boys, he
gave him back in exchange one of his Servants called Wamotack, with Coral, and
some Corn, which served well for the relief of his men, and afterward he
furnished the Captain with all things necessary. He as also Captain Smith
had a great desire to find out veins of Gold and Silver, but both he and
those that came after him were frustrated in their desire. Yet he sent a Ship
laden with Cedar to England. In the mean time Ponuhatan labourd to get some
arms and munition from the English, which the Governors did very much
suspect, as if the King with those arms intended to kill the English, or drive
them out of the Country. But Captain Smiths vigilance and watchfulness
prevented him, so that he could effect nothing, and the English Colonie living
here are now in a good estate increased to many thousands, Virginia so now
flourishes, that it vittels other parts.
and Kine, and Hogs, and Turkies abundance, and all things plentiful, and no
want but of good women, thick sown, but thin come up. NEW SPAIN.
HISPANIA NOVA
map Tecoanteper a Country of new Spain. There reigned in the City of Mexico
9. Kings in a 130. years, being 619. years after that the Chichimeicians did
possess the Country of Mexico. The last of these was Motezun^a, who was slain
in a certain sedition, and in him the family of the Mexican Kings was extinct.
Moreover this part is inhabited by the Spaniards, who have many Colonies in it,
namely, Comp^stella, Colima, Purificatio, Guadalajara, Mechoaca, Cacatula,
Mexico, and others. There are also in New Spain diverse famous Countries,
namely new Galitia, Mechawcan, Mexico, and Guastecan. Nova Galitia was first
called by the Inhabitants Xalisce, which Nunus Gusmannus first sought out and
discoverd, The Cities.
who built some Cities in it, namely, Compostella, where there is a Bishops
Seat, and a Royal Counsel: also Spiritus S. Conceptionis, S. Michaels, and
Gaudalajara, which is the chief City of the whole Kingdom. There belongs
to Nova Galitia that Country which is called Culicana from a City of that
name. It lies between the River Piasala, and the River S. Sebastian, which
runs under ground, before it discharge it self into the Sea. The Metropolis
is the City Culiacan, where the Spaniards planted the Colony of Michaels
House. The Country Methaucan is 40. leagues in compass, and it is one of the
richest and fruitfullest Kingdoms of new Spain: for it has ripe Maiz three
times a year, and also other fruits. This Country does contain two principal
Cities, in which the Spaniards live, called Pas^uar and Valadolid, which is a
Bishops Seat, besides other Towns of less note. The Country of Mexico does
not only exceed the other Countries of New Spain, but of all America. It was
so named from the City Mexico, which is called also Temistitan. It is the
Metropolis of the Province of Mexico. It was seated in the middle of a great
Lake, before Cortes did possess it, who removed it to the bank of the same
Lake, it is now well built, and it is 6. Italian miles in compass, one part
whereof the Spaniards do inhabit, the other part the Indians. Mexico signifies
a Fountain, and it was so called by the first Founders, in regard of the many
Springs and Fountains which do encompasse this City. This was the fairest
and chiefest City of the Indies, yea of the whole World, when Ferdinand
Cortesius took it and won it by assault in the year 1521. For this being
the chief City of the whole Kingdom of Mexico, contained 70000. Houses. The
Kings and Noblemens Houses were very large, and conveniently built, but the
Common peoples Houses were meaner and lower. There are in this City, a Bishop,
a Viceroy, and the high Tribunal, or Court of New Spain. There is also a
Mount in it for coining of money. Moreover there are in the Mexican Lakes, and
about their banks 50. Towns, every one of which does contain about 10000.
Houses. Next after Mexico is the City Tescura by the bank of the same Lake,
which is as big as Mexico. There is also in this Province the City
Angelorum, which was first called V^^sita^^ that is the Land Serpents, which is
famous for dressing of W^o^^ which has Vales and Plains round about it, in
which great Flocks and Herds of Cattle do graze, and great store of Corn
and (...) are gotten and gathered here. The Country of Guastecan in THE
DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPAIN.
HISPANIA NOVA
map

NEW SPAIN.
NEW Spain is the greatest Province of America, being more inhabited, more
populous, and more pleasant than the rest. It is a great tract of Land reaching
from Tavascus or the River Grialvus Westward, to the Land of Saint Michael, and
the Culiacans Country. On the North it is bounderd with new Granada, and other
Countries of the Kingdom of new Mexico. The South shore is washed with the
Pacifque Sea. It lies between the Aequinoctiall Line^ and the Tropic of
Cancer, so that there is little difference between the length of the days and
nights, and it is almost always Spring. In the months of June, July, August,
and September, the daily rain, and the gentle breeses of wind that come from
the Sea, do temper and mittigate the heat of the day, which is the true
reason, why it is convenient living under the Summer Tropic, contrary to the
opinion of ancient Philosophers. Therefore it has a temperate air, although
it lie under the Torrid Zone. This Country has abundance of rich Mines of
Gold, Silver, Iron, and Brass: it has also Cassia, and a certain kind of
fruit, which the Inhabitants call Cacao which is like Almonds, of which they
make a drink which is very much desired. It has abundance of Cotton, and all
other kinds of fruits which we have in Europe: as Wheat, Barley, and all
kind of Pulse, also Sallets, Lettice, Colworts, Cabbages, Radishes, Onions,
Leekes, wild Alexander, Rape Roots, Parsnips, and Carrets, Turnips, Beete,
Spinnage, Pease, Beans, Lentills, and the like. There are also great store of
Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Pomegranats. Here are also Apples and Pears, but
not very big, Prunes are rare, but there are abundance of Figs. But there are
great store of Cotton, Apples, but Cherries do not yet thrive there. There are
Vines also that bear Grapes, but no Wine is made of them. Moreover it has
Oil, Sugar, and Mulberries. And it has many other fruits which are unknown
to us: especially a kind of Grain called Maiz, which is like Pepper, of which
they make Bread. It yields also diverse living Creatures, as Sheep, Kine,
Goats, Hogs, Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cats, and other Beasts, all which are
found in the West Indies: Also Lions, Bears, Tigers, Boares, Foxes, and other
wild Beasts: also Hearts, Hares, and Connies. Besides these there is a kind of
Beast called Sainos, which is like a little Hogge^, which have their Navells on
the top of their back. There are great store of them in the Woods, and also of
other Beasts, which for brevity sake I omit. There is also great variety of
Foul, as Geese, Ducks, Starlings, and Hens which are bigger than ours, and
diverse other. The Spaniards first took possession of this Country, under the
conduct of their Captain Ferdinando Cortes, with a great loss and slaughter
of their own men, and of the Inhabitants, in consideration whereof, the
Emperor Charles the fifth gave them New Spain is situate by Mare del Nort, or
the Northern Sea. The Spaniards have here two Colonies, namely Panuca, and S.
James of the Valleys Colonie. Lastly, there is in new Spain the City
Tlascalan, which is second to Mexico, which is very populous and rich, and has
a fruitful soil round about it, it is governd like a Commonwealth, but it is
under the possession of the King of Spain. There are in new Spain many Lakes,
which are for the most part so salt, that Salt is made out of them. The chief
Lake is that, which in regard of the bigness thereof is called the Chapalican
Sea. There is also the Lake of the City Mexico. There are also many Rivers in
it full of Fish, some of which have golden Sands. There are also Crocodiles in
them which the Inhabitants do eat. The Country also is full of Mountains and
rugged Rocks. In the Province of Mexico there is a flaming Mountain, which the
Inhabitants call Popocampeche. There is also a Mountain in the Country
Guastecan, in which there are two Fountains, the one of black Pitch, the other
of hot red Pitch. Moreover this Country is full of Woods, and generally it has
great store of Trees, especially of that Tree of which they make Boats or
Canoas of one bough. It has also Cedars which are so tall and thick, that
they cut square timber out of them, which is 120. foot long, and 12. broad,
and such great store of it, that you may say that Ceders do grow as commonly
on their Mountains, as Oaks do on ours. I come to the public works. There
were in these parts of the Indies many fair and magnificent Temples
consecrated to Idols, and ordained for the worship of the Devil, which the
Spaniards heretofore called Cu. First there was in the City Mexico the famous
Temple Vitziliputzli, being very large within. But the care which the Mexicans
show in educating and bringing up their children is very strange, for they know
assuredly that there is nothing, which avails more to the right ordering of
public or private matters, than the instruction of children. The Indians are
cunning Artificers in Mechanic Arts, especially in weaving of diverse sorts of
Birds feathers, and Beasts skins: and they are so painful and laborious, that
oftentimes they do not eat in a whole day, until they have coined and
neately filled some one feather, and then they view it on every side, both in
the Sun and in the shade, that they may see whether it will become them to
wear it with their hair standing on end, or lying on either side. So that
they will presently make any kind of Beast, or Flower, or Herb, and set it
forth to the life. The Goldsmiths are the chief Artificers, and are more
cunning than the rest, so that they will express a thing to the life: and they
are excellent casters of metal, so that they will cast either any Herb or
the smallest thing so lively, that you shall think it to be natural. The
City of Mexico has the best government and policy of all new Spain. For it
being the Metropolis of the whole Empire, diverse Nations of the same Country
did flock thither to trade and traffic, so that several Nations kept their
several places, and every 5. days they kept markets, which were well
furnished with all commodities. So that several Manufactures and kinds of
Merchandise, had a several place appointed them, which none could forestall or
take up, which was a great point of Policy. Neither as Zenophon witnesses in
his Oeconomicks, can any City or House be governd more conveniently, then by
assigning every thing a certain place which the Indians did observe.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRM LAND, OR OF THE NEW KINGDOM OF GRANADA.
THIS new Kingdom of Granada begins on the South, near the Mountains of
Opon; the Country is is plain and fruitful, and well inhabited, especially in
the Vales, here Anthropophagi or Canibals do live, who are called Pancho^, but
they which dwell on the Firm Land do hate their barbarousnesse in eating of
man's flesh. It is 130. leagues in length, and 30. broad, and it lies in 3.4.
or 5. degrees of height. It is divided into two special Provinces, Bogata and
Tunea, it has abundance of Gold and Emraulds. The Inhabitants have comely
bodies, especially the Women, who are better shaped, and fairer colored than
their neighbors. They wear Mantles died black and white, which they make fast
beneath their breasts, and so let them hang down to their feet, they adorn
their heads with Flowers, and Cotton Crowns of diverse colors. They are not
troubled with cold, for there is no great difference between their Summer and
Winter. The air also is good and wholesome, and they make their Houses and
Cottages of wooden boords, which they cover with straw. Their food is Maiz,
which is a kind of Corn, and they eat also the flesh of wild Beasts, and
they have store of Conies. They delight much in Songs and Dancing, and they are
vain liars, as more people are in this Country. The soil is fit either for
Pasturage or Tillage. And in some parts there are Mines of Gold, Copper, and
Latin Metal. The Metropolis of this Province is called S. Fidei de Bigota,
it is situate 4. degrees Northward from the Aequinoctiall Line, near the foot
of the Mountain, in which there are 600. Inhabitants, and there the royal
Senate is held, and the Kings Officers do dwell. This City is also adornd
with a Cathedral Church, and two Monasteries, the one of Dominicans, the other
Franciscans. Five thousand men are ceased by this Senate, and do pay tribute.
It has a clear wholesome air. The City Toycama is seated by the bank of
the great River Patus, it has a clear dry air and wholesome, except it be
when the heat is too immoderate. The Inhabitants are courageous, having small
foreheads, and heretofore they were all Anthropophagi or Men-eaters, but now by
conversing with the Spaniards they have left of that barbarous use. They
esteem not of Gold, but go naked for the most part, they are much addicted to
Hunting, and do make their Bread of Maiz. The tops of the Mountains for the
most part of the year are white with Snow, but yet they are full of Gold,
Brass, and Lead. This Country also has Cattle, and diverse wild beasts, as
Tigers, Lions, and the like: it has abundance also of Citterus and Mellons.
The Province Popajana is annexed and joined to this, which from the North to
the South is 220. leagues in length, but the most part of it is barren and
unhabited, and therefore it brings forth little Corn, but yet it is rich in
Gold. It has no peculiar Governor but the Viceroy of the Kingdom, because
the most of the Courts of this City, are subject to the Quito. The chief
City is called after the name of the Province being situate two degrees from
the Line, it has a temperate constant climate, the day and nights are all the
year equal, it has seldom any rain, but it is often troubled with
Lightning and Thunder. The soil affords two Harvests of Corn every year,
and this Country breeds great store of Cattle. The Inhabitants are
courteous, the City is adorned with a Cathedral Church, and a Monastery of
Friars. It has a great Jurisdiction, and many Towns round about are subject
unto it. The Gold which is gotten here is accounted purer than other Gold. Not
far from hence the most famous Rivers in this Country do rise, which are
called la Magdalena, and la Martha, which do water all the Country.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE FIRM LAND.
TERRA FIRMA et NOVUM REGNUM GRANATENSE et POPAIAN.
map

THE DESCRIPTION OF PERVVIA.
PERUVIA is the noblest Country of all the New World, it is now divided into
three parts, namely, the Plain, the Mountains, and the Andes. The Plain of
Peruvia reaches 500. leagues by the Seacoast, and is 10. or 15. leagues
broad, but this part is sandy, and full of deserts, and for the most part
barren, for it has no Springs, nor Lakes, neither is it watered with any
showers, but as it is moistened with a kind of humor or dew which the
Inhabitants call Garva. But yet there are green fruitful meddowes which lie
by the banks of the Rivers, which in the Winter time do overflow them, which
makes them yield both store of Cotton, and all kind of Corn. The Inhabitants
of this Country are poor, living under Trees, and among Reeds, and do feed
on Fish, and raw flesh. The mountainous is extended in a long space of ground
some hundred leagues from the North to the South. These Mountains are very
cold, neither do they bear any Trees, so that the Inhabitants are feign to
burn a kind of pitchie Turfe. Here are Lions, Wolves, black Bears, Goats,
and a kind of beast like a Cammell, of the Wool whereof they make Cotton
Garments, in the Valleys of these Mountains there lives a populous Nation,
who are more witty and civil than the former. The Andes also are Mountains,
which run along with a continued ridge, without any Valleys, and they are
chiefly two, commonly called Cordeleras, which are almost 1000. leagues long,
and equally distant one from another, in which there are great store of Goats,
wild Sheep, Apes and Parrots; the soil also is very fruitful, and does
yield all kind of Pulse, and diverse Sallet herbs. And especially there is the
herb Coca, (of which there are many fabulous reports) whose leaves are like a
Shrub, which the Graecians call Rhus, the Latins call it Tanners herb, which
as it is found by experience, if it be carried in ones mouth, it takes away the
appetite from meat and drink, but it increases valor and strength. There is
a Viceroy that governs all this Province, under whose jurisdiction are the
Chilenses, also Salomons Islands, and toward the West the Country of the Silver
River. It has three Seats of Judgment, Quito, Limam, and Las Charcas. The
first whereof Quito does contain more Countries, as Pogaya, Quixos, Cavelas,
Iuan de Salinas, Pocomoros; and it is 24. leagues in length near the
Aequinoctiall Line, even to the Seat of Justice at Lima. Many poisonous
herbs THE DESCRIPTION OF PERVVIA^
PERV
map do grow in this Country, and they do get Gold out of the Cordillerian
Mountains, but afterward it was prohibited, they do also dig Saltpeter
from thence. The second Seat of Judgment is at Lima, which reaches from the
North Southward, from the 6. degree of Altitude, to the 16. or 17. and so
runs forward 120. leagues. The chief City hereof is Lima, built in a
Plain 2. leagues from the Southern Sea, by a River which is a small stream
in Summer, but in Winter it has store of water. The third Provincial Seat of
Judgment is at a place called Charcas, it is situate in 17. degrees of
latitude, by the River Lambopulla, and it contains many Regions and
Countries, which are amply described in Authors.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SVMMER ISLANDS WHICH THEY CALL BERMVDAS.
WE have mentioned these Islands in our former descriptions, but now seeing
they have gotten a peculiar table of their own, it will not be impertinent to
add this narration thereunto. Authors do report that the chiefest of these
Islands is small and low, but that it grows somewhat bigger in the middle.
There are great store of Birds in it, but it is subject to storms and
tempests, and it has great store of Cedar Trees, and Hogs. Some Englishmen
suffering shipwreck near unto it, planted a Colony there in a Semicircular
form, and called it after their Captains name, Summers Colony. Sir George
Summers.
But afterward when the English had got the Kings Letters Patents to erect a
Company for the governing these Islands, they sent in the year 1612. to the
aforesaid Islands 60. men with Captain Richard Moan, and so the Colony or
Plantation began to increase. The Captain lived in these parts three years,
and raised every where many Forts, and Defenses, and furnished them with
Ordnance, that the Colony might the better defend it self from any invasion of
the enemy. After Captain Moan there succeeded Captain Tuckher, who caused
many Trees which were brought out of the West Indies to be planted there, and
the Country to be divided among the Colony, that every one might have a greater
care of his own part. After whom Captain Butler with 4. Ships, and 5. hundred
men sailed thither, Butler.
and so all the Country was replenisht with Inhabitants. On the East side
Warwicks Forte was built, on the North-West Sands Fort, on the Prormontory
toward Afric, Danes-fort. Also two Fortresses were raised in a small Island
the one called Cavendish Fort, the other Pagets Fort. There is also an Island
which lies to the South which is called Coupers I Will. At the Promontory called
Gurnets head there is Pembrooks Fort. A little farther Westward there is
Nonsuch a little Island, and Moors Island with a Fort. The next is Charles his
Fort, and more to the North is Kings Castle over against the Eastern
Promontory of the greatest Island. Near which there are many other Islands, to
which the English have given several names. And that they might not want fresh
water, they have dug Wells not far from the Sea shore, for the Sea does
not flow above a foot high. The air in these Islands is clear and temperate,
and not too hot, so that fruits brought from other places do grow and thrive
here very well, but yet for want of heat they do seldom come to maturity or
ripenes: they reap two Harvests in a year, and their Wheat is bigger than
ours. Two grains of Maiz will grow to a pound weight. Neither are they much
troubled with cold or rain, by reason of the diverse winds which come from the
Sea, which do also mittigate the heat, they have thunder often, but it does
no harm. There are no venamous creatures in these Islands, neither does the
earth bring forth any venomous thing, except one Plant. So that the English do
live here peaceably and commodiously, and have abundance of all things
necessary.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE SVMMER ISLANDS.
Mappa AESTIVARVM Insularum alias Bermudas dictarum ad Ostia Mexicane
map

SOVTHERNE AMERICA^
Southern America or Pervana follows, between which and new Spain there is
a Neck of Land or Isthmus which is 18. The Country.
miles broad. Which keeps the Country Pervana from being an Island: and it is
called the Province Dariena, from the great River Dariene. Moreover all
Southern America has the form of a Pyramid being broad beneath, The
Situation.
and sharp toward the top, the Base whereof is near the Isthmus Northward, the
top thereof does lesson by degrees like a Wedge even to the Straits of Magellan
toward the Southern Pole, and so ends in a sharp point. The parts of it are
many: but these 5. are the chief: Castella aurea, Castellana Aurea.
Popajana, Peruvia, Chile, and Brasilia, Castle aurea, or Castiglia del oro,
was so called from the great store of Gold which it has. It is situated by the
Isthmus, which joyneth the Southern part of America to the Northern. The
breadth of the Isthmus is 73. miles. But this part of Land is but little
inhabited, in regard of the intemperatenesse of the air and Marshes, Whence so
called.
or standing waters. And it has no Corn, but they gather their Maiz twice or
thrice a year. It has two Cities Nombre de dios by Mare dael Nort, or the
North Sea, and Panama by Mare del Sur, or the South Sea. It has Gold-bearing
Rivers, and Mines of Gold, whence great store of Gold is gotten.

The Country Popayana begins from the North side at the City Antioch, The
Country Popayana.
and ends on the South side at the City Quinto. Therefore it is bounderd on
the North with Castella aurea, from which it is separate by the City Antioch.
On the South it bordereth on the Country Pervana, and is parted from thence by
the City Quinto: on the East it is bounderd with the Kingdom of New Granada,
and the Country Pervana, which beginneuh from thence Eastward. On the West it
has the Southern Sea. This Country is full of high rugged Mountains.

Peruvia is the noblest Country of all the new World, which lies almost wholly
between the Aequinoctiall and the Tropic of Capricorn. It was so called from
a Haven and River of the same name. The bounds thereof are on the North new
Granada, Castella aurea, and the River and Haven Peru, on the West is the Ocean
or Mar del Zur, that is, the Southern Sea: on the South the Province Chilus:
and on the East the Mountains, and it is 1800. leagues long. But it is now
divided into three parts according to the situation of the Country: into the
Plain: into the Sieras or Mountains, and into Andes or that which lies
beyond the Mountains. The Plain of Peruvia near the Seacoast does reach
almost 1500. Italian miles. And the greatest breadth of it is 60. miles. But
this part is sandy, full of Deserts, SOVTHERNE AMERICA.
AMERICA MERIDIONALIS
map and for the most part barren. But yet it has many green flourishing
Meddowes which lie by the banks of the Rivers which do water them, and make
them fruitful, so that they yield good store of all kind of Corn, and Cotton
of diverse colors. The Mountainous Country reaches from the North to the
South, above 1000. leagues in length, and in some places less. But these
Mountains are very cold, and Snow does often fall upon them, neither do they
bear any trees, so that the Inhabitants do make their fire with a kind of
turffes. The Andes also are Mountains but they lie in a continued ridge
without any Valleies between them, and the Province Collao lies between these
and the other Mountains, which is also full of Mountains, and subject to cold
but yet very populous. The Mountain Country as Laevinus Apollonius witnesses
does far exceed the Maritime Country, for populousness, and frequency of
Cities, and for the happiness of the soil and air, and therefore Kings and
Noblemen are wont to seat themselves therein. For Chamaecerasia, and others
like it does bring forth Mulberries which are used to grow amongst Bushes, also
Lettice, Cabbages, and great Radishes, sweet Marjoram, and other Herbs, and
plenty of all other things which the Spaniards first sowed. But especially it
yields such abundance of Corn, that a pint and. being sowed will yield, 50.
or 100. or sometimes 200. which truly deserves admiration; because they use
but little care in their Tillage or Husbandry. Peruvia is thought to be the
richest Country for Gold and Silver in all the World. Moreover the Province of
Peruvia has many Cities, the chief whereof are Portus Vetus, Michael^a,
Trugillum, Regium or Lima, Arequipa, Quito, The Cities.
Cusco, Argyropolis, and Potosium. The five first whereof in regard of their
commodious situation, and convenience for trading, the Spaniards first took,
and built them after the Europaean fashion. Concerning the manners of the
Peruvians Laevinus Apollonius writes thus in general. They are all
distinguished into three chief Nations, Their manners.
every one which have several kinds of people under them: these Nations are
unlike and different in languahe: and sometimes they were wont to go out of
their bounds to war one against another, and to revenge injuries, before all
the Province even to the Aequinoctiall Line came to belong to the Territory of
Gynacana. The Women wear a woollen garment which hangs down to their ankles.
Their habit.
The men wear a kind of shirte which reaches down to the calfes of their
legs, and upon it a Mantle. And though they wear one kind of Garment through
the whole Country on their bodies: yet their head-attire is wonderful
different, for every one of them according to the usual custom of their
Country do wear wreathed Garlands, some plain, and some of diverse colors,
but every one different. They still retain their natural rudeness and
simplicity in their manner of trading which is ridiculous to us: they know not
their own inexhausted treasure of Gold and Silver, of which they use great
ill-favored pieces, but yet they delight in Golden or Silver Pictures or
Emblemes.

The Kingdom of Chili is situate beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, between
Peruvia, and the Country of the Patagons, the latter on the North side, the
former on the South side: on the West it has Mare Pacificum, or the peaceable
Sea. It was so called from the cold in these parts, which is so vehement, that
it will freeze Horses and their Riders, until they be hard as Ice. It has
rain and thunder, and several seasons according to the time of the year, as
in Europe, but that it is Summer with them when it is Winter with us. All the
Country is partly Maritine, and partly Mountainous, the Maritine part which
lies near unto the Sea, is the hotter. The soil is naturally fruitful, and
has abundance of all things necessary, as Honey, and Woad for Diers, etc. It
has also long Pepper: and the Vines which were brought thither out of Spain
and planted there do yield good Wine. It has also geeat store of pure Gold.
And the fruits which are brought out of Spain and planted here, do easily
grow, here are great store of Cattle and Ostriches. The Metropolis is S. James
his City, which is a Colony of Spaniards. That part which lies near the Sea
is watered with many Rivers, which together with the Snow which melts with
the days heat do fall down from the tops of the Mountains, and so run
into the Pacifique or Magellanick Sea: but for the most part the vehemence of
the cold does freeze them by night, but in the day time they run when the Ice
is thawed. The Mountains in these Countries do exceed all the other
Mountains in the Indies.

The more Eastern Country Brasill remains, which was so called from the
great store of red wood growing there which is called Brasill wood. It is
situate between the two Rivers Maragnon and Della Plata. Maffejus describes
it thus. Brasil runs forth from 2. degrees from the Equator, to 45. degrees
Southward, it lies in a triangular or three cornerd figure, the Basis whereof
is turned against the North, and so runs strait forward from the East unto
the West. The farthest corner or point does reach to unknown Countries
Southward. The East side has the Ocean between it and Aethiopia. A high ridge
of Mountains does part the other side of it from the Province of Peruana,
which are so high that Birds are tired with flying to the top of them. All the
Country is pleasant, and has a delightful wholesome air: by reason that the
gentle Breezes of wind which come from the Sea do dispell the morning vapors
and clouds, and do purify the air. This Country opens partly into Plains,
and rises gently into Hills, having a fat Glebe, and a fruitful soil,
always green, and for the seed which is sown, it returns a great interest
of increase; and especially it has great store of Sugar. It has many wild
Beasts, which are partly known, and partly unknown: and Birds of an excellent
color. Here are many Colonies of Portugals, who having built many Houses to
boil Sugar in, namely, Pernambicum, Caput St. Augustini, Portus Omnium
Sanctorum, where the Bishop and the President of the Province are resident.
This part of the Country is full of Fountains, Woods, and Rivers, as the
Silver River, which runs into the Sea 40. leagues with such violence, that
the Mariners can take in fresh water from thence, before they discover Land.
The Brasilians do worship no Gods at all, yet they adore the rising Sun, and
they believe the immortality of the Soul.

THE STRAITES OF MAGELLANA^
ANd so much concerning Southern America: Fretum Magellanicum or the Straites
of Magellan are now briefly to be unfolded and described. It was so called
from Magellan who discoverd this narrow Sea. Of whose skill and experience
which he showed in finding out the Molucco Islands by a Voyage made Westward,
we have spoken other where is. He on the 24. of August when the wind stood
fair, weighed Anchor out of S. Iulians Bay, where he had lain a long time,
being not vexed so much with winds and high Seas, as the civell dissentions of
the Castellanians and Portugals. After he sailed some days Southward, he
came to the Promontory of the holy Cross. Here one of his Ships run a shore,
but the Men, Ordnance, and freight was saved. Afterward when he observed that
the shore did bend a little from the South Eastward, he began to be in hope
of reaching the Straites. And on the 26. of November this narrow passage was
discovered, into which Magellan with four other Ships entered. Here they
thought good to stay in a certain Bay, and to send 3. Ships before to ^ound
the passage, and to make discovery. One of the Ships in which was Alvarus
Meschita, having past through, stood out to Sea again, and so directing their
course Northward, it was brought first to Aethiopia, and afterward to Spain,
and 8. months after they had left their company, Alvarus was brought before
Charles King of Castile as a Captive. The third Ship made report that it was a
strait narrow Sea, by observing the flowing and ebbing of the Sea. It was the
Month of November and the night was five hours long, the shore on the right
hand and the left, or the Starbord and Larbord shore was very solitary and no
creature to be seen, but that on the left side they saw a great fire. And this
was the cause why they called that Country Terra del Fuego, and they supposed
that the Inhabitants had discoverd them. Magellan having left 2. Ships in this
manner, he furnished the other according as was fit for the present occasion,
and discovering all as he went, two and twenty days after he entered the Bay or
Strait he was brought into another Sea, which for the quiet peaceablenesse
thereof he called Mar del Zur, or Mare P^cificum, that is, the peaceable Sea.
But this Strait being environd on every side with high Rocks, is 120. miles
long: or according to others 76. miles: the breadth of it is not equal, and
very different, for sometimes it is 2. or 3. miles broad, and sometimes 10. or
5. and where it is narrowest it is a mile broad. The Northern Sea on the East
side is carried between the Straites of either land 70. miles and more, where
it mingleth with the Southern Sea, on the West side winding through those
Promontories, it meets with the Northern Sea, where their Waves meet very
violently, and with a great noise, so that all the Sea is coverd with froth.
The Southern Sea does flow and ebb more gently, for the Western part of the
Bay being very deep and broader^, affords a quieter passage to the Sea when
it flows. But the Eastern part of the Straites is full of Flats and Sands,
and many Islands, which causes the raging and troublesomenesse of the Seas: on
either Shore there are high trees. Moreover, when Magellan had layne half a
year in these Southern parts, he viewed and discoverd nothing but the
shoares, but the innermost parts of the Country remained unknown, but yet it
is manifest that that part which lies Southward, is most of it a Mountainous,
Woodly Country, and has Snow continual upon it. Some say blue Snow has been
found here, which I leave to others judgment. Magellan called this Southern
Land del Fugo from the fire or fires, for when he discoverd these Straites he
saw no mortal creature, but he often beheld in the night time many great fires
(as we said before) on the left hand. The Southern L^nd.
But the Southern Land on the West side does look toward both the Iavas,
Summatra, and the Molucco's, on the East it has Afric, and the Ethiopian
Ocean: on the North it has the Straites of the Magellan Bay, The Situation.
and the Land of the Patagons. The Country on either shore is barren and
unfruitful, but yet it has great strange unknown Trees. The quality of the
soil.
Here are at all times great store of Pinguines, Cormorants, and Sea-calfes.
For the Pinguines come hither in the month of September, and do hatch their
young ones in October. In the Month of April they fly to the Sea: The
variety of liv^^g creatures.
and after they are gone there comes great store of Cormorants. They are
called Pinguines apirguedine, from their fatness, the old one do weigh 13.14.
or 16. pounds, the younger 8. or 12. pound. They are black on the back, and
white on the belly, and they have a Milk white circle round about their neck.
Their backs are like the Sea Calves, and as thick as a Hog, which you cannot
pierce with a Spear. Their Bill is bigger than a Crows bill, but not crooked.
Their neck is thick and short. Their bodies are as big as a fat Goose, but
not so broad. They have no wings, in stead whereof they have two pinnions
coverd with feathers, which hang down like wings, which do make them swim
wonderful fast. They live by Fish, for they are Water-Fowle. They go strait
upright, with those pinnions hanging down. They have black feet like Geese,
but not so broad. If any pursue them, they will cry with a voice like a man.
Mergus or the Cormorant is so called by Varro Lib. 4. concerning the Latin
tongue, because mergendo se in aquam, captat escam, he gets his food by
diving into the water unto whom Ovid in his Metamor. Lib. 11. concerning
Aesacus the son of Priam does assent, where he sings thus.

THE STRAITES OF MAGELLAN^
FRETUM Magellani.
map

Aequor ama^, nomenque manet, quia mergitur illi.
He loves the Sea, and keeps that name,
Because he dives into the same.
And though diverse kinds of Water-fowle do the same, yet the ancient Latins
did call this kind of Bird only Mergus, or a Cormorant, which the Greeks do
call (...)* the Italians Corvo Marino, the Germans Tu^her, and the English do
call a Cormorant. Turner an Englishman says that this Bird is as big as a
Goose, of a brown color, having a long Bill and crooked in the end, flat
footed, heavy bodyed, the shape of her body when she stands upright is like
a Bird sitting. Pliny writes that she builds her Nest in Trees: but
Aristotle says upon the Sea Rocks. Ovid calls that Bird which has long
legs, and a great throat a Cormorant, for he says, -- Longa internodia
crurum,
Longa manet cervix, caput est a corpore long.
His Thighs, and Neck both long are,
His Head is from his body far.


The Cormorants contrary to all other Birds have their feet under their tail,
so that when they stand on the ground they bear their breasts strait upright
as men do, as the Author of the Book of natural matters writes, Pliny
calls Phoca Phooke, and the Sea-calfe. Albertus also calls it the Sea
Wolf, and otherwhiles the Sea Dog, the Germans call Ein mere Kalb, and the
English call it a Seal. It does Bay like a Calfe, his tongue is cloven into
two parts, his teeth are like Sawes, and his hinder feet like the tails of
Fishes: it has a small tail which is coverd with skin and hair. It has
feet like a Whelpe, and it is as hairy as a Goat, and it has a hayrie skin,
full of black and white spots, as Isodorus witnesses. Isidorus calls the Sea
Calfe Bo^pin, from the greatness of his eyes, because they are like Ox eyes.
Albertus writes that he has shining eyes. Aristotle says that he has no
ears but hollow holes to hear withal. Pliny says that it does give suck to
her young ones. It is hard to be killed unless it be struck on the temples of
the Head. For all the body of it is fleshy, as Pliny and Aristotle do write.
They breed on the Land, and engender like Dogs. It roareth aloud when it
sleeps, and it sleeps always on the Land. But the Sea which we come into
after we have passed these Straites. Magellan called the Pacifick Sea, because
he had there for the most part a fair calm wind, The Paciffick Sea.
or else in regard of the vast spaciousness of the Sea, he was not troubled
with any whirle winds, now Mariners do commonly call it Mar del Zur, or the
Southern Sea. This Sea albeit it were unknown to the ancients yet it had a
name, for Pliny and Orosius call it the Oriental or Eastern Sea. Ptolemy
falsely calls it the great Bay, when he should have called it rather the great
Sea. For it is the greatest Sea in the World. Paulus Wenetus describes it by
the name of the Sea ^in, and Haithomus Armenus, whom Ortelius otherwheres
calls, Antonius Curchinus calls it the Sea Cathai. And though ancient
Writers do name it, yet it was not well known or discoverd, before Ferdinand
Magellan sailed through it. Vascus Nunnius in the year 1513. had a view of it
from the Coast of Peruvia. But Magillan in the year of Christ 1520. having
passed the Straites which we described before, archieved an Herculean
enterprise in discovering this Sea, which whether any Ship had sayld on before,
it is uncertain. Those that have described the new World, do say that this
Sea is deepest about the unfortunate Islands, which are now known by the name
of Tuberones and St. Peter's Islands, and that it has Pearls on the Coast of
Peruvia: and that there are in it 7440. Islands, so that some do not
undeservedly call the Western part of it the Archipelagus, because this is
full of Islands like the Aegean Sea, which contain the Ciclades, the Sporades,
and many other scattering Islands, and it is commonly called the Italian
Archipelagus. Francis Vlloa and Antonius Pigiafelta do relate that there
grows in the Sea a certain kind of Herb which is 14. or 1^. Cabits high,
and that it grows about the Sea 4. or 5. Cubits high, so that it seems not
to grow in the Sea but in a green Meddow. I with Ortelius do suppose this to
be that which Pliny and Antigonus do mention out of Megasthenes, namely, that
all the Eastern Ocean, or Indian Sea is coverd with Woods. And that place in
Aristotle is agreeable hereunto, who writes that the Phoenicians who inhabited
Gadyra, when they had sailed beyond Hercules Pillars, arrived at certain
Countries which were full of weeds and Reeds. Polibius writes that the Sea
which washes Portugal has Oaks in it. Add to this that which Theophrastus
has 4. Histor. Plantar. Cap. 7.8, 9. and that which Aelianus has 13. Animal.
cap. 3. and Arrianus concerning the Indies: also Strabo 16. and Plin. 11. cap.
103. Their manners.
and the same 6. cap. 22. and 13. cap. 25. Plutarch in his natural Questions,
and concerning the face of the Moon. But of these things enough. The Southern
people are of a low stature, but the Northern people are of a great large
stature, so that they are commonly 11. or 13. foot high, they are of a white
color as our Northern people: but have such loud horrible voices, so that it
is more like the lowing of an Ox, or the braying of an Elephant, than a humane
sound. And they are so agill and nimble that they will out-runne and overtake
Dear, so that they are hardly wounded with a Musket shot, unless they go in
troops together, or at unawares. And this is an Argument of their strength,
the one of them will take up an Hogshead of Wine and bring it a Ship-boord, and
3. or four will hale a Ship from the shore, which 30. of our men can hardly
do. The cause of their whiteness and largeness of stature is attributed to
the coldness and humidity or moistness of the Country, because the Country
being always laden with Snow, makes it continual Winter. It is a very
barbarous and cruel Nation, and has no knowledge of humanity, but are only
led by the instinct of nature like beasts to any object that is before them.
But the Southern people are thought to be more inhumane, who living under the
An^arrick Circle are void of all humanity. When they would show a stranger
some token of friendship or goodwill, which they do very seldom, among their
Songs and Dances, they cast dust upon their Heads, or if they see others do it
they esteem it as a rare complement of friendship. When they go to War they
choose a Captain, unto whom they are all obedient, the most of them are so
cunning and skillful in their Bows, that they will hit whatsoever they aim
at, and when an Arrow sticks in a Planck of a Ship, it can hardly be pulled
forth again. They have great Bows, and they make their Bowstrings of wild
beasts guts, and as big as ones Thumb: they are armed also with great wooden
swords; and they use the sling, with which they will hit any thing they aim at
within their reach. And thus they defend their liberty though to no purpose,
for no man will take the pains to go unto those cold Countries, and there to
fight with these bloody Giants for no reward. The Inhabitants do clothe
themselves with the skins of wild beasts and Sea-wolves, which they hunt every
day. There are also Estriches, with whose feathers they adorn and deck
themselves, and they make holes through their faces, in which they put a green
kind of Marble, they get their food and clothing by hunting. And they desire
to take Sea-wolves not so much for their flesh as for their skins, for they
have found by often experience that their flesh is hard and unsavory. There are
also great store of Whales, with the bones thereof they build them Cottages. In
the first entrance into the Magellan Sea, there is a new Castle which Philip
the second King of Spain commanded to be built there for the defense of these
^traites in the year 1582. after that Francis D^ake an English Knight, having
passed these Straites, came into the Paciffick Sea, and sailed even to Quivira,
to find a passage by the Northern Straites into England. But the cold was so
intolerable, that when he came to 62. degrees of Altitude, in the year 1581.
on the No^es of June he turned his course toward the Aequinoctiall, and having
spoiled Iava, his Ship called the Victory, having sailed by Asia and all the
Coast of Afric, returned again into England. After him Thomas Candish did
deserve the same praise, who kept the same course, and with wonderful speed
and celerity sailed round about the whole world. And so much shall suffice
concerning the Straites of Magellane, and the fourth part of the world,
America. The discovery whereof all Writers of our age do worthily attribute to
Christopher Columbus. For he first found it out, and made it known to the
Christian World, and did communicate the use thereof, in the year 1492. He
that desires a larger explication of these matters, let him have recourse to
Laevinus Apollonius, Peter Martyr of Mediola^um, Maximilianus Transilvanus, who
have written thereof in Latin; also the Jesuits Epistles, and Maffeius
concerning the Indies, and others.

FINIS.
NEW ENGLAND The most remarqueable parts thus (...) by the high and mighty
Prince (...) now King of great Britain
map of New England HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms THE PORTRAICTUER OF CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH ADMIR^^
(...) NEW ENGLAND.
These are the Lines that show thy Face; but those
That show thy Grace and Glory, brighter be:
Thy Faire-Discoueries and Fowle-Overthrowes
Of Salvages, much Civilliz'd by thee
Best show thy Spirit; and to it Glory Wyn;
So, thou art Brass without, but Gold within.
If so, in Brass (too soft smiths Acts to bear)
I fix thy Fame, to make Brass steel out wear.
Thine as thou art Virtues, John Dauies Heref:
portrait of John Smith He that desires to know more of the Estate of new
England let him read a new Book of the prospecte of new England and there he
shall have Satisfaction

Observed and described by Captayn John Smith. 1634.


A TABLE OF THE FOUR GENERAL PARTS OF THE World, Europe, Affricke, Asia, and
America: and also of the North Pole, Iseland, and the Isles of BRITAIN.
Countries. A
ADea Magaduzzum Fol. 16 Aeolia 18 Aethiopia near Egypt, 12 Aethiopia the
innermost, 12 Affricke 12 Affricke properly so called, 12 Ag^dez, 12 A^ana, 12
Allania 38 Albion, 38 Amara 12 America 22 America Northern, 22 America South,
22 Angola 12 Angote 12 Anterr^t 12 Anzichi 12 Apulchen 22 Articke Pole, 28
Asgara 12 Asia 18 Asia the Less, 18 Bamba 12 Barbary 12 Barea 12 Barnagnes 12
Borra 12 Benin 12 Bidulgerid 12 Biro 12 Bornum 12 Brasil 12 Bugamedrum 12 Bugia
12 Butua 12 Cafria 12 Cambria 12 Cano 12 Caria 18 Caseva 12 Castella aurea 22
Cayrenaica 12 Cephala 12 Chile 22 Constantina 12 Damali 12 Damar 12 Dara 12
Dauma 12 Del 12 Dobas 12 Ducala 12 Egypt the higher, 12 Egypt the Lower, 12
Elchausum 12 Elhabata 12 England 38 Errifa 12 Estotiland 22 Europe 8 Ezzaba 12
Fatiagar 12 Fessan 12 Fesse 12 Florida 22 Freezland 28 Gago 12 Galata 12
Garetum 12 Giolosa 12 Goago 12 Gora 12 Goyami 12 Guangara 12 Guber 12 Gueguorre
12 Guinea 12 Guzala 12 Hea 12 Hosiora 12 India 22 Jonia 18 Ireland 33 Jucatan
22 Land of Labor, 22 Libya 12 Libya the Innermost, 12 Loangi 12 Loegria 38
Lycaonia 18 Lydia 18 Manaemuci 12 Manamotapa 12 Manicong 12 Marmarica 12
Mauritania 12 Mauritania Caesarieusis, 12 Medra 12 Meligens 12 Melinara 12
Melli 12 Morocc^ 12 Mombazza 12 Mozambique 12 Natolia 18 New France 22
Nicaragua 22 North Pole 28 Norumberg 22 Nova Hispania 22 Nova Zembla 28 Nubia
12 Numidia 12 Pango 12 Paphlagenia 18 Pemba 12 Pontapolis 12 Peru 22 Plopiana
22 Quiloa 12 Quivira 12 Scotland 38 Seb 12 Semia 18 Songo 12 Sunde 12 Susa 12
Tedletes 12 Tegelmessa 12 Temesna 12 Temiamo 12 Tesset 12 Thule 33 Tigraim 12
Tigremaam 12 Tingitana 12 Tombutum 12 Torra 12 Tremiseu 12 Tripolis Territ. 12
Tunis 12 Xoa 12 Zanfara 12 Zanguibara 12 Zegzeg 12
ISLANDS. B
BAlearets, Fol. 11 Bonavista 17 Borneo 21 Britain 38 Canarie Islands, 17
Celebes 21 Corsu 11 Corsica 11 Creete 11 England 38 Eust 42 Fair Isle 42
Fortunate Islands, 17 Fracta Lamea 17 Freezland 28 30 Gilola 21 Gomera 17 Grand
Canarea 17 Greeneland or Groanland, 28 Hebrides 42 Hyrrha 42 Japan 21 Javae
^ae. 21 Ila 42 Island of Salt, 17 Insula del Fuego 17 Jonar 42 Ireland 38 L^wes
42 Madera 17 Maggio or May, 17 Magna Sors 17 Mainland 41 Ma^orica 11 Malta 11
Man 42 Mindana 21 Minorica 21 Moluccoes 21 Mula 42 Nova Guinea 21 Nova Zembla
30 Orkeney 41 Palma Ferro 17 Palohan 21 Pomonia 41 Portus Sanctus 17 Princes
Island 17 Racline 42 S. Anthonies 17 S James 17 S. Laurence 17 S. Lucia 17 S.
Nicholas 17 S Thomas Island, 17 S Vincent 17 Sardinia 11 Scotland 38 Sicili^ 11
Sky 42 Taprabana 21 Teneriffa 17 Western Islands, 42 Wight 42 Zeland 42
Zetlan 21
Promontories.
Caput lonae Spei or the Cape of good hope. 12
Cities.
Babylon 21 Cusco 25 Jerusalem 21 Mexico 26 Ninivie 21 Quito 26
Rivers.
Cambra 12 Cuamar 12 Euphrates 18 Ga^ges 18 Indus 18 Iordane 18 Niger 18 Nilus
12 Senoga 12 Tigris 18 Zaire 12
Lakes.
Caspian Sea, 18 Z^mbre 12
Mountains.
Atlas Fol. 12. Cantaberes 12 Heila or Heikfort, 33 Helga 33 Mountain of the
Cross, 33 Mountains of the Moon 12 Sierra Liona, or the Mount of Lions, 12
Taurus 18
Strange Beasts.
Cascuij 25
Strange Fowls.
Barnacles. Puffins.
Strange Fishes.
Pollacks.
Strange Fruits.
Cassader 24 Guanavanae 25 Guiana 24 Haia 24 Hovi 25 Mamei 25 Mayz 24 Finea 25
Plantane 25 Potatoes 24
Observable Matters.
The Temple of Diana 21 The Walls of Babylon, 21
A PARTICVLAR TABLE OF IRELAND.
Countries. A
ANtrimme, Fo. 48 Arde 58 Armack 51 A^thule 58 Cav^n 51 Caterlough 58 Clare 48,
51 Colrane 51 Connaugh 48, 53 Corck 63 Cosmay 48 County of the Holy Cross 63
Delvin 48 Desmond 48, 63 Donergall 51 Down 48 Dublin 58, 60 Enaugh 58
Fermanagh 51 Fernes 58 Fingal 48, 60 Four 48 Fuse 58 Galway 51 Glandeboy 58
Ireland 43 Kerie 48, 63 Kildare 58, 60 Kilkenney 58 Kings-shire 58 Lagenia 48,
53 Lecale 48, 58 Leinster 58 Leis 48 Letrimme 51 Lim^ick 63 Longford 58 Louth
48 Mago 51 Maio 53 Meth 48, 51 Momonia 52* 53 Monakon 51 Morn 58 Munster 63
Newry 58 Offal 48 Ormund 48 Os^r 48 Queens-shire 58 Roscomen 51 Sl^ni 48 Slego
51, 53 Tiroen 51 Tomond 48 Trecomen 48 Tripperan 63 Trippitate 48 Vdrone 63
Vlster 48 Vriel 58 Waterford 63 We^shford 58 Wicklo 58
Islands.
Arran 51 Inis Bovind 56
Peninsulae's.
Ard 50 Lecale Fol. 50
Promontories.
Biar-head 64 Calebegh 64 Hieron 60 S. John's Foreland 50 The Ground 60 Wiclo or
Winchiligello 50
Havens and Bays.
Baltimore 64 Beheravim 64 Galloway 54 Kilmore 50 Knocfergus 50 Koldagh 50
Nagnutae 53 Smerwick 64
Cities.
Armack 58 Cork 46 Dublin 46 Galloway, or Gallive, 48 Korckcach 67 Luglyn or
Leighlin, 63 Limbrick 46, 66 Rosse 61 Waterford 46
Towns.
Aboy 50 Alon 54 Anner 54 Arctlo 54 Arde 48 Bala mac Andan, 61 Cassel 66 Clare
53 Delvin 48 Down 48 Droghead 48, 56 Duleck 50 Four 49 Kelles 52 Kilkenny 61
Leiglyn 64 Molingar 48, 56 Navan 48 Porchlargy 66 Rheban 66 Scrin 51 Sligo 53
Thomas Town 61 Trim 52
University.
Dublin 58, 60
Castles and Abbeys.
Arcklo C. 50 Killaire C. 52 Black Abbey 50
Rivers.
Avenmo 67 Banne 43 Banny 48 Birgus 61 Boand 43 Boyne 53 Furne 43 Iernus 64
Libin 53 Liffie 45 Lin 43 Lough Foil 48 Moad 43 Modarne 43, 61 Neoru 58 Ovoca
61 Samair^ 43 Shevin 43, 48 Shower 66 Slane 61 Slichei 43 Sairus 61 Vinderius
48
Lakes.
Eaugh 50 E^n^ 46, 54
Woods.
Dyffrim 50 Kilu^ra 50 Kilwarney 50
Mountains.
Bliew Blemy 61
Observable Matters.
A wonderful Lake in Ireland 46 A Disease called Lycanthropie 60 Aurifi^ij are
certain Birds which have one foot a^med with talents, and the other smooth
with a plain web 44 In Down a Town in Ireland S. Patricke was buried 48 No
Serpents nor venomous creature^ live here, nor in Creete. 44
A TABLE OF SCOTLAND.
Countries. A
ABr^ 77, 80 A^ma 80 Albania 88 Amandale 73 Angusia 78 Argile 77 Argathel 77
Atholia 78 Badenack 80 Baronia 76 Boina 80 Braid Albin 77 Buguhan 80 Caledonia
68 Cantyre 77 Caricla 74 Cathanes 81 Clacman 78 Clidesdale 73 Cnapdale 77 Cocla
74 Colrosse 78 D^um Albin 77 Eskedde 73 Eusedale 73 Fife 78 Gour 78 Kinrosse 78
Landeria 73 Lauria 77 Lennox 76 Liderdale 73 March 73 Marria 80 Mernia 78
Moravia 80 Navornia 80 Nillerdale 73 Perth 78 Renfroan 76 Rin^ 74 Rosse 80
Stathiern^ 77 Sterling 76 Twedia 73
Islands.
Hebrides, or Western Isles, 82 Orades or Orkney, 82 Zeland Islands 82
Promontories.
Betubium, or Dunis Bay, or Duncans Bay, 81 Navernia 81 Novantum 74 Vervedrum,
or Hoya, 81
Havens and Bays.
Forth 73 Gerigontus 74 Gerloch 74 Glotta 74 Letha 70 Longus 74
Cities.
Edinburgh 68 Glasgow 74 Lanarick 74
Towns.
Aberdon 72, 80 Abreneth 78 Air 74 Berwick 73 Calidon 78 Caralia 74 Coldingham
73 Cuper 78 Dalneth 74 Dunbar 74 Dunbrittan 74 Elgina 80 Hadington 74 Kello 73
Lemmuch 74 Leth 74 Nessus 80 S. Andrew 72
Universities.
Edinburgh 68 S. Andrews 72
Castles.
Dunbrittan 77 Dunotrum 80
Rivers.
Air 74 Almone 74 Annan 73, 74 Aven 76 Carrou 76 Carth 76 Cl^de 74 Coyil 74
Cray 74 Cunningam 76 Dee 70, 74 Duglasse 76 Dun 74 Eske 73 Eve 73 Fin 77 Grenan
74 Ierna 77 Kenn 74 Leth 74 Levin 77 Lide 73 Lowys 74 Lox 80 Navernus 80 Nessus
80 N^th 73 Solwaya 68 Spey 80 Stinsian 74 Taus 77, 78 Tine 74 Tweede 68 Vrus 74
Vrwyn 74
Lakes.
Abria 80 Avus 77 Finis 77 Iernus 77 Labrus 80 Lomund 70, 74 Myr^on 74 Nessus
80 Roan 74
Mountains.
Cheviotae 73 Grampius, or Graintzbai^e 70 Ocellum Moun. 78
Observable Matters.
The Gospel first preached in Scotland, Fol. 70 The deaf Stone, 76 A strange
Lake in Scotland, 76
A TABLE OF ENGLAND AND WALES.
Countries. B
Barke-shire, Fol. 110 Bedford-shire, 110 Bishopric of Durham, 88
Breckn^ck-shire, 99 Buckinghamshire 110 Caernarvan^sh. 90, 95 Cambridge-shire,
110 Cheshire 92 Cornwa^l 99 Cumberland 88 Dar^y-shire, 105 Denb^gh-shire 92
Devonshire 99 Dorsetshire 99 Essex 110 Flintshire 92, 99 Glamorganshire, 99
Gloucestershire 99 Hampshire 110 Hareford-shire 110 Hereford-shire, 99
Huntingdon 110 Kent 110 Lancashire 92 Leichestershire, 105 Lincolnshire 105
Mer^on^th shire, 95 Middlesex 110 Monmouth-shire 99 Montgomery-shire, 92
Northampton-sh. 110 Norfolk 105 Northumberland, 88 Nottinghamshire 105
Oxfordshire 11^ Pembrock-shire, 99 Rutland-shire, 105 Shrop-shire 92 Somme^set
shire, 99 Stafford shire, 105 Suffolk 110 Su^rey 110 Sussex 110 Warwickshire,
110 Westmorland, 92 Wilshire 99 Yorkshire, 105
Islands.
Anglesey 116 Garnsey 116 Gersey 116 Wight 116
Promontories.
Cape of Cornwall, 83 Holy head 118 Promontorie of Kent, 83
Havens and Bays.
Dover 84 Falmouth 84, 99 Milford Haven, 96 Muntsbay 84 Southampton 84 Tor^^y
84 Traith-Bocum 96 Traith-Maur 96
Cities.
Bathe 84 Bristoll 84, 100 Cacr^liffe 102 Canterbury 84, 115 Carlisle 90 Durham
91 Excester 99 Gloucester 102 Hereford 103 Landaffe 202 Leicester 108 Lincoln.
105 London 84, 114 Manchester 94 New Castle 88 Norwich 109 Oxford 84, 112
Sandwich 84 Shrewsbury 84 Southampton 114 West-Chester 94 Westminster 114
Winchester 114 York 84
Towns.
A^rgraw 116 Abergenny 102 Abingdon 114 Amersham 113 Ancaster 106 Andover 114
Anger 113 Apelby 92 Arundell 115 Arwenack 99 Ashelwelthorpe 109 Ashwell 113
Attleburgh 109 Bablac 112 Bakewell 106 Balacuri 98 Banburie 112 Bangor 95
Barkley 102 Barton 113 Bathe 100 Bealt 103 Beddington 114 Bedford 113 Bemflot
113 Beumarish 116 Bewdley 96 Binchester 91 Birtport 109 Bisham 114 Bishops
Stratford 113 Bletso 113 Blithe 108 Blueth 103 Bodman 99 Borrough of Southwarke
114 Boston 106 Bosworth 108 Brackley 110 Brading 119 Brecnock 103 Bretenham 112
Bridgnorth 96 Buckingham 113 Bulnesse 92 Burcester 112 Burford 112 Burton 106
Burtport 100 Burwell 112 Caerleon 102 Caermarden 103 Calne 100 Cambridge 112
Camden 102 Carram 90 Castlement 102 Champernons 100 Chensford 113 Chepstow 102
Chester upon the street 91 Chichester 115 Chipp^nham 100 Christ Church 114
Cirencester, or Cicester 102 Colbroke 113 Colchester 113 Collerford 89, 90
Congleton 95 Coventry 110 Cowbridge 102 Credendon 113 Crowland 100 Croydon 114
Cunnington 110 Dancaster 105 Darbie 106 Dartmouth 100 Daventry 110 Deereham 109
Delenham 112 Denbigh 95 Deohirst 102 Darlington 91 Dis or Disco 109 Dorchester
100, 112 Dover 115 Draiton 96, 114 Drayton Basset 106 Duglasse 98 Dunmow 113
Dunstable 113 Earls Cone 113 Eaton 113 Effingham 114 Egleston 91 Ely 112
Ensham 112 Exminster 100 Farendon 114 Finbo row 95 Foroy 99 God^lming 114
Gods-Hill 119 Gra^ton 110 Grampound 99 Grantham 100 G^avesend 115 Hadl^y 112
Halifax 105 Harbury 1^0 Hariford-West 1^3 Har^^^h 96 Haril^pole 9^ Ha^ 10^
Hell^s 99 Her^^ord 113 Hide 115 H^gham 11^ Hi^^ Wick^m 113 Hi^ckly 10^
Hungerford 114 Huntingdon 110 Juborow 109 Ipsw^ch 112 Ithancester 113 Ixming
112 Ke^dale 92 Ke^wick 90 Kedwilly 103 Kings Clear 114 Kingston 105, 114
King^^. upon Hul, 105 Lancaster 94 Lanuethlin 96 Leamington 110 Le^bury 104
Leigh 113 Leinster 104 Leske^d 99 Lestuthiel 99 Leuston 99 Leyton 113 Lichfield
106 Lidston, or Lidford, 100 Lime 100 Loghor 102 Longburrow 108 Long-Ichingdon
110 Ludlow 96 Luton 13 Lu^terworth 108 L^^re 109 Maidenhead 114 Maldon 113
Malsmebury 100 Mancester 110 Mansfield 108 Marleburrow 100 Marlow 113 Me^^on
114 Minster Lovell 112 Modberry 100 Monmou^h 102 Montgomery 96 Neuth 102
Newarke 108 Newberry 114 Newburg 116 New^ort 102, 113, 119 New^on 119
Northampton 110 North ^lmeham 109 Not^ingham 108 Oc^ley 114 Odiam 114 Odill 113
Okeham 108 Oreford 112 Ormeskirke 94 Oulney 113 Oundale 110 Padstow 99 Pannell
113 Patrington 105 Penbroke 103 Perith 90 Peryn 99 Peterborow 110 Plessey 113
Plimmouth 99 Plimpton 100 Pontfreit 105 Poole 100 Portsmouth 114 Pyle 98 Quarre
119 Radcliffe 114 Ralegh 119 Reading 114 Rech 112 Ringwood 114 Rochford 113
Roiston 112, 113 Rosse 104 Rumford 113 Rumney 115 Rumsey 114 Russia 98 Ru^^lan
95 Ruthun 95 Saffro^ Walden 112 S. A^banes 113 S Asa^h 95 S. Columbs 99 S
David's 103 S. Diacre 106 S. Edmondsbury 112 S. Ives 110 S. Needs 110 S. Peter's
120 Salsbu^y 100 Sa^dwich 115 Saltash 99 Scroby 108 Shelton 109 Shirbu^ne 100*
1^5 Silcester 114 Skulton 109 Spal^^g 1^6 Stafford 106 Stan^ord 106 Stant^orpe
91 Sta^nes 114 Stone 10^ Sto^y Stratford 11^ Stow 99 Stratfo^d upon Avo^, 110
Stratton 99 Sturminster 100 Sudbury 112 Sut^w^ll 108 Swaff-ham 109 Sweins^y 102
Tame 112 Tamerton 99 Tamerworth 99 Tameworth 106 Tenby 103 Tetbury 102 Tetnal
106 Thetford 109 Torcester 100 Treketh 103 Trubridge 100 Truscu 99 Tukesbury
102 Verulame 113 Vppingham 108 Vicester 106 Vxbridge 114 Wallingford 114
Wandlesworth 114 Wantage 114 Warham 100 Warwick 102 VVa^lingstreet 113
VVa^li^g^on 112 VVanbu^ne 109 VVebley 104 VVeden 110 VVe^sburrow 106 VVelledone
110 VV^lls 100 VV^^k^nton 90 VVe^herby 105 Waymouth 100 VVhitney 112 VVhorwell
114 VVick^m 13 VVi^^^ay 114 VVil^on 100 VVimbledon 114 VVi^^urne 1^0
VVi^^els^ombe 102 VVind^am 109 VVi^^s^re 114 VV^l^^rhampton 106 VVoo^stocke 112
VVorkensop 108 VVor^^worth 106 VVroxeter 96 Yarmouth 109, 119
Universities.
Oxford 112 Cambridge 112
Rivers.
Adderburne 100 Alan 99 Alen 95, 100, 110 Alne 89, 110 Arrow 110 Arun 115 Avon
100, 110 102 Ax 100 Air 1^5 B^^^fice 113 Bl^^^e 89, 106 Bre^on 112 Brui 100
Calder 105 Came 112 Camel 99 Carr 100 Chelmer 113 Cherwell 112 Charnet 106 Clun
96 Cokar 90, 105 Colne 112 Columb 100* 113, 114 Conway 95 Coquet 89 Corn 96
Creden 100 Dan 106 Dane 95 Darent 115 Deben 112 Dee 83, 95 Dert 100 Deva 95
Derwent 88, 90, 105, 106 Don 105 Dor 104 Dove 106 Dow 105 Du^losse 94 Eden 90
Eeden 90 Eimot 92 Elen 90 Ell^n 100 Elny 95 Erome 100 Evenlode 112 Ewe 100
Fosse 105 Foulness 105 ^owy 99 Frow 100 From 100 Froshwell 113 Gaewnlesse 91
Gerne 109, 112 Giping 112 Go^^y 103 Guash 108 Hail 99 Hamble 114 Hanse 106
Hull 105 Humber 84 Idle 106, 108 Idwell 94 Irton 90 Isca 100 Isis 100, 102, 112
Ituna 92 Ivell 100 Kennet 100, 114 Lack 94 Lambor 114 Lea 113, 114 Leam 100 Ley
113, 114 Lid 100 Lim 100 Lin 108 Liner 99 Loghor 102 Lone 92, 94 Loo 99 Lud 106
Lug 104 Medway 115 Mersey 92 Mimer 113 Mole 114 Munow 104 Nid 105 Nide 102 Ock
100, 114 Olen 90 Ore 112 Ottery 100 Ouse 84, 102, 105, 109, 112 Pedred 100
Penke 106 Piddle 100 Plim 100 Ran 92 Recall 105 Rhie 105 Ribell 94 Rumney 102
Severne 83, 102 Snite 108 Soar 108 Somer 100 Sous 106 Stort 113 Stour 112 Sturn
100 Taffe 102, 103 Tam 106 Tamar 99 Taw 100 Tayn 106 Teave 100 Tees 91
Tefidian^ 96 Teigne 100 Terne 96 Test 14 Teyle 105 Them 102, 112, 113 115
Thames 84 Thet 109 Thon 100 Till 89 Tine 88 Totnes 100 Towridge 100 Towy 103
Trent 84, 100, 106, 108 Vaga 104 Vale 99 Vendrath Vehan 103 Vske 103 Wandale
114 VVanspethel 89 VVash 108 VVaveney 109 Wear 91 VVelland 106, 110 VVelwe
100 VVents 109 VVever 95 VVey 100, 114 VVherfe 105 VVilleybourne 100 VVindrush
112 VVisk 105 VVitham 106 VVreck 108 Wye 103 VVyre 94 Year 109, 112
Lakes.
Merton 94 VVinander Mere 92
Mountains.
Derwentfels 90 Ingleburrowhill 94 Peake 106 Pendle-hill 94 Penigent 94
Sceafell 98
Observable Matters.
Sir Francis Drake borne at Plymouth, 99 King Richard the 3d. slain at
Bosworth, 108 The Vale of VVhite-horse 113
A TABLE OF NORVVEY, SWETHLAND, and DENMARK.
Countries. A
AGgerhusia 121 Allantacia 125 Angermannia 125 Bahusia or Bay 121 Begerhusia
122 Biarmia 125 Botina-East 125 Botina North 125 Botina West 125 Corelia 125
Dalia 124 Denmark 126, 132 Dithmarsh 144 Finland 125 Fionia 132, 147 Gestricia
125 Gotland 135 Halland 135 Handharet 140 Helsing 125 Holsatia 132 Ingria 125
Jutia 132, 137 Lapland 125 Li^fland 125 Meringia 129 Midelpad 125 Morsoc 140
Natagundia 125 Niricia 124 Norwey 121 Opland 124 Ostgothia 124 Reccalia 125
Savolosia 125 Scania 132 Scricfinia 125 Sleswick 132 Smalandia 124 Solies Dalia
124 Stormaria 144 Sudermannia 124 Swethland 121 Tonastia 125 Tuiscia 124
Thyland 140 Verendia 184 Wagna 144 Wendsyssil 140 Westgothia 124 Westmannia 124
Wichia 125 Wiria 125 VVotichonia 125
Islands.
Abo 125 Ageroa 140, 150 Alant 125 Alsen 148 Amigria 134 Aroe 148 Arr 148
Birkholm 150 Bodum 140 Boko 150 Bornholm 135 Brando 150 Cifland 140 Dagon, or
Dachlen, 125 Ebilo 150 Egholm 140 Endelo 150 Falstre 148 Fenno 150 Grysholm 140
Hannoe 135 Hansholm 140 Herisholm 140 Hellenis 150 Hiarnoe 140 Hielme 140
Hilgenes 140 Huena 134 Jegen 140 Jordo 150 Landoe 135 Langeland 148 Lawland 148
Moeneland 134 Ocland 129 Oland 140 Ostholm 140 Oxeholm 140 Ramso 150 Samsoe 140
Tosing 148 Towe 150 Tuen 140 Tussing 150 Tydsholm 140 Weem 134 VVithurgeum 125
Zeland 132
Peninsula's.
The Cimbrick Chersonesus, or Peninsula, 132
Promontories.
The Promontorie of Hellen 140
Havens and Bays.
The Bay of Helenore, 124 Bay Die Flensburgerwick 150 Botnick Bay 125 Finnick
Bay 125 Assensian Bay 150 The Sound 134
Cities.
Arboga 124 Arosia 124 Assens 147 Berga or Bergen 122 Bowens 147 Copenhagen a
University, 130 Cortemund 147 Foborch 147 Itzohoa 144 Londa or Londis 135
Middlefart or Milvart 147 Niburch 147 Nicopen 150 Nicoping 140 Ottensel 147
Segeberg 144 Staffanger 122 Stegoa 134 Stormaria 144 Stubecopen 150 Swynburch
147
Towns.
Alburg 140 Arhusen 140 Asloia 121 Congel 121 Coping 150 Die Holle 150
Ellebogen 135 Elleneur 134 Flensburg 142 Fridrichstad 122 Grammelgard 150
Habsay 125 Haderslebia 144 Hamburg 145 Hammaria 122 Heimingsted or Henste 145
Helsingburg 150 Hexholme 125 Hussum 144 Kexholme 125 Kile 145 Koengeef 121
Konningsberg 122 Krempe 145 Landskrone 151 Lincop 124 Londen 151 Marib 148
Nasco 148 Nerva 125 Nidrosia 122 Nistadt 148 Norborch 150 Novogard 125
Odderwold or Odwad 121 Osternholm 150 Rensburg 145 Ripen 140 Roeschild 134 Roth
148 Rudkeping 148 Saltzburgh 122 Scara 124 Schon 122 Sleswick 142 Stocholm 1^4
Strengenes 124 Sundorburg 150 Swineburg 150 Togrop 148 Tolgo 124 Tollingsted
145 Tystad or Tysset 140 Vexio 124 Vpsal 124 Wardhu^se 122 VVes^mberg 1^5 VVexo
124 VViburg 140 VVisby 135
Rivers.
Egidora or Eyder 135 Eidera 145 Lovat or Ny 125 Stora 1^5
Lakes.
Dithmars 145 Solion 124
Woods.
Alverderpenholi 145 Borcholt 145 Burgholt 145 Resenwalde 145
Mountains.
Alberg 140 Skarringclint 140
Observations.
S. Laurences Clock in Denmark 135 Stockfish made in Norwey 122 Vraniburg, a
Castle full of ^stronomicall Instruments sometime belonging to Tycho-Brahe 134
A TABLE OF BORVSSIA, OR PRVSSIA, LIVONIA, OR LIEFELAND, Russia, and Moscavia,
Lithuania, Transylvania, or Siebenburg^n, and Taurica Chersonesus.
Countries. A
ALlantika 158 Barionia 152 Belz 172 Bideiz^ow 166 Bielskia 166 Black Russia
166 Borussia 152 The Briestian Palaetinate 170 Condora 166 Correllia 166
Culmegeria 152 Curland 158 Duina 166 Estland 158 Galinda 152 Halycz 172 Harland
158 Hockerland 158 Jaroslavia 166 Jeruen 158 Ingra 166 Kiovia 170 Lappia 166
Lemburg 172 Lettea 158 Liefeland 157 Lithuania 166 Lucomoria 166 Miceflow Pal.
170 Michlovia 152 The Minscentian Palatinate 170 Mosaiskia 166 Moscovie 162
Nadravia 152 Natangia 152 Novogrodia 164, 166 Novogrodian Palatinaic 170 Obdora
166 Odenpoa 158 Permia 166 Petzora 166 Plescovia 166 Pomesania 152 Prussia 153
Rescovia 166 Rhezan 164 Rostow 166 Russia 158 Sambia 152 Samogitia 166 Severia
164 Sibior 166 Siebenburgen 173 Slavonia 152 Smolensko 164 Spruceland 152
Sudavia 152 Susdali 166 Transylvania 173 The Trocensian Palatinate 170 Tweria
166 Vilenskian Palatinate 170 Vodzka 166 Volhinia 166, 170 Volodomiria 164
Vst^aga 166 VVarma 152 VViathka 166 Wicke 158 Wielki 166 Wirland 158 W^tebscium
Palatinate 170 Wolochda 166 VVoretinia 164
Islands.
Alona 158 Dachden 158 Kien 158 Osel 158 VVormse or Worist, 158 VVrangen 158
Peninsula's.
The Taurick Chersonesus, or Peninsula, 178
Cities.
Ambotein 160 Angerburg 154 Azac 180 Bassenburg 160 Boytia 154 Bra^denbury 154
Briesti 170 Capha 180 Cestia 154 Christaderder 154 Colluga 164 Corsira 164
Crentzburg 154 Dalem 160 Di^ wild 164 Doblin 160 Dringford 154 Durbin 160
Fischusen 154 Fridland 154 Girania 154 Grubin 160 Hasenpot 160 Heiligenbeil 154
Hermanstat 174 Keningsberg 154 Kerzemenes 172 Kneyback 154 Kokenhusen 158 Labia
159 Lebenicht 154 Lechstet 154 Liccow 154 Lucko 172 Minsko 170 Mitaw 160
Moschwa 164 Norbeitia 154 Novogrod 164 Novogrodeck 170 Pilten 160 Pinsko 170
Poloteska 170 Ragnet 154 Renum 154 Revel 158 Rhezan 164 Riga 158 Salaw 154
Seleburg 160 Shippenbeil 154 Srunden 160 Tanas 180 Tapia 154 Tilso 154 Tulla
164 Valdonia 154 Vensdorfe 154 Vilenski 164 Vintburg 154 Volodomire 164 Wenden
158 Witebske 170 Wolmar 158 Wolodomiria 172 Zinten 154
Towns.
Abse^l 158 Allenstein 154 Althasis 154 Balachium 180 Bar 172 Barton 154
Berglaw 154 Bichow 170 Bobroisko 170 Borcholm 158 Boristow 170 Brastaw 172
Bretchen 154 Brezania 172 Brunsburg 154 Candaw 160 Canienies 172 Cercum 180
Cherso 180 Christburg 154 Cimmerium 181 Clausenburg 176 Copyz 170 Costovia 180
Crim 178 Cronstat 176 Culenbury 154 Culme 154 Czeringow 146 Derpt 158 Disna 170
Dreschdow 154 Dressa 170 Dromon Achillis 180 Druha 170 Dubrowna 170 Elbing 154
Fellin 158 Fridech 154 Garnesie 154 Gilgehburg 154 Golb 154 Goldingen 160
Graecida 180 Grandentz 154 Grodna 164 Gustat 154 Hapsel 158 Heilsberg 154
Helmet 158 Heraclia 180 Hohenstein 154 Holand 154 Jabansburg 154 Ingermenum 180
Insterburg 154 Iurgburg 154 Kamiona 170 Kerkew 170 Kerzemenesia 170 Kies 160
Kowno 164 Lais 158 Lantenburg 154 Lawisko 170 Lawna 164 Leal 158 Lebmul 154
Leippe 154 Lesen 154 Lichstad 154 Lida 164 Linsko 170 Lode 158 Luezko 170
Luzenburg 154 Maiendeweder 154 Mangutum 180 Marienburg 154 Medziboz 172 Melsak
154 Merinec 154 Micestaw 170 Midwisch 176 Millenbach 176 Mokilow 170 Moser 170
Munhuse 154 Nerne 158 Newmarke 154 Newnburg 154 Newtich 154 Neyburg 154
Noesenstat 172 Nordenburg 154 Nyschlot 158 Ober Paln. 158 Oczacow 180 Odruck
170 Ortleburg 154 Osterod 154 Overpolen 158 Pappaw 154 Passenhume 154 Perecopia
180 Pernaw 158 Pomp^iopolis 180 Prensmark 154 Rodascowna 170 Rastenburg 154
Reczycza 170 Reden 154 Ressen 164 Rhenum 154 Richtenerder 154 Riga 116 Ring^n
158 Rose^burg 150 Sacer Lucus 180 Salaw 154 Salfeld 154 Schovenberg 154 Schonte
154 Scorpow 154 Seburg 154 Sicw^arksey 164 Slonin 170 Starodub 164 Straburg 154
Strasburg 154 Stum 154 Swisto^z 170 Thorn 154 Tolkemit 154 Tolsberg 158 Topatum
158 Volodomire 170 Vp^ta 170 Wart^nburg 154 We^senburg, 158 176 Wersensteim 158
Wenaen 160 Wenstaw 154 Wermedie 154 Werneboa 158 Windaw 160 Woelzowiez 170 Zaaz
176
Seas.
The Euxine Sea 181 Pontus 181
Rivers.
Alla 154 Alth 176 Aluta 176 Ariel 180 Beca 160 Borysthenes 164, 166, 180
Chrysoloros 176 Chrysus 176 Cronon 154 Desma 160, 180 Don 166, 180 Dravaniza
154 Duina 160, 166 Duinga 166 Duna 170 Edel 166 Eidera 145 Einbeck 160 Elbing
154 Fasso 181 Kockel 176 Lavia 154 Lua 154 Morus 170 Moschus 164 Nemeni 154
Nester 166 Niopor 166, 180 Nogent 154 Oby 166 Occa 164, 166 Obt 176 Ompay 176
Onega 166 Orsa 170 Ossa 154 Passerg 154 Phasis or Phazzeth, 181 Pregel 154
Sabesus 17^ Sam^us 17^ Samiar 180 Strygius 176 Tanais 166, 180 Thimes 176 Tyrus
172 Vistula 154 Volga 164, 166 Vre^b^itz 154 Vusera 154 Weisel 154 Winda 160
Lakes.
Beibus 160 B^elejeziow 166 Ilme^ or Ilmer 166 Ladega 166
Woods.
Hercynia 160, 162, 176
Mountains.
Conningsperg 156 The Riphaean Mountains 160
Observations.
A strange manner of Burial in L^eseland 160
A TABLE OF SPAINE^
Countries. A
ALgarbia 188 Andalus^a 188, 217 Arragon 188, 227 Astigitana 187 Asturia 188
Asturia de Oviedo, 2^2 Asturia de Santillana, 207 Ausonia 237 Barcinon 237
Baetica 187, 188 Biscay 188, ^07 Bisuldinum 237 Bracara 188 Caesar Augustana
188 Canaras 237 Card^^a 2^7 Carthag^nia 188 Castile Old and New, 212, 188, 227
Catalonia 188 Celsona 237 Ceretania 237 Clunia 188 Corduba 187 Dertosa 2^7
Emerita 187 Emporia 237 Estremadura 188 Gaditana 187 Galicia 188, 202 Gerunda
137, 237 Granada 188, 217 Guimeranum 237 Guipuscoa 207 Herlua 237 Hispalia 187,
217 Herda 237 Itona 237 Leon 188, 202 Lucia 188 Lu^itania 187 188 Ma^orica 188
Minor^sa 237 Mo^t^cuto 237 Mont Albo 237 Murcia 188, 222 Navarre 207 Pacensis
187 Palmosium 237 Petrelata 237 Pollearia 2^7 Portugal 188 ^rata 237 R^ssellion
237 S^^olumba a Queralto 237 S. Columba a Scintillijs, 237 Sanallanium 237
Sc^libitana 187 Spain 183 Tarracon 187, 188 Tingitana 188 Valentia 188, 222
Vallisfogona 237 Vicke 237 Vrgell 237
Promontories.
St. Vincents Promontorie 184 Cape de Creus 184 Olarso 184
Havens and Bays.
Alber 191 Baia de Cadiz 191 The Bay of Gibraltar, 192 B^y of Sucronia 224
Corvima 191 Dubal or Tuball 200 Fuentarabie 191 Haven of Venus 191 Illicitane
Bay 225 Portus Tanaconensis, 191 Puerto d'Aliconte, 191 Setubal 200
Sucronensian Bay 191 The Virgitane Bay, 191
Cities.
Alasiar de Sal 198 Alcantara 190 Almada 198 Amaya 2^1 Anca 191 Aranda 214
Asturica 189 Augustobroga 190 Barcelon, or Barcino, 189, 228 Begia Bega, or
Be^a, 178 Bilbao 207 Burgos 222 Co^mbrae 198 Complutum 190 Compostella 189, 198
Corduba 189 Estella 211 Evora 198 Girona 230 Granada 189 Guensa 189 Hispalis
189 Huesca 227 Ilerda 230 Leon 189, 204 Lerida 230 Lisbon 189, 198, 190 Madrid
189, 215 Mons Regalis 211 Nebriss^ 189 Olisippo 198 Oly^a 211 Ore^se 190 Oviedo
2^6 Palacios 218 Pampelon 189, 211 Pedis ^ortus 211 Pintia 189 Placentia 214 S.
Jago 198 S. Johannes 211 S. Lucar 189 Salamanca 189 Saragossa 189, 227 Segobia
or Segovia, 214 Sevill 190, 218 Taffala 211 Talamera 189 Tarracon 187, 189, 230
Toledo 189 Tolosa 210 Tor^osa 189, 215 Tudela 211 Tyriassona 227 Valence 189,
224
Towns.
Aierb^um 228 Alanguera 193 Alboroz^n 224 Alc^^a de Henares, 215 Alianta 225
Ampurias 230 Astorga 206 Avila 214 Axalita 218 Barbrastrum 228 Be^aro or
Bigerra 192 Belgida 225 Bera 191 Bethleem 198 Bigerra 192, 225 Blan^s 230 Bolsa
189 Braga 200 Cabeca 215 Caesar Augusta 189 Cagnamanus 190 Calata^ut 228 Cal^z
190 Carmona 218 C^s^^^^ 198 Castola veia 215 Castaon 190 Casted verde 190 Ceice
198 Chippiona 220 Cin^^a^a 230 Co^mbra 198 Colibra 230 Complutum 195 Coniltum
220 Con^mbria 185 Conta^na 224 Cordona 2^0 Coria 214 Cuerca 215 Decia^a 230
Denia 225 Ece^a 218 Elche 225 El Puerto de S. Maria 220 Fraga 228 Fuen^^bre 182
Funtar^bie 184, 210 Gu^rda 198 Gurr^ae 228 Jacca 227 Incibilis 225 Julia 189
Juliobriga 189 Lagoa 201 Lamego 189, 220 Lebazuza 215 Lebrixa 218 Leria 198
Lericla 198 Liria 225 Loia 2^8 Lucar 220 Lugo 190, 204 Manresa 230 Medina
Sidonia 220 Merida 190 Metallina 190 Miranda 189 Monda 220 Mon^on 228 Monte
Majore 192 Mon^oro 220 Moron 218 Morvedere 225 Motrico or Monte de Trico 210
Nebrissa 215 New Carthage 184 Odeseiza 201 Oliva 224 Orensium 204 Osia 195 Osma
214 Ossonoba 201 Ossuna 218 Palentia 212 Penastor 218 Perpigna^ 231 Pineia 185
Placentia 212 Ponte Fouga 198 Ponte Ve^ra 204 Porto 190 Porto-morin 190
Portugallete 208 R^badeo 204 Rodericke 214 Rotskinoon 231 Ronda-veia 220 Roses
230 Saganta 195 Saguntum 225 S. Lucar de Barrameda 215 Salabris 189 Salamanca
195 Sebastian 210 Seguntia 186 Selves 201 Siguensa 215 Simanca 214 Talavera 215
Tariffa 220 Tavila 201 Tomar 198 Tordesillas 189 Torres 224 Tragacet 189
Tudella 189 Valladolid 214 Vegel 220 Vera 191 V^cque or Vich 230 Villa Franca
191 Villamanta 215 Villaria 190 Visco 198 Vrgella 228 Xativa 225 Xavanicium 214
Xeres de la Frontera, 220 Zamora 225
Universities.
Complutum 216 Commbra 200 Ebora 200 Herda 231 Lerida 195 Osca 195 Pincia 195
Saganta 195 Salamanca 195 Sarragosa 227 Toledo 216 Vale^ce 226
Learned Men.
Abraham Cacutius, 195 Almanca Alphonsus King of Castile Arnoldus Villonovanus,
Averroes, Avice^, Avienus, Aurelius Prudentius, Caelius Sedulius, C. Julius
Higinus, Johannes Vives, Iustine Lucan, L. Annaeus Seneca, L. Iunius, M. Fabius
Quintilianus. M. Valerius, Martialis, Mela Messahallah. Moderatus Columella,
Nonatus, Pompo^^us Mela, Pope Damasus, Portius L^tro, Ra^mundus Lullius, Rasis,
Rufus Festus, Seneca, Sextilius Haena, Sotion, Trogus Pompeius, Valentinus,
Ibid.
Seas.
Atlanticke Sea 183 Balcaricke Sea 183 British Sea 184 Cantabrian Sea 183
Mediterranean Sea, 184
Rivers.
Anas 190 200 Araxis 210 Avia 190 Austra 190 Baetis 187* 190 Besotium or
Betulo, 236 Carei-vas 201 Carrion 214 Chalibs 190* 210 Conga 228, 2^6 Duero 189,
215 Duria 224 Ebro 189, 228 Fluvianus 236 Gada 214 Gallego 228 Guad^let 220
Guadalcheber 190 Gua^alguinor 190 Guadiana 200 Guetalabiar 225 Gunenea 210
Henores 214 Iberus 228, 2^6 Lethe 190 Limaea 190 Minas 190 Minius or Mino, 215
Mondega or Monda, 215 Orta 210 Pes^erga 214 Plum^^lbus 2^6 Rio Guadiano 190
Rubricatus 236 Ruscison 236 Salon 228 Sicoris 190, 236 Tagus, or Tayo, ^0^
Teyo, 189, 215 Techum or Tetrum, 236 Tettni 236 Turia 214 Turius 190 Vataon 201
Vramea 210 Xa^on 228 Xucar 226
Lakes.
Albufera 189 Cantabria 189
Woods.
Monte d'oca 189
Mountains.
Bambola 228 Cacus 227 Calpe 192 Canus 234 Idubeda 189 The Jews Mountain 192
Jupiters Moun. 192 La Penna de les Ena morades 192 Mariola 226 Mont-^ui 192
Monte d'Oca 191 Mont Serrato 237 Nav^ia 211 Orospeda 189, 190 Rendgolosa 226
Tyrenaean Mountains 183, 191 S. Adrians M. 184 S^erra d'Alcarez 190 Sierra de
Childecatao 200 Sierra de Cocolo 189 Sierra Mollina 191 Sierra de Monchiquo,
200 Sierra Morena 191 Sierra de Sordedas, 200 Sierra Vermigia 191 Verode
^lacentiae 214
Observations.
A strange custom used by the Maids, in Biscay 208 Lucan the Poet, and the
two Seneca's borne at Corduba. 220 Two strange Fountains, 236 Seventie Bridges
in Spain
A TABLE OF FRANCE, From Fol. 245. to 386.
Countries. A
AGincourt 376 Aine-ville 376 Albret 276 Alencon 262 Ambianum 294 Amiens 284
Ang^ers 263 Anjou 263 311 Aquitaine 274 Ardres 308 Arelatum 276 Arley 376
Armignac 276 Avernia or Avergne, 274 Avignon 279 Aulnay 276 Aulnis 276 Aumale
262 Avor 319 Auserre 376 Austun 376 Auxerre 288 Auxierroit 376 Auxone 376
Baignon 260 Barsur S^ine 288 Basque 276 Bassigny 286 Baugy 319 Bear 276
Beaucairo 274 Beauchamp 37^ Beavilois 321 Beaumont Sur Oyse, 292 Beausse 292
Beauvais 292 303 Belsia 259, 263 Berrie 274, 316 Bession 262 Bethifi 292
Bigorre 276 Boisbo^on 319 Boulog^e 297 37^ Brain 288 Br^s^y or Brass 376
Bresse 277 348 Brestement 376 Br^any 2^9 Labrye 2^8 Burbon or Burbonois 321
Bordeaux 329 Burgundy 251, 276 372* 376 Cadurcium 345 Cahors 343 Campania 284
298 Carnates or Carnoti, 262 Catalaune 287 Caulx 262 Chaligny 376 Chaloces 276
Chalon Sur Saone, 376 Champagne 286 Chargni 376 Charolois 376 Chariram 26^
Chovigni 376 Commingcois 276 Compoy 319 Constantine 262 Cony 319 Corb^e 284,
298 Couches 376 Court Robert 301 Courtembrone 308 Cru 319 Dam-Martin 292
Daulphine 251 Delphinate of France, 359 Dijon 376 Dola 377 Dreux 263 Esparre
276 Espi^ey 376 Estampes 292 Estrac 276 Eu 262 Eurcux 262 Fane 319 Fa^ges 319
Fiennes 308 Foix 276 Forest 224 Franche Cont^ 377 France 245, 249 Franssae 276
Gast^nois 292 G^lly 376 G^on 319 Goella 291, 292 Grandpre 288 Grave 276 Grello
260 Gucel 260 Guienna 274 Guisne 297, 3^8 H^rcourt 262 Hault Avergne 274 Hault
Beausse 262 Helvetia 276 Henrepois 292 Hovivet 262 Jain-ville 288 Isle Adam 292
Isle of France 290, 292 Ju^gny 286, 288, 301 Langres 287, 376 Languedoc 356
Laonnois 286, 296 Lassax 319 Laugey 376 Le ^igle 262 Le Bas Limosin 264 Le
haul^ Limosin 264 Lemovicium 262 Ligny 288 Limosin 264 276 Lions 351
Longue-ville 262 Lora^ne 263, 362 L^uran 519 Ma^lly 288 Maine 314 Malcurier 262
Le Man's 265 March 276 Ma^cilly 319 Marnay 319 Mascon 376 Metu 292 Mo^by^ 376
Mommart^n 376 Mongomery 262 Monstreul 297 Montalbon 343 Montford 260 263
Montigna^ 276 Montliet 376 Morienne 277 Mortaine 262 Motte 288 Mountfalcon 319
Mussy 376 Narbonne 276 N^mours 292 Nevers 376 Normandy 259 Nuissement 319
Orange 279 O^e 308 Pa^^ de Diois 277 Pa^^ de Pariois 287 Pais de Querci or
Creci 343 Paris 291 Perch 236, 322 Perigort 276 Pe^uigny 284, 294 Percigny 319
Persang 292 Picardie 194 Picardie la Vray 284 Pierre fons 292 Planes 27^
Poictou 338 Polichum 377 Pompadour 276 Ponthieu 297 Pontois 292 Poursuivent
287, 288 Province 251, 279 Ragny 376 Retel 288 Retelois 284, 286 Rhemes 287
Rochefort 292, 376 Rogemont 376 Rohan 260 Roussy 28^ Royaume de Yvetot 262
Rupes Fortes 292 S. A^gnan 389 S. Ja^gon 376 S. Martin 376 S. Paul 297
^aintogne 276 Sal^gny 319 Sancerre 319 Santerre 297 Savoy 251, 276, 382 Sees
376 Senegnon 376 Senry 319 Soissonois 288, 296 Solonium 263 Susa 277
Ta^carville 262 Tarentais 277 Tarrant 376 Ta^tenois 286, 296 Toulouse 276
Tirasche 289, 294 Tirecourt 376 Tonnerre 288, 376 Touraine 274, 263 Tours 263
Turone 335 Valenion 376 Valesia 276 Vallage 286 Valois 292 Vannetais 260
Vasconia 274 Vaulx de Vire 262 Vendosme 315 Ventadour 276 Verberie 292
Vermandois 289 Veromandois 274 Vertus 288 Vesutium 377 Vexinum Francicum, 291
Vien^ois 277 Villabon 319 Ville Neure le Roy, 292 Villiers 319 Virean 376 Vult
262 Valxin le Francois, 269 Xaintogue 269
Islands.
De Ba^ 251 Le Taureau 251 Hieres or Years 283
Promontories.
Gobaeum 251 Pyrenaean Promontory 251
Havens and Bays.
Ancrayum 260 Aquitaine Bay 251 Br^st 260 Briga 251 Conquest 250 Fenstiers 250
French Bay 251 Hancbont 260 La Bar^ 249 La Rochelle 251 Lusson or Luxo, 251
Ponts^cro^ 260 Rosc^^ 251 Tarbellicus Ancon, 251
Cities.
Aix 280 Amboise 274, 359 Ambrum 277 Amiens 284 Angiers 284 Arclatum 276, 280
Arles 280 Baion 274 Beavais 292, 304 Besancon 378 Bordeaux 248, 250, 274
Carcasson 356 Caralaun 287 Cha^lon en Champaigne 287 Chamberry 277, 384 Dijon
374 Dio 277 Dola 377 Ebrodunum 277 Engoul^sme 274, 359 Geneva 277 Grenoble 277,
359 Juliomagus 248 La Fere 297 Langres 287 Laon 296 Limoyes 264 Lions 248 Loya
380 Lutetia 291 Massels 248, 282 Naeomagus 248 Na^tes 260 Narbon 248, 356 Noion
286 Orleance 248 Ornance 380 Paris conta. La Ville, l'Vniversitie, La Cite.
248, 291 Poicters 248 Quingey 380 Rhemes 287 Roan 262 Rochelle 248, 270
Rochford 380 S. Antony de Tricastin 277 S. Flower 274 Saints 269 S^ns 288
Soisson 286, 296 Toulouse 250, 356 Tours 276, 335 Troyes 286 Tuile 266 Valence
277, 359 Vercelle 381 Vienne 277, 359
Towns.
Abbeville 297 Ablys 202 A^gres 274 A^guebelle 277 Ainay la Chasteau, 324 Alage
332 Alassa^ 266 Alencon 262 Allier 322 Amance 365 Ambianum 294 Amboise 276
Ancrayum 260 Andelot 287 Angilberts 376 Angoulesme 270 Angy 242 Anthony 332
Apt 282 Ar^himont 322 Ardres 308 Ar^late 359 Argenton 319 Argeny 319
Argilliers 287 Arnay 375 Argue 310 Aseilly 319 Avalon 375 Avaricum 319
Auguranda 319 Aulnay 343 Aumale 262 Aurenches 262 Auson^ 375 Ausserre 375, 376
Austun 374 Ays d'Anguillon 319 Baranion 319 Barat 266 Bar Sur Senie 301
Basochium 332 Basse Manche 341 Bauge 314 Bayeux 262 Bayon 365 Bazes 274
Beaucarie 283 Beaufu 319 Beaufort 314 Beavica 324 Beaujeu 319 Behulicu 319
Beaulne 375 Beaumont 306 Beaurams 365 Belesme 332 Belloy 277 Bello-mon 266
Bellus-Locus 266 Beugy 319 Bisnay 287, 301 Blaisac 274 Blanc-mont 365
Blankenburg 365 Blavet 260 Blaye 272 Blois 287, 301 Boisson 266 Bommicres 319
Bonge 319 Borbesieux 272 Botzen 252 Boulogne 307 Bourges 318 Bourg nouff 341
Bourssac 319 Bouteville 274 Bray 288 Brecy 319 Brenonville 292 Bressuyre 341
Breast 260 Bridieres 341 Brie 319 Brige 341 Brilliers 319 Brisac 314 Brivay 319,
266 Brosse 341 Brovage 272 Brovi 332 Bruyeres 365 Brye 301 Bueil 319 Buillon^
274 Burbon 322 Bordeaux 330 Burelle 347 Bussan 367 Cahors 343 Carbonaria 330
Carcasson 358 Carla^um 274 Castelherault 341 Castle Sarrazin 347 Castenoy 365
Castres 283 Chabannes 274 Chaligny 365 Challon sur Saone, 374 Chancelle 324
Chapelle Blanehe 274 Charms 365 Charrou 341 Charroux 324 Chartres 263
Chassusio 266 Chasteau 274 Chasteau aux forges, 287 Chasteau briant 260
Chasteaumur 341 Chasteau Thieny 287 Chastellerand 341, 375 Chastelot 378
Chasteneray 341 Chaumont en Bassigny 287 Chivon 276 Chizay 341 Choiseul 287
Cisternes 375 Clameci 376 Clemon 319 Clermont 274 Clesmont 287 Clisson 260
Coballinum 375 Concressault 319 Condate 331 Condom 274 Confollant 274
Conquerneaux 260 Consolat 266 Constances 262 Constantia 251 Corbigny 376
Corduba 284 Cormeille 291 Cosne en Burbonnois, 324 Crevant 375 Cressie 297
Cuffec 274 Cusset 324 Cuyssellum 375 Dam Martin 290 Darney 365 Dax 174 Dedier
301 Deneuvre 365 D^zisa 376 Diepe 251 D^ne 282 Dium 359 Dompaire 365 Dontlerant
287 Donzenac 266 Dorat 260, 341 Dousy 376 Douxiois 324 Dry 319 Dun le Roy 319
Du etail 314 Ensenis 260 Erisson 324 Esclaren 287 Escova 291 Esparram 3^0
Espinal 365 Estampes 263 Estrechies 319 Eu 262 Evesque 301 Euroux 261 Fane de S
Paul, 260 Fenestrange 368 Feriul^ 282 Fer^e 319 Feurs 325 Flavigny 375 Flesche
3^4 Foici 319 Fontenay le Conte 341 Fountain Belleau, 292 Fossigny 384
Franche-ville 319 Fruart 365 Fruille 301 Fully 319 Gannat 324 Gapencois 278
Gerbev^ller 365 Ghan ocean 314 Giso^s 262 Glanate or Glandeve, 282 Goeffi 287,
301 Govet 322 Gourdon 347 Gourvi^le 274 Gracay 319 Grass 282 Graveling 310
Grenoble 360 Guadalup 250 Gu^mund 368 Guise 286, 297 Guisnes 308 Hanebou^ 260
Harcourt 262 Hartincourt 308 Hesd^n 310 Hieres 283 Hodon Ch^steau 365 Homburg
366 Jalonges 319 Janville 287, 301 Jatinum 302 Igell 370 Incilles 277 Ingon 260
Jocelin 260 Josac 272 Jovy 371 Isoire 274 Issouldum 319 Juigny 287, 301 Jussy
le Chauldrier, 319 Kerchingam 265 Kontherbruck 368 La Fere 286 La Ferte sur
Auge, 301 Lambellum 260 La Mothe 365 Langes 276 Langres 287, 301 Languedoc 282
Lanzac 274 Laon 2^0 La^mont 330 Las^n^^u^t 287 La Sou^steravie 266 Lausette 347
Le col S. Diego 178 Leigne 375 Le Pont 292 Le Puy 174 L' Estray 365 Leureux 319
Liburnium 3^0 Lignium 287 Limoges 270 Lions 351 Lisi^ux 262 L'Isle Joardain 341
Longue-ville 262 Love 319 Louvemen 287 Louvres 291 Lune-ville 3^^ Lury 31^
Lussac 34^ Luyzium 37^ Luzaz 34^ Lyneres 31^ Macarium 33^ Ma^lla^d 3^^
Malestroit 26^ Maleurier 16^ Maleuvirior 314 Mammorancy 2^0 Manlers 3^^ Man's
3^5 Marcham-ville 365 Mar^ul 319 Mariemont 366 Marsal 365 Mar^ell 347 Marton
27^ Marveil 274 Mascon 375 Masseuvre 319 Massy 319 Matiscon 375 Maubranches 319
Maulhesy 332 Maulpas 319 Maxen Soubs-Bresse, 365 Maymagnes 319 Meaulx 288, 302
Mehun 319 M^^ssac 266 Melle 341 Melun 292 Mem^rt 332 M^n^sme 319 Merxant 341
Me^z 364 Mevy 319 Mil^nium 376 Milly 293 Mirande 274 Mirebau 341 Much 319
Moissa^ 347 Mo^ns 322 Molo^l 341 Mombard 375 Mo^b^rron 274 Mond^dier 296, 297
Monferrat 274 Mongomery 262 Mon^ec 347 Mons Belial Mons ^martium 360 Mons
^^rallij 332 Mons ^essula^^s ^58 Monst^er 277 Mon^^reul Belay 314 Men aux
Mo^nes ^^4 Monta^gu 341 Mont^^^son 325 (...) 344 ^ontcontour 260 Monteclar 287,
301 Mont^g^y 287, 301 Mo^t^randel 287 Mon^lusson 324 Montmelian 277 Mon^merant
3^4 Mon^morillon 341 Mon^reneaw 314 Morer 293 Morhanges 365 Mor^uz 260 Mor^agne
262, 263 Mortemer 341 Morthomer 319 Morton 3^2 Mortua 378 Mota 366, 378 Motte
341 Motte d'A^sy 319 Mu^stat 365 Nancay 319 Nancy 364 Narbon 358 Nazareth 347
Neffi 319 Nemausus 348 Nemours 293 Nerac 274 Nessa 297 Nevers 375 Neuff 274
Neuf-ville 250 Neuf-visur 319 Nicy 277, 279 N^ort 340 Nogent 301 Nogent le Roy
287 Nogent Retrou 283 Nogerat 274 Nohant 319 Noiers 375 Nos^roy 378 Noyon 296
Nuys 375 Olten 252 Orillac 274 Orleance 263 Ormes 365 Ormont 365 Orthes 274 La
Pal^se 3^4 Palleteau 319 Partenay 341 Pequig^y 284 Perona 297 Peronse 319 Perte
287 Peuplinge 308 Ple^el 260 Poicters 340 Poissy 290 Pomorigny 319 Pongoing 292
Pont a Monson 365 Pontarlum 378 Pont Cheranton 290 Pontigny 260 Pon^ l'Oubleze
272 Pontsecrot 260 Pont Sur Seem 301 Premecy 376 Province 288, 302 Puech
d'vsoldum 347 Puuldy 319 Quantilly 319 Quimpelray 260 Quantilly 319 Raiz 260
Rambert ville 366 Ravicres 355 Remeroville 366 Remiremont 365 Retelium 286
Rhemes 260 Ribemont 296 Richcourt 365 Ries 282 Rieulx 260 Rion 274 Rizay 319
Roan 297, 324 Roche-Conart 341 Rochecourt Roche-Foucault, 274 Roche sur John
241 Rosieres 366 Rua 297 Rully 319 S. Amand 324 S. Antonies 360 S. Aubbin du
Cormier 260 S. Bettemont 366 S. Benoist de Sault, 341 S Beray 341 S. Bovet 325
S. Brien 260 S. Chartier 319 S. Crapaix 319 S. Denis 240 S. Desire 287 S.
Estierne de Furan, 325 S. Fleurant 319 S. Florentine 301 S. Galmier 325 S.
Gellis 341 S. German enlaye 290 S. German la Val, 325 S. Giles 283, 296 S.
Hermine 341 S. Hilaire 341 S. Jean d' Angeli 272 S. Jean de Mirienne, 277 S.
Julian 260, 319 S. Leonards 376 S. Malo 260 S. Maxeme 292 S. Maxent 341 S.
M^ximin 283 S. Mesnim 341 S. Nicholas 365 S. Palais 319 S. Paul de Leon 260 S.
Peter's or S. Pierre le Monstier 324 S. Porcin 324 S. Quintin 286 S. Rembert 325
S. Benant des Bois 260 S. Richeri 297 S. Satur 319 S. Savin 341 S. Seigne 375
S. Sepulcher 319 S. Severe 319 S. Soulange 319 S. Stephen 325 S. Toma^s 310 S.
Valeri 297 S. Valerians 360 S Vrsin 319 Sables de Aulonne 341 Sais 262 Salina
378 Salle du Roy 319 Samar 314 Sameges 319 Sanas 282 Sandacourt 366 Sanitium
282 Sanlieu 375 Sur-Abben 368 Saragosse 319 Sarbruch 366 Sarbrug 368 Sar^burg
368 Sar-Pruck 368 Sar Vberdon 368 Segouium 348 Segre 314 Seloigne 375 Semur 375
Sens 263 Sentis 290 Seure 375 Sovillac 3^7 Souvigny aux Moines 324 Suray 34^
Suray en Vaulx 319 Susa 277 Taillebourg 272 Talmont 341 Tancarville 262
Tarascon 283 Tarenay 319 Techemfull 366 Teroane 308 Tevelet 332 Thorigny 262
Tillay 319 Thorrette 292 Tolon 283 Tonnerre 375 Tornus 375 Tovers 341 Toul 366
Treigna 260 Treport 297 Trignier 260 Trois 301 Vafrum 378 Vaigny 365 Vailly 319
Valence 359 Vandement 36^ Vannes 260 Varennes 324 Vassy 287, 301 Vatan 319
Vancoleur 365 Vanlurilles 219 Vendosme 315 Venza 282 Verdigny 319 Verdun 375
Vernol 332 Vernveile 324 Vesuntio 378 Vienna 359 Vierzon 319 Villebois 274
Ville Dieu 319 Ville Faignax 341 Villeneu^^^ 319 Villiers 214 Visnorry 287, 301
Viteau 375 Vitray 260 Vitry 287 Voullon 319 Vouv^nt 331 Vouver 341 Vsarche 266
Vsc^ 325 Vsset 266 Vzes 358 Walderfing 365 Waldersing 368 Wasserbillich 370
Xamcois 324 Years 283
Universities.
Angiers 255, 314 Avemon 255 Bordeaux 225, 274 Bourges 225, 318 Caen 225 Cahors
225 Dol 225 Grenoble 225 Lions 225, 355 L'Vniversitie en Paris 291 Massils 255
Mompellier 255 Names 255 Orleance 255 Paris 255 Poi^ters 255 Rhemes 255
Toulouse 255, 356 Valens 255
Castles.
Ardera 310 Candeius 370 Chasteau Andron 260 Donion 321 La Gross Tour 318 La
hault sucilde 321 La Tour Cordan 250 S. Germane 190 Xystum 322
Abbeys and Monasteries.
Bosnois Villa 370 Cornelius Mana. 297 D. Ambrosius M. 319 Grandimont 270
Monastery of the blessed Virgin 270 S. Benedict Mon 347 S. John Baptists Mon
272 S. Leonards M. 270 S. Severines 329 S. Sulpitius M. 319
Seas.
The French Sea 279 The Ligustick Sea, 283
Rivers.
Alisontia 367 Allier 250, 324 Anfron 318 Arar^s 274, 376, 380 Arrontius 274
Arva 250 Asduasdabis 378 Aubetta 262 Aurette 318 Ayne 250, 297 Ays^ 249 Aysne
250 Byrsa 253, 375 Cancha 307 Char^nte 269 Cher 250, 324 Clanius 341 Crenon 262
Daine 378 Dor^onne 250 Doria 277 Doux 378 Drahona 367 Drosne 251 Durance 251,
279 Ellanere 375, 376 Ella 260 Epta 262 Erubro 367 Escault 297 Esne 250 Garumna
249, 250 Gelby 397 Gerond 250 Gers 250 Hesd^n 310 Hidia 367 Icauna 375 Idra 276
Ilere Isere 249, 251, 277 Leire 375 Lesura 367 Liger 249, 260 Loire 249, 314
Lorius 314 Love 380 Lougnon 378 Lovus 378 Marne 249 Main 250, 314 Mortana 367
Mosa 367 Moselle 367 Murta 364, 367 Nemesa 367 Old or Ooldt 250 Oscara 274, 376
Oyse 297 Pronea 367 Rausa 260 Rodanus 249, 250 Ros 250 Rosne 251 Rubecus 262
Salmona 367 Saravo 367, 367 Sartra 314 Scarne 297 Scoldt 297 Sella 365, 367
S^yne 249 262 Some 250, 294 Sone 250 Sura 367 Suzione 367, 377 Tar 250 Tarnis
347 Vendee 341 Verina 292 Vezar 266 Vienne or Vignance, 250, 314 Voloio 367 Yse
249 Youne 288 Yure
Lakes.
Avitacum 249 Chamblici 378 Creux de Soulcis, or Crypta 248 Frogeay 378 Le
Guard Lac 360 Lake of France, or Lemanus 248 Linderus 365 Maleteux 378 Marlay
378 Ronchault 378 Rubressus 249 Vernoy 378
Woods.
Andain 253 Banbois 253, 370 Beaulieu 253 Beseyne 270 Bois de Banio 253 Bois de
Bennoit 253 Bostblanc 253 Boursin 253 Bresse 253 Cell^s 253, 310 Charnay 253
Corncise 253 Dalles 253 Dyne 253 Guie che 253 Hard^lot 253 Heyde 253, 370 Ligne
253 Longoul^cy Forest, 253 Lou^saie Forest 253 Maine 253 Marson 253 Mondon
253 Mortaigne 253, 370 Morton 366 Moal^ore Forest 253 Persi 253 Recoigne 253
Robe^^o 253 Sille 253 Surene 253 Toriant For. 253 Tourneth 307 Voyage 253, 270
Warned-walt 253, 370
Mountains.
Boltzberg 252 Chaumont en Bassigny 301 Civis 374 Dannes 310 Faucilles mount.
252 Iurten 252 Lacenna 319 Neuf Castle mo. 310 Nider-Hawenstein, 252 Pierre
Port 253 Roberts Wood 319 Schaffmat 252 S. Bernard moun. 382 S. Ingelbert mou.
3^7 Velay mount. 279 Vogesus 367, 370
Learned Men.
Antony Sadaeel 413 Conradus Gesner 39^ Cornelius Bertram, 413 John Calvin 413
John Deodatus 413 Isaac Causabon 413 M. Arnold Sorbinus 347 Matthew Paris 296
Theodore Beza, etc. 413
Observations.
An ancient Elm which does bound and limit 4. Countries in France, 264 A Seat
cut in a Rock in France* called La Che^e de la verite. 254 A strange Echo 290
Ansonius studied at Tolouse 356 M. Arnold Sorbinus borne at Monhec. 347
Province a Town famous for red Roses, and for Rose-cakes, and Rosewater made
thereof 302 S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage lies buried in the Monastery of S.
Benedict, in the Town Moyssac, 347 S. Gregory borne at Toures, 336 S. John
Baptists head kept whole at Ambianum, 294 The bones of Iustine Martyr, Eurotus,
and Germerus, are kept in St. Peter's Church in ^eauvois, 304 The original of
the Cistertian Order of Friars and Nuns, 375 The Poet Anacreon was borne in
Perch in France, 334 The Poet Ausonius borne at Bordeaux, 330 The famous Poet
Rousard, called the French Homer, or Pindar, is buried in S. Martins Church in
Toures, 336 Vid his Epitaph on the Poet Anacreon, 334 The Solicke Law whence
derived, 254
A TABLE OF HELVETIA, ZVRICHGOVV, BASIL, VViflispurgergow, the Lake Lemann,
Argow, the Rhetians, or Grisones, From Fol. 387. to 424.
Countries. A.
ANdelfignen 392 Argow 388 Basil 392 Cham 394 Eglisow 392 Glaris 417 Grife^see
382 Grisones 419 Groeningia 392 Hamburg 419 Helvetia 387 Humbert 417 Kiburg 392
Lauffen 392 Montanus 394 Regensperg 392 Rhetia 419 Ringenbereg 417 Saxony 390
Switscherland 387 Turgow 388 Vad^svillana 392 Vallis Egeria 394 Vnderwaldt 416
Wadischwyll 392 Werdenberg 390 Wiflispurgergow 388 Zurichgow 388, 392
Cities.
Basil 394 Zurich 392
Towns.
Abona 410 Bara 344 Bremgart 418 Cassonex 410 Chelant 416 Claudus 410 Davosium
420 Ebicona 416 Evian 410 Glarona 414 Habspurg 416 Krientz 416 Lausanna 409
Lucerna 414 Mellige 419 Merischwanden 416 Nevidunum 410 Rotenburg 416 Rott 416
Sempachium 416 Steina 392 Surseium 416 Switz 414 Vitadurum 392 Vnderwald 414
Vrama 416 Vren 414 Waggis 416 Willisow 416 Winterhur 392 Zugis 394
Rivers.
Adua 391 Aenus 391 Arola 391, 418 Athesis 420 Byrsa 391 Dur 391 Langorus 391
Limagus 391, 417 Oenus 420 Rhene 391, 428 Rhodanus 391 Rusa 414 Sur 391 Tieinus
391, 418 Vrsa 418
Lakes.
Bodenz^^ 390 The Lake Lemann, 409 Lucernerzee 39^ Nuwerbu gerzee 39^ Pilates
Lake 417 Walenzee 390 Zuriche^zee 390
Woods.
Bonwaldt 391 Brigantine wood 391 Kernwaldt 417 Rhynwaldt 391
Mountains.
Abnobae Mount. 391 Brantius M. 391 Cottian Alps 391 Grecian Alps 391 Julian
Alps 391 Jurassus 391 P^nine Alps 391 ^e^mu^na 391 Pil^is Mount. 414 Rhetico
Mo. 391 S. Bernards M. 391 S. ^o^ha^ds M. 391 S. Serg^us 412 Silvius 391
Valarius M. 391 Vogel M. 391
Observations.
A strange Lake 417 418
A TABLE OF THE LOW-COVNTRIES.
Countries. A
ARtois 428 Belg^um 422 Bewester-Schelt 460 Brabant 428, 449 Cliveland 451 Dale
428 Flanders 428, 439 Gelderland 428 464 Groneland 428 Groylandt 457 Hannault
428 Holland 428, 454 Holy Empire 428 Ju^iacum 451 K^nnemelant 457 Landt vanwaes
444 Limburg 428 Lutzenburg 428 Maeslandt 457 Mechin 428 Namurcium 428 Nideken
453 Nuenge Rode le Duc 428 Trans-Irsalania 428 Texel 457 Valchenburg 428
V^recht 428 Walacheia 460 Wassia 442 West-Friseland 428 Zeland 428 Zutphania
428, 469
Islands.
Cadsant 440
Cities.
Amerford 474 Amsterdam 428 Arnheim 466 Antwerpe 428 Atrecht 428 Axelle 439
Birflett 2^9 Birgen 439 Bruges 428, 439 Bruxells 428 Cameracum 4^8 Coriracum
439 Damm 488 Delph Dixmunde 439 D^raretch Dort 428 Douze 439 Dunkerk 439 Gaunt
428, 439 Gerard^mont 439 Graveling 439 Ha^lem 428
Cities.
Hulst 439 Leyden 428 Limburg 506 Lovaine 428 Mechlin 428 Newport 439 Ostend
439, 440 Sluse 439 Teneramund 439 Tornay 428 Traiectum 428 Valencene 428, 492
Virocht 474
Towns.
Arendone 452 Ariun 500 Arnemada 466 Argues 491 Bouchoute 4^2 Br^ll 4^9 Bru^ge
453 Busse 453 Campen 468 Charlemont 492 Chimay 494 Conde 494 Cor^greene 463
D^st 431 Dietenhove 500 Duffel 452 Dusten 431 Duysburg 452, 453 Elborch 467
Elburg 466 Enschede 484 Fleurbay 491 Flushing 460 Frages 491 Fressin 491
Griekenbeck 407 Hage 457 Hardenberg 484 Hardisch-volt 458 Harlem 458 Hasselet
468 Heemsted 458 Herentals 452 H^rwerd 429 Honascott 440 Huch^n 491 Hulst 442,
444 Kess^l 467 Landresse 431, 494 Lecke 458 Lisburg 4^0 Maestricht 452
Marieburg 494 Maubeuge 494 Middleburrough 460 N^eustat 467 Oetma^se 468
Oldensale 486 Oldseel 468 Raveste^ne 453 Richbou^g 491 Romerswal 462 Rotterdam
4^9 S. Martins Dijck 469 Schoonhoven 458 Sevenbergen 458 Sonsbeck 453
Steenwijck 460 Sluice 440 Thonberg 453 Tou^nay 442 Turnholt 439 Va^kenburg 508
Vollenhove 486 Wa^hemingen 467 Wassi^gberg 453 Watchtendouck 467 Wesel 453
Wiltheimstein 453
Universities.
Doway 435, 442, 453 Franckford 433 Leyden 435 Lovaine 435
Rivers.
Aa 428 Albis 502 Amisis 428 Amstela 456 Atardus 502 Authia 391, 490 Bemoy 502
Bervinum 508 Borckel 466 Canchia 490 Dela 428 Demera 431 Ghomeus 502 Hania 494
Houl 502 Isala 466 Lech 502 Lisa 428, 490 Merona 429 Mineus 502 Mosa 428, 452
Mosella 428 Netha 431 Niers 466 Orto 502 Prumeus 502 Regge 502 Rene 391, 466
Rhocr 431 Sambra 428 Scaldis 494 Scarpe 442 Schelt 428, 452 Seyne 431 Soverus
502 Sualm 466 Tene^a 494 Vahalis 429 466 Vidrus 466, 468 Worm 466 Yperen 440
Lakes.
Lakes Lemann 409 Pilates Lake 417 Vpaw Fountain 508
Woods.
Arden 433 Engerwalt 435 Faigne Wood 434 Grootenheist 452 Grootenhout 434
Marlaigne 434 Meerdal 452 Mormaw 434 Niepa 434, 442 Nonnen 434 Poodsberg 435 S.
Amand 434 Saveuterloo 334 Svewolden 435 Sonensian Wood 434 Williams Wood 435
Mountains.
Kolmbergen 508 Palvagius 498
Observations.
Dogfishes 430 Gerard Mercator a most famous Mathematician and Cosmographer,
and the Ptolemy of our age, borne at Kupelmonda 442 The Art of Printing
invented at Harlem a Town in Holl^nd: (this is as the Dutch would have it, but
no man bound to believe it.) 456 The Description of the Low-countrie-men, 437
The Low-Countriemen excellent Pa^^ters. 437
A TABLE OF GERMANY, From Fol. 510, to 687.
Countries. A
ALsatia Higher and lower 521 Amstein 521 Anholt 521 526 Austria higher and
lower, 520 Baden Elect 521 Bavaria D. 520 Bava^ia Palate. 521 Benthem 521 Berge
520, 555 Bohemia K. 520, 656 Brandenburg 521, 562 Breames 562 Brisgow 597
Brunswick 520 Butidia 520 Carinthia 520 Carmina 233 Cleveland 520 Colen 555
Colmerlandt 556 Delmenhorst 556 Diepholt 521 Dungerdeel 521 Duringen 521 East
France 542 Embden 521 Frankenlandt 520 Germany 518 Gheesterlandt 518 Hassia
518 Hatstat 596 Hessen 521, 529 Holst 520 Hungary higher and lower 520 Jeveria
681 Lawenburg 520 Leden 566 Lemgow 550 Leodum 550 Lewarderadeel 501 Livonia
521, 535 Lunenburg 520 Mansfelt 521 Mechlenburg 521 Meddix 520 Meissen 520
Meysten 557 Misnia 557 Moravia 520 Muers 571 Nassaw 534 Norica 534 Nortgow 552
Oldenburg 521 Ostergow 535 Palatinate 520 Poland 520, 649 Pomeren 520
Ruvensberg 550 Rhene Palate. 550 Saltzburg 669 Saxony higher and lower. 520
Schl^sen D. 520 Scho^^^reland^ 520 Schonnenberg 550 Silisia 677 Smalenger
Sporenberg 550 S^adland^ 550 S^olberg 521 Suevia 521 T^chle^borch 550 Tiroll
521 Thuringia 521 V^^^eb^rg 522 Vlothem 522 Vesterland^ 523 Wallock 550
Westergow 550 West-^riselandt 532 Westphalia 5^2 Wippra 527 Wirtenberg 521, 585
Islands.
Rugia 652 Schellingana 535 Sp^keroga 577 Wargeroga 577
Seas.
Atlantic Ocean 527 Bal^hick Sea 528 Chronian Sea 52^ Cimbrian Sea 528
Cedonian Sea 528 Ge^manie Sea 527 Spanish Ocean 527 Suevian Sea 528
Promontories.
Stubben k^mer 655
Havens and Bays.
Codo^ Bay 679
Cities.
Agrippine 523 Argentine 523 Arnsperg 548 Belgrad 686 Brandenburg 567 Br^da 523
Breme 523 Bres^aw 678 Brunswick 524 Buda 686 Casimiria 676 Colen 523 Cracovia
676 Daniz^ck 561 Franckford 523 Friburg 523 H^idelburg 523 Ingolstat 550
Lip^ick 523 Lubeck 523 Lun^burg 523 Magdeburg 527 Meniz 584 Munster 547
Norumberg 546 Oldenburg 538 Oss^nburg 548 Ploczk^ 676 Prague 523, 658 Ratubone
523 Rava 676 Rottenburg 546 Saltzburg 546 Spires 523 Triers 584 Tubingen 523,
586 Vienna 523, 666 Vladislavia 676 Waldeck 578 Wassenburg 548 Wesel 547
Winsha^m 546 Witzburg 544
Towns.
Al^kirck 592 Aguisgranum 544 Arensberg 563 Arnburg 563 Auwerback 563 Baerdt
535 ^eet^. 535 Bergen 555 Bielgost 555 Bielsko 557 Boching 558 Bra^tenbern 559
Brilon 558 Brukel 583 Cathrybandt 535 Cellenberg 596 Cleve 572 Colberg 572
Collin 534 Colmar 592 Co^nie 592 Diepruck 593 Dor^mund 544 Durlach 583
Dusseldorp 556 Duysburg 544 Eburc 570 E^selye 563 Embden 537 F^esen 586
Fra^nker 535 Fritzlar 532 Fulnick 563 Gambin 563 Gaw 563 Geppinga 586 Gra^s 597
Grewe^werdt 597 Grietenyen 535 Hass^herhorn 535 Hasset 564 Hebffenberg 564 Henk
564 Hilbrichusen 563 Hull^nchoven 563 Iglavia 563 Ilsta 535 Ingiltheim 583
Itenburg 583 Julinum 584 Kemnat 585 Koppe^ie 585 Koscien 586 Ladeburg 583
Langstra^en 563 Lemmer 567 Lovensburg 564 Mar^purg 530 Meilor 563 Metz 594
Munster^holt 597 Napurg 555 Neclo burg 556 Nettlestead 563 Newburg 579
Newenstad^ 555 Newgard 556 Newmarkt 556 Oldehorne 535 Old Schotten 535 Os^ern
535 Ostresoi^ 535 Otmaersen 536 Parnaw 536 Passaw 550 Petricovia 550 Pizary 550
Pleistern 560 Plo^sk^ 561 Prenez 561 Radish 562 Rauwart 562 Radzanow 563
Rog^rno 563 Ruden 563 Saxenberg 579 Saxenhusen 574 Schorenderfum 586 Schriessen
583 Stadbach 567 Steinck 564 Stockem 565 Strasburg 590 Stridon 690 Sultback 555
Terwert 555 Weinheim 583 Weissenberg 522 Werdeck 563 VVickel 535 VVitzens 535
Worms 594 Zarnow 594 Zigeth 595
Universities.
Basil 529 Colen 529 Erphord 529 Frankford 529 Friburg 529 Gripswald 529
Heidelburg 529 Ing^lstade 529 Lipswicke 529 Marpurg 529 Moguntinum 529 Prague
659 Rostoch 529 Trevers 529 Tubingum 529 Wittenberg 557
Rivers.
Albis 523, 561 Alimula 551 Altimulus 5^5 Amisis 523 Ambra 579, 551 Barusius
678 Berckel 550 Bobrus 678 Brusschus 592 Buda 679 Bystizna 679 Danubius 523
Demera 570 Dewera 550 Dextra 550 Dimula 548 Dines 663 Dravus 670, 686 Duro 594
Dussela 556 Egar 555 Eidera 578 Elsa 678 Ems 678 Entius 588 Erdel 687 Erfall
575 Erlaphus 575 Esta 678 Filtzius 588 Fulda 588 Galaa 550 Giskera 658 Glaa 550
Glana 673 Hasa 548 Herke 570 Hespe 570 Honta 550 Hoy 570 Jagusta 588 Jaxtus 584
Jekel 570 Igla 663 Illa 592, 594 Illicetus 551 Isara 551 Ister 533 Ko^herus 588
Kiwisgus 592 Lavand 673 Lawter 592 Laawers 535 Lenne 563 Letha 667 Lippia 550
Louch 594 Lowter 594 Marcheia 667 Matter 592 Matran 687 Maenus 523 Melicut 667
Misa 659 Mur 670 Nabus 551 Nagoita 588 Necarus 523 Negra 575 Nersa 575 Neth 550
Nisa 560 Nyemien 676 Odera 663 Oenus 551 Ola 678 Pennitius 555 Pregoll 676
Ratheck 570 Regus 551 Remisus 588 Rhene 523, 583 Ruhon 676 Rura 575 Sala 550
Saltxach 670 Savus 673 Stevera 550 Subtza 555 Teius 667 Tibiscus 686 Tranius
667 Tuberus 584 Twista 578 Vandalus 676 Varta 676 Veses 570 Vesara 570 Vidrus
550 Vilsus 555 Vistula 523 Visurgis 523 Vrt 570 VVeser 523 Win 563 VVixoll
676 VVilfada 551 Ypsius 551 Zoisa 562
Lakes.
Amersee 551 Asee 551 Collensian Lake 524 Gmunda 667 Goplo 676 Judenburgersee
673 Lavandtsee 673 Muls^tters^e 673 Ossiachersee 673 Platze 686 Rorsee 551
Suerinus 522 VVeifee 673 VVerdsee 673 VVirmsee 551
Woods.
Adelwaldt 579 Albuchius 588 Aldervalt 589 Auff-dem Hartzwalt 673 Behemerwalt
556 Calemberg 536 Gabreta 560 Galberheid 561 Geppenhage 579 Greinwaldt 551
Hardio 672 Hensterholt 550 Heagerstruth 550 Heynerdoch 551 Holt-markt 550
Odenwelt 550 Oraynium 663 Passunerwalt 569 Plat 579 Priewalt 673 Schwardtzwalt
551 Spondawerheid 551 Stubhenitzs 551 Zellerwaldt 551
Mountains.
Caranancas 553 Deusperg 667 Diotzberg 673 Felbergthaurn 670 Gastein Taurn 673
Hossus 528 Kornchauru 670 Horcy^^a 528 Melibocus 528 Palvagius 498 Paenine
Alps 551 Pimfer 528 Rheticus 528 Sarmatian Mo^. 529 Vocetius 528
Observations.
A black kind of Stone-Coles, 556 A trial by hot Iron, 557 Mills that will
forge Iron, 556 Male and Female Frankincense 662 Guns, Printing, and Clockes
first invented and made in Germany, 531 Good Gamons of Bacon in Westphalia,
551 One end of the banks of Rhene there are many old Cities, but none on the
other, 520 S. Georges Statue of pure Gold in Saint Lamberts Church in Leden,
569 St. Hierom borne at Striden in Hungary 686 The Alps whence so called, 588
The Description of the manners of the Germans, 530 The Spaw Fountain, 570
Vienna famous for holding out a great Siege against the Turks, 667
A TABLE OF ITALY, WITH THE ISLANDS Corsica, Sardinia, and Sicilie. From Fol.
690. to 781.
Countries. A
ABruzzo 762 Anconitana 752 Basilicata 767 Bressia 728 Calabria 767 Campagna di
Roma, 757 Carniola 742 Cilia 742 Ferara 723 Friuli 742 Genoa 714, 720 Intrem^nt
708 Istria 742 Italy 690 Karstia 742 Lumbardie 704, 709 Mantua 723 Marca
Tarvisina, 709 Martinacht 708 Millan 728 Montisferrat 714 Naples 762 Parma 723
Patavium 737 S. Peter's Patrimony, 747 Piemont 714 Puglia Piana 767 Romand ola
727 S. Mauritium 708 Spoleto 7^4 Terra di Barri 767 Terra di Lavero 762 Terra
di Otranto 767 Tirolis 709 Tuscany 747 Valesia 704 Verona 737 Vicentia 737
Wallis 707
Islands.
Cirnus 718 Corsica 772 Sardinia 772 Sicilie 777
Promontories.
Arvisium 809 Capo di Chiarenza, 807 Cisanum 745 Cumeras 752 Japygium 768
Lilybaeum 777 Muratio 745 Pachynus 777 Pelorus 777 Phasiana 745
Havens and Bays.
Acomtanian H. 698 Albinganus H. 698 Arminan H. 698 Augustus H. 698 Brundusian
H. 698 Ba^on H. 698 Ca^etan B. Charybdis 781 Delphin H. 698 Erycis 698 Garne
698 Genua 698 Gravisia 698 Hanibals Castra 698 Hercules H. 698 Julian H. 698
Livenza 698 Luna 698 Mauricus 698 Metaurian H. 698 Risania 698 Orestes H. 698
Ravenas 698 Sabatrian Vadians H. 698 Savona 698 Scabrian H. 698 Scylla 781
Tarentine B. 698 Telamons B. 698 Vadian B. 698 Vilinian B. 698
Cities.
Alba 717 Anio^ 752 Aguila 762 Aquilegia 742 Ascuto Satriano 767 Beneventum 762
Bononia or Bologna, 724 Brescia 728 Capua 765 Ferrara 724 Fir^^o 752 Florence
749 Forli 724 Genoa 717, 720 Lemena 720 Leuca 749 Mantua 727 Millan 708, 732
Naples 764 Osmo 752 Otrante 768 Padua 712, 740 Palermo 778 Parma 726 Pesa^o 754
Pisa 749 Placentia 726 Polignano 767 Ravenna 724 Rome 757 Sarsina 724 Savona
718 Sedunum 708 Siracusa 780 Spoleto 754 Taran^o 770 Tarvisium 712 Tridentum
709 Turino 714 Venice 712 Verona 712, 737 Vincentia 712, 738 Viterbium 750
Volaterra 750 Vrbin 754
Towns.
Agrigentum 780 Algher 776 Al^omonti 770 Ancone 752 Astura 756 Bassimana 716
Belmont 770 Bottesino 730 Brixia 709 Carignano 716 Crema 706 Cremona 727 Critio
716 Cuma 765 Dreponum 780 Fabrianum 780 Falcon 744 Fassumbruno 754 Fuligno 755
Goritia 744 Heraelea 780 Imolais 724 Mambrino 716 Maranum 709 Moncalvo 717
Morill 708 Mutazzo 745 Novilara 730 Orbetellum 747 Paestum 770 Pagellato 716
Palma 744 Parenzo 745 Petroso 716 Picenum 754 Pientio 747 Pinarole 716 Piranum
745 Pisa 747 Pisciotta 770 Pistorium 747 Pratum 747 Puteoli 765 Quintianum 730
Recanatum 752 Rimini 723 Ripa 710 Rivoli 716 S. Laurence 745 S. Perigrine 745
S. Salvatore 717 Salvorum 718 Sarzan 749 Sassarit 749 Sestrile Levan^o 769
Sulmo 762 Susa 716 Tarracina 756 Tiber 760 Tirolus Tusculum 760 Vernaccio 756
Villa ^ranca 716 V^nacum 718
Universities.
Anconita 701 Bononia 701 Ferrara 701 Florence 701 Macerata 701 Millan 701
Naples 701 Padua 701, 765 Parma 701 Patavina 701 Perusina 701 Pisona 701
Placentia 701 Romana 701 Salerne 701 Vernice 701
Seas.
Aegean Sea 796 Archipelagus 796 Carpathian Sea 796 Higher Sea 698 Icarian Sea
796 Jonian Sea 796 Lower Sea 698
Rivers.
Abdua 695 Aduva 706 Albengia 750 Alma 750 Argila 755 Arno 695 Aron 750
Asinella 762 Asinus 754 Asonus 754 Athesis 695, 710 Bachili^ 713 Barono 774
Bremba 698, 706 Brenta 713 Canal grande 712 Candclaris 765 Cecinia 750 Cervaria
752, 767 Chientus 754 Correcta 765 Cusanum 765 Ebolis 765 Eris 750 Felirinus
762 Ferisano 719 Flastra 754 Floris 750 Freddus 765 Frigidus 749 Furor 765
Garza 731 Gelone 774 Glanis 765 Iscleraus 765 Lavagna 719 Lemus 745 Lime 719
Linternus 765 Lira 698, 765 Magra 719 Martha 750 Melfa 765 Mella 731 Merula 719
Meyra 698 Mimo 750 Mincius 695 Natiso 744 Nymphaeus 760 Oenus 710 Oglio 695
Omnei 765 Osa 750 Pescara 762 Piave 718 Pisclavo 698 Plumba 762 Po 695, 716
^ution Quictus Roita 719 Rubico 695 Sabbatus 765 Sagona 774 Saxuns 746 Serius
698 Silarus 765 Stura 769 Tarteno 698 Tavignano 774 Tegiamo 774 Ten^a 754 Tiber
695 Ticino 695, 706 Tilaventum 744 Tronto 754 Turus 744 Vacina 750 Vesubie 719
Vmbro 750 Vul^urnus 765
Lakes.
Albanus 694 Aquae Salviae 694 Averni^n 695 Aufente 760 Benacus 760 Caecubus
694, 760 Ciana 694 Ciminus 694 Cutilensian 786 Fuccinus 694 Floridus 694, 756
Fundane L. 760 Gaviratius 706 Hostia 694 Juturna 694 Lago di Gataa 370 Lago di
Idre 731 Lago di Iseo 731 L. di Marsos 760 L. di Nemo 760 L. di Orbatello 750
L. di Pemgia 750 L. di S. Prussode 760 Lago Majore 706 Larius 107 Lucrine L.
695 Luganus 706 Monatius 706 Nemorensian L. 694 Nursine L. 694 Pudusa 695
Pompeia 695 Pontina 694 Popeia 765 Reg^lius 694 Sabatus 694 Sebinus 695
Simbruine L. 694 Stagno 760 Stativa 695 Tiburrine 760 Tiburtine 694 Trinatius
694 Tundale 694 Vatican L. 694 Vulsinian L. 694
Woods.
Albuna 760 Algitia 760 Bolsena 760 Castrorum Lucus 700 Cimiman Wood 699 Cold
W. 760 Diana^'s W. 760 Eboli 700 Feroma 760, 699 Furina 760, 700 Gall naria
Silva 700 Junoes W. 700 Lucina-Jupiters Woe. 760 Luco Sacro 700 Lucus Gargarij
700 Lucina 700 Milebach 708 Muses W. 760 Perigrinalis 700 Rh^gian Forest 700
Vacuna 700 Velia 700 Volsinian W. 760
Mountains.
Aetna 781 Alg^dus 760 Alps 698 Apennine 699 Arolla 708 Aventine M. 760
Austalberg 708 Auximus 754 B^bius 716 Cacubus 760 Catillus 760 Cheparteno 779
Christ's M. 765 Ciminian W. 750 Cortensian M. 750 Corvus 754 Culma 765 Eryx 781
Falernus 765 Fessulian M. 750 Fiscellus 756 Floridum 756 Furc 754, 708 Gaurus
765 Gemula 713 Gothards M. 706 Gualango 774 Lepinus 760 Loetsch 708 Lucmannier
706 Massicus 765 Matter 708 Misenus 765 Montes tremuli 764 Orba 774 Pescas 754
Ruffus 774 S. Silvester M. 750 Taburnus 765 Tifata 765 Trifolinus 765 Venda 713
Vefuvius 765 Virgins M. 764
Observations.
A strange herb in Sardinia, which makes men dye laughing, whence grew the
Proverb, Sardonius Risus, or the Sardinian laughter, 775 B. Clara who founded
the Order of Saint Clares Nuns, was borne at Monus Falco, a Town of the Duke
of Spoleto, 755 Doomesday, or the day of Judgment is lively drawn by Michael
Angelo in the Popes Chapel in Rome, 700 Eustathius does liken Italy to an
Ivy Leaf; Pliny and Solin I do resemble it to an Oak leaf, because it is
longer than broad, 691 Horace borne at Venusium, 768 Latter Writers compa^e
Italy to a man's Thigh and Leg, vid. the Allusion, 691 M. Tullius Cicero
slain at Astura as he sled from Antony, 758 Ovid born at Sulmo a Town in
Italy, 762 Parmizan an excellent sort of Cheese made at Parma, a City in
Italy, 720 S. Francis who instituted the Order of the Minorite Friars was borne
at Ascen or Sisi a Town in the Dukedom of Spoleto, 755 S. Marks the chiefest
Church in Venice, The Alps are so called, ab albedine, or from their whitenes
707 The Arsenal a famous Armory in Venice, The Poet Plautus was borne at
Sarsina a City in Italy, 724 The Rosean Fields in Italy are so fruitful, that
if a Pitchforke be left in them the day before, the Grass will cover it it
over in one nights growth, 691 The Tridentine Counsel held under Pope Paul the
third, in the year 1546. 710 The Vatican Library at Rome, 758 Thomas Aquinas
was borne at Aquinus a Town in Abruzzo in Italy, 762 Titus Livius borne at
Padua, 741 Venice is governed by a Senate called Gran Consiglio, 713
A TABLE OF STIRMARCK, SLAVONIA, CROATIA, BOSNIA, Dalmatia, VVallachia, Servia,
Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, and the I Will of Candie or Creete. From Fol. 782. to
813.
Countries. A
AChaja 795, 806 Albania 795 Arcadia 806 Argia 806 Barbary Bosnia 786 Corinth
806 Croatia 786 Dalmatia 786 Elis 806 Epire 795 Greeco 795 Laconia 806 Lebnaw
782 Macedon 795 Messenia 806 Morea 804 Peloponesus 804 Sicyonis 806 Slavonia
786 Stirmarck 782 Thessaly 799 Warasden 782
Islands.
Candy or Create 809 Corfu 812 Milo 813 Naxus or Nissia 813 Santorino or
Therosia 813 Zanto 812
Peninsula'es.
Ploeponesus or Morea 804
Promontories.
Capo di Chiaronza. 807 Arvisium 809
Cities.
Abdera 792 Aegira 807 Alexandria 787 Antioch 787 Argos 795, 806 Athens 795
Aulis 803 Bruga 784 Calydon 802 Canea 810 Candy 810 Charenza 807 Constantinople
792 Corinth 795 Cortina 810 Delphos 795, 803 Dodone 880 Elis 807 Guossos 810
Hadrianopolis 792 Jaitza 789 Lacedemon 795 Libaea 807 Mantinea 807 Marchpurg
785 Megalopolis 807 Megara 803 Mycenis 795, 806 Mytenes Nicopolis 792, 801
Olympia 807 Patras 807 Perinthus 792 Phestos 810 Philipolis 792 Platea 803
Psophis 807 Rhetimo 810 Selimbria 792 Sissegkum 788 Sparta 806 Stimphalus 807
Tanagra 803 Thebes 803 Thessalonia 799 Tra^anopolis 792 Voytsperg 784
Towns.
Actium 802 Apollonia 789 Azamur Bigihon 788 Braila 790 Bulatinan Cavalla 800
Cheronaea 803 Cilia 785 Cor^ne 806 Dictinna 810 Dyrrachium 800 Eleusis 803
Epidaurus 786 Helice 807 Judera 786 Leucas 802 Leuctra 806 Marathon 803 Modrish
788 Novograd 790 Naupactum 803 Pella 792 Phocis 803 Prisdena 790 Rachelspurg
785 Rhegium 777 Salena 786 Samandria 790 Sebinium Segna 786 Serratum 792
Spalatum Stagira 800 Stimbrigrad 790 Teniovizza 790 Tran 786 Trescorium 790
Turna^ 788 Warboseyne 789
Rivers.
Achelous 796 Acheron 796 Alpheius 796 Arrabone 785 Axius 795, 800 Cephisus 796
Cnopus 803 Danubius 790 Dravo 785 Drinus 788 Echedorus 795 Errigon 795 Hebrus
793 Hoyne 790 Inachus 796 Ismenus 796 Lydius 795 Melipotamus 810 Peneus 796
Rhizon 788 Spenchius 796 Styrmon 795 Ticicus 788
Lakes.
Lema 806 Stymphalian Lake 807
Mountains.
Argentarus 790 Arocerannij 796 Athos 796, 800 Bertiscus 796 Calidromus 796
Carax 796 Citerius 796 Cithoron 796 Claudius 785 Cronius 796 Elatos 813 Evan
808 Gesacus 785 Haemus 793 Helicon 796 Himettus 796 Ida 810 Madara 810 Messapus
743 Minthe 796 Nimphaeus 800 Oeta 796 Olimpus 796 Orbelus 793 Ossa 796 Othris
796 Pangaus 793 Parnassus 796 Pelion 796 Pindus 796 Pholoe 796 Psilori 810
Radel 795 Rh^dope 793 Sothia 810 Stimphe 796 Stimpalus 796 Taigetus 796, 808
Taurus 785 Zarex 796
Observations.
Aristotle was borne at Stagira in Macedon, 800 Democritus was borne at Abdera
a City in Romania, 792 The Emperor Justinian borne at Prisdena in Servia, 790
The Labirynth of Creete, 810 The Dodonian Oracle vid. 880
A TABLE OF AFRIC. From Fol. 813. to 833.
Countries. A
Aethiopia 824 Angote 827 Barbary 814 Barca 816 Duccala 820 Egypt 814 Errifea
817 Fesse 816, 819 Guinea 829 Hascora 820 Hea 819 Maremma 817 Morocco 816, 819
Susa 819 Tedles 820 Tunis 816
Islands.
Princes Isle 829 Isle of the Good-yeere, 829 S. Thomas Isle 829
Havens and Bays.
Marsa Eltabrius 816 Horamus or Orama, 816
Cities.
Alcair 818 Alexandria 817 Alemandin 820 Algie^s 816 Azaesi 820 Babylon 817
Beroe or Barn 826 Caxumo or Cassume, 827 Damiatum 818 Delgumuha 820 Diospolis
817 Heliopolis 817 Imitzmazi 820 Memphis 817 Mersalcabar 816 Morocco 820
Mustagamn 816 Pelusium 817 Scanderoon 818 Syene 817 Tentyra 817 Thebes 817
Tigremaon 826
Towns.
Agmet 820 Amara 827 Asiselmel 820 Azamur 820 Bulatiuan 820 Contopozzi 820
Conte 820 Elmadina 820 Esza 822 Githiteb 822 Guzzula 820 Haninimer 820 Meramer
820 Mosca 819 Tagodast 820 Taurent 819 Temeracost 820 Tenezza 820 Terga 820
Treijut 819 Tesza 822
Rivers.
Abanhi 827 Major 816 Niger 829 Niffis 822 Nilus 818 Omirabih 822 Sifelmel 822
Tagarost 820 Tacassi 827 Tedsi 826 Teawsift 822
Lakes.
Barcena 827
Woods
Deserts of Arabia, 816
Mountains.
Atlas 819 Hadimeus 820 Italemus 819 Netisa 820 Nisipha 822 Semete 822 Sensana
822
A TABLE OF ASIA. From Fol. 834. to 889.
Countries. A
Aeolides 844 Alexandria 837 Anatolia 844 Ari^ 856 Armenia 844 Asia properly so
called 844 Asia the Less 844 Assyria 856 Atti^a 836 Bactriana 856 Bithinia 836
Bulgaria 837 Cappadocia 844 Caria 844 Carmania 856 Cathaio Chaldea Chanaan 819
China Cilicia 844 Dalmatia 837 Drangiana 856 Dorides 844 East Indies 854 Erraca
Eubaea 837 Galatia 844 Galilee 842 Gedresia 856 Holy Land 839 Hyrcania 856
Idumaea 842 Illiria 836 Jo^ia 844 Israel 839 Judea 839 Lycania 836 Lycia 844
Lydia 844 Macedon 836 Macran 836 Media 856 Mesopotamia 856 Mysia 844 Natolia
844 Nicaea 836 Padan Aram 856 Palestine 839 Pamphilia 844 Parepamissus 856
Parthia 856 Persia 855 Persis 856 Phocides 836 Phrygia 844 Pontus 836 Russia
837 Samaria 842 Sarmaria Servia 836 Susiana 856 Tangut 856 Tartarie 857
Theodosia 837 Thessalie 830 Thrace 836 Turkish Empire 834 Valachia 637
Islands.
Ambon 878 Celibes 875 Corigo 849 Chios 849 Cyprus 849 Delmore 878 Gil^lo 875
Japan 880 Lemnos 850 Mitylene 849 Molucco Islands 875 Negroponte 849 Rhodes 849
Stalimene 849 Taprobana 885 Ternate 876 Zeilan 885
Promontories.
Arvisium 850 Geresto 852 Phanaeum 850 Posideum 850
Cities.
Aleppo 857 Amasia 847 Anguri 848 Antioch 858 Ascalon 879 Babylon 858 Bactra
858 Caindo 862 Calcedon 848 Chalechut 872 Camuchi 888 Cambaia 872 Cambalu 862
Cana 839 Canton 866 Caramil 856 Carizeth 856 Cerasus 848 Ephesus 848 Eretria
852 Famagosta 849 Fiongo 882 Gadara 839 Gaza 839 Halicarnassus 848 Heraclia 848
Jerusalem 879 Ilium 848 Liampo 869 Meacum 882 Merdin 856 Naim 839 Nazareth 834
Nicae 848 Nicomedia 848 Nicotia 849 Nineve 856 Peroamu^ 848 Persepolis 856
Prusa 848 Scandaroon 862 Sardis 848 Tarsus 847 Troy 848 Vr 858
Towns.
Arbe 842 Bethlehem 842 Bethsaida 842 Candabur 858 Capernaum 842 Cariatharbe
842 Chorazin 842 Cochino 850 Gomorrah 842 Jericho 842 Joppe 842 Lemnos 850
Macherus 842 Mambre 842 Marant 856 Metelino 852 Sichem 842 Sigaum 842 Smachia
856 Sodom 842 Tauris 856 Turconian 856
Rivers.
Aesopus 847 Araxes Ascanius 847 Caicus 147 Caistrus 147 Calbis 147 Cataractes
847 Euphrates 847 Granicus 147 Ganges 847 Helis 847 Hermus 147 Hydaspes Indus
Jordan 842 Limymus 147 Maeander 147 Phison 147 Rhindacus 847 Sangri 847
Scamander 147 Simois 147 Tigris Xanthus 147
Seas.
Aegean Sea 847 Euxine 847 Hellespont 847 Icarian Sea 847 Myrtaean 847
Phamphylian 847 Propontis 847 Rhodiensian 847
Mountains.
Argaeum 847 Athon 850 Calvary 842 Caphareus 853 Carmel 842 Caucasus 872
Chimaera 847 Coronus 858 Dindyma 847 Hermon 842 Ida Mount. 847 Monte Negro. 847
Moriali 842 Olimpus M. 846 Olivet 842 Orontes 858 Pico de Adam 888 Sabina 847
Sion Mount. 842 Tabor M. 842 Taurus 847 Tmolus 847 Vulcans M. 850
Observations.
Achilles Tomb, 848 A strange Story of an Elephant, 886 A strange Plant in
Tartarie, 860 A Fish called a Whirlpoole, strange woods Figge-trees, and
Reeds, 873 Godfrey of Bologne did beat the Sarazens out of the Holy Land, 842
Herodotus and Dionysius born at Halicarnassus, 848 Simonides the Lyrick Poet
borne at Eretria a City in the I Will Negroponte, 852 Strabo borne at the Town
Amasia in the lesser Asia, The great Brazen Colossus at Rhodes, 853 The Bird
Manucodiata that lives only by the air, 875 The Clove-tree described, 875
The death of Aristotle, 852 The discovery of the Molucco Islands, 876 The
description of the Nutmeg-tree, and of Mace and Cinnamon, 878
A TABLE OF AMERICA^
Countrics. A
AVanares 900 Brasil 920 Canida 900 Castella aurea 920 Chile 920 Firmeland 921
Florida 898 Granada 921 New France 900 New Spain 906 Peru 914 Popajana 920
Southern America, 920 Terra del Fuego 925 Virginia 898
Islands.
All Saints 892 Andgada 892 Anguilla 892 Antigra 892 Barbados 892 Bermuda^ or
Summer Islands, 892 Cambales 890 Cuba 890 Granada 892 Guadalupe 892 Hispaniola
890 Jamayca 890 Leucinae 890 Marigolante 892 Margari^a 897 S. Bartholmews 892
S. Christophers 892 S. Dominico 892 S. John's Isl. 890 S. Martin S. Peter's Isl.
929 S. Vincents 892 Summatra 826
Promontories.
Gurraets head 919 Maragnon 925
Cities.
Mexico 908
Towns.
Culiacum 908 Cusco 922 Lima 916 Nombre de dios 920 Panama 920 Quito 922 S.
Dominico 890, 894 S. James 890 Toycama 921
Seas.
Archipelagus 929 Mare del Nort 920 Mare Pacisicum 923 Mare del Sur 920 The
Straits of Magellan, 925
Rivers.
Della Plata 913 La Magdalena 912 La Martha 912 Porto Real 901 Powhatan 903 S
Sebastian 900
Observations.
America discovered, 930 Captain John Smith in the year 1608. did discover
Virginia, quod in illius honorem, quem meruit, adnotavit Mercator, page 903 Et
ego amicitiae gratia in Indice collocavi, and shortly expect a Map of Virginia
according as it is now, more exact, The Herb Coca being carried in ones mouth
takes away all appetite from meat and drink, 914 The Description of those
violent tempests called Harowcanes, 892 The Maiz or Cassader, a very good
root, 906 The Straits of Magellan described 925 A Description of New England,
931
THE TECHNOLOGICALL AND GEOGRAPHICALL WORDS mentioned in this Work, defined
and explained.
The World called in Latin Orbis, in respect of the Orbicular round form,
and in Greek (...) in respect of the beauty thereof, is divided by Geographers
into parts:
Real, viz.
A Continent which contains many Countries and Territories. An Island in
Latin Insula, quasi in ^alo sita, a Land situated in the Sea. A Peninsula is
so called quasi Paene Insula, in Greek Chersonesus, being a compound word of
(...) and (...), signifying a forsaken Island. A Promontory is a part of Land
lying out farther than the rest, and is contrary to a Bay, the uttermost end is
called a Cape, A Bay or Sinus, is a Bosom of Land receiving the Sea into it,
and so making a Haven. The Ocean is so called from the Greek word (...)
signifying swift.
Imaginary, viz.
The Aequinoctiall so styled because when the Sun is under this Circle in the
Heaven which answers to this on the Earth, the days and nights be of one
length. The Tropickes are two nominate Circles that be Parallel to the
Equator, from which the Northern Tropicke of Cancer is distant 23. degrees,
and the Southern called the Tropic of Capricorn, as much. Parallels are
defined by Keckerman, quod sint lineae quae in infinitum ductae nunqua^
concurrunt, that they are two equidistant lines, which being infinitely drawn
forth, yet do not, nor will ever meet. Latitude is the distance of a place
North or South from the Equator or middle of the World. Longitude is the
distance of any place East and West, from the chief Meridian, and is measured
by the degrees of the Equator, it is placed in the Island of St. Michael one of
the 9. Azores in the Atlantic Sea. A Clime is a space of the Earth
comprehended between 3. Parallels, lesser innominate Circles* which compass
the Earth from East to West. Periaeci so called from the Greek word (...), i.
e. habito circum, are those that dwell under the same Parallel. Antaeci so
named from (...), i. e. ex adverso habitare, are those that dwell alike distant
from the Equator, but the one Northward, and the other Southward. Antipodes so
styled from (...) and (...), q.d. adversa vestigia figentes, are people
dwelling on the other side of the Earth, with their feet directly against ours.
The Artick Pole so called for its neerenesse to a constellation in the North
Hemisphere called (...) which signifies a Bear. Antartick Pole so called
because it is opposite to the Articke Pole.
FINIS.
Finem habet hic Mundus, finem terrenus habebit. Sit Soli dempto Gloria fine
Deo.
THE ERRATA.
ALl Books are subject to some Typographicall faults, so that the Errata's of
this Work (which are few) being thus corrected and amended, deserve pardon.
viz.

Page ^. line 45. for greates read greater, p. 37. l 2. for straight 1.
stretched, p. 83. l. 1. for ^nglang r. England, p. 143. l. 3. for Norway 1.
Denmark, p. 195. l. 16 s. Complu^o r. Complutum, p. 257. l. 14. f. incure, r.
injures, p. 268. l. 14. ^ for r. on, p. 352. l. 14. f. glideth r. gildeth, p.
356. l. ^1. f colonas r. colonos, p. 358. l. 4. ^. done r long, p. 368 l. 9. f.
du^item r. duplicem, p. 438. l. 2. f. us r. thee, p. 432. l. 10. and 16. f.
Rudol^^us r Rodol^hus, p 499. l. 2. f. Mamurci^n r. Namurcium, p. 532. l. 9. f
which r. whose, p. 694. l. 2. f. Virgins r. Virgils, p. 730. ^. 12. f lv^t,
hate r. hate, love, p. 740. l. 17. f. Pompineis r pampineis, p. ^96. l. 42. ^.
Nusaeus r Musaeus, p. 856 l. 35. f. (...) r. (...), p 911. l. 42. f Mounraines
^. Mountains, p. 919 l. 13. f. Moan r More, p. 919. l. 18. ^. Tuckher r.
Tucker, p 919. l. ^9. There is an error in the latter end of the description of
Bermudas, concerning the temper of the air, and quality of the soil.

Note that after Page 549. the Pag^s are misfigured, and begin aga^ne at 520.

In Page 905* for the Des^ription of New Spain r^ad New Virginia, but there is
no Map for Virginia in re^gard there is a (...) exact Map drawing in that
Country, whose Platform is not yet come over, but when it comes, every buyer
^f the Book shall have it given him gratis.

Directions for the Binding.
At Page 4^9 let the Book-binder take notice that at the Signiture M m in the
2. Alphabet it goes on with N one, O one, and so to ^he end of the Alphabet,
and then follows A a a in the 3. Alphabet.

At Page 818. the single Map of Egypt is to be pasted on the Page
Crosse-wayes, under the words: which is the fairest River in the World.

Let the Book-binder take notice that at M m 3. i^ the second Alphabet, being
Page 401. there comes in a half sheet.

December. 19. 1633.
Recensui hanc Anglicanam versionem Atlantis Minoris a Joan. Mercator Belgico
olim Latin editam, qui quidem liber continet Fol 772. aut circiter, in quibus
nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum
utilitate publica Imprimatur; ita tamen ut si non intra biennium typis
mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guilielmus Haywood Archiep. Cant. Capellanus Domest.


