THE BLACK BOOK.

LONDON: Printed by T. C. for Ieffrey Chorlton. 1604.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader. OR The true Character of this Book.
TO all those that are truly Virtuous, and can touch Pitch and yet never defile
themselves: read the mischievous lives and pernicious practices of Villains,
and yet be never the worse at the end of the Book, but rather confirmde the
more in their honest Estates, and the vprightnes of their Virtues: To such I
dedicate my self, the wholesome intent of my labors, the modesty of my
Phrases, that even blush when they discover Vices, and unmask the worlds
shadowed villainies: And I account him as a Traitor to Virtue, who diuing into
the deep^ of this cunning Age, and finding there such Monsters of Nature, such
speckled lumps of poison, as Pandars, Harlots, and Ruffians do figure, if he
rise up silent again, and neither discover or publish them to the civil Rank
of sober and continent Livers, who thereby may shun those two devouring
Gulfes: to wit, of Deceit and Luxury, which swallow up more Mortals, the^
Scy^^a and Charibdi^, those two Cormorants and Woolners of the Sea, one
tearing, the other devouring: Wherefore I freely persuade my self, no virtuous
spirit, or Judicial Worthy, but will approve my politic Morrall, wherevnder
the shadow of the Devils Legacies, or his bequeathing to Villains, I strip
their villainies naked, and bare the insectious Bulkes of Craft, Coosnage, and
Pandarisme, the three Bloodhoundes of a Commonwealth: And thus far I
presume, that none will or can except at this which I call the Black Book
(because it doubly Damnes the Devil) but some tainted Harlot, Noselesse Bawd,
obsceane Ruffian, and such of the same black Nature, and filthy Condition,
that poison the towardly Spring of Gentilitie, and corrupt with the mud of
mischiefs the pure and clear streams of a Kingdom: And to spurgall such, who
reads me shall know I dare, for I fear neither the Rats-bane of a Harlot, nor
the Poniard of a Villain.

T. M.

A Moral.
Lucifer ascending, as Prologue to his own Play. NOw is Hell landed here upon
the Earth,
When Lucifer in limbs of burning gold
Ascends this dustie Theater of the world,
To join his powers: and were it numbeed well.
There are more Devils on Earth then are in Hell.
Hence springs my damned joy, my torturde spleen
Melts into mirthfull Humor at this Fate,
That heaven is hung so high, drawn up so far,
And made so fast, naylde up with many a Star.
And Hell the very shop-borrd of the Earth,
Where when I cut out souls, I throw the shreds
And the white linings of a new-soyld Spirit,
Pawnde to luxurious and adulterous merit.
Yea, that is the sin, and now it takes her turn,
For which the world shall llke a Strumpet burn:
And for an Instance to fire false embraces,
I make the world burn now in secret places,
I haunt invisible corners as a Spy,
And in adulterous Circles there rise I*
There am I coniur'd up through hot desire,
And where Hell rises there must needs be fire:
And now that I have vaulted up so hye
Above the Stage-rayles of this earthen Globe,
I must turn Actor, and join Companies
To share my Comic sleek-eyde villainies.
For I must weaue a thousand Ills in one,
To please my black and burnt affection:
Why? every Tearme-time I come up, to sow
Dissension betwixt Plough-men, that should sow
The Fields vaste women, and make the harvest grow:
So comes it often to pass dear years befall,
When Plough-men leave the Field to till the Hall:
Thus Famine and bleake death do greet the Land,
When the Plough's held between a Lawyers hand.
I fat with joy to see how the poor Swains
Do box their Country-thyes, carrying their Packets
Of writings, yet can neither read nor write,
They Are like to Candles if they had no light:
For they are dark within, in sense and judgment,
As is the Hole at Newgate, and their thoughts
Are like the men that lie there without spirit,
This strikes my black soul into rauishing Music.
To see Swaynes plod and shake their ignorant skuls:
For they are naught but skul, their brain but Burre,
Wanting wits marrowe and the sap of Judgment;
And how they grate with their hard nayly soales
The stones in Fleet-streete, and strike fire in Powles:
Nay, with heir theauie Trot, and yron-stalke,
They have worn off the brass in the mid-walke.
But let these pass for Bubbles and so die,
For I rise now to breath my Legacy:
And make my last Will, which I know shall stand,
As long as Bawd, or Villain strides the Land.
For which I Will turn my shape quite out of Verse,
Moved with the Supplication of poor Pierce,
That writ so rarely villainous from hence,
^or spending money to my Excellence:
Gave me my Titles freely, for which giving,
I rise now to take order for his Living.
The black Knight of the Post shortly reternes
From Hell, where many a Tabacc'mst burns:
With news to smoaky Gallants, Ryotous Heirs,
Strumpets that follow Theators and Faires,
^^ded-nosde Usurers, base mettald Pandars
To Copper Captains, and Pickt-hatch Commanders.
To all ^nsectious Catch-poles through the Town^
The very speckled ve^min of a crown:
To these and those, and every damned one,
I Will bequeath Legacie^ to thri^e vpon^
Amongst the which, I Will give for his red^esle,
A standing Pension to Pierce-Pe^^^^^e,
THE BLACK Book.
NO sooner was Peirce-Pennilesse breathed forth, but I the ^^ght-b^^ning
Seriant Lu^^^ter, quenched my fiery shape, and whipped into a Constables night
gown, the cunningst habit that could be, to search Tipsi^ Tauerns, roosting
Innes, and fr^thy Ale houses, when calling together my worshipful Bench of
Bill-men, I proceeded toward Pickt-hatch, intending to begin their first,
which (as I may fitiy name it) is the very shirts of all Brothel-houses; the
watchmen poor Night-crowes followed, and thought still they had had the
Constable by the hand, when they had the diueil by the Gowne-s^^eue^ at last I
looking up to the casements of every suspected mansion, and spying a light
twinekling, between hope and disperation, gessed it to be ^ome sleepie sn^ff^,
ever and anon winking and nodding in the socket of a Candlestick, as if the
flame has been a departing from the grea^^e body of Simon Snuff the Stinckard:
whereupon I the black Constable commanded my white Guard, not only to assist
my Office with their brown Bills, but to raise up the house extemporie: with
that the dreadful watch men having authority. standing by them, thundered at the
door, whilst the Candle lightened in the Chamber, and so between thundering and
lightning, the Bawd rizze, first putting the Snuff to an untimely death, a
cruel and a lamentable murder, and then with her fat-sag-chinne hanging down
like a ^owes Vdder, lay r^eking out at the window, demanding the reason why
they did summon a Parley: I told her in plain terms, that I had a warrant to
search, from the Sheriff of Limbo; How? from the Sheriff of L^me-streete
replied Mistress W^mble-ch^nn^, (for so she understood the word Limbo, as if
Limbo had been Latten for L^me-streete) why then all the doors of my house
shall fly open and receive you Master Constable: with that, as being the
watch word, two or three vaulted out of their beds at once, one swearing
stocks and stoones, he could not find his stockins, other that they could not
hit upon their false bodies, when to speak ^roath and shame my self, they
were then as close to their flesh as they could, and never put them off since
they were twelve year old: At last they shuffted up, and were shut out at the
back-part, as I came in at the North part, up the stays I went to examine the
Feather-beddes, and car^ie the sheets before the Justice, for there was none
else then to carry, only the flower was strewde with Buske-pointes, silk
Garters, and shooe-strings, ^^attred here and there for have to make away from
me, and the farther such run, the nearer they come to me: then another door
opening rere-ward, there came puffing out of the next room a villainous
Leiftenant without (...) Band, as if he had been new cut down, like one of
Wapping, with his cruel Garters about his Neck, which filthy resembled two of
Dericks Neckelaces: he had a head of hair like one of my Devils in Docter
Faustus, when the old Theater cracked and frighted the Audience; His Browe was
made of course Branne, as if all the Flower had been boulted out to make
honester men, so ruggedly molded with ch^ps and creuises, that I wonder how it
held together, had it not been pasted with villainy; His eyebrows ^etled out
like the round casement of an Aldermans diningroome, which made his eyes look
as if they had been both damned in his head: for if so be two souls had been
so far suncke into Hell-pittes, they would never have walked abroad again:
His Nosthrills were cosen Germans to Currall, though of a softer condition,
and of a more relenting humor; His C^weblacke Muchatoes, were almost half an
Ell from the end to the other, as though they would whisper him in the ear
about a cheat or a murder: and his whose face in general, was more
detestable only then the visage of my grim Porter Cerbe^us, which showed that
all his body besides was made of filthy Dust, and Sea-cole ashes: A down
countenance he had, as (...) would have lookte thirty mile into Hell, and see^^
Sisyph^s rolling, and Ixi^n spinning and reeling: thus in a pair of hoary
Slippers, his stockins dengling about his wrists, and his read Buttons like
Foxes out of their holes, he began like the true Campion of a vaulting-house,
first to ^ray me with the Bug-beares of his rough-cast beard, and then to sound
base in mine ears, like the Beare-garden Dr^m, and this was the humor he put
on, and the very apparel of his Phrases! Why? master Constable, dare you
(...) our own mansion? ha! What is not our house our Cole-harbour, our Castle
of come-downe, and lye-downe? must my honest wedded Punck here, my glorie-fatte
Awdry be taken napping, and raisd up by the thunder of Bil-men? are we disanold
of our first sleep? and cheated of our dreams and fantas^es? Is there not Law
too for stealing away a man's slumbers, as well as for sheets off from hedges?
Come you to search an honest Bawdie-house, this seven and twenty years in
(...) and shame? go too then, you shall search; nay, my very Boots too: are
you well now? the least hole in my house too, are you pleased now? can we not
take ou^ ease in our Inn, but we most come out so quickly? Nawd, go to bed,
sweet Nawd, thou will c^^le thy grease (...), and make thy fat cake. This said
(by the virtue and vice of my Office) I commanded my Bil-men down stairs,
when in a twinkling, discovering my self a little, as much as might serve to
relish me, and show what stuff I was made off, I came and kissed the Bawd,
hogde her excellent villainies and cuning rare conueyances, then turning my
self, I threw mine arms (like a scarffe or (...)) cross the Leiftenants
melancholy Bosom, embraest his resolute phrases, and his dissolute humors,
highly comm^nding the damnable Trade, and detestable course of their (...), so
excellent filthy, and so admirable (...)! Whereupon this Lefitenant of
Pickt-hatch, fell into deeper league and farther acquaintance with the
blackness of my bosom, sometimes calling me Master Lucifer the Head-borow,
sometimes Master Deuillin, the little black Constable. Then telling me, he
heard from Limbo the 11. of the last Month, and that he had the letter to
show, where they were all very merry: marry as he told me, there were some of
his friends in P^legeto^* troubled with the heart-burning: yea, and with the
soul burning too thought I: though thou little dreamst of the torment: then
complaining to me of their bad takings all the last plaguey Summer, that there
was no stirrings, and therefore undone for want of doings, whereupon after many
such inudctions to bring the scene of his poverty upon the Stage, he desired
in cool terms to borrow some forty pence of me; I stuffed with anger at that
base and lazy petition; (knowing that a right true villain, and an absolute
practiced Pandar) could not want silver damnation, but living upon the
Revenues of his wits, might purchase the Devil and all, half conquered with
rage thus I replied to his baseness.

Why? for shame a Bawd and poor? why then let usurers go a begging, or like
an old Greek stand in Powles with a Porringer? let Brokers become whole honest
then, and remove to heaven out of Hounsditch? Lawyers turn feelesse, and take
Ten (...) a poor Widows tears for Ten shillings: Merchants never forswear
themselves, whose great periurde ^aths a Land, turn to great winds and cast
away their Ships at Sea: which false perfidious tempest splits their ships
abroad, and their souls at home, making the one take salt water, and the other
salt fire: let Mercers then have conscionable Thumbes, when they measure out
that smooth glittering Devil Satin, and that old Reuell^r V^luet in the days
of Mounseir, both which have devoured many an honest Field of Wheat and Barley,
that has been metamorphosed and changed into white money; puh, these are but
little w^nders, and may be ^astly possible in the working; A Usurer to cry bread
and meat is not a thing impossible, for indeed your greatest Usurer is your
greatest Beggar, wanting as well that which he has, as that which he has not:
then who can be a greater Beggar? he will not have his house smell like a
Cooks shop, and therefore takes an order no meat shall be dressed in it* and
because there was an House upon Fish-streets Hill burnt to the Ground ^nce, he
can abide by no means to have a fire in his Chimny ever since: to the
confirming of which, I will insert here a pretty conceit of a nimble-wiltied
Gentlewoman, that was worthy to be Ladyfied for the Jest, who entering into a
Usurers House in London, to take up money upon unmerciful Interest, for the
space of a Tweluemoneth, was conducted through two or three hungry rooms into
a fair dining Room, by a Lenten faced Fellow, the Usurers man, whose Nose
showoe as if it had been made of hollow Past board, and his Che^ks like two
thin Parcakes clapped together: A pitiful kna^e he was, and lookte for all the
world as if meal^ had been at twenty shillings a Bushel: the Gentlewoman
being placed in this fair Room to awaite the Usurers leisure, who was cassing
up Ditches Gold in his Counting House, and being almost frozen with standing
for it was before Kandle-ma^ Frost bitten Term) ever and anon turning about
to the Chimney where she saw a pair of Corpulent Giganticall Andiorns that
stood like two Burgomasters at both corners, a Harth briskly dressed up, and a
great cluster of Charcoale pilde up together like black Pudoings, which l^ye
for a^ dead fire, and in the dyning Room so: the Gentlewoman wondering it was
so long a kindling, at last she caught the nuscrable conce^t of it, and
calling her man to her, bad him seek ou^ for a piece of Chalk, or some
peeling of a white Wall, whilst in the mean (...) she conceited the D^uice,
when taking up the six former Coals one after another, she chalkt upon each
of them a Satyricall Letter, which six were these.

T. D. C. R. V. S.

Explaind^ thus:

These Dead Coals, Resemble Usurers Souls.

Then placing them in the same order again turning the chalkt sides inward to
try conclusions, which as it happened, made up the Jest the better, by that
time the Usurer had done amongst his golden heaps, and entertaining the
Gentlewoman with a Cough a quarter of an hour long, at last after a rotten
Hawke and a Hem, he began spit and speak to her: To conclude, she was
furnished of the money for a twelue-moneth, but upon large security and most
Tragical Usury; when keeping her day the Twelue-moneth after, coming to
repa^e both the money and the breed of it.

(For Interest may well be calde the Usurers Bastard) she found the Hearth
dressed up in the same order with a dead fire of charcole again, and yet the
Thames was half frozen at that time with the bitterness of the season: when
turning the formos^ rank of coals, determining again as it seemd to draw
some pretty knavery upon them too, she spy^d all those six^ Letters which she
chalkt upon them the twelue-month before, and never a one stirde or displaced:
the strange sight of which, made her break into these words. Is it possible
quoth she a Usurer should burn so little here, and so much in Hell? or is it
the cold property of these Coals to be above a tweluemonth a kindling? so
much to show the frozen Charity of a Usurers Chimney.

And then a Broaker to be an honest soul, that is, to take but sixpence a
month, and three pence for the Bill making: a Devil of a very good conscience?
possible too, to have a Lawyer bribelesse and without Fee if his clye^tesse or
female clyent please his eye well, a Merchant to wear a sut^ of perjury but
once a quarter, or so: mistake m^ not, I mean not four times an hour, that
shift were too short, ^ee could not put it on so soon I think: and lastly,
not impossible for a mercer to have a Thumb in Folio, like one of the biggest
of the Guard, and so give good and very bountiful measure: but which is most
impossible to be a right Bawd and poor, it strikes my spleen into dulnes:
and turns all my blood into cool lead; Wherefore was vice ordained but to be
rich, shining and wealthy, seeing virtue her opponent is poor^, ragged, and
needy? those that are poor are timorous honest, and foolish harmless, as
your carroling Sheepheards, whistling Plough-men, and such of the same innocent
Rank, that never reiush the black Juice of villan^^, never taste the red
food of murder, or the damnable suckets of Lururie: whereas a Pandar is the
very o^le of Villani^, and the sirroppe of Rogues^ of excellent Rogues I mean,
such as have purchasde five hundreds a year b^ the Talent of their Villainy:
how many such Gallants do I know, that live only upon the reuenewe of their
wits: some whose Brains are above an hundred mile about, and those are your
Geometrical Thieves, which may fitly be called so, because they measure the
Highways with false Gallops, and therefore are Heirs of more Acres then five
and fittie elder Brothers: sometimes they are Clerks of Newe-market Heathe*
sometimes the Sheriffs of Salisburie Plain; and another time they commit
Brothelrye, when they make many a man stand at Hockley in the Hole. These are
your great head Land lords indeed, which call the word Robbing, the gathering
in of their Rents, and name all Passengers their Tenants of Will.

Another set of delicate Knaves there are, that diue into Deeds and Writings
of Lands, lest to young Gall-Finches, poisoning the true sense and intent of
them, with the merciless Antimonie of the Common Law, and so by some crafty
Clawe or two, shoue the true foolish Owners quite beside the Saddle of their
Patrimonies, and then they hang only by the Stirrops: that is, by the cold
Alms and frozen christie of the Gentlemen-defeaters; (whom they take after me
their great Grandfather) will rather stamp them down in the deep mire of
poverty, then bolster up their heads with a poor wispe of charity: such as
these corrupt the true meanings of lest Wills and Testaments: and turn
Legacies the wrong way, wresting them quite awrie like Grauntum Steeple.

The third Rank (quainter then the former) presents us with the Race of
lusty Vaulting Gallants, that in stead of a French Horse practice upon their
Mistresses all the nimble Tricks of Vaulting, and are worthy to be made Dukes
for doing the Somerset so lively.

This Neast of Gallants, for the natural parts that are in them, are
maintainde by their Drawne-worke Dames, and their imbrodered Mistresses, and
can dispend their two thousand a year out of other men's Coffers: keep at
every heel a man, beside a French Lackey, (a great Boy with a beard) and an
English Page, which filles up the place of an Ingle: they have their
Citie-horse (which I may well term their Stone-horse) or their Horse upon
the Stones: For indeed, the City being the lusty Danie and Mistress of the
Land, lays all her foundation upon good Stone-worke, and some body pays well
for it, where ever it lights, and might with less cost keep London Bridge in
reparations every fall, then Mistress Briget his wife; for Women and Bridges
always lack mendings and what the advantage of one Tide performs, (...)
another tide presently and w^shes away.

Those are your Gentlemen Gallants, that sees uppermost, and never lin
gallopping, till they runns over into the fire, so gloriously accounted, that
they ravish the eyes of all Wantons, and take them prisoners in their shops
with a brisk suit of Appar^ll: they strangle and choke more Velvet in a deep
^^ther^d Hose, then would serve to line through my Lord what call ye-hims Coach.

What need I infer more of their prodigal glistrings, and their ^pangled
damnations? when these are Arguments sufficient to show the wealth of sin,
and how rich the Sons and Heirs of Tartarie are: And are these so glorious
so flourishing, so brimfull of golden Lucifers or light Angels, and thou a
Pandar and poor? A Bawd and empty, appareld in villainous Pack-thread, in a
wicked Suit of course Hoppe-bagges, the wings and skirts faced with the ruins
of Dish-cloutes? Fie, I shame to see thee dressed up so abominable scuruie.
Complaynst thou of bad doings, when there are Harlols of all Trades, and Knaves
of all Languages? Know thou not, that sin may be committed, either in
French, Dutch, Iitalian, or Spanish, and all after the English fashion: But
thou excuse the negligance of thy practice by the last Summers Pestilence:
Alas, poor Skark Gull, that put off is idle: for Seriant Carbuncle, one of the
Plagues chief Officers, dares not venture within three yardes of an Harlot,
because Mounseir Dry-bone the Frenchman, is a Ledger before him. At which
speech, the Slave burst into a melancholy Laugh, which shewde for all the world
like a sad Tragedy with a Clown int: and thus began to reply.

I know not whether it be a Cross or a Curse, (noble Philippe of Phlegeton)
or whether both, that I am forced to pinck four Else of Bag to make me a
Summer suite, but I protest, what with this long Vacation, and the ^idging of
Gallants to Norfolk, and up and down Countries, Pierce was never so
Pennilesse, as poor Lieutenant Frig-beard.

With those werds he put me in mind of him for whom I chiefly changed my
self into an officious Constable, poor Pierce-Pennilesse: when presently I
demanded of this Leiuetenant the place of his abode, and when he la^t heard of
him (though I knew well enough both where to hear of him, and find him) to
which he made answer. Who? Pierce, honest Pennilesse? he that writ the
Mad-cappes Supplication? why, my very next Neighbor, lying within three lean
houses of me, at old Mistress Siluer-pinnes, the only doore-keeper in
Europe. Why? we meet one another every Term time, and shake hands when the
Exchequer opens, but when we open our hands, the Devil of Penny we can see.

With that II cheerde up the drooping Salve, with the Aqua-vitae of villainy,
and put him in excellent comfort of my damnable Legacy: saying, I would stuff
him with so many wealthy instructions, that he should excel even Pandarus
himself, and go nine mile beyond him in Pandarisme, and from thence forward
he should never know a true Rascal go under his red Velvet flops; and a
gallant Bawd indeed below her loose bodied-Sattin?

This said, the slave hugd himself and bust the Bawd for joy, when presently
I let them in the (...) of their wicked Smack, and descended to my Bil men
that waited in the pernicious Alley for me their Master Constable: and
marching forward to the third Garden-house, there we knocked up the Ghost of
mistress Siluer-pin. who suddenly risse out of two white sheets, and acted
out of her tyring-house window, but having understood who we were, and the
Authority of our office, she presently eneu in her Ghosts apparel, unfolded
the Doors, and gave me my free entrance, when in policy I chargde the rest
to stay and watch the house below, whilst I stumbled up two pair of stayres
in the dark, but at last caught in mine eyes the sullen blaze of a melancholy
lamp, that burnt very tragically upon the rarrow Deske o^ a half Bedstead,
which descryed all the pitiful Ruins throughout the whole chamber, the bare
priuities of the stone-walls were hid with two pieces of painted Cloth; but so
ragged and tottreb, that one might have seen all nevertheless, hanging for
all the world like the two men in Chains between Mile-end and Hackney; The
Testerne or the shadow, over the bed* was made of four Else of Cobwebs, and a
number of small Spinners Ropes hung down for Curtains; the Spindle-shanke
Spyders which showd like great Leachers with little legs, went stalking over
his head, as if they had been conning of Tamburlayne. To conclude, there was
many such sights to be seen and all under a Penny, beside the lamentable
prospect of his hose and doublet, which being of old Kendall Green, sitly
resembled a Pitched Field, upon which trambled many a lusty Corporal: in this
unfortunate Tyring-house lay poor Pierce upon a Pillow stuffed with Horsemeate,
the Sheets smudged so durtily, as if they had been stolen by night out of
Saint Pulchers Churchyard when the Sexton had lest a Grave open, and so laid
the dead bodies wool-ward: the Couerlet was made of pieces a black Cloth clapped
together, such as was scatterd off the railes in Kings-Streete, at the Queens
Funeral: upon this miserable Beds-head, lay the old Copy of his Supplication
in soul written hand which my black Knight of the Post conveyed to Hell:
which no sooner I entertaynd in my hand, but with the rattling and blabbing of
the papers, poor Pierce began to stretch and grate his Nose against the hard
Pillowe, when after a Rowze or two, he muttred these reeling words between
drunk and sober, that is, between sleeping and waking.

I should laugh ysaith, if for all this I should prove a Usurer before I die,
and have never a Penny now to set up withal, I would build a Nunnery in
Pickt-hatch here, and turn the walk in Powles into a Bowling Alley; I would
have the Thames leaded over, that they might play at Cony-holes, with the
Arches under London- Bride. Well, and with that he wakte, the devil is a mad
Knae still.

How now Pierce, (quoth I) do thou call me Knave to my face? Whereat the
poor slave started up with his hair a tip-toe, to whom by easy degrees, I
gently discovered my self, who trembling like the treble of a Lute, under the
heavy finger of a Farmers daughter, craved pardon of my damnable Excellence,
and gave me my Titles as freely, as if he had known where all my Lordships
lay, and how many Acts there were in Tartarie: but at the length having
recovered to be bold again, he unfolded all his bosom to me, told me that
the Knight of Perjury had lately brought him a singed Letter, sent from a
damned Friend of his: Which was thus directed, As follows.

From Stix to Woods close, OR The Walk of Pickt-hatch.
AFter I saw poor Pennilesse grow so well acquainted with me, and so familiar
with the villainy of my humor, I unlocked my determinations, and laid open my
intents in particulars, the cause of my vprising being moved both with his
penetrable petition and his insufferable poverty, and therefore changed my
shape into a little wapper-eid Constable, to wink and blinke at small faults,
and through the policy of searching, to find him out the better in his cleanly
Tabernacle, and therefore gave him encouragement now to be frolike, for the
time was at hand like a Pickpurse, that Pierce should be called no more
Pennilelie, like the Majors bench at Oxford, but rather Pierce-Penny-fis.
because his palm shall be pawnde with Pence. This said, I bad him be
resolude, and get up to Breake-fast, whilst I went ^ogather my Noise of
Villains together, and made his lodging my Convocation house: with that in a
resulting humor, he calde his Hose and Dublet to him, (which could almost go
alone, borne like a Hearse upon the Legs of Vermin) whilst I thumpt down
stairs with my Cowe-heele, embraced Mistress Siluerpinre and betook me to my
Bill-men: when in a twinkling before them all, I leapt out of Master
Constables Night-gowne, into an Usurers ^ustie ^urde Jacket, whereat the
Watchmen staggered, and all their Bills fell down in a sownde: when I walkte
close by them laughing and coughing like a rotten-lunpde Usurer, to see what
Italian faces they all made, when they mist their Constable, and saw the
black Gown of his Office lie full in a puddle.

Whell, away I scudded in the mustie moth-eaten habit, and being upon Exchange
time, I crowded my self amongst Merchants, poisoned all the Burse in a minute,
and turned their Faiths and Troths, into Curds and whay^, making them swear
those things now, which they for-swore when the Quarters struck again: for I
was present at the clapping up of every Bargain, which did nere h^ld, no
longer then they held hands together: there I heard news out of all
Countries, in all Languages; how many Villainies were in Spain: how many
Luxurs in Italy: how many Persurds in France: and how many Reele-pots in
Germany.

At last I met at half turn, one whom I had spent hoarie eyes so long for, an
(...) money-maister, that had been off and on sow six and fitly years
dambde in his Counting House, for his only recreation was but to hop about the
Burle before twelve, to hear what news from the Bancke, and how many
Merchants were banqrout the last change of the Moon. This ramish Penny-father
I rounded in the left Ear, winded in thy intent, the place and hour: Which no
sooner he sucked in, but smilde upon me in French, and replied: O Mounseir
Deiable.
I Will be chief Guest at your Table,


With that we shook hands: and as we parted, I bade him bring Master
Cog-bill the Scriuenet along with him, and so I vanished out of that dressing.
And passing through Burchen-lane, amidst a Camp Royal of Hose and Doublets,
(Master Snips backside being turnde where his face stood) I took excellent
occasion to slip into a Captains Suit, a valiant Busse, Doublet, stuffed with
Points like a Leg of Mutton with Pa^slye, and a pair of Velvet slops, scored
thick with Lgce, which ran ound about the Hose like Ring-wormes, able to
make a man scratch where it itcht not. And thus accoultred, taking up my
weapons a trust in the same order, at he next Cutlers I came too, I marched to
Master Bezles Ordinary, where I found a whole dozen of my damned crew sweating
as much at Dice, as many pooze Laborers do with the casting of Ditches: when
presently I set in a Stake amongst them: round it went; but the crafty Dice
having peept upon me once, knew who I was well enough, and would never have
their little black eyes of a me all the while after; at last came my turn
about, the Dice quaking in my First before I threw them; but when I yerkt them
forth, away, they ran like Irish Lackeys, as far as their bones would
suffer them.

I sweeping up all the Stakes that lay upon the Table: whereat some-stampt,
others swore, the rest cursed, and all in general fretled to the Gaull, that a
new Commer (as they termed me) should gather in so many Fi^teenes at the first
vomit.

Well, thus it past on, the Dice running as false as the Drabbes in
White-Fryers, ano when any one thought himself surest, in came I with a
lurching cast, and made them all swear round again: But such Gunne powder
Oaths they were, that I wonder haw the Seeling held together without spitting
Mortar upon them. Zownes, Captain swore one to me, I think the Devil be
thy good Lord and Master: True, (thought I) and thou his Gentleman-usher. In
conclusion, it fatted me better then twenty eighteene-pence Gr^inaries, to
here them rage, curse and swear, like so many Emperors of Darkness. And all
these twelve, were of twelve several Crmpanies.

There was your Gallant extraordinary Thief, that keeps his College of
Good-Fellowes, and will not fear to rob a Lord in his Coach for all his
ten Trencher-bearers on horseback, your deep conceited Cut purse, who by
the dexterity of his knife will draw out the money, and make a flame
coloure-purse show like the bottomless pit, but with never a soul int: Your
cheating Bowler that will bancke false of purpose, and loose a game of
twelue-pence to purchase his Partner twelve shillings in Bettes, and so share
it after the Play. Your Cheu^rell-g^tted Catch-pele, who like a Horse-litch
suckes Gentlemen, and in all your twelve Tribes of Villainy, who no sooner
understood the quaint form of such an uncustomed Legacy, but they all pawnds
their vicious Golles to meet there, at the hour prefixed: and to confirm
their resolution the more, each slipped down his Stockin, baring his right Knee,
and so began to drink a Health, half as deep as Mother Hubburds Celler: She
that was calde in for selling her working Bottle-Ale to Booke-binders, and
spurting the Froth upon Courtiers Noses. To conclude, I was their only
Captain, (for so they pleased to title me) and so they all rizze, Poculis
manibusque, applauding my news: then the hour being more then once and once
reiterated, we were all at our hands again, and so departed.

I could tell now, that I was in many a second House in the City and Suburbs
afterward, where my entertainment was not barren, nor my welcome Cheap or
Ordinary. And then how I walkte in Powles to see fashions; to diue into
villainous meetings, pernitions Plots, black Humors, and a Million of
mischiefs, which are bred in that Cathedral Womb, and borne within less
then forty weeks after. But some moy object and say; What does the Devil
walk in Powles theu? Why not, Sir, as well as a Seriant, or a Ruffian, or a
Murtheter: may not the Devil I pray you walk in Powles as well as the Horse
go a top of Powles, for I am sure I was not far from his Keeper. Puh, I
doubt where there is no doubt, for there is no true Critic indeed, that will
carpe at the Devil.

Now the Hour posted on-ward to accomplish the effects of my desire, to gorge
every Vice full of poison, that the soul might burst at the last, and vomit
out her self upon blew cakes of Brimstone. When returning home (for the
purpose, in my Capiaynes apparel of Buffe and Velvet) I struck mine Hostess
into admiration at my proper appearance, for my Poh, foot was helped out with
Bumbast. A property whielt many worldings use, whose Toes are dead and
rottenand therefore so stuff out their Shoes, like the corners of
Wooll-Packes.

Well, into my Tyring-house I went, where I had scarce shifted my self into
the Apparel of my last Will and Testament, (which was the Habit of a covetous
Barne-cracking Farmer) but all my Striptlings of Perdition, my Nephews of
Damnation: my Kindred and alliance of Villainy and Sharking, were ready before
the hour, to receive my Bottomless Blessing. When entering into a Country
Night-Gowne, with a Cappe of sickness about my brows. I was led in between
Pierce-Pennilesse, and his Hostess, like a feeble Farmer, ready to depart
England, and sail to the Kingdom of Tartarie: who setting me down in a
wicked Chair, all my pernicious Kins-folkes round about me, and the Scriuener
between my logges (for his loves always to fit in the Devils Cot-house) thus
with a wha^ countenance, short stooppes, and earthen dampish-voyce, the true
Counterfets of a dying C^llian, I proceeded to the black Order of my Legacies.

The last Will and Testament of Lawrence Lucifer, the old Batchiler of Limbo.
ALIAS, Dicke Deuill-Barne, the griping Farmer of Kent.
IN the Name of Bezle-bub, Amen.

I Lawrence Lucifer, alias, Dicke Deuil-Barne, sick in soul but not in body,
being in perfect health to wicked memory: Do constitute and Ordain this my
last Will and Testament irreuocable, as long as the world shall be trampled on
by Villainy.

Inprimis, I Lawrence Lucifer, bequeath my soul to Hell, and my body to the
Earth, amongst you all, divide me and share me equally, b^t with as much
wrangling as you can, I pray: and it will be the better if you go to Law for
me.

As touching my worldly wicked Goods, I give and bequeath them in most
villainous order following.

First, I constitute and Ordain, Leiuetenant Prig-beard, Arch-Ponder of
England, my sole Heirs, of all such Lands, Closes and Gappes, as he within the
Bounds of my gift: beside, I have certain Houses, Te^^ments, and with drawing
Rooms in Shoreditch, T^^^hold-streete, WhiteFryers, and Westminster: which I
freely give and bequeath to the aforesaid Leiuetenant, and the base Heirs
truly begotte of his villainous body: with this Prouiso, that he sell none of
the Land when he lacks money; nor make away any of the Houses to impair and
weaken the Stock, no not so much as to alter the property of any of them,
which is to make them honest against their wills, but to train and muster his
wits upon the Mile-ende of his Mazard, rather to fortify the Territories of
Tunbold-street, and curich the County of Pickt-Hatch, with all his vicious
Endeavors: golden Enticements, and damnable Practices. And Leiutenant, thou
must diue (as thou use to do) into Lauded Nouices, who have only wit to be
licorish and no more, that so their Tenants trotting up to London with with
their Quartridges, they may pay them the rent, but thou and thy College shall
receive the money.

Let no young rigle-eyde Damsel (if her years have struck twelve once) be
left unassaulted, but it must be thy Office to lay hard seige to her honesty:
and to try if the walls of her Mayden-head may be scaled wish a ladder of
Angels: for one ^ere of such Wenches will bring in more al years end, then
an hundred Acres of the best harrowed Land between Detford and Dover: and take
this for a Note by the way, you must neu^r walk without your Dewce, or
Dew^e-Ace of Drabbes, after your Boote-heeles: for when you are abroad you know
not what use you may have for them. And lastly (if you be well feed by some
riosons Galiant) you must practice, (as indeed you do) to wind out a wanton
Veluet-cap and Bodkin from the tangles of her Shop, teaching her (you knew
how) to cast a Cuckolds Mist before the eyes of her Husband, which is, telling
him, she must see her Coozeu, new come to Town: or that she goes to a woman's
Labor: when thou know well enough, she goes to none but her own: and
being set out of the Shop, (with her man before her, to quench the iealouzie
of her Husband) she by thy instructions shall turn the honest simple fellow
off, at the next turning, and give him leave to see the merry Devil of
Edmunton, or a Woman killed with kindness: when his Mistress is going her self
to the same murder. Thousand of such inventions, practizes and devices, I
stuff thy Trade withal: beside the luxurious meetings at Tauernes, ten pound
suppers, and fliteene pound reckonings, made up afterward with riotous Eggs and
Muscadine. All these female vomites, and adulterous Surfets, I give and
bequeath to thee, which I hope thou will put in practice with all expedition,
after my decease: and to that end, I ordain thee wholly and solely, my only
absolute, excellent, villainous Heir.

Item, I give and bequeath to you Gregory Gauntlet, high Thief on Horseback;
all such sums of Money, that are nothing due to you, and to receive them in,
whether the Parties be willing to pay you or no. You need not make many
words with them, but only these two: Stand, and deliver; and therefore a true
thief cannot ^huse but be wise, because he is a man of so very few words.

I need not instruct you, I think Gregory, about the politic searching of
crafty Carryers Packes, or ripping up the bowels of wide Boots, and
Cloake-bagges, I do not doubt but you have already exercised them all. But one
thing I especially charge you of: the neglect of which makes many of your
Religion sender their wine-pipes at Tyburne, at least three Months before
their day: that if you chance to rob a virtuous Townesman on Horseback,
with his wife upon a Pillion behind him, you presently speak them fair to
walk a Turn or two at one side, where binding them both together like Man and
Wife, arm in arm very lovingly: Be sure you tie them hard enough, for fear
they break the bonds of Matrimony, which if it should fall out so, the
matter would lie sore upon your Necks the next Sessions after, because your
negligent tying, was the cause of that breach between them.

Now, as for your Welsh Hue and Cry (the only Net to catch Thieves in) I
know you avoid well enough, because you can shift both your Beardes and your
Towns well, but for your better disguising, hence forward I will fit you with
a Beard-maker of mine own: One that makes all the false hairs for my Devils,
and all the Periwigges that are worn by old Courtiers, who take it for a
pride in their balde days to wear yallowe Curles on their Foreheads, when one
may almost see the Sun go to bed through the chinkes of their faces.

Moreover Gregory, because I know thee toward enough, and thy arms full of
feats, I make the Keeper of Come-Parke; Seriant of Salisburie-Plaine; Warden
of the Standing-places; and lastly, Constable of all Heaths, Holes, Highways,
and Conny-groues: hoping that thou will execute these Places and Offices as
truly, as Dericke will execute his place and Office at Tyburne.

I give and bequeath to thee Dicke Dogge-man, G^aund-Catchpole, (over and above
thy bare-bone Fees, that will scarce hang wicked flesh on thy back) all such
^urches, Gripes and Squeezes, as may be wrung out by the fist of extortion.

And because I take pillie on thee, wayfing so use as thou ere to do, (...)
thou can land on^ Fare at the Counter, watching sometimes ten hours together
in an Alehouse, ever and anon peeping forth and sampling thy Nose with the red
Lattis: let him whosoever that falls into thy Clutches at night, pay well for
thy standing all day: And cousen Richard when thou have caught him in the
Moustray of thy liberty with the cheese of thy office, the wire of thy hard
fist being clapped down upon his Shoulders, and the back of his estate almost
broken to pieces; then call thy cluster of fellow-vermins together, and sit in
triumph with thy prisoner at the upper end of a Ta^ene table, where under the
color of showing him favor (as you term it) in waiting for Bail, thou and
thy Counter-liche, may swallow down six Gallons of Charnico, and then begin
to chafe that he makes you stay so long-before Peter Bail comes: And here it
will not be amiss if you call in more wine-suckers, and damn as many Gallons
again; for you know your prisoners ransom will pay for all: this is if the
party be flush now, and would not have his credit copparde with a scut^ey
Counter.

Another kind of rest you have which is called Shoopenny, that is, when you
will be paid for every stride you take: and if the Channel be dangerous and
ruff, you will not step over under a Noble: a very excellent Lurch to get up
the price of your legs, between Powles-chaine and Ludgate.

But that which likes me beyond measure, is the villainous nature of that arrest
which I may fitly term by the name of Cog-oulshder, when you clap a both
sides like old Rowse in Cornewell, and receive double Fee both from the
Creditor and the Debtor, swearing by the post of your office to shoulder-clap
the party, the first time he lights upon the Limetwigs of your liberty, when
for a little Usurers Oil, you allow him day by day free passage to walk by
the wicked precinct of your Noses, and yet you will pimple your souls with
oaths, till you make them as well favored as your faces, and swear he never
came within the verge of your eyelids: nay more, if the Creditor were present
to see him arrested on the one side, and the party you wot on, over the way at
the other side, you have such quaint shifts, pretty hindrances, and most
Lawyer-like delays ere you will set forward, that in the mean time he may
make himself away in some by Alley, or rush into the Bowels of some Tavern,
or drinking school; or if neither, you will find talk with some Sharke-shift
by the way, and give him the marks of the party, who will presently start
before you, give the D^bter Intelligence, and so a rotten Fig for the
Catchpole. A most witty, smooth, and damnable conueyance: many such running
devices breed in the Reins of your offices: beside I leave to speak of your
unmerciful dragging a Gentleman through Fleet-streete, to the utter confusion
of his white Feather, and the lamentable spattring of his Pearl color (...)
Stockins, especially when some six of your balcke Dogs of Newgate are upon
him at once. Therefore sweet cosen Richard for you are the nearest kinsman I
have I give and bequeath to you no more then you have already, for you are so
well gorged and stuffed with that, that one spoonefull of villainy more, would
ouer-lay your stomach quite, and I fear me make you kick up all the rest.

Item, I give and bequeath to you Benedick Bottomless, most deep Cutpurse,
all the benefit of Pageant-dayes, great Market-dayes, Ballat-places, but
especially the Sir Penny Rooms in Play Houses, to Cut, Diue, or Nim, with as
much speed, Art, and dexter^tie, as may be handled by hon^st Rogues of thy
quality. Nay, you shall not stick Benedick, to give a shave of your Office at
Powles Cross in the Sermon time: but thou holdst it a thing thou may do by
law, to cut a Purse in Westminster Hall. True, Beuedicke, if thou be sure the
Law be on that fide thou cutst it on.

Item, I give and bequeath to you, old Bias, Alias, Humfrey Hollow-banke, true
cheating Bowler, and Lurcher, the one half of all false Bettes, Cunning
Hooks, subtle Ties, and Crosse-layes, that are ven^ured upon the landing of
your Bowl, and the safe arriving all the Haven of the Mistress, if it chance
to pass all the dangerous Rocks and Rubs of the Alley, and be not choackt in
the sand, like a Merchants Ship, before it comes half way home, which is none
of your fault (you will say and swear) although in your own turnde-conscience
you know, that you threw it about three yards short out of hand, upon very set
purpose.

Moreover, Humfrey, I give you the lurching of all young Nouices, Citizens
sons, and Country Gentlemen, that are hookt in by the winning of one
Twelue-penny Game at first, lost upon policy, to be cheated of Twelve pounds
worth-a Bets afterward. And old Bias, because thou art now and then smelt out
for a Coosner, I would have thee sometimes go disguisde (in honest apparel)
and so drawing in amongst Bunglers and kellers, under the plain Freeze of
simplicity, thou may finely couch the wrought-veluet of Knavery.

Item, I give and bequeath to your Coosen German here, Francis Finger-false,
Deputy of Di^inghouses, all cunning Lifts, Shifts, and Couches, that ever
were, are, and shall be invented, from this hour of a Leauen-clocke upon
black Monday, until it smite Twelve a clock at Doomes-day: and this I know
Francis, if you do endoure to excel, as I know you do, and will truly
practice falsely, you may live more gallanter far upon three Dice, then many
of your foolish Heirs about London, upon thrice three hundred Apr^s.

But ^urning my Legacy to you-ward, Barnaby Burning-glasse, strech
Tabacco-taker of England, in Ordinaryes, upon Stages both common and private,
and lastly, in the Lodging of your Drabbe and Mistress: I am not a little
proud, I can tell you Barnaby, that you dance after my Pipe so long: and for
all Coun^erblasts and Tabacco-Nashes (which some call Raylers) you are not
blown away, nor your fiery thrist quenched with the small Penny-Ale of their
contradictions, but still suck that dug of Damn^^ion, with a long nipple, still
burning that rare Phaenix of Phlegiton Tobacco, that from her ashes burnt and
knocked out, may ari^e another pipefull: Therefore I give and bequeath unto
thee, a breath of all religions, save the true one, and tasting of all
countries, save his own: a brain well footed, where the Muses hang up in the
smoke like red Herrings: and look how the narrow all^y of thy pipe shows in
the inside, so shall all the pipes through say body. Besides, I give and
bequeath to thy kings, as smooth as Iet, and just of the same color, that when
thou art closed in thy grave, the worms may be consumed with them, and take
them for black Puddings.

Lastly, not least, I give and bequeath to thee Pierce-pennelesse, exceeding
poor Scholar, that has made clean shoes in both Universities, and been a
pitiful Batler all thy life time, full often heard with this lamentable cry
at the Buttry-hatch Ho Lancelot, a Cewe of bread, and a Cewe of beer, never
passing beyond the confines of a farthing, nor once monching commons, but only
upon Gaudy days: To thee most miserable Pierce, or pierced through and through
with misery, I bequeath the tithe of all Vaulting Houses, the tenth ^eneere of
each heigh pass come a loft: beside the playing in and out of all wenches at
thy pleasure, which I know as thou may use it, will be such a fluent pension,
that thou shall never have need to write Supplication again.

Now for the especial tr^st and confidence I have in both you, Mihell Money God
Usurer, and Leonard Lauender Braker, or pawne-lender, I make you two my full
Executors to the true disposing of all these my hellish intents, wealthy
villainies, and most pernicions damnable Legacies.

And now kinsmen and friends, wind about me, my breath begins to cool, and
all my powers to (...) se. And I can say no more to you Nephews then I have
said, only this, I leave you all like Rats-bane so poison the realm. And I
pray, be all of you as arrant villain^s as you can be, and so farewell, be all
hangde, and come down to me as soon as you can.

This said, he departed to his mo^lton kingdom, the wind risse, the botto^e
of the Chair flew out, the Scriuener fell flat upon his nose, and here is the
end of a harmless Morrall.

FINIS.

Now Sir, what is your censure now? you have read me I am sure: am I black
enough think you, dressed up in a lasting suite of Incke? Do I deserve my Dark
and pitchy Title? Stick I close enough to a villains Ribs? Is not Lucifer
liberal to his Nephews, in this his last Will and Testament? Meethinkes I
hear you say-nothing: and therefore I know you are pleased and agree to all:
for Qui tacit consentire videtur: And I allow you wise, and truly Judicious,
because you keep your Censure to your self.

FINIS.

