Certain brief, and special Instructions for Gentlemen, merchants, students,
soldiers, mariners, etc. Employed in services abroad, or any way occasioned
to converse in the kingdoms, and gouernementes of foreign Princes.

LONDON, Printed by John Woolfe, 1589.

To the most valiant, and renowned Knight, Sir Francis Drake, the ornament of
his Country, the terror of the enemy, the Achilles of this age, P. I. wishes,
in all his honorable actions, the continuance of Gods former blessings, and in
his now intended service the best success.
SIr, my hap was of late, ouerlocking a large Library, to light upon a small,
but sweet book of Method, for men intending their profit and honor by the
experience of the world, and access to externe and remote parts, by that
means to inrole themselves in the Cataloge of Homer his (...).
seers of many Regions, and of the manners of many Nations, as Ulysses was, and
your self more then Ulysses. This Method, was composed by one M. Albertus
Meier, at the command, direction, and charge of the honorable Henry Ranzou, now
lord of Bredenberge, Counsailer and deputy to Christiern, the young King of
Denmark in his Dukedoms of Sleswike, Holst, Stormare, and Dithmarsen, a man of
singular wisdom learning, and zeal, both to his country, and the utility
and furtherance of virtuous minds in general.

My resolution was at the first to accommodate the same to my private use, and
thereby to square my self fit for an occasion, whenever the pleasure of God,
convenient time, and good company (which I evermore wished) should draw me to
travel: But considering that excellent Moral of Tullie, in his golden Offices
derived from the Stoikes: Officiorum (...) titul. de Iustit.
Homines hominu^ causa esse generatos, vt ipsi inter se alii aliis prodesse
posse^t, and communes vtilitates in medium afferre: that men are borne for men,
one to do for another, and to communicate al common helps with those that want
them: and withal, seeing how coherent the argument hereof is, with the
occurrents of this year, not so myraculous to the Astronomer, as parturient to
al me^ of spirit, wherein for military and marine matters, as expeditions,
plantings, discoueries, and voyages of the largest compass, there is grown so
universal a consent and disposition in this triumphant kingdom, that all
Christianity stands now at the gaze, attending from us some notable effect and
consequence; for these respects, I have deemed it a better duty both toward
nature and my country, by reducing the same into our vulgar language, and so
committing it to the press, to benefit many the^ one, more then my self only,
as knowing, that (according to the Aristoteles* bonum quo communius, eo melius.
prince of Philosophers) a good and profitable thing, the more common it is,
the better it is. And whether this method may justly be received into the
number of things of that opinion, yea or no: I appeal to no other judge tha^
to your self: a judge in this matter so sufficient, as that this Realm, nay
many realms (I speak that which is impude^cy to deny) cannot produce an
equal. There is no man, although but of mean and ordinary insight in the state
of things, that is ignorant of the great necessity and commodity of Methods,
and directions to men of all qualities: insomuch, that whosoever undertakes
any course or profession without it, is like to the foolish youth, that would
needs prove a Latinist without his Grammar, or to the mad Architect, which
went about to set up a house without his rule and compass, both whose
beginnings were confused, and their conclusions ridiculous.

I have heard speech of a wise Gentleman of Naples, who sometime for a trial
dismissed his son, and gave him liberty to travel to certain other Cities,
and territories of Italy, but without instructions, and upon his return, he
made report that he had seen men, women, walls, houses, woods, and meadows, but
of the state, manners, laws, government and natures of the people, his simple
wit could make no reasonable answer. Many of our own Nation have been taken
tardy and tripping in this grosenesse: as diverse Gentlemen very studious in
cases of policy, and navigations, by questions and examinations have found. In
whom the ancient complaint of the Poet has been too truly and fully verified.

Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt, Some by passing the seas,
change airs but not minds, returning with brains nothing bettered, and
spirits nothing quickened with the varieties of the world. I doubt not, but that
if our men will vouchsafe the reading, portage, and practice of this pamphlet
of notes, (a sovereign Antidotum, or preservative against the poison of that
disease) the thick mistes of ignorance, and hard conception will soon be
scattered, and the same converted into a quick sight, and illumination of the
senses, so that the traveler (although in that course a Nouice) after his
ranginges and peregrinations, shall retire him self a man of skill, and bring
more to his home from ouer-seas, than the servant did to his Master from
Paul's cross, which peradventure was a hat and a cloak, but no profit by
doctrine.

For the patronage of this discourse, as it is the custom, or rather by
custom the habit in men of industry, to commend their labors to persons of
countenance and judgment, and for the most part to such as by their own
experience are able to speak of that argument, which the work presented to
the^ does principally prosecute, if either I regard your self, or your
present business, I can not sort and single out a man more fit to who^ the same
may be offered. The matter is respective to travel, and who in that course
this day living is your superior? And by reason of that peerelesnesse, who in
the appurtenances, and circumstances thereof, can give a sounder judgment, or
better censure? And as for the men of service that are at this instant to be
employed under your charge and government what precepts are more convenient
for their negotiation and use? So that although it may seem a fault and error,
that I (as yet unknown) have in this sort pressed upon your self: yet the
love I bear by duty to my country, the care I carry (according to my
standing) to further my countrymen, and the sincere affection (which abounds in
me) toward your intended attempt (which the Lord of Hosts bless and prosper)
may justly excuse me, and move you to accept this poor pains. I confess,
that although my propension was always to endeavor something for the inlargeme^t
of your name and honor, having so well deserved of this commonwealth, and of
every particular thereof, yet I was motioned to remember your self in the
impressio^ of this Method, by my very good and learned friend, M. Richard
Hackluit, a man of incredible devotion toward your self, and of special
carfulness for the good of our Nation: as the world inioying the benefit of
some of his travels can give testimony, and is possible to give better, if
that rare and excellent work which he now plyeth, once come to public view.
In the mean time I record his diligence, and mine own petition to the grand
Captain, and commander of all armies, which is fervent and incessant, for the
happy egresse and victorious success of the expedition present: that the issue
thereof may be, his glory, the propagation of the truth, the confusion of the
enemy, the terror of Antichrist, the comfort of the Church, the honor of our
Prince, the renown of our kingdom, and the immortality of your own name.
London the 24. of January, 1589.

At your devotion and service, Philip Jones.

Ad eundem clarissimum, and fortunatissimum Equitem, D. Franciscum Dracum,
eiusdem Philippi Jones, de conscripto exercitu carmen conscendens.
NVncage, victricis Ductor fortissime classis,
Periuri tremor Hispani, tutela tuorum,
Hactenus indute exuuias, Regisque superbi,
Primitias, manibusque arrepte insignia belli:
Hinc vltra infandi circum scandenda Tyranni
Moenia pressa iugo tollendaque colla cruento,
Pulsus, and antiquas Rex restituendus ad oras.
Non hoc humanis opibus, non art Magistra,
Proueniet factum, neque te tua dextera seruat,
Mayor agit Deus, atque opus ad mirabile mittit,
Mittentique cohors ipsi tua militet omnit,
Militet and patriae, patriaeque parentis honori
Elizabeth: faciles tum velis auguror Euros,
Praesentemque Deum: cursum Deus atque recursum
Tum dabit optatum, reducique extendet amoris
Amplexus natale solum, Elizabetha triumphum:
Nec nostrum interea noctes sic stertere possit
Ingenium, neque tam tranquilla silentia Musae,
Ducere, quin vestra extemplo soluetur in arma,
Resque tuas Epico cantabit carmine gestas.
Perge igitur faelix, tua iustam tela ministrent
Materiem scripti; and quamuis me fata volentem
Dura vetant oculis tua cernere facta, relictis
Insequar ipse tamen votis, pro teque, tuisque
Vt been qui victor de victis hostibus exis
Bis been post victor de victis vrbibus adsis.
Ad P. I. huius opellae (...) T. H. Medicinae Doctoris Hexasticon.
EXiguum precio, nummisque (Philippe) volumen,
Imprimis, at fructu grandius illud erit.
Instruit ad bellum veluti armatura paratos,
Sic proficiscentes haec (...) tua.
Et proficiscenti Comitem hunc commendo Libellum,
Lautior esse potest, nescio an vtilior.
Ad eundem M. B. Oxoniensis aliud Hexasticon.
VIx satis ex multis nostrorum millibus vnus,
Quaerenti quae sint trans mare Regna facit.
Non populi ingenium, mores, Respublica, lingua,
Religio in Cerebrum nec cadit ipsa suum.
Qui cupit huic tandem communi occurrere morbo,
Consilii capiat pharmaca recta tui.
The general sections, or places of this discourse are in number twelve: to
some one whereof, whatsoever particular thing shall be seen, learned, offered,
observed and described in any Region, may very fitly, and orderly be referred.
Viz.
1 COsmographie, or, the description of the world. 2 Astronomy, or, the art
of skill, in the course of the stars and planets. 3 Geographie, or, the
drawing and proportioning of the earth. 4 Chorographie, or, the demonstration
of Cities and Regions. 5 Topographie, or, the protraiture of particular places.
6 Husbandry. 7 Navigations. 8 The Political State. 9 The Ecclesiastical
State. 10 Literature. 11 Histories. 12 Chronicles.
The first Section. Cosmographie, or the description of the world: wherein is
to be noted.
1 THe longitude and latitude of the place, not Geometrically, but by the
degrees. 2 The declination of the pole, and of the loade-stone, from the pole
of the world. 3 The variation of the compass, both of the Mariner, and sun
dials, from the Or South.
Meridionall line. 4 Under what Lines of equal distance in the sphere.
Parallel the place is situated: whether under the Equator, or between the A
circle wherein the sun makes the days and nights of equal length.
Equator and a Tropike, or under one of the Tropikes, or betwixt a Tropike,
and the circle Or northern
Artike: or under the Artike or Or southern opposite to the Artike.
Antartike circle: or betwixt the Articke circle and the pole, or under the pole
it self. 5 Under what climate or portion of the firmament betwixt North and
South. 6 In what Whereof the Astronomers make 5. in the sphere.
Zone, either temperate, or intemperate, cold, or burning. 7 In what
Hemisphere, or half sphere, septentrionall, or southerly. 8 Whether the place
be about us, against us, or under us, as the Antipodes, which are people going
with their feet to ours. 9 The manner of the shadows, or the proportion
betwixt the dial and the shadow. 10 The quantity of the day, and of the
night. 11 The least and greatest lights of the summer So called of Solstitiam
which signifies the stay of the sun when it can go neither higher nor lower.
Solstitiall nights. 12 The rising and the setting of the sun in the
Solstitiall days. 13 The beginnings, and ending, of the morning and evening
twylightes.
The second Section. Astronomy, or the art of skill in the course of the
stars, and planets, wherein is to be observed.
1 THe ascendant The part of the firmament that arises every hour from the
east.
Horoscope. 2 The Medium, or heart of the heaven. 3 The Zenith, or Vertical
star, which is the point of the firmament directly over a man's head,
wheresoever he stands. 4 The Topicall star, or star of the place. 5 The
star Dominant, or the sign of the heaven, which is the degree, or planet
whereunto the place is subject.
The third Section. Geographie, or the drawing and proportioning of the earth:
wherein is to be marked.
1 WHether the place be A midland.
Mediterrane, or the part of a Continent. 2 Whether it be an Istmus, or narrow
part of a country, where two seas do almost meet. 3 Whether it be a Penyle,
and place almost environed with water. 4 Whether it be an Island, little,
indifferent, great, or very great. 5 Whether there be many Islands in number
30. as the Scottish Islands called Orchades, 50. as the Cyclades in the sea
Aegeum, or more, or less. 6 Whether it be in form As England and Sicillia.
trianglewise, or round, or more in length then in breadth, or what other form
it bears. 7 Whether it be among many Islands the chief, or of least
account. 8 Whether it be an Island lying near the continent, or far in the
sea, and remote from the land, and how much. 9 Whether it be bordering upon
the dominion, or dominions of any other prince, or diverse princes. 10 Whether
it be the sea shore of a country, or a place up in the maine land. 11 Whether
it be near any river, arm of the sea, or the Ocean, and maine sea. 12 Whether
it be near to any gulf, haven, creek, or bay. 13 Whether it stand upon a
river, or at the mouth of a river. 14 Whether it be by, near to, far off, or
in the mids of the sands, shoales, rocks, quick sands, or shelues in the
water.
The fourth section. Chorographie, or the demonstration of Regions, and
Cities: wherein is to be regarded.
1 WHether it be a city, town, village, or what else. 2 In what Region,
Kingdom, Dukedom, Erledome, bishoprike, presidentship it stands. 3 Whether
it be like in situation to other cities, towns, villages, houses, etc. 4
Toward what parts of the earth it stretches. 5 The length of the miles, and
distance from place to place. 6 The coasts and borders, with what Regions,
rivers, mountains, or woods, it is compassed, bounded, or separated from other
places. 7 The bigness of it, in comparison of other places: the length,
breadth, compass, and circuit thereof. 8 Whether the place be much, or little
frequented, of travelers and merchants, or else desolate, or almost desolate.
9 Whether it be of any name and fame, for power, wealth, force, multitude of
people or not. 10 The division, parts, shires, provinces, of the region. 11 As
London.
The chief, or mother city, or the place of the prince. 12 As Canterbury and
York.
The Metropolitan cities, or city thereof. 13 The markets, faires, places
of resort, and traffike. 14 The Colonies, or places where people are sent, and
conducted to plant, and dwell. 15 The Cities and towns corporate,
incorporate, free, Receiving wages as towns of garrisons.
stipendarie, confederate. 16 The provinces governed by deputies, vizroyes,
presidents, lieutenants, or other officers, with their number, names, and
situation. 17 The next bordering countries, and regions, of what nature, name,
force, government, and temperature. 18 As Barwike upon our borders.
The towns of war, frontiers, castles, and defenses upon the borders, with
their provisions. 19 Whether the access, ingresse, and coming thereto be
quiet, safe, difficult, or dangerous. 20 The public ways, streets, passages,
ferries, and common trauellings, with the state and quality of them and each
of them.
The fifth Section. Topographie, or the portraiture of particular places,
wherein is to be noted.
1 WHether the city, town, village, or what place else so ever it be, be
built upon the top, or side of a hill, or in a low ground. 2 Whether in a wet
and marrish ground, or in a plain, valley, mountain, hill, or foot of a hill.
3 Whether upon a rock, cape, or promontorie. 4 Whether within the walls there
be any hills, or little hills, or some places higher, and lower then others. 5
The manner, form, and figure of the city or town. 6 To what point, and from
what point it stretches, and looks, from North to South, or from East to
West, or otherwise. 7 The geometrical bigness, breadth, length, and circuit
thereof. 8 The division, parts, parishes, and wards of the city. 9 The ditch,
or ditches that compass it, how broad, and how deep they be. 10 The castles,
trenches, rampires, bulwarks, sconces, forts, towers, blockhouses, and
fortresses thereof. 11 The entrances and gates, how large, long, broad, high,
their names, number and standing, with their distance also. 12 The walls, of
what matter built, stone, or timber, of what compass, height, or thickness,
state and reparation, strong and fair, or ruinous. 13 Whether the walls be
furnished with artilerie, ordinance, and watch, yea or no. 14 The streets of
the city, the length, breadth, and beauty of them, and how many of the city
are of greatest account, use, and concourse, with their names. 15 The pipes,
wels, and conducts of water, how many, in what places, of what plenty and
abundance of water: wherehence it comes, how far it is fet, be whether by
pypes of lead, or otherwise. 16 The bridge, or bridges, with their length,
making, buildings, and whether they are in the time of war to drawn, yea or
no. 17 The windmils, and watermils serving the city. 18 The general
buildings of the city, or country, their situation, greatness, manner,
form, shape, beauty, elegancie, ornaments, prospects, courts, entries, hals,
parlers, chambers, nurseries, kitchins, cellers, barnes, stables, private wels,
and conduits, and other Pertaining to the order and government of a house.
oeconomicall necessaries. 19 Public houses: as Market places, shambles,
almes-houses, hospitals, storehouses, theaters, laborinths, hals of Companies,
guildhals, burses, or places for the meeting of merchants, places of justice,
judgment, punishment, correction, execution, signs of special use, pillars,
rases, spyres, crosses, and other such like common ornaments. 20 The buildings
of colleges, libraries, schools, and universities, with their form, beauty,
statelines, contriuings, number, and situation. 21 Temples, churches,
cathedral churches, with their names, bigness, and furniture: as pictures,
images, (if any) altars, Idolatries, organs, dials, clocks, bells, chimes,
towers, steeples, etc. 22 Monasteries, abbeys, pryories, nunneries, oratories,
chapels, etc. 23 Courts of the law, common and civil, as Consistories. 24
Armories of the Prince, subjects, noble men, special Cities and towns. 25
The chiefest houses, and dwelling places of nobility, bishops, and gentlemen.
26 The houses and palaces of the Prince: with their names, beutie, matter, and
manner of building, situation, offices, gardens, orchards, walks, tilts,
parks, ponds, special rooms, and other royal commodities, and appurtenances.
The sixth Section. Husbandry: wherein is to be observed.
1 THe usual natures and times of the spring, summer, Autumn, and winter, in
that region. 2 The winds proper, and peculiar to that place. 3 The chiefest
places, and dwellings of health, free and safe, from unwholesome aires, and ill
winds. 4 The quality of the air in general, with the temperature,
commodity, and salubritie. 5 Whether the people live long, and come commonly
to good ages, or else die in their youth, or riper years yea or no. 6 The
beauty, plesantnesse, fertility, barrenness, of the region, soil, grounds,
fields, etc. 7 Whether the land be plain, hilly, rough, uneven, full, or
scant, or reasonably furnished with woods, waters, and rivers. 8 The quality
and nature of the ground, whether it be moist, dry, moorish, fennie, clayish,
myerie, cloddie, sandy, grauelly, stony, and plentiful or scarce of
necessary stone for building, cole pits, etc. 9 The tillage, and manuring of
the soil, and fields, how much it is, after what sort they labor and till
them, what grain or grains they sow, and how it yields. 10 The natural
goodness of the soil, the harvest and increase of all sorts of fruits. 11 The
quantity of grass and hay, that the meddowes commonly yield. 12 The gardens,
sorts of herbs, flowers, arbors, knots, mounts, and places of delight. 13 The
Orchards, sorts of trees, apples, pears, plumbs, berries, spices, oringes,
limmons, figs, and other fruits, with their quantities and increase. 14 The
medicinable herbs, and Apothecarie drugs. 15 The vines, vineyards, and sorts
of wine, and drinks. 16 The woods, what kind of trees be most frequent and
abundant, whether like or unlike to the trees of other countries in nature,
growth, and height. 17 Whether the woods yield trees to mast ships, yea or
no, and what ships of burden they may serve. 18 The hills with their names,
number* greatness, distance, situation, height, nature and form: whether having
any standing waters on the tops, any springs in their sides, any metals in the
bowels of them* whether inhabited, or desolate, and frequented of wild beasts:
whether apt for the pastime of hunting: whether holow, with caves and dens, yea
or no: and all other prodigious, and memorable things of them, that are
known, and visible. 19 Standing waters, pooles, lakes, ponds, rivers, ditches,
boggs, and qua^emires. 20 The springs and heads of rivers, with their fish:
which way they run: what other rivers or seas they fall into: what towns,
cities, and villages they run by: of what breadth and depth: where nauigable,
and where not, and how far. 21 How many bridges they run thorough, what,
and how many milles they drive, what special uses they serve to, in those
places, cities and towns, by which they run: what variety, abundance, or
scarsitie of fish is in them, and how far up they do ebb and flow. 22 The
quality of the water, whether sweet, salt, bitter, brackish, clear,
wholesome, running by any mines or metals, yea or no. 23 Bathes of whot water,
the number, original, cause, quality, force, and operation of them. 24
Salines, or places of making of salt, the cause, number, kinds, and manner of
preparing them. 25 Minerals, mines, quarries of metal, their kinds, multitude,
place, and increase. 26 Precious stones, as pearls, diamonds, rubies,
saphires, corals, and turkyes: whether these or any of these grow there yea or
no. 27 Birds and fowls, their names, bigness, qualities, course, increase, and
multitude. 28 Fishes both of sea, and fresh rivers, with their kinds and
abundance. 29 Noisome and hurtful beasts, as serpents, Adders, vipers,
basiliskes, wolves, tigers, bears, and others of wild natures, with the woods
and places of their breed and haunte. 30 Poisons, with the remedies, and
preservatives against them there known, and used. 31 Parks, cunnigers,
berries, warrens, their largeness, fruitfulness, game, situation,
pleasantness, and to whom they belong. 32 Flocks, and herds of sheep, kine,
oxen, swine, goats, with their common grounds, and meadows of pasture. 33 All
other commodities of the place that are known, either agreeing, or not
agreeing with other countries and regions, and whatsoever else that place has,
strange, new, notable, and commodious.
The seventh Section. Navigations: wherein it is to be observed.
1 THe widnesse, and greatness, of the seas or rivers you pass. 2 The depth,
whether nauigable yea, or no, and for what ships of burden. 3 The state and
quality of the water, whether salt, clear, thick, and troubled. 4 The color,
whether green or Azure, etc. 5 The sand, color, and quantity thereof. 6 The
shallowes, fords, and places of least depth. 7 The quick sands and dangerous
places of sand, and gravel, how many, after what sort they lie, and how they
may be avoided. 8 The hidden rocks of the sea that are known, their place and
danger. 9 The narrow and difficult passages, like unto those rocks called
Scyronia, between Attica, and Megaris, or the Symplegades in the Greekish sea.
10 Streights, and narrow seas, as Gibaltar, and the straights of Magellan. 11
Famous and high rocks, used for notes and marks to the mariners. 12 Places of
toule, and custom, as the sound of Denmark. 13 Promontories, capes, and
heads of lands, with their names, and cause or original of such names. 14
Wracks on the sea, drownings of men, ships, goods, with the value, time,
cause, and occasion of the wracks. 15 Commodious creekes, bays, harbors, and
docks. 16 Ports, and havens, their largeness, narrowness, and depth: what
towns, and cities they serve to: what winds are commodious to arrive at them:
whether it be an open haven, or barred, and fortified, and how strong by
nature, or art, with garrisons, castles, artillery, etc. 17 What store of
shipping lie ordinarily in the haven, and frequent the same most usually. 18
The safest, and most commodious rodes for riding, and anchoring of ships. 19
The landing places, stairs, wharfes, serving to the sea, and haven. 20 The
common passages, by botes, whirries, ferries, and the breadth, and depth of
them. 21 Swift streams, whirlepooles, gulphes, and ouerfals of water. 22 The
rising, and swelling of the water, the ebbing and flowing of the tides, the
times, quantity, and manner. 23 The shipping of the place, of what number,
bigness, force, burden, manner of making, quality, and swiftness for
sailing. 24 Whether the people, and nation has made or do intend any long
voyages, or discoueries: to what places, and what number of ships and men
they carry, and what commodities are brought from such places. 25 The navy of
the king or prince; his ships, their names, number, burden, strength,
artillery, and employment. 26 The multitude or scarsitie, of Pylots,
Shipwrightes, Shipmasters, Mariners, and others skillful in marine causes. 27
What men of skill in the art of navigations, and composition of sea cards, and
other instruments are there famous. 28 What course and order they take, for
the making and breeding of skillful and expert Pylots, and mariners. 29 What
Officers and persons of name belong to the princes Navy; as the Admiral,
Viceadmirall, Treasurer, Captains, etc. and other men of principal charge,
with their knowledge, diligence, and stipendes. 30 What number of ships every
city, port town and haven is able to make, and of what burden and force
either for war, or merchandise.
The eight Section. The political state, wherein is to be marked.
1 THe form of government, whether it be a Monarchy, that is the Soueraintie
of one person alone, as in England, France, Spain, Scotland, etc. or an
Aristocratie, that is, the government of the better sort, as of old in Athens
and Lacedemon, and now in Venice, and Genes: or a Democrati^, that is, a
popular Regiment, as among the Cantons of Zwitzerland: or whether their
contraries be in use, as either a tyranny, as that of the great Turk, or an
Oligarchie, which is, the authority of a few noble or rich men, or an
Octogarchie, which is a tumultuous, and disordered confusion, swaying without
reason and law: or whether the government and common wealth be mixed, and
compounded of the first 3. and so made both Royal, Aristocraticall and popular
as in old in Rome and Carthage, and is now also somewhat represented in the
state of Venice. 2 Whether the kingdom be elective, as of old the dictatorship
of Rome, and in these days the Empire, the kingdoms of Polonia, Bohemia,
Hungaria, Thunes Denmark, the dukedom of Venice, the popedom and the great
Mastership of Malta, or else successiue, and hereditarie, as in England,
France, etc. 3 What manner of law the place is governed by, civil or common:
and whether the laws are made and corrected, according to the condition, and
circumstance of times, (as our statutes of parliament) or such as may not be
changed, as the Salike law in France, and the laws of the Crown in England.
4 How the cities and towns are governed, by what officers* of what names,
state, number, continuance in office, and manner of election. 5 The multitude
of the people, wherein consists much of the strength of the Realm. 6 The
speech, and language of the country, with the manner of pronunciation, and the
rules thereof. 7 Proper names of men and women, differing from those that are
common in other places. 8 The fare and diet of the region, their manner and
kinds of meat, drink, ale, bear, with the order of making and dressing
peculiar to that people. 9 The habites and apparel of men, women, wives,
maidens, citizens, countrymen, Courtyers, noblemen, officers, Magistrates,
Gentlemen, Merchants, Ministers, etc. 10 The wits, and conceits of the people,
whether quick, and sharp, or blunt and heavy. 11 The industry, studies,
manners, honesty, humanity, hospitality, love, and other moral virtues of
the Inhabitants, and wherein they chiefly exce^^. 12 The special manuarie
artificers, and handicraftes of the place of greatest perfection. 13 The
annual fayres and markets, where they are kept, and how often, and what
commodities do there principally abound, with the prises of each good
commodity. 14 The money and coin, with the value, bigness, stamp, and
metal, either gold, silver, or copper. 15 The waightes and measures, both in
dry wares, and liquid matters, with their names: whether yardes, el^es,
quartes, gallons, bushels, quarters, hundreds, etc. and whether they be less
or greater than ours, or of the same quantity. 16 What offenses are there most
common, and most punished, or tolerated. 17 The kinds and varieties of
punishments for malefactors. 18 The prerogatives and privileges of special
cities, towns, ports, and havens. 19 The subsidies, toules, impostes,
customs, due, and paid to the prince. 20 The disposition and spirit of the
people: whether warlike and valiant, or faint hearted and effeminate: their
store or want of military furniture, and provisions: whether they, or their
Ancestors have been famous for victories, or infamous for cowardlinesse and
overthrows, yea or no. 21 How the king or prince is allied with his neighbor
Princes, and who are his confederates, and who not. 22 The manners, rites, and
ceremonies of Espowsals, marriages, feasts and bankets. 23 The variety and
manner of their exercises for pastime and recreation. 24 The rites,
solemnities, and pompes, of common and noble funerals and burials.
The ninth Section. The state Ecclesiastical, wherein is to be respected.
1 THe religion, whether true, and reformed, or the Romish and superstitious. 2
The preaching, prayers, and other holy exercises, in what language, how often,
and with what devotion they be used. 3 The discipline and church government,
whether good, reasonable, or corrupt. 4 The superstitions, and poperies in what
sort, and degree, whether it be main Idolatry, and abominable yea or no. 5
The holy days and festival times there observed. 6 The Ceremonies used or
left in the ministry and Sacraments. 7 The doctrine, articles, opinions, held
and taught agreeable or contrary to other Churches. 8 The greatness or
smalnesse of auditories, assemblies, and concurse to sermons. 9 The Ministers,
Divines, Preachers, and Clergy men, of greatest pains, account, learning,
judgment, languages, tongues, and virtuous lives, with their names degrees,
charges, offices, and dwelling places. 10 The times of public fasting, alms
giving, of going on pilgrimage, if the place be superstitious. 11 The
Archbishops, and Bishops, with their sees and Churches, and Diocesses:
Deanes, Abbats, Priors, Moonkes, Priests, and other orders, with their names,
stipends, offices, revenues, and hospitalities. 12 The Heretics if any spring
up, with their names and errors, absurdities, false opinions, and punishments
for the same. 13 The stipendes of Preachers, Pastors, Ministers, how large,
how small, and how collected in tithes or otherwise. 14 The number of Churches,
and congregations in every city and town, whereby the populousnes may be
known. 15 The special benefactors to the ministry, with their liberalities,
gifts, pencions, exhibitions, and other Christian works, the fruits of faith.
16 The greatest, famous, and most ordinary preaching places. 17 The number of
godly preachers, and ministers in the greatest cities.
The tenth Section. Literature wherein is to be noted.
1 THe Charecters, and letters of the Alphabet, in that place, both printed and
written: whether different or not from the form and fashion of letters used
among other nations. 2 The faculty of imprinting, of what estimation, of what
exactnes, and perfection: the number of Printers and Stationers, the names of
the men of greatest learning and diligence in that quality. 3 The common, or
private libraries of any account, with the most ancient, and rare books there
preserved. 4 The monumentes and antiquities of famous and learned men. 5 The
names, places, and times of birth, education, and death of such men as have
been most renowned for virtue, knowledge, learning and judgment, of that
nation. 6 Ancient Epitaphs, and inscriptions, cut, graven, carved, or painted
upon tombs, pil^ers, gates, Churches, and other buildings. 7 Ancient coins,
as those of the Romans, or others, with their stamp, sign, posies, and
sentences. 8 Ancient or late monuments, churches, tombs, pictures, pillars, and
dyals, of rare and exquisite workmanship, with the workmen and authors, at
whose charge they were erected. 9 Ingenious epigrams, sonets, epitaphs,
orations, poems, speeches, verses, adages, proverbs, and other scholasticall
and learned exercises, the fruits of good wits. 10 Musical instruments
public and private, with their inventions, varieties, names sweetness of
harmony, and first authors. 11 Instruments of special art, and use in
Geometry, Astronomy, the Mathematikes, and handicraftes. 12 Excellent, and
rare artificers, in arts and faculties, as ingrauers, painters, builders,
lapidaries, guilders, etc. 13 Universities, with their manner of government,
number of Colleges, multitude of students, commodities, situation, antiquity,
and privileges. 14 The manner and kinds of studies, in the liberal arts. 15
Their public and private lectures, discipline, wits, degrees, rewards, and
preferments. 16 Public schools, schoolemasters, teachers, readers, lecturers,
professors, governors of Colleges, with their names, stipends, diligence in
government, and other good parts. 17 Men of special learning at this time,
in Divinity, Philosophy, Arithmetike, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology,
Music, Poetry, Grammar, Hebrew, Greek, Rhethorike, law, physic, and
histories. 18 Antiquaries, that is men excellently seen in antiquities and
ancient monuments, both of the Church, and kingdom.
The eleventh Section. Histories: wherein is to be searched.
1 THe Antiquity, and original of the city, town, and kingdom, when it
was first erected, first built, with the parts, portions, and chiefest places
thereof. 2 The conversion of the nation to christianity, when, how, and by
whom. 3 The first builders, and founders of cities, towns, churches, palaces,
and other public and notable edifices. 4 The ancient names and appellations of
the kingdom, city, people etc. with the etimologie, reason and cause of such
names. 5 The arms of the kingdom, prince, noble men, and chief cities, with
the signification thereof. 6 The first inhabitants of the Region, wherehence
they came, when, and by what means. 7 The most ancient families, and houses of
noble men, and Gentlemen. 8 The fortitude, magnanimity, behavior, discipline,
disposition, wealth, and fame of the ancient nobility. 9 The affinities old and
late, alliances, and intermariages of honorable personages and families, at
home or abroad. 10 The wars of their ancesters, and what acts and exploits
worthy of honor, and remembrance have been done by them. 11 The Prince now
living, his counsel, what they are, how many, how descended, their personages,
education, experience, wisdom, liberality, and other honorable virtues. 12
The royal line of the Prince, his progenitors, grandfather, father, their
virtues, his correspondence, and princely parts in all respects. 13 The
chiefest men of policy, and good government, both in court and city, for
peace, war, and all occurrences.
The twelfth Section. Chronicles, wherein is to be learned.
1 THe wars of that nation both of old, and of late, when they were, where,
against whom, and with what success, of victory, or dishonor, waged, and
held. 2 The diversity of seditions, rebellions, conspiracies, insurrections,
and tumultes that have risen in that country: with their pacifications, and
conclusions of peace, for what time, and upon what occasion. 3 The strange and
memorable events, that have happened in, and upon the actions of great and
noble me^. 4 The birthes of monsters, where, when, of what parents, with the
consequences thereof. 5 Prodigious signs, and apparitions in the air. 6
Comets, blasing stars, great and extraordinary eclypses, and what they
wrought. 7 Great frosts, deep snowes, thick and monstrous yse, cold winters,
with the dangers and inconveniences of each of them. 8 Hot, and burning
summers, with the discommodities there hence arising. 9 Lightnings and
thunders, how terrible, strange, and perilous, and how common in those
places. 10 Mischiefs, losses, and detriments by accidents of fire in cities,
towns, villages, and houses. 11 The storms and tempests that have bin
horrible, outrageous, and fearful, with their effects. 12 Inundations,
deluges, ouerflowings, breakings in of the sea, where, when, by what chance,
occasion, or negligence, and how much ground have been lost, and harms done by
that means. 13 Earthquakes, and their consequences. 14 Dearthes, famines, and
extremities for want of corn and grain, how long the scarsitie endured, when
it ended, and how it was remedied. 15 Sicknesses, and pestilences, that have
happened in any country, city, or town: the beginning and cause of them,
their continuance, end, and mortality of the people. 16 Notable pyracies, and
pirates, with the indemnities, and losses, received by travelers, and
merchants. 17 Egregious theeueries, and robberies, with the judgment of God
and the law upon such persons. 18 Infamous conspirators, and traitors, with
their names, treasons, and executions. 19 The horrible and just ends of
malefactors. 20 Sudden deaths of great personages. 21 Messages, entreaties,
gratulations, and condolements sent to foreign Princes. 22 The arriuals,
feastings, lodgings, and other royal intertainements of Ambassadors, with the
time of their abode, cause of coming, and dispatch of business. 23 The
occasions of ia^res, and discontentments betwixt the Prince, and other
Potentates, 24 The perpetual care of the Prince to withstand all the
policies, inventions, invasions, violences, hostilities and indignities of
other Princes, his or her enemies, and to preserve the realm, and people in
peace, tranquillity, security, and prosperity.
The opinion of Abrahamus Ortelius, the notable Geographer, concerning the use
of notes and observations in travel, written by himself in his Itinerarium
Belgiae.
PEregrinationes nostrae futurae nobis erunt long gratiores, si vna cum
itineribus animaduertamus, and annotemus in chartis, si quid obseruatione
dignum occurrerit, non quod speremus posse a nobis ex locis visis annotari quod
non omnibus est iam notum, sed quidlibet potius commentari, quam in toto
itinere esse otiosi: tum quod hac ratione, quae semel vidimus, securius
memoriae mandentur, and cum Regiones illas cessaueremus perlustrare, iuuabit
easdem quotiescunque libuer^t nobiscum Domi, atque adeo sine itineris molestia
recognoscere.

In English thus.

IF in our peregrinations and travels, we shall observe and note in our tables,
or papers those things which do occur and seem worthy of regard, we shall
make our iournies and voyages in great measure, pleasant and delectable unto
us: not thinking that our diligence can search and mark any thing in any place,
which other men before us have not seen, but to discourse and record any
thing, rather then to pass the way, and spend the ^ime in idleness: and with
all by this means, this commodity is reaped, that whatsoever the eye sees,
is the easier and the better remembered, if it be once written. And when the
time comes, that we make an end of our travels, and personal view of foreign
parts, it will be a singular pleasure unto us, whenever we are so disposed
to recognize, and recount those things which we have seen, quietly and in our
chambers, without any trouble of journey, or toil of body.

FINIS.

