THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S ASSVRING HOUSE. AND A SINNERS Conversion. TWO SERMONS; The
former, preached, before the Prince his Highness at St. James: The other to
his Majesty's Household at Whitehall, on Sunday the 6. of February

By GEORGE MERITON Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Peterborough.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Ralfe Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1614.

TO THE PRINCE HIS MOST excellent Highness.
Most noble Prince.
IT pleased your Highness, to hear this Sermon with patience, and afterward
to command it at my hands: which I offer unto you (as David's servants did their
gifts for the Temple) 1. Chron. 19.9.
with a good heart willingly. It is an incomparable comfort to all true
professors (in the number of whom J desire to be accounted) that your Grace at
these years is so religiously disposed. The God of mercy fill you more and
more with his blessings, that it may be said of Prince CHARLES, as was spoken
of our greatest Master Christ, ( And the child increased in wisdom and stature
and in favor with God and man.) Luke 2.52.


By him that serves your Highness with his earnest prayer to God for your
happiness, George Meriton.

THE TEXT.
2. PETER 1.10. Wherefore Brethren the rather give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE office of a Minister (says Tertullian) consists, in the performance of
three special duties: tingere, offerre, docere. And answerable unto these, are
there as many places appointed in the Church for his attendance: the Font, the
Altar, the Pulpit. The Font for dipping or baptizing; the Altar for offering:
the Pulpit for teaching. In Christ's commission ( Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them etc.) Math. 28.19.
Teaching, has the first place. And as it is chiefest in commission, so among
all points of Divinity, that can be taught, there is no One of greater moment,
than to be acquainted with the counsel of God, concerning our salvation. What
can be more comfortable, than Paul's ( Certus sum) Romans 8.38.
I am well assured? what sweeter news, than to hear that it is our Fathers
pleasure to give us a kingdom? what more acceptable, than to know that we are
the chosen of God? Chosen (infallibly) to be saved? Translated from death to
life? Never to be snatched out of the hands of Christ? This high point of
Religion, so comfortable, so sweet, so acceptable, I am now about to deliver.
My text craves your diligence, not only in the reading: but much more your
best endeavor, in laboring for the same. ( Give rather diligence ( Brethren)
to make your calling and election sure.) It is S. Peter's advise, to the
dispersed Jews, who were now become Christians and had obtained like precious
faith with others. 2. Pet. 1.1.
The words have dependence ( wherefore) and the Context is this: In the verses
before, he exhorts them to the practice of excellent virtues, which would
adorn their profession: as, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly kindness, Charity, and such like: verse. 5.6.7.
if these (says he) abound in you, you shall neither be idle, nor unfruitful,
nor blind, as men which cannot see, or (at least) not remember that they are
purged from their sins. 2. Pet. 8.9.
To be ( idle) nihil agentes, doing nothing, is the root of evil: To be (
unfruitful) aliud agentes, doing things impertinent, is the note of folly: To
be ( blind and in darkness) male agentes, committing wickedness, is the
mother of mischief. He that stands, let him take heed that he does not fall.
Brethren, you have not thus learned Christ: such carriage befits not Conuerts:
wherefore the ( rather) give diligence, to make your calling and election sure.
Hetc nobis apponuntur, nobis proponuntur, (says S. Bernard) these things are
written for our learning. St. Peter's good counsel has been rejected by the
Jews, and they are fallen; the destruction of them should be instruction to
us. Wherefore suppose (I pray you) that our Apostle were now turning himself
unto the Gentiles, and were ( thus) speaking to you: Brethren it is enough,
that hitherto you have misspent the time: some in ( idleness) shorting in
summer like sons of confusion: Prou. 10.
some in ( vanities) which is the travel of fools: Eccles. 10.
some in ( sin) which is the service of the Devil. It is enough, that you
have wearied your bodies, troubled your wits, broken your sleeps, in the
pursuit of the world: some setting nets for commodities, as the Spider does his
web to catch a Fly: some striving for honors, still building upwards, as if
Nimrods Tower were now too low: some wallowing in pleasures, as if they would
lie deeper and longer with the swine in the mire. My brethren, what profit can
be in those things, whereof ye are, or may be, or shall be ashamed? The Jews
are fallen, wherefore do you ( Gentiles) first seek the kingdom of God.

Give diligence rather to make your calling and election sure. The parts of the
Text are two: 1. A motive. 2. A duty.


The Motive, in this word ( Brethren.) The Duty in the rest: And first of the
Motive ( Brethren.)


There are Brethren by 1 Humanity. 2 Country. 3 Affinity. 4 Consanguinitie. 5
Christianity.


1 For the first: God will require the life of a man at the hands of his
brother. Genesis 9.5.
2 For the second: Paul desires to be separate from Christ for the Israelites
his brethren. Romans 9.3.
3 For the third: Abraham said to Lot his nephew, Let there be no strife
between me and thee, for we are brethren. Genesis 13.8.
4 For the fourth: Children of the whole or half parents, as Jacob and Esau,
Andrew and Peter, the 12. Patriarchs were Brethren. 5 For the fifth: One is your
master (Christ) and all ye are Brethren. Math. 23.8.



Brother is a name of much love, and it moves howsoever it be taken. One (
Man) is not borne a wolf unto another, but so made by custom: though we are
dispersed upon the face of the earth, yet are we framed out of the same moulde.
(The slime of the earth is our common Mother) we are formed with the same
stamp. (A reasonable soul is our common character) we have one Author from
whence we all come ( God who is our common Father.) Non taliter fecit omni
Creatura. It is not so with the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field,
the fishes of the sea. Only one Man was created, from whom all should proceed,
that a strength of Brotherhood might be amongst all. And if S. Peter had been
pleased, to have pressed the word ( Brethren) in this large sense, and had
advised the Jews, even by their common humanity, to make their calling and
election sure: his motive were not to be despised.

Our ( Country) wherein we have our being and breathing, which susteineth,
feeds, ministers content unto us: wherein we worship one God, obey one King:
where our stock and lineage does remain: and where are many monuments of our
ancient predecessors: omnes in se charitates complexa est (says the Orator)
has such strong motives to affect us, as Ulysses is reported (in Homer) to
prefer the smoke of his country before the immortality of the gods. If then
our Apostle had said in plain terms, ( Countrymen) I exhort you, even by the
name of ( Iewry) our promised land, where you have once pleasantly lived, and
wherein our father Abraham and his posterity lie buried: by all the sweetness
that our Country has afforded you, I exhort you, to make your calling and
election sure; the strength of his motive, were already much increased.

( Kindred) is yet a further and faster bond, and so reputed both by the law
of God and man; the very name whereof possesses many with so grateful
delight, as that they are ready to claim it of those, who are many degrees
removed.

( Natural Brotherhood) goes beyond the rest, in so much as nothing is deemed
more odious, then that those who are conjoined in blood, should be disioyned in
affection.

But if the names of ( Affinity and consanguinitie) have ability and force to
plead, most of all ( Christianity) which binds men together in the
straightest conjunction, having one God for our Father: one Church for our
Mother: one Christ for our elder Brother: being all begotten by the same
immortal seed, washed by the lauar of one new birth, conglutinate by the
sinnowes of the same faith: nourished by the milk of the same word: having all
the same hope of immortality in the world to come. The name of this (
Brotherhood) is (says S. Basil) like a precious ointment, which sweetneth by a
pleasing perfume the whole Church of God, and by so much is it the more
forcible, by how much Grace is a stronger bond then ( Nature.) That of (
Nature) represents the similitude of bodies: but this of ( Grace) the
agreement of minds. And hence it comes that there is no passionate lover
will endure more for his best Beloved, than one true Christian brother will
adventure for another. A Lover (as they say) is tried by these three things:
Hercules for the love of Omphale.) Jacob for the love of Rachel.) Sampson for
the love of Dalilah.) And such are the affections of Christians one to another.
They are content to suffer, pro fratribus, a fratribus, propter fratres; They
will endure, for their good: Bear, for their sakes: put up, at their hands.
And why will they do this, but because they are Brethren? If then Nature be
able to move, much more grace: If our Country, much more our Religion: If
affinity, much more the fellowship of Gods spirit: If the name of Brother, in
every sense be forceable, then out of doubt in a Christian signification it is
exceeding strong. Here is then the wisdom of our Apostle S. Peter, who to
persuade a matter of maine importance, is not content to express his
affection, in a vulgar term; he calls upon the Jews, not by the name of
Men, of Kinsmen, of Countrymen, etc. but as if such words had been but tokens
of an estraunged mind, he tells them of their adoption which they had in
Christ: calls to their minds that inviolable knot of love, wherewith all of
them, as members (by the spirit of Love) were joined unto Christ their head.
And the rather to prevail, he saluteth them by the name of Brethren in the
sweetest (that is in the Christian) sense. Wherefore my Brethren. This is
likewise the practice of S. Paul ( I beseech you Brethren.) Romans 12.1.
And in his Epistle to Philemon ( Brother refresh my bowels.) 2. verse. Phile.


Now these Apostles beloved (me thinks) prescribes a method unto Ministers of a
loving behavior toward the flock of Christ. It is fit (I confess) sometimes
to use sharp reprehension, to fling firebrands, to denounce judgments: where
sin is red and rank ( Bonarges) a son of Thunder is more requisite then (
Barnabas) the son of consolation: yet suspendite verbera, producite vbera
(says S. Bernard) hearers may not be commonly gauled or goared. It is a point
of high skill to catch a soul by craft. (...) (says S. Paul.) Brethren if a
man be overtaken by any sin (restore him) or as the word imports put him
into joint. Bones out of joint must not be boisterouslie touched: That Surgion
deserves praise who lightly presses the wound, and handles it cleuerlie,
with the tops of his fingers: not he that rudely thrusts in his fist. Manna
is pleasant unto many, which cannot patiently abide the rod of Aaron: Mildness
has bent where severity could not break: The horseleach by gentle sucking
draws more blood, then the Gnat does by her fierce biting. He that will
cleanse a glass must not rub it too hard, least in laboring to cleanse it, he
breaks it in pieces. Such as seek to persuade by sharpness, Quos volunt
correctiores faciunt plerumque deteriores (says S. Austin) they cleanse not,
but break the glass: they pinche, but they draw no blood: there actions
without skill, comes oftimes to ends without profit. Away then with rough and
boisterous carriage: though thou were as good, and as great as S. Peter, yet it
best beseems thee to support with mildness: to strengthen with gentleness:
to instruct with meekness: to imitate S. Peter, who carries Balm in his
mouth, sauoureth of the sweetest ointment: and stricking out the teeth of his
words (least in biting the Jews he might chance to grieve them) to express
his love, and win them to his purpose he calls them ( Brethren) wherefore
brethren (thus much of the motive) now to the duty.

Give diligence rather to make your Calling and Election sure. Every duty
must be known, and done. First we must know it, then do it: God wills his
people first to teach their children the law (there is to know it) and then to
see them keep it (there is to do it.) These two words in my Text (calling and
Election) stand for instruction to inform; the other serve for action to
reform. Deuteronomy. 4.
Calling has precedence, not because it is first in Gods counsel, but for
that it has priority in man's conceiving. The former being (indeed) the
execution of the latter. And the order of standing in the Text, prescribes unto
us a rule of searching: first to look to our calling then to our Election.
Calling (to begin as the Text does guide me) is a work of God in Christ by the
Spirit, whereby we are translated from darkness to light: from nature to
grace: from the kingdom of Satan, to the Church of God. The absolute Lord of
all creatures is God alone, and therefore has he power, to call into his own
kingdom both when and whom he will. It is God alone that calls the things
that are not, as though they were (as S. Paul speaks.) Romans 4.17.
And albeit those are said to be called, who any ways do answer their calling,
or yield obedience thereunto: (whereof some do it in external profession, some
in heart, some in both) yet is calling first of all and principally directed to
such as are elect. It pertains to others as mixed in their society. And hence
arises a distinction of calling. Sometimes it is operative, when God works
his will as well as reueales it. Sometimes only significatiue, when God opens
his mind unto men, but for just causes best known to himself, spares to work
it in them. In the calling of God which is operative and effectual, there is a
double act: Inuitation and admission. Inuitement is, when God offers eternal
life, outwardly by the preaching of the Gospel, and inwardly by the
inspiration of heavenly desires. Admission is, when we are actually removed
from nature to grace: taken out of the first Adam, and by faith ingrafted into
Christ the second: for hereby are we made the real members of the kingdom of
God: And this is that calling which we are to make sure.

Election is a decree of God, in which according to the good pleasure of his
will, he has chosen some, to everlasting life in Christ their Savior. First
(Isay) it is Gods decree: for there is nothing in the world, which comes to
pass either in the whole or in the parts, without the eternal and
unchangeable decree of God. And therefore whereas some are actually saved,
others rejected, it is not for that their luck and fortune was better, but
because God before all worlds did purpose and ordain the same. Secondly, this
decree is according to the good pleasure of his will, for the impulsive cause
which moved him thereunto, was not the foresight of faith and good works (for
these are the fruits of Gods election) He has chosen us that we might be holy:
Ephesians. 1.4.
but his love: his will: his good pleasure. We are predestinate according to
the good pleasure of God (says S. Paul) Ephesians. 1.5.
And where as man first chooses, then loves, according to that of the Poet.
Primum quod amare velis, reperire labora; it is otherwise with God, who first
loves, then electeth. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Romans
8.18.
First there is his will, then follows mercy: Thirdly his choice is but of
some to everlasting life: The number of the elect in the judgment of charity
is great, even all that are called; for our Apostle speaking to all the Jews
which were called, bids them make your election sure: The number of the elect
in the judgment of verity, is small; Many are called, but few are chosen.
Consider them in themselves and they are innumerable: Mundum redemit de mundo
(says S. Austin) he has redeemed a world out of the world: consider them with
others and they are but a handful even as gleanings after a harvest (as the
Prophet speaks.) All men are by nature the children of wrath: John 15.19.
Out of these has God chosen some: he that takes all cannot be said to
choose. And therefore saving grace is no universal respect, unless we make
the stream more large than the fountain. Fourthly, his choice is in Christ
our Savior. Ephesians. 1.4.
The foundation of Gods election is Christ Jesus alone. We are chosen to
salvation (not for Christ) but in Christ. As he is God, we are chosen of him:
as he is mediator we are chosen in him. And this is our election which we must
make sure. We know the matter of our duty, let us go on to practice: And for
our better proceeding, there are four questions to be discussed.

Questions 1 Why: 2 Whether: 3 What: 4 How:


Why.
Why should we be diligent to make our Calling and Election sure? Are they not
sure of themselves? Are not those who are indeed called and chosen, without
fail to attain Everlasting life? Paul takes it for a Conclusion, that the
purpose of God according to Election must remain sure, Romans 9.11.
and that the Calling of God is without repentance: Romans 11.29.
I am (says God) Exodus 3.
not will be. For Nouitas initium testificatur, I am; not has been; for
Vetustas finem comminatur (as Tertullian speaks) I am: neither will be: nor
has been, but (as S. Austin says) Aeterna veritas and vera aternitas, an
eternal truth and a true eternity. Now as the Nature of God is immutable, so
are his wills and counsels. The strength of Israel is not as Man that he should
repent: 1. Sam. 15.
he altreth not by Consent, and who has resisted his will (says S. Paul.)
Romans 9.19.
He changes not by Constraint, why should we then make our Calling and
Election sure? Calling and Election have a double consideration: as they are in
God, as they are in Man. In God, they are sure; In Man; they must be made sure.
I know my Sheep (says Christ) Ioh. 10.14.
there is Calling and Election in respect of God. Thus are they sure (And I am
known of mine) Here is Calling and Election in respect of Man, thus are they
made sure. They must then be made sure, not in Gods counsel, but in man's
conscience.

Whether.
But can this assuranre be made? The indisposition of our Nature is such, our
hidden and and secret sins so many: as a man would think, there should ever
remain a scruple in the Soul. Yet it is confessed at all hands: ( The Church
of Rome denies it not) but that assurance may be made. It were in vain for S.
Peter to exhort us to give diligence to make them sure, if they could not be
assured. Prove your selue, (says S. Paul) 2. Cor. 13.
whether you be in the faith or not. He takes it for granted, that he that
has faith, may know he has it: and therefore by consequent, that he may be
assured of his Calling and Election: because a saving faith is an undoubted
mark of both. Rejoice (says Christ) to his Disciples, Luk 10.20.
that your names are written in heaven. To rejoice in things unknown: we
cannor: to joy our selves in things uncertain, is but an induction of grief:
Doubtful presumptions, prove certain confusions. We may assure our selves
then, that they may be assured.

What.
I but what kind of Assurance are we to seek after? here stands the diffe^ence
betwixt Rome and us, for howsoever we cannot look for such a one (but that
which sometimes may be joined with doubting) especially when temptations shall
lay hold upon us: yet (say they) it is to be had by extraordinary Revelation:
we, by ordinary means. They say: that it can be but probable. We, that it may
be infallible. Theirs comes from hope: which makes but Goniecture. Ours from
faith: which gives a Certainty. They maintain certitude in respect of object
only that is of the thing believed: We, in respect of Subject also: that is of
the party believing. The one arising out of the Immutability of that, which
cannot be otherwise then it is, the other from the means, whereby it is
persuaded unto us. They find it in some comfortable feelings which are oftimes
deceiptfull: We, hold it by way of pledge, and as an ernest in a bargain, which
puts all out of question. 2 Cor 1.22.
They tell this us, is arroga^cy: we with S. Austin S. Austin de verbis D^m.
sermon. 28.
say this is faith: they, pride We, devotion. And albeit this assurance be in
some more evident, in some more obscure: (according to the measure of the
receipt of that which gives testimony) yet are the sons of God sealed with au
Eternal and inviolable Character: in the beholding whereof they have an
assurance of life. We know (says S. John) 1. Ioh. 3.2.14.
that he abides in us: we know that we are of the truth. We know that when
he shall appear, we shall be like unto him. We know that we are of God. Here
is then no moral supposition, no variable conceit of Man, which begets
anxi^ty, and perplexity of mind. 1. Ioh. 5.19.
But (Scientia) a knowledge which gives an entrance unto the Thrane of Grace
with boldness.

How.
Now our last Question and greatest, is how this our assurance may be obtained?
The generality of the means (says my Text) is Diligence (Give rather
diligence) we must not stand all the day idle in the market. An put as
dormitanti tibi Confecturos Deos? Does any man think it shall be thrust into
his pocket? There belongs more unto it, then hold and have it. The Kingdom of
heaven comes not by observation. (Diligence) that industrious workemaister must
build our assurance ^or iustum est (says Gregory) vt illi consequantur
stipendium, qui suum commodare reperiuntur obsequium. The Labourer is worthy of
his hire. And as (Diligence) our careful endeavor is the means in general,
so in particular must we carry this Item with us, that in our first setting out
we mount not too high. Qui nescit viam ad Mare, Amnem sibi queras Comitem:
(says the Poet.) The surest way to find out the Sea, is to be guided by a
River. The beginning of our search must be in our selves: and so must we go up
(as by Jacobs ladder) to the counsel of our God. For in our selves has God
set signs and testimonies of our Calling and Election, which will not deceive
us. Here therefore is our Diligence: our travail, our labor to be bestowed.
The tokens or testimonies which God has given us are three: two within us: One
without us. Within us, we have first a testimony of Gods Spirit. (Then)
another of our own. The Spirit of God says S. Paul Romans 8.16.
bears witness, together there with our Spirits, that we are the sons of
God. Without us: is our new obedience. Make your Election sure: (...) by good
works: so it is in the vulgar transtations. And as this well agrees with the
scope of the Text, so does Master Beza confess, that he saw two Greek
mannscripts, wherein these words (...) were expressed. One witness (says
Baldus) is no witness vni testi, ne Catoni quidem credendum est (says S.
Hierome. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every truth stand. God
therefore has provided for us a threefolde* that is a perfect evidence. For as
the number of three is complete, which is contained in a beginning: in a
middle in an ending. So is this evidence funiculus triplex, a perfect
testimony. Begun by Gods Spiritte Seconded with our own: and ended with
good works. Our first evidence in Gods spirit. Et vbi Spiritus testatur,
ambiguitas non relinquitur (says Chrysostom) in his fourteenth Homely upon
the Romans. And this testimony of the Spirit is without exception; neither
Deceiving: nor deceived: not deceiung: for it is the Spirit of truth Not
deceived: for it searches all things even the deep things of God. If an Angel
should come from heaven unto us as he did to Marie, and tell us in the name of
God, that we were called and elected; would we stand in doubt Rather would we
not esteem him a Messenger of most joyful tidings? But so much the more
certain is the testimony of Gods Spirit, by how much he is more acquainted
with the mind of God then an Angel is; and can less deceive. Yet howsoever
(as Paul witnesses) 1. Tim. 4.
the Spirit speaks evidently such for all that is our natural presumption,
as many dream they are Rich, when in truth they are but poor: boast of the
Spirit, and are well persuaded of their Calling and ^ection when they are
nothing less. Yea dye in a gr^t conceit of salvation, and yet are damned. A
g^e the sleights of the Devil, are strong illusions* He foisteth in many times
another testimony than ever God gave unto us: especially working upon the weak
heart of man, which being full of self love, is easily persuaded of any good
to it self. Two things then for our better security must be observed: First
how the testimony of the spirit is framed in us: Secondly how it may be
discerned by us. It is not framed by extraordinary infusion; or by Enthusiasme
that is ordinary revelation without the word. It is no sudden act in the
soul, or hasty conclusion, without discourse; but made by application of the
promise of the Gospel, in the form of a practique silogisme. The proposition
whereof is this: whosoever believes in Christ, is called: is chosen to
everlasting life. This is the word of promise, which is opened and applied to
the heart, by the Ministers of the Gospel, set apart for that purpose. Now
whilst a hearer of this word, gives himself to meditate and consider of the
same, comes the spirit of God, and enlightens his eyes, and opens his heart,
and gives him a double power: One is, a will to believe: and the other to
believe indeed: and that in such a sort, as a man with freedom of spirit, shall
be able to make the assumption, and say: But I believe in Christ: I trust not
to my self, all my joy and comfort is in him. And hence arises the blessed
conclusion, which is the testimony of the spirit, Therefore am I the child of
God, called and elected unto everlasting life. This is the frame of it. Now as
the operation of an Angel of God, may be discerned from the Spirit of God by
the working: for (as S. Bernard speaks) Angelus suggerit, spiritus ingerit.
So the way to discern the Spirit of God from natural presumption, or
sathanicall illusion; is by effects. Ex fructibus cognoscetis (says our
Savior) ye shall know it by the fruits. The fruits to discover it are
especially two: Couched together by S. Paul in one piece of a verse: Romans 8.
It makes us cry ( Ahba) that is Father. The first fruit is to cry: to pray
earnestly, out of a touched heart with asence and feeling of sin. We are not
able to pray of our selves (says the Apostle) It is the spirit that helps
our infirmities, that makes intercession for us with sighs and groans which
cannot be uttered. Romans 8.16.
Hence it is called by Zachary the spirit of prayer. Zacha. 12.10.
And as a fool is known by much laughter, so is the child of God by frequent
prayer. Eccles. 19.28.
A wicked man may be partaker of the preaching of the word, may come to the
Sacraments, may acknowledge the truth of the Gospel: may profess it with
Judas: may defend it with Julian: may have some feeling of his sins, some
terror of conscience for them: may desire Gods children to pray for him; (as
Pharaoh did Moses) as Simon Magus did Simon Peter) but pray himself he cannot:
unless we will account the mumbling over of mattins for fashion sake to be a
praying, which a parrot may be taught to do. Wherefore to cry unto God, out
of an humbled heart for sin, with a confidence to be heard, is a principal
note of the Spirit of adoption. The second fruit, is a childlike affection to
his God ( Abba) a most loving father: which permits not a man upon every
occasion to fall into sin straightwaies, without mislike or stay: but it
moves him to make a conscience of every evil way: to stand in fear of the
Majesty of God, wheresoever he is. In fear (I say) not least he perish, but
least he displease: not engendered by the terror of hell, and is a fear, lest
God should punish him: but which comes from the promises of heaven, and is a
fear, least his father should forsake him. A filial fear, cum dilectione,
cum delectatione (says S. Austin) joined with a love and delight. And he that
thus cries, that is thus affected to God as to his father: This crying, this
affection, is neither the conceit of the flesh, nor the deceit of the devil,
but the testimony of Gods spirit within him, that gives assurance of salvation.

The second evidence is the testimony of our own hearts, purified and
sanctified in the blood of Christ. And as that of Gods spirit must go before,
so this of our own, must follow after: for what boldness (says S. Paul) 1.
Cor. 1.4.
can we have with God if our hearts condemn us? Now the heart testifies by
special graces imprinted in the soul or spirit of a man.

Which have a double reference, 1. To our sins. 2. To the mercies of God in
Christ.
To our sins, either 1. Past. 2. Present, 3. To come.


The grace, which concerns sins past, is a godly sorrow for them,
occasioned indeed by sin, but springing properly from the apprehension of the
favor of our God unto us. 2. Cor. 7.10.
This begets a carfulness in us, to amend our lives: teaches us by
confession and supplication to clear our offenees: Compels us to be angry
with our selves, for our sins committed: to fear, least we fall into the same
again: to desire strength and assistance against them: to be zealous of good
duties: and to subdue our bodies by revenging our sins upon our selves. For
your godly sorrow (says S. Paul) see what care it has wrought in you? yea
what clearing? yea what indignation? yea what fear? yea what vehement desire?
yea what zeal? yea what revenge? These are the fruits of a saving sorrow. And
he who feels them for his sins past, has a testimony of his own spirit of
his calling and election.

And as a man must be a mourner for his sins which are past, so must he play
the soldier in respect of sins present. The next grace then in the heart,
which regards present corruption, is to combat with it. Gal. 5.7.
Plato was of the mind that in every man there were two souls, but Paul tells
us, that in every man there are two men: so joined together, that the one
cannot be without the other, so severed asunder, that the death of the one is
the life of the other. These (two) one man is as ancient as the world it self,
the one, deriuing his original from the earth, the other from heaven. But as
Pharaohs two dreams were but one famine, so these two Men, were but one Adam.
The Lord framed Man of the dust of the earth, there was one man. And he made
Man in his own image with the breath of life, there is the other Man, and
called his name Adam, there is both in one. Ever since our fall has there been
a combat or deadly warfare betwixt this double Man. The inward Man, fighting
with the outward. the Spirit with the Flesh. The two Twins Esau and Jacob
wrestle together. And though Esau be first borne ( prius carnale) the Carnal
the former yet in Gods Children, Jacob gets the blessing, the spiritual is the
better. Our estate is not now like the Cope of the world above the Moon free
from storms, we have here the perfection, not of ( Resters) but of Runners,
not of our Country: but of the way, wherein there are flawes and tempests. If
we be a while at a calm: the Flesh is ready to molest us. And we cannot so
sing peace to our souls, but the Devil also will cast his Crotchets in: yet
if we take unto us the Armor of God, and fight manfully: If we raise up our
selves under the burden of sin, and do such things as are acceptable unto
God (though we cannot do them as we would) if we find a striving in our
selves, the Mind fighting with the mind: the will with the will, the
affections with the affections: albeit we cannot utterly overcome: though
Jacob and Esau be up in arms; yet if we cause the Elder to serve the Younger:
though Canaanites and Iebusites dwell among the Israelires; yet if we make
them our bond slaves and hewers of wood: though Sarah be shrewish; yet if
Abraham that is the Spirit, does beget of Sara, (that is the Flesh) a Son
Isaacke (that is, Joy and Laughter) here is good cause of Comfort: Another
Evidence in our hearts from the resisting of Sins present, that we shall
be saved.

The third grace which respects sin to come: is a care to prevent it. And
as the first makes us Mourners: the second Soldiers: so this third calls
upon us to be Watchmen: not to lie a sleep till a dead blow be given: but to
suspect the first strokes of sin, not to tarry to be stung, but to fear the
least buzzing. This mark of Gods child we find in S. John, 1. Ioh. 8.18
He that is borne of God sins not, but keeps himself that the wicked one
touch him not: that is, he is circumspect, he is careful to avoid sin.
And his care is not only in the ordering of outward actions, but even of the
very thoughts of his heart: O Lord (says David) keep me from the way of
wickedness: Where upon Saint Ambrese observes, that he would be kept not from
wickedness only, but from the way too: For, where the Gospel is of force, it
brings cuery thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ, as Saint Paul
does witness. 2. Cor. 10.5.
And thus much of that part of your inward evidence which respects sin.

That which concerns Gods mercies in Christ, is twofold. 1 An earnest desire
of reconciliation with God. 2 And ardent love to Christ and his righteousness.


For the first: when as man feels himself distressed with the burden of his
finnes; when he apprehends the heavy displeasure of God in his conscience
for them: if then conceiving (his great need of a Savior) he does heartily
desire (yea hunger and thirst to be at peace with God, in the meritas of
Christ) no peril being so fearful unto him, as to be out of Gods favor: no
blessing so cheerful; as to be at unity with him: unto such a one, has
Christ made most comfortable promises, which can appertain to none but the
Elect: unto him shall be given of the Well of the water of life freely: Revel.
21.6.
And this water shall be in him as a Well of water springing up unto
everlasting li^e. John 4.14.


For the second, he that can so highly esteem of Christ and his righteousness,
as that he accouneth with Saint Paul, Philip 3.
the most precious things that are to be but doung in comparison: He that can
proferre Christ and his love, before father and mo^her, wife and children: He
that has so strong an affection wrought in his heart, as that if his young
child should hang about his neck: his mother show her breasts which gave him
suck; his Father lie in the door to stay him from Christ: he could cast away
his child: contemn his Mother: tread upon his Father: renounce all, et volare
ad vexillum Chrisli (as Hierome speaks) and fly to the Banner of his Christ
(like Aene as in the Poet) who when Troy was won, carried away neither kithe
nor kin, sed Deos ciuitatis, but the Gods of the city: Certainly such a one
is marked out to salvation: he has the seal of God upon him, and (as John
says) 1. Ioh. 3.19
he may assure his heart before him.

Every man will say of himself, that he is thus afected unto Christ, when as
indeed most men had rather have Esaus broth, then Jacobs blessing. Wherefore
least we be deceived, we must try our love unto Christ by these two tokens:
First, he that does rightly esteem of Christ, does in like manner esteem of
those which are his members. Tustis et Amor Celari non possunt, as the Cough
cannot be covered, no more can love, it will break out to others: He that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Prophets reward. He
that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive
the reward of the righteous. Math. 10
It is he that loves Christ, and shall dwell in his Tabernacle, who makes
much of him that fears God. Psalm. 15.
And hereby do we know that we are raised from death to life, because we
love the Brethren (that is) such as are the members of Christ, even because
they are so. 1. Ioh. 3.14.


Secondly, it is a token of our love to Christ, if we love his coming, that we
may have full participation and fellowship with him. The carnal man cares
little: he has no sense nor sight of his coming but as the Ox is fatted in
the pasture, and the Bird sings sweetly, and feeds without fear: yet
suddenly one is carried to the slaughter, the other is taken in the snare, so
are worldlings drowned in security: and seldom think of: much less wish for:
the coming of Christ. Others, who are strong in sin, and which force the
wrath of God against them) do tremble and quake at the remembrance of his
coming. They wish it might either never be, or ever be deferred. Oh; it is
most terrible unto them, once to think that a day will come, when all of them
shall be cited before Gods Judgment seat: when as all their works, their
words, their thoughts shall be revealed: when as a heavy doom of damnation
shall be pronounced against them: when to lie hidden will be impossible for
them, and to appear will be intolerable to them. The consideration of these
terrors of the Lord, does affright them so, as if the Devil were at their
doors.) But the children of God (who love Christ) cry Lord Jesus come quickly.
Now, they are as wards; then shall they come to their own. Now are they in
the skirmish; then shall they be in the victory. Now are they in the
tempestuous Sea, then shall they be in the quiet Haven. Now in the heat of the
day, then in the rest of the Evening. Now are they absent from Christ, Then
shall they follow him wheresoever he goes. And why should they not be joyful
at his coming to judge them, who came to be judged for them? A loving Spouse
desires to be in the bosom of her husband: and such is the longing of the
Church after Christ: for, if being absent from him, he does so enrich us with
grace, and tokens of his love: Lord, how will he hug us, and embrace us,
when we are present with him? Si sie es bonus sequentibus te, qualis futurus es
consequentibus (says Saint Bernard)? The very desire then we have, wholly to
enjoy the fellowshippe of our Christ, makes us to lift up our heads, and to
love his coming: which is another Argument unto us that we shall be saved,
because a Crown of Righteousness is laid up for them that love his appearing
(as S. Paul does tell us.) 2. Tim. 4.8.


There remains now the last and outward evidence of our calling and Election,
that is new obedience: our endeavor by good works to obey Gods commandments:
for hereby are we sure we know him, if we keep his commandments: 1 John 2.3.
we need not to wring or wrest a good deed out of a good man, as one would
wring veriuice out of a Crab. He is a tree, that has ever some figs upon
him. But least here again, we should chance to deceive our selves: The
obedience (which is the infallible mark of Gods child) must not be a half
but a whole obedience of the whole man: To the whole law of God. In the whole
course of our lives.

in Body, in Soul, in Spirit. 1. These. 3.13.
We must summon all our parts and powers together like a Crier, to pe^forme a
service unto our God. To the whole law: for the condition of the Law is merely
Copulative; All the parts of it are linked one to another. He that's bound to
One, is bound to All? He that makes no Conscience to keep One, when Occasion
is offered will break any. Herod gave John Baptist the hearing in many things,
but would not leave his Brothers Wife: Judas followed Christ, and preathed the
Gospel, but would in no case forsake his Covetousness: Saul was content to slay
some of the Amalekites, but left Agag alive. But this piece meal obedience is
nothing worth: He that fails in One, is guilty of All. For howsoever the
rigor of the law is abated unto us in Christ, (who accepts of him, that does
what he can do, as if he were one that did what he should do) yet may not
the Israelites hault between two opinions. Mongrells in Religion were devoured
by Lions. But I shall nor be confounded (says David) Psalm. 119.6
when I have respect to (All) thy commandments: Upright Obedience then does
enlarge it self to every precept.

Terrigina fratres, the earth-borne brood, they are like to the Grasshoppers,
which sometimes leap a little upwards, but presently fall to the ground
again: So these have some light and short motions to goodness, but they
quickly return to their old affections again. They love vanity more then
truth, dross more then gold, the earth more then heaven, the world more then
him that made and redeemed the world. Fowls that feed grossly never fly
high, and they that fill their hearts with things below, cannot be but earthly
minded: but the true sons of God (through in Infirmity without perfection,
yet in sincerity without dissimulation) have their conversation as Citizens of
new Jerusalem which is above. The works of darkness are wearisome unto them,
because they are the children of Light. The fruits of the flesh are loathsome
unto them, because they are renewed by the Spirrt of God. They are In the world,
but not Of the world. They use the world as though they used it not. They
esteem their houses as Innes to rest in, not as mansions to dwell in for ever.
All their worldly honors, pleasures, profits, preferments, they use as staves
in their hands, the better to bring them to their iourneyes end. Thus do the
Sons of God, walk in a whole obedience of the whole man: in their whole
life, which gives an evidence unto them of their Calling and election.

Now (my beloved) Hic specimen specitur, hic certamen cernitur: here is now the
main point the total sum, the whole duty of a Christiau. Will thou be sure
thou shall be saved? beware of an idle speculation of faith. Give all
diligence to have the testimony of Gods Spirit rightly formed in thee. Give all
diligence to have it truly discerned by thee. Pray unto thy God earnestly,
obey him lovingly, mourn for sins past heartily, strive with sins present
stoutely, prenent sins to come carefully. Give all diligence to seek after
reconcilement with thy God, with a thirst unto it, value Christ and his
righteousness at the highest price, express thy mind herein, by love to his
Members, by desire of his coming, hold not heaven with thy two singers, but
with thy whole hand, and study to yield obedience to all the laws of God, at
all times, in body, in soul, in spirit, begin quickly, increase daily,
continue in thy obedience constantly, without hypocrisy: Give (rather)
diligence, (that is) before all things, in the prime of thy youth, in the
beginning of thy days: (Give rather) diligence (that is) Above all things,
above a Dukedom, aPrincedom^, a Kingdom, to make thy calling and election
sure.

I have read a story of an Abbot, who beholding what cost a woman had bestowed
in attiring of her self, fell a weeping. Oh (said he) what a misery is this,
that a woman should bestow more labor upon the dressing of her body, then we
have done in the adorning of our souls. That she should put more ornaments
upon her head, then we have been careful to put into our hearts. And truly
(beloved) this is a common calamity we wish for heaven, but contend for the
earth. Mary's part is better: but Marthaes the greater. Let us therefore give
the (rather) diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure. What if the
world sets on good wine at the first? it will afterward bring that which is
worse. What if it entertain with mirth? it concludes with mourning: It is like
a Candle shining brightly, but ending in a stinking smoke. What does the Fles^
afforde? but sin? What the Devil? but torments, what the world? but trouble.
Make therefore thy calling and election sure, and then have thou righteousness
and joy, and peace in the holy Ghost: Righteousness against sin, Joy
against Torture, Peace against trouble. Oh seek not death in the error of your
souls (says Wisdom) and destroy not your selves in the works of your own
hands. Make haste to make salvation sure. A fool will desire to do that in
the end, when he comes to had I wist, which he that is wise will do in the
beginning. Do people commend thee for a good and a just man? I, but what if
thine own heart condemns thee? Are all men friendly to thee? I but what if
God be thine enemy? Surely, if thine assistance were an host of armed
Soldiers, if thy friends were the Princes and Monarkes of the earth; if thy
possessions were as large as from East to west, if thy me ate were as Manna
from heaven, and thy apparel as costly as the Ephod of Aaron, if every day
were as glorious unto thee, as the day was to Christ when he arose from his
grave; 1. Ioh. 8.18
yet who dares meet with the anger of the Lord of hoasts? who can put to
silence the voice of Desperation? who can make a Covenant with hell, to spare
thee? or an agreement with the Devil to lay no claim unto thee? Wherefore give
all diligence to make thy calling and Election sure. It is a greater toil (I
confess) but profit will make men labor hard; Will carry our desires very
far. The dangers of the Sea are made delightsome by the expectation of gain.
The tediousness of Physic is mitigated by the hope of health: Nullus labo^r
dur^us videri debet (says Hierome) quo gloria aternitatis acquiritur. Let us
not give over, we shall be rewarded according to our labors. It is a
diligence (I confess) that is subject to much disgrace, to many a scoff and
floute amongst wicked men* Sed durate and vosmet rebus seruate secundis: but
be not dismayed the labor is for life: Salvation lies at the stake. Has
Mutius patiently endured burning? Socrates poison? Cato death? Have heathen men
been constant for so small are compence, as a popular applause, and praise in
the world? How much (rather) ought Christians for the Kingdom of God? Wherefore
(my Brethren) if heaven be our Country, if Christ be our treasure, if Glory
be our hope, let us give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure,
which grace God grant unto us for his mercies sake, Amen.

FINIS.
THE SINNERS CONVERSION.
And behold a woman in the City which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus
sat at Table in the Pharisees house, she brought a box of ointment:

And she stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet
with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his
feet, and anointed them with the ointment.

Luke 7. verse. 37.38.
THese words, contain in them the Conversation and Conversion of a woman,
which pressed upon Christ, as he sat at meat in a Pharisees house: Her
Conversation, is described in the beginning of the 37. verse. And behold a
woman in the city which was a Sinner. Her Conversion, appears in the words
following. When she had knowledge of Christ, she brought a Box of ointment;
she stood at his feet behind him, weeping: she began to water his feet
with tears: she wiped them with the hairs of her head: she kissed them:
she anointed them with her ointment. Conversation.
First of her Conversation: The first word of the Text sets me at a stand,
and bids me Behold. Surely there is some strange matter following worthy
observation. For so much does ( Ecce Behold) import in the Scriptures. In the
seventh of Esaias, Ecce virgo: Behold a virgin: Why? what is the matter? She
shall conceive, and bring forth a Child. A virgin conceive? A virgin bring
forth? This is strange indeed. So here ( Ecce mulier) behold a woman. A
woman, which at the first was the cause of ^ns destruction: is now become the
exemplary cause of man's Conversion. A woman weak by nature, is become strong
by grace: A woman in sex, is become a man in action. A woman, who when she was
at the best, was soon seduced: is now become the Joy of Angels, the
astonishment to Devils: a shame unto those, who are slow to Repentance: and
unto such as are willing to come to Christ, a Pattern and Instruction. Ecce
mulier, Behold a woman: Though this be rare, yet this is not all. For Behold,
a woman, a Sinner. It is a harder thing, to stern a ship in a tempest: then to
stand upon the shore. A harder thing, to rid a man from danger: then to keep
him in safety: and wisdom is more justified of a child which arises; then
of that which does not fall. Behold then a woman, a sinner. Sinners, are
blind, are fools, are slaves. First they are blind: For howsoever the
children of this world, would seem to see more then the children of light; as
owls are sharper sighted in the night time, but duller in the day, yet can
they not possibly perceive those things which are of God. Cor. 1.2.14. Though
there be light in Goshen amongst Gods people, yet will there be black and
palpable darkness in the land of Egypt, amongst the wicked. Exodus 10.22. That
which is manifest to Saints, unto whom God does make known the riches of his
wisdom: is hidden unto worldly men. Colos. 1.26. These may have the name to
see, as the Church of Sardi had the name to live: but as that Church was stark
dead Apocal. 3. so these are soon blind; their minds are blinded. Corinth.
2.3.14. Yea their very hearts are full of darkness. Romans 1. 21. verse.
Secondly, Sinners are fools, neither let it seem strange unto us, that
subtle sinners should be simple fools. For he that is called wise Pro. 28.11.
in the 12. of Luke 20. verse, is termed a fool. A good Gramarian (says
Origin) upon the 16. to the Romans, may be a fool at a handy craft, a good
Governor a bad Physician, and men of deep reach in wordly matters, plain
idiots in heavenly wisdom. There was a time I confess when we had a
threefold knowledge which was most excellent: of all things created: of our
Creator: of our selves: Sed Adam dam raperet Diuinitatem, perdidit
foelicitatem. (says S. Bernard) But since Adams fall, we are become like bruit
beasts void of understanding. We have a threefold ignorance in stead of our
knowledge: of all things created: of our Creator: and of our selves. Hence it
is, that sins are said by Saint Augustine to be the souls darkness: That
Gregory calls offenders fools: and Saint Paul, the wisdom of the world
enmity unto God. Thirdly, Sinners are slaves: Man was appointed the Lord of all
creatures, but by sin he is made a slave to every vilde thing. A miser is a
slave to his money: a glutton, to his throat: a chollericke man to anger: a
lascivious man, to pleasure. Servants are not more at the beck of their
masters, then sinners are at the command of vices. According to that in the 8.
of John 34. verse: Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of the same* and
which makes the slavery the worse, they are thereby become vassals unto Satan,
who never suffers them to rest, but always sets them about his drudgery,
till he has wearied them in the way of wickedness, and brought them to
destruction. Wisdom the 5. 7. verse. Wherefore in that a blind woman, seeks
after the light: a foolish woman, after wisdom: a woman in ^auery, after her
redeemer. This in^reaseth the wonder: E^ce mulier pecc^trix: Behold a woman a
sinner. And yet his not this all neither. Behold a woman: A sinner: in a city:
a common, a known sinner; blazed over a whole city, notorious and infamous.
Though there were many (no doubt) in the city: yet was none like unto her. She
had lost her honor: her good name: and through custom in sin, was become
careless of reports. A young offendour, is not impudent on the sudden, but
has some remorse when he sins. He that puts on new clothes, will at
the first be careful where he sits, least he stain or defile them, but
being once soyled over, he little respects where he clappes himself down:
so a nouice in sin, will have some care of his conscience, but an inueterate
transgressour is without respect. a horse at the first is quick upon the
spur, but a continual digging in his sides makes him dull, offenders have
sense of sin in the beginning, but custom takes the feeling of sin away.
A Candle lately put out with a little puff, is lighted again: but if it be
loug extinguished, it is not so soon revived. A young Sinner is easily
converted, but old Soakers are hardly reclaimed. Behold then a matter full of
wonder, A woman a Sinner, an usual, an infamous Sinner, tota ciuitate in a
whole City, does now begin to make a conscience of her actions, having had
her light long put out, now begins to be enlightened by Grace, having lived
long in iniquity, yet now begins to have a feeling of her former life, to
leave her sin, to seek after her Savior. This truly is exceeding strange,
seldom seen in the world. And therefore no marvel though there be an (
Ecce) a word of admiration prefixed: Behold a woman in a City which was a
sinner. My Text gives me leave, and her carriage compels me, to make
after her a further search. First, who this woman was? Secondly, why her name
is concealed? Thirdly, what was her Sin? Fourthly, where was this City?

Origin with Theophilact tells us that there were three, Mary Magdalens, whereof
(as they say) this was one. Chrysostom (with whom agrees Saint Barnard) is of
opinion that there were but two, whereof one was the sister of Lazarns,, and
the other, this woman. S. Augustine, S. Gregory, and Beda say plainly, there
was but one Mary Magdalen, making this, and the sister of Lazarus and of Martha
to be the same, unto whom there were many sins remitted: and out of whom
there were many devils removed. And albeit some thing might be objected to the
contrary, yet for that I find it to be the common opinion of ancient times, I
am willing to embrace it, the rather for that she was one of them, which
followed Christ out of Galile where this accident fell out: As we find in the
beginning of the next chapter which makes it more probable. This woman then was
Mary Magdalen.

Aristotle for his knowledge is called the Philosopher, Tullie for his
eloquence the Orator) so for evil deeds are there oftentimes fastened upon
us Nicke-names of disgrace. As a contentious fellow may in time be called, a
towne-wrangler, a covetous man, a city miser, a flattering Preacher, a court
clawbacke: Such perhaps was Mary's cafe. She was so wretched and shameless a
sinner, as in stead of Marie she was called the city-sinner. Or was her name
suppressed to teach others a lesson, that when we are about to publish the
defects of men, we should conceal their names? so does Saint Luke in his 16.
chapter: where describing a rich Glutton he tells of his cruelty, he spares not
his particular sins, yet does he not publish or proclaim his name: Our
hatred must be against the sins of men, and not the men themselves. Or is she
namelesse, to teach all sinners, that howsoever they here strive, to make
their names great: to call their lands after their names Psalm. 49. yet that God
will not acknowledge them? that before him they shall be namelesse? not once
remembering them? to give his allowance of them? These are likely to be the
causes why Mary is here unnamed, and in place of Marie called a sinner.

sinner in a city, a known offendour, it cannot choose, but that her offenses
were public in her outward actions. Others suppose she was a common whore,
prostituting her body to every commer, but this (me thinks) is too sharp a
censure. For such (for the most part) are poor and miserable, and know not
readily otherwise to relieve themselves: but Mary Magdalen was well descended
of good wealth: she ministered unto Christ and his disciples out of her own
abundance. And therefore it is not likely that she would betake herself to so
base a trade: Most probable it is, that amongst other of her sins, whoredom
was one, that she had given herself to idleness, and so fallen into filthy
lust, which is a sin subject to great reproach, especially in a woman of
eminent rank none more, for which cause she was publicly noted and termed a
sinner in all the city.

Naim in Galile, of which we read in the eleventh verse of this chapter:
which our Evangelist in this place names not: being needless without cause to
repeat one thing twice. Here did Christ raise to life the widows dead son.
Here did he raise to grace this sinful woman. In this province of Galile was
Mary borne, in a town called Magdaleel, of which we read in the nineteenth of
Joshua, and of which town she took her name ( Magdalen), Now in this city of
Galile she hearing of the fame of Christ, and being moved in her mind, with
the strangeness of the Miracle, wrought upon the widows son: being also
touched with the spirit of God, and resolving with her self, that this was the
Messiah that was to come; we may well conceive (by reason of the Sequel her
speedy Conversion which followed) that she thus reasoned within her soul.
Surely, he that has restored to life a dead young man: can likewise give life
unto me, who am dead in my sins: He that only by a (Touch) caused the men
that bare the corpse to stay: can compel these to cease which are carrying me
to Hell. My beauty, my riches, my liberty, my youthful years, they are now
transporting me into the hands of death. I will go unto this Christ: it may
be, he will vouchsafe to touch me with his hand of mercy, and can se these
porters to stay. When a widow cried for the death of her son, he was moved
with compassion toward her. If I then who am motherlesse go and bewail mine
own estate: if I water his feet with mine own tears there is hope of mercy
for me. He that calls all sinners to repentance, will not despise me, though
I be a sinner. Surely this is that Prophet which is sent to visit us: I will
run unto this fountain: I will return unto my God from whom I have gone
astray. And forthwith (says the Text) when she knew that Jesus sat at the
Table, in the Pharisees house, she went unto him. Conversion.
And here does our Evangelist begin to describe her Conversion. Wherein he
imitateth a skillful painter, who first draws out the lineaments of his
picture, with a coal or black lead and then lays on lively colors. So does
S. Luke* first he notes out Marie with a black coal, and now he sets her
out with beautiful and perfect colors.

This first thing obseruable in her Conversion is her knowledge and with all
her speed: when she knew: then she went Knowledge is the first step to
amendment of life: knowledge of Christ: knowledge of our selves ( both in this
woman) For unto a sound Conversion these three things must concur. 1. A
heavenly light in our understanding. 2. A holy heat in our will and affections.
3. The strength of Gods arm in our works and actions. Now a heavenly light in
the understanding must go before. The first thing, which God made in the
framing of the world was light, and the first thing also which he works in
our conversion is light, a true knowledge in our understanding. This light,
this heat this strength of action had this blessed convert. First she knew,
there was her light; Then she carried a Box of ointment, there was her heat:
Then she stood: she wept, she watered, she wiped, she kissed, she anointed
Christ's feet; Here was her strength in action. Now as the first degree unto
amendment of life is knowledge: knowledge of God whom we have offended: and
knowledge of our selves who are offenders) according to that in the 51 Psalm,
Wash me O God from mine iniquities and cleanse me from my sins, (says David)
why so? Because I know mine iniquities, and my sins are always before me) So
the second step to Conversion, is presently to go unto him, that can heal,
that can pardon, that can cure our infirmities. Thus went this woman on, she
had knowledge of Christ, and then forthwith she goes unto him. She knew that
her sins were like snakes in her bosom, which she would not (having knowledge
of them) sleep with all, but by and by labor to rid herself from them.
Unhappy Pharaoh being plagued with frogs in his Bed, in his oven, in his
kneading troughes and all his chambers, fear caused him to seek unto God: but
when Moses said unto him Exodus 8. 9. verse, When shall I pray for thee that
these frogs may be destroyed, he answers in the tenth verse, that he should
do it to Morrow. It had been fitter for a man in his case to have requested
Moses to pray presently, but he was content to defer and put off his
deliverance. Many are there in the world at this day, just of Pharaohs stamp:
who having their sins croking in their consciences (as the frogs crawled in
Pharaohes chambers) are yet contented to delay their Conversion from day to
day, To Morrow (say they) or some time hereafter will serve the turn. But
Marie was of another mind, for being a woman (whose usual commendation is to
keep at home) the leaves her own house: being a sinner: she steppeth into
the house of a Pharisie (who could not abide the presence of a Sinner) she made
no bones (contrary to the rule of modesty) to thrust herself amongst a
company that sat at meat: nothing could withhold her from the house where her
Savior was, vir^ egeno inutilis pud^r (says the Proverb) overmuch
shamefastness is no profitable virtue for a beggar. Marie therefore takes not
counsel with the world: she respects not the speech of men: (which many times
cause us to surcease from good actions) she feared not the mockes and scoffs
of the Pharisees, she stayed not till Christ had dined and come forth with his
disciples: she forgot circumstances of behavior: And remembered nothing but God
and her sins: when she knew where Christ was, she could not rest till she
came unto him. Why? could she not have invited Christ unto her own house as
Matthew and Zache did (who were also sinners?) She knew that he received
sinners: did eat with sinners: I but Mary made more haste then so: she had
fire in her bowels, the Spirit of God was as a flame within her. Beside she was
an humbled and a broken hearted sinner deeming herself now unworthy to
receive Christ under the roof of her house: if like a dog she might wait at
his feet, and there receive but the crumbs of his goodness and mercy, she thought
that enough for her. A notable example for us to follow; teaching us in our
necessities, both (...) whom, and how to go, even to ru^e unto our God with a
broken heart. So did the Centurion in the third verse of this Chapter. So did
the Cananitish woman, Math. 15: So David in all his troubles* Lord (says he)
Psalm 143. Deliver me from all mine enemies, for I hide me under the shadow
of thy wings, that I may be defended by thy power. So did Moses and Aaron, who
to avoid the Rage of the people, betook themselves unto the Tabernacle of
their God, Numb. 16. Unto this course are we invited by our Savior himself
in the 11. of Matthew, Come unto me you that travel and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. Who ever cried unto God and was not heard? who ever sought
him with his heart, and did not find him? who ever shrouded himself under the
shadow of his wings and was not protected by him? As a father is pitiful unto
his own children, so has the Lord mercy of them that fear him, he knows
whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust. When Kings are in
their Courts, and keep their Privy Chambers, none may speak unto them, nor
yet approach near them, but Nobles and parsonages of great account: but if they
walk into the fields, take a journey, or ride a hunting, every shepherd and
Peasant of the Country may have free access and speak his mind. So may we
say of Christ, being in his glory, in the Court of heaven, in the Chamber of
his Majesty, those who familiarly and nearly conuersed with him, were Angels,
Archangels, Principalities and Powers* but being made man, and become a
Traveler in this world, Publicans, Thieves, Harlots, notorious Sinners, they
came unto him. He speaks, he gives audience to them: for Mary a great Sinner
resorted unto him, and was received.

The Pelagian heretics, for that Mary went unto Christ, conclude from hence,
that man has free will and power in his own nature to seek after God. But the
truth is, that he who received Mary, did also make her come. Therefore does
Gregory call Christ, both trahentem and suscipientem, the drawer and the
receiver. Rivers run howerly into the Sea, yet does not the Sea thereby
ouerslow the banckes, because (as the Preacher tells us) out of the Sea did
they first proceed. Secretly, does the Sea by pores and hidden veins send his
waters out, and publicly by rivers receives them home again. Even so did
Christ with this woman, he called her secretly, he instilled devotion, love,
repentance, into her heart: he called her unto him by private inspiration, but
he received her openly, as the Sea does the rivers. The gifts of grace, which
after an invisible manner did issue from him, by a visible returning, were made
acceptable unto him. Surely, if Christ had not called, Mary had never thought
of coming. The spirit came (says Ezechiel in his second chapter) and set me
upon my feet: If the spirit had not entered, the prophet had not been raised:
neither can sinners rise, till Gods spirit raise them up: they cannot go, till
they be moved. They are not unlike the Echo in the wood; for as the Echo
has no power to speak first, but only to answer* so is it with all kind of
sinners, Gods voice must sound, before they have power to speak: He must draw,
before they can obey: He must often call, yet will they slowly answer. And
herein also do they resemble the Echo, which though many words be spoken,
yields but few again. Mary then being privately called, did openly come.
Teaching us hereby to testify our inward calling, by our outward coming. For
Mary being called, she answered, she came, she came presently, and she came not
empty. For as it follows in the Text, she brought a box of ointment with her.
That whereof she made so high account, wherewith she anointed and perfumed her
self, when she lived like a wanton: that sweet and precious ointment, she
brought unto Christ. Was it for that her sins were unsavory, and therefore
would come with odours? Indeed in the 30. of Exodus we read, that before the
sacrifice for sin was offered, Incense (by the law) was to be burned. So
perhaps did this Sinner, she came first with her sweet smelling ointment, lest
by the stench of her sins she should offend her Savior. Or was it rather to
prepare him with her gift, and therefore did bear him this box of ointment?
This was Jacobs policy toward his brother Esau. He gave gifts unto him to
prevent his anger, Genesis 32. or was it for that God commanded that none should
appear before him? Exo. 32. Being therefore now about to present her self
unto her God, to show her sorrow for her sins, to profess her obedience unto
his law. Did she judge it meet for her (according to the law) to come with
something in her hand? or it may be because she thought him to be the Messiah
to come, and for that she saw him endued with more than humane power. She
judged him worthy of honor, and therefore brought him a box of precious
ointment: that after the manner of that nation, by anointing of him she might
give honor unto him: howsoever it was, she came not empty. Condemning hereby
the practice of many professors in the world, who love to come to Christ of
free cost: if he once prove chargeable, they will shrink in the wetting: and
their profession grows cold when cost is required: but let us walk with these
Pharisees into the Pharisees house, and see how Mary there behaved her self.
First, we find her standing at Christ's feet behind him: for as the Publican
durst not lift his eyes to heaven, Luke 18. so was Mary ashamed to behold her
Savior in the face, she goes boldly into the house: she fears not the
countenance of those that were present: she knew whom she had offended, and
therefore in an humble bashfulnesse she cast her self behind him: Against
thee O Lord have I sinned (says David in his 51. Psalm:) Why does David say
so? Had he not transgressed against Vriah also? It is as much as if David had
said: Though I have sinned diverse ways, and offended others, yet it is thou
(O Lord alone) which causest me to be ashamed of my sin. Thus was Mary affected
when she came into the house, her sins against Christ made her abashed to
look upon him. This is flatly contrary to the practice of worldly men and
women, who never care how grossly they offend their God, so the doors be shut,
and they can escape the shame of men: as for Christ, they will stare him in the
face: his eyes they fear not, so the world do not see them: if they can be
drunk in a cellar: if they can oppress cunningly with some pretty color: if
they can but get the good opinion of men: as for Christ Jesus they will beard
him to his head, and brave him out of countenance. This holy convert was
otherwise affected: she was not ashamed because of the Pharisie: the guests
which were at the board did not affright her; the multitude in the house,
nothing moved her: It was only Christ's presence that struck her conscience,
and therefore she stood behind him. But what did she there? I will tell you but
of one thing she did, and leave the rest to your reading in the Text. She
began to water his feet with her tears: that is such a fountain of tears
gushed out of her eyes, as that they began to water Christ's feet, (not only
wet them) and that as she stood also, before she bowed herself unto the
ground, to wipe them, to kiss them, to annoint them with her ointment. O what
a wonderful grief did this woman conceive for her sinful life past: that
being a woman (no doubt) of some reasonable stature (for Mary Magdalen is held
to have been a comely person) yet even as she stood, did her tears run
down her cheeks: did they descend to the ground and watered the feet of
Christ.

Surely, that same ice which was congealed in her breast, being frozen in her
sins: did now at her coming to Christ, resolve and flowed from her eyes. She
set her sins in the eyes of her mind, and her sins set tears in the eyes
of her body. Let us learn to follow Mary in this godly practice. If Baronius
(out of his old manuscript) says true, she came with Lazarus and her sister
Martha into Britain: Her example is thereby made more proper unto us.
Wherefore let us with Mary set our sins before us, that our eyes may weep
for us. Nettles and thorns are hurtful in a garden; yet are they profitable
in the pale or hedge: for that they serve as a fence to preserve the same.
Sins in the soul are very dangerous unto it, they prick, they sting, they
wound the conscience like nettles and thorns but retain them in the memory:
keep them in the skirt of the soul, that thou may mourn for them, and then
are they profitable to defend the soul. Adam was placed over against Paradise.
Genesis 3. that beholding the garden from whence he was cast and thereby being
brought to the remembrance of his sin he might be grieved for it. So Marie
here recounting with her self; that she had lost her God, and the pleasures
of Paradise for the delights of her flesh, she is grieved at the heart, and
resolved into tears. Often have I seen the heavens to rain upon the earth,
but never the earth to pour showers upon heaven till now: here is an earthly
woman, which waters heavenly feet. Peter went out and wept bitterly: but
here is one that blusheth not to weep within doors, at a feast: and where is
wont to bemirth; she falls a monrning. Indeed God commanded Numbers 29. in
maxima solemnitate, in the greatest feast, to offer up a Goat for a sacrifice
for sin: There is no time of joy no solemn assembly: wherein the remembrance
of our sins is not grateful unto God, if thou sighest before thou eatest: if
thou chance to weep for thy sins at a feast, thy tears are accepted. Christ
in the highest honor that was ever given unto him in this mortal life, when
multitudes came from Jerusalem, and received him triumphantly, with great
boughs and songs of joy: then did he mourn in all that pomp for the sins
of Jerusalem. And this holy woman knew that at this banquet, plenty of tears
would be more grateful and joyful unto Christ then many bowls of Wine. We
do not read that she spoke as she wept: No, no, she stood as a woman
confounded in herself: Non legimus quae dixit, sed legimus quae fecit, vt
intelligamus, apud Deum plus valere opera quam verba: We read what she did:
not what she said, to let us know, that works are auailable with God more then
words. And unto whom shall I have a regard (says God) but to one that is
contrite, broken hearted, and who trembles at my sayings? Moses spoke not a
word, Exodus 14. And yet says God unto Moses; Why do thou cry unto me? Such
was the grief of Mary, her tears, her sighs, her sobs did stop her mouth,
only in her heart she cried and spoke as Moses did. We may not neglect this
holy example, having a cloud of Motives calling upon us to follow her steps.
One) taken from our vocation. where unto God has called us. In the 22. of Esaias
the 12. verse. The Lord of hosts is said to call us unto weeping and mourning:
In the 2. of Joel the 17. verse: Let the Priests (says God) and the Ministers
of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar. And it is Saint Paul's
iniunction, 1. Corinthians. 7.17. that as God has called every man, so he should
walk. Another Motive: is from the prediction of Christ: who in the 16. of John
the 20. verse foretold, that his Church should weep. Verily, verily I say unto
you, ye shall lament, and weep, and the world shall rejoice. Weeping is the
badge of the Church: Laughing of worldly men. All the Saints of God have been
deep sighers, great weepers. King David thought it no disparagement for him to
say, that he caused his bed to swim, and watered his couch with tears.
Psalm. 6. 6. verse. Hezekias a noble King wept very sore 2. Kings 20. 3. verse.
Job in his 30. chap. 25. verse, appealeth unto God in this case. Did not I
weep with him that was in trouble, and was not my soul in heaviness for the
poor? Esaias the Prophet in his 22. chapter 4. verse, wept and would not be
comforted. Jeremy in his 9. chapter 1. verse, Wishes that his head were full
of water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day and
night. Daniel was in heaviness for three weeks of days together. Dan. 10.2.
The Apostle S. Peter wept bitterly, Matthew. 26. Of all the holy Kings, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Children of God it may beesayd as it is in the
126. Psalm. verse. Quod ibant flentes, that they all went by weeping cross.
Exechiel the fourth, they are call Mourners and Cryers. In the sixteenth of
Marc. the tenth. This our Mary Magdalen who went to tell the Brethren that
Christ was risen, is said to go unto them who mourned and wept. And if names
be given (as the Philosopher tells us) to express the nature of things: It is
then very natural for faithful ones to be Mourners and weepers. mourn we
shall be comforted. In the 61. Chap. of Esaias the 12. verse. Christ is said to
be sent to preach good tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted,
to comfort those that mourn. To give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the garment
of gladness, for the Spirit of heaviness. Who would not be a Mourner when as
Christ only comes to cheer up such a one? will not promises persuade?
Judgments prevail, to wring tears from our eyes. For woe says our Savior
Christ Luke 6. 28. verse, unto you which laugh, that is unto you which live at
ease, merrily, after the pleasures of the flesh, for you shall wail; show
outward signs of heaviness, and weep, and be inwardly tormented. After a
great feast follows a great payment, and much laughter is recompensed with
much woe. If we did but consider well what howling and gnashing of teeth, is
prepared in hell for loud laughers in this world, it would make us to mourn
like Pellicans in the wilderness, like owls in the Desert, to weep till our
bones were vexed: till our eyes did sincke, till our hearts were smitten within
us, and withered up like grass, as the Prophet speaks. Quocung, oculot
conuertis causa est lachrimarum. Look upon our selves, and in our selves, upon
our ignorance, our little desire to learns, our rejecting of knowledge: our
crookedness in our wills, our corruptions in affections, our Rebellion
against God: our want of Love to our Neighbors, our manifold sins which hang
upon all our members, we shall find in our selves great cause of weeping.
There are more sins committed with the little eye of a man, then the tears
of all eyes, (without the merits of Christ) can ever wash away. Look upon
others, and in others, upon those horrible wickednesses that are committed by
them, upon the profaning of the Sabbath: upon the common use of swearing: the
beastly sin of whoring, the swinish sin of drinking, the default of
Magistrates in punishing, and there will appear unto a religious heart
infinite cause of weeping. If there were wanting weeping work at home, there
were enough abroad. Wisdom does teach us to square and apply our selves unto
that place wherein we are conversant: A Courtier must not behave himself like
a Country man, nor a Country man like a Courtier. If being at a funeral or in
the house of mourning we should do nothing else but laugh, all would wonder at
us, for so strange a behavior. The place wherein we are it is the world:
resembled unto the sea, full of dangers, of rocks, or rempests. Our bodies
which are the vessels to carry us in this sea, are weak, crazy, so many
senses, so many leakes to let dangers in. Rimarum pleni sumus, we are full of
Rifts. In a word (...) in a vale of miseries, in a valley of tears, and sighs,
and tears do best becomme us in such a place. Conversion. Thou art a
continual sinner, yet desirous to be saved: thou must then continually renew
thy repentance. He that repents must turn unto his God, and Joel tells us
in his second chapter 12. verse, that it must be done with all the heart, with
fasting, with weeping and with mourning. Thus did David turn unto his God.
Lord (says he) Psalm 38. I pour out my whole desire before thee, and my
sighing is not hid from thee, my heart pants: my strength fasleth: I am bowed
and crooked very sore: I go mourning all the day long: will we then turn
unto our God: Repent us of our sins and be saved: we must roar with David
for very grief of heart: mourn with Magdalen. Christ wept for the sins of
others: It were a shame then for us, not to weep for our own transgressions.
Have we lived in sin, which caused Christ, not only to shed tears, but to
spend his blood for us: and did there never yet fall a tear from our own
eyes? Have we lived 20. 40. 80. years, and can we not remember that we ever
wept for our sins? A shrewd sign that we never yet repented. Tears for sin
(says S. Bernard) are like the water which Christ turned into wine: they are
like Noah's flood which do wash and cleanse as they go: Oration Deum lenit, sed
lachryma cogit, illa vngit haec pungit (says Saint Hierome). It is a dry
sacrifice (says Gregory) that is not watered with tears. Is it childishness
to weep? if it were so we must be like children, before we enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore, seeing we are called unto mourning: seeing
Christ foretold that we should be weepers, seeing we are so called in the
Scriptures: seeing there are great rewards for weepers: great punishment for
laughers: seeing there are many causes to mourn, within us, without us, round
about us: seeing the world is a place of tears; and that our Conversion must
be joined with a sadness of heart: having so many Motives to persuade: Let not
Mary's example be slightly regarded: whose heart and eyes were relatiues in
sorrow: A stagge if he be compassed with dogs, will weep and mourn: Has an
unreasonable creature such an impression of grief because of his enemies? much
more then ought men and women shed tears: being compassed about with so many
Devils, so many evils: set upon with fiends: burdened with sins pestred with
a thousand infirmities: wherefore let us drown our sins with the tears of
our eyes, as the Egyptians were drowned with the waters of the sea. Let us say
with David, my tears, have been my meat day and night, let us say with
Christ, my Soul is heavy: let us open the fountains of our eyes with Marie
and strangle our sins with the streams of our tears: for she stood at
Christ's feet behind him weeping and began to wash his feet with her tears,
you may find further in the Text, that she did wipe them with the hairs of
her head, that she kissed his feet, and anointed them with her ointment. Quot
habuit in se oblectamenta, tot fecit de se holocausta, her eyes, her hairs,
her lips, her ointment all the instruments of her death, were turned at her
Conversion into the means of life. God give us grace to embrace her example.
Amen.

FINIS.

