Ane FRUITFUL AND COMFORTABLE Exhortatioun anent Death.

Gif thou wald lead a godly life,
Think daily thou man die:
Gif thou wald die a blessed dead,
Live weill I counsel thee.
EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. Anno
Do. 1597. Cum Priuilegio Regio.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS DEAR Brother in the death of the Lord Jesus,
JAMES LVMMISDEN of Airdrie, Grace and peace, etc.
MY Bedfellow, best beloved, being visited with ane extreme Fever, so that I
saw nothing in her but evident takens of death: I set my self (Right
Honorable, and dear Brother in the Lord Jesus) to seek out sik comforts as
might best confirm me against sik ane assault, and prepare me for the patient
behalding of that spectacle quhilk I looked shortly to have seen, and ease me
of that importable sorrow, quhilk soon might have insewed upon that dulefull
departure. So casting over my scrolles, I fell upon the minutes of a certain
Sermon, quhilk sometime comfortablie God has uttered be the mouth of me his
simple servand, in the hearing of ane honorable and frequent Auditorie, of the
quhilk, that honorable man of special account in the eyes and hearts of all
the good men, quhair he remains, for vnfenzeit godliness and earnest care in
all good vvarkes, Sir GEORGE DOVVGLAS of Elenehill Knight, and your self gif I
be richtlie remembered was ane pairt: And the quhilk as I understood of you and
him both, thairefter was the first motion of our conjunction and affection in
Christ. The quhilk quhen I had found, I recognosced the heads of the samin, and
fostered a piece of meditation upon the points thairof at certain days to my
great comfort, and of the person afflicted, with quhome I communicated also.
The pleasure quhair of, moved me to employe my pen, and set them down in some
order, with sik affections as the present constitution furnished, flowing
always from that fountain of al consolation, the haly speiches of the spreit
set forth in sacred Scripture. Now because of the estate of your disease, I
daily langed and purposed quhiles ye were heir at home, to come and spend some
piece of time with you, and to bestow as it should please the Lord to give, some
spiritual gift by conference, for your strengthening in the truth, and that
ready resolution to dye in Christ, quhilk I have often rejoiced in sa good a
measure to be granted unto you: But being from day to day empeshed and stayed,
till I hard ye had transported your self to that may noble Town and Kirk of
all this Realm; howbeit I knew ye had then na need of any sik thing from
me, having there at hand sik store and abundance of all: yet it behooved me
for testifying of my affection toward you. And supplying some part of the
inlack of my promised Christian dewty, in visiting of you, to send you a copy
of the said Sermon, with a little history of the departure of Iean d'Albret,
vmquhile Mother to this present King of France, for a plain and comfortable
example and practice thairof, and all for furthering of that good wark, where
about I wot ye are may occupied; that is, after a reformed and sanctified
life, to make a good and godly end. How far their little things may serve for
so great a wark, I remit that to the chief Master of the warke, the haly
Ghaist. Certain I am be a piece of experience in my self, that sum thing they
may serve by his grace, for howbeit they be far from the fair stuff ye
have there at hand; yet now and then, it may be, ye find them feat for
pinnings and wages: use them therefore as ye think they may deem. It is aneuch
for me, that I have testified in some sort my affectionat remembrance of you
in the tender bowels of his love, quha hes dyed once for us, to make us live
with him for ever, quha mote perfect and crown the wark of his grace in you.

From Anstruther, the 17. of December 1596. Yours dearly in Christ, I. M.

A FRVITFVLL AND comfortable Exhortatioun anent Death.
APOC. 14. 13. Blessed ar they that die in the Lord, yea say is the Spirit, for
they rest from their labors.
THis sentence was sounded from the Heavens, in the hearing of JOHN the beloved
Apostle of Christ, confirmed be the asseueration of the Spirit, and commanded
to be registrat in writ: that it might the mair gravely be considered and
imprented in the hearts of all the faithful children of God, for strenthning
of their faith, and framing of their wills to the obedience of the calling of
God be death, with cheerful contentment, being assured it sall turn to their
everlasting life ane weilfare.

Anent death, there is two things even amongst Christians to be marueyled at;
First, that many lives sa secure and dissolutelie, as though they should never
die, quhilk is a wonder, in respect that nature it self teachis all, that they
man die: and daily experience tries, that we man leave the things of the world,
and they us, with how great a lust and pleasure soever we be carried after them.

The other is, that when death approches, we are sa greatly troubled; and when
it befalls, we mourn and lament, quhilk also is strange among professed
Christians, seeing haly Scripture preachis sa highly the profit of death; the
godly Fathers sa pleasandlie hes died before us; the Saints oftentimes wished
for death; and that quhilk is grievous of all, seeing this is the chief point
of our Christian faith, that JESUS CHRIST our Lord and Savior has for us be
death tryumphed over death, nether is there any other way to life and immortal
felicity, but be the death to triumph and be victorious pertakers with him of
his crown and kingdom.

For remedy of the first, let us always remember the penalty, inflicted to
us all in person of our first Father for his transgression; Thou shall die the
death, (sayis the Lord) Thou was taken of the earth, and to the earth thou sall
return. Remember the fragility of our nature be the saying of JOB; Man that is
borne of a woman is of short life, repleat with miseries: as the flower of the
field how soon it is sprung up, it is cut down. And that of the 144. Psalm.
preatilie paraphrased be the Prince of Christian Poets.

O rerum genitor quantulus est homo,
Hac quam prosequeris munificentia?
Et curas patria solicitudine
Figmentum fragilis luti,
Quo nec bulla levis vanior est, ne que
Quae mentes agitant somnia turbidas.
Nec rerum fugiens vmbra crepusculum,
Nec fumi volucris vapor.
That is:
O Great begetter of the world,
How small a thing are we:
Whom so with graces manifold,
Thou tenders fatherly:
A can of brukkle clay, or like
A bubble in a dub,
Or as a dream quhilk we may call
a trattle of a tub,
Or as a shadow when the Sun,
Is set dois clean decay,
Or like a smoke ascending up,
And wearing soon away.
Let us then ever think, we have that debt of nature to pay, when it likes
the author of nature to crave it: and that we can neither tell when, quhere,
nor how. The heavens daily reclayming the saul wherefra it descended, and the
earth the body, whereof it was taken; On this condition were we borne that we
should die, and to this end our maker continuis the use of this life, that we
sulde learn rightly to die.

Death is called the way of all the earth, 1. Reg. 2. and that way is
wounderfull, for as sailing on the Sea, whither we sleep or wake, we hasten to
the Haven; And that quhilk is stranger, we can na ways erres from the course:
for whither so ever we direct, we tend toward death. In this way entered ADAM
first, and continued 930. years, and yet died: So did METHVSALEM, and
continued 969. years, and yet died: And so did the rest of the Fathers of the
first age, every one many hundredth years and yet died. And so in all ages
after to this hour, neither have they passed another way, neither yet can any
nor that way of death. One Generatioun comes, (says the Preacher) and an
other goes, but the Earth stands still: even as a skaffold or stage whereon
every man hes his part to play for a short space, and so to lay of his mask
and leaving the vanities of this warlde, retire him self to his dust.

We should never theirfore be under the commoun and danger of time: saying, wald
to God I had yet ane year, ane oulke, ane day or ane hour to live, for
wishing heir will not avail: but at all times be in readiness to do that,
quhilk anes thou man do, weil thou wald do, and when least thou wald do, may
may be urged to do.

Weil has ane counseled and said: He wha every day putis ane end to his
life, hes no neid of time: therefore, think to live but for ane day, and
esteem every day a new life: For there is nathing lyker the course of our
life, than the daily course of the Sun rising in the morning, ascending to the
noone, and declyning to the evening. No like thing to the grave then our bedds,
to the winding-sheit, then the shiets to the worms, nor the punneasses or
flees to the sound of the Archangels trumpet, nor the Cock or morning wackner.
Theresore, let us every hour of the day remember sa mekel of our life to be
spent, every evening remember death, every night go to bed as we wald to
grave: lap us in our sheits as in our winding- sheits and rest, attending for
that wackner that sal summound us to judgment.

We have no permanent City, heritage, nor dwelling house heir, we sit on an
other man's ground, and occupies ane other man's house, without few-ferme, yea,
without ane hours tack: therefore we should be ever ready to flit, seeing flit
man we of necessity, whenever that officiar death warnes us, chopping at
the door of this house of mudde: or rather clayming wherein the saul for a
season is enclosed; Of nathing then, sa often and sa mekil should we think of, as
of the time, place and manner of our death, and migration from this life: in
sik sort, that gif it were possible, the whole moments that we pass of the
life, should be no other thing, but a learning or reckning over some new lesson
of death.

This moved JOSEPH of Arimathea that noble and honest Counselor, and
faithful Disciple of Christ, to prepare for him a Sepulcher in a Garden, after
the ancient custom of the people of God; at the quhilk daily he might
meditate of death. The quhilk had the honor to ressaue the body of the
victorious Dantoner of death.

This moved the noble men of AEthiopia (after as appears) they had received
the Gospel, be the ministry of Queen Candaces Eunuch, to keip this custom,
that whenever they went forth to the field for pourmeneying them selves:
they caused carry before them a golden Basen full of earth, togeither with the
sign of the Cross, to remember them that they were earth, and should turn to
earth: and that only in the death of Christ Crucified, they had comfort
against death, ane assured hope of life. This moved PHILLIP of Macedon, to
command his chalmer child every morning often times to cry thrice in his ear;
remember Ppillip that thou art but a mortal man. This moved also the ancient
Egyptians at all their bankets, to have placed in a clew and open place: right
in the sight of all their banketters, the Image and picture of death, to make
them in the midst of their pleasure to remember their end, and sa to
moderate themselves from falling in sik vices, that easily aryseth of
intemperance of banketting.

And finally, this same moved the godly Father Jerome, whether he eat or
drank, or whatsoever he was occupied about, strongly to imagine the hearing of
the sound of that Trumpet summonning to judgment.

And therefore that warning that the wise man gevis to the youth, that thinks
their lusty age will never be spent: and therefore gives them selves to all
licentious sensuality:ought to be weill remembered of all: for, For all these
things (sayis the Preacher, Eccles. 12.) God will bring thee to Judgment.
Remember thy Creator (sayis he) in the dayis of thy youth, whiles the evil
days are not come, etc. The years quhairin thou sall say, I have na pleasure
in them, whiles the Sun is not darkened, nor the Light, nor the Moon, nor the
Stars, etc. And after a long figurative and very artificious description of
the decripped, weak, and sickly auld age, he comes to this remembrance of
death, whereabout we are in these words: Whiles the silver cord is not
lengthened, nor the golden round broken, nor the pitcher broken at the well,
nor the wheel broken at the Cisterne, and dust return to earth as it was, and
the Spirit to God that gave it.

But let us above all, give heid to the wholesome warninges of our Master
Christ, and imagine with Jerome the samin to be always sounding in our ears.
Matthew. 24. Watch (sayis he) for zee know not quhat hour zour Master will
come: Of this be sure, that gif the Gude-man of the house knew at what watch
the Thief wald cum, he wald surely watch, and not suffer his house to be
dug throw. Therefore, be ye ready always, for in the hour that ye think
not, the Sun of man will cum: Take heed therefore (sayis he again) to your
selfs, lest that at any time, zour hearts be oppressed with surfeit, or
drunkenness and cares of this life, lest that day cum upon you at unawares, for
it sall cum as a snare: vvatch therefore, and pray continually, that ye may be
counted vvorthie to escape, so that ye may stand before the Son of man. Luc
21. To this same effect serves the Parables of the Talents, and ten Virgins:
for that quhilk is insisted into be our Master anent this point of watching
for his coming, hes the same use and weight for every ane in particular, when
Christ sall call them to their several judgment, as it hes for all in
general, when he sall appeir to the common and last.

Now in this continual meditation of death, we should remember, that it is the
wages of sin (as sayis the Apostle) and therefore the meditation thereof,
should strike our heart with a terror of sin, make us earnestly to repent all
our sins, and redeem the time that God spares us, with a richt amendment of
our life, and gredelie to gripe at the remeid, the mercies of God plentifully
offered in the merits and death of the Lord Jesus; lest that after the death
temporal, we die and perish eternally.

Next, this vile brickle weak estate of our life is to be weyed, to make us
eschew pride, ambition, lechery, drunkenness, gluttony, delicate feeding,
pampering, and decking of this filthy claye, and sik other vices of the flesh.

Thirdly, in that as we brought nothing with us into this life, so we are to
carry nothing away with us at our death; but as we came naked from our Mothers
womb, so ar we naked to be laid again in our common mothers belly. Let us
learn to eschew avarice, greedines of lands and gear, usury, oppression,
and all other unlawful means customablie used, for attaining to riches and
honors in this world; but as the Apostle counsels, having meat and raiment be
content, and so pass throw their things temporal, that by them we tyne not
the things eternal. It is easy (sayis one) to that man, to contemn all the
things of this life, quha setledly thinks that he must die.

Fourthlie, let us lay as it were before our eyes, a dead carkesse putrified,
and worm eaten, and of the foul smell and ugly sicht of every ane of the
members, Let us learn to eschew the vices, quhairof they are commonly
instruments: as to refrain the tongue and lips from blasphemy, swearing,
lying, flattering, and filthy talk: the eyes from wantonness, and unchaste looks;
the whole face from f^rding and false shows: the hands from blud-shed,
oppression, theft: and finally, the feet and whole body from entering, going
fordward, and continuing in evil ways, against God, our neighbor, and our
selves; without remorse and true repentance; lest a mair horrible spiritual
spectacle be seen on the miserable saul, demayned in the hells be these
spiritual Adders and Snakes, the Devils.

And last, in sa far as death, with equal fute choppes as weill at the gates
of Princely palaces, as at the doors of puir cottages; and taks pleasure to
wound as weill the flurishing youth, as the hairy languishing age: shuiting his
darts continually, and never missing be Land, be Sea; be day, be night; at
home, or a field: Let all estates at all times, in every place, learn to be
ready. And this meikill for remeid of forgetfulness of death and louse-living.

Now followis for comfort aganis the fear and force of death when he strikes.
For this purpose, we have often and weightilie to considder, what a change and
cosse we sall make, when we sall exchange this miserable and painful
pilgrimage, with that pleasand and happy habitation. For sen God first for the
sin of ADAM, enjoined to him his penalty in these terms. The Earth sall be
cursed for thy cause, with sorrow sall thou eat thy bread all the days of
thy life, and with the sweat of thy browe sall thou feed, till thou return to
the Earth. Behold the estate of this brickle body heir, a booth of all
sicknesses and diseases: so that no Apothecary hes his shop so pleasant with
drugs, unguents, and salues; as the body of man is with dregs, corrupt
humors, vennoms and sares, subject to all injuries of fortune; that is, of sik
miseries and mischiefs, as God by his providence sends and sowes athort the
warlde for sin whose death the whole Elements he^ dight, and to whose
destruction and cutting off, innumerable enemies hes conspired: how many wild
beasts? how^ many creeping Serpents? how many fleeing waspes? how many
sowmin^ monsters? yea, how many men and women in shape and name, but indeed
for cruelty, Tigers; for craftines, Foxes; for malitiousnes under a flattering
fashion, Crocodiles; for vennome, Vipers; and finally, for all mischief
against their own kind, the greatest monsters in nature: and yet the most
dangerous enemy of all against thy self, is thy self; be thy follies, thy
fantasies, thy vanities, thy surfettings and excess, thy lusts, thy anger,
and the rest of thy affections, whereof within thy breist, thou fosters a
Forest full: as of all kind of vndantoned and raging beasts, ravenous
fowls, and venomous Adders; justly thereby procuring at the hand of God and
man, the wrack of the miserable body.

Syne see whereabout this life is occupied: how vainly, how dangerously, how
painefully, how grievouslie, in what company: as DAVID often complained in his
days, of Lions, of Dragons, of Dogs, of Swine, hungry Foxes, Aspes, and
Scorpions, devouring us, deceiving us, incensing us, traducing us, biting,
scratching, barking, and pudling us in sik sort, that oftentimes there is
greater security, and ease to be found among these evil beasts, nor amongst
many men, with whom we must live in thi^ world.

And what estate I pray thee can thy puir saul ly intill, in the midst of sik
bale full business of the body, within the quhilk, it is enclosed as ane
Addercop, it the midst of her web; set a floght with the smallest twitch
thereof: as a Mous^ trapped in a fall, with the quhilk the children takes their
pastime, or rather as DANIEL in the den of Lions, SIDRACH MESACH in the fiery
Oven, or JONAH groaning in the Whales belly, overgone with the waves and
surges o^ the raging Sea; sobbing like a Dove chattering as a Crane, and
mourning a^ ane bewayling his Mother: What feare^ what care, what grief, what
sadness, wha^ sorrow, what indignation, what vexation, and wanrest? No, it is
in vain to prease to express the infinite cogitations and commotions of the
mind, in respect of that, quhilk daily experience may make us to conceive.

Now, the only rest and relief from all this, is in and be death: whereby
we sall change these diseases in health; these dangers, in safety; these
pains, in pleasures; this fighting and labor amongst deadly enemies, in
singing and honor among heavenly Angels: And finally, this wicked and evil
company, with that most happy society of the glorious and blessed God of the
holy Trinity, the Father, Son and Spirit, of the whole triumphant Kirks,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and of the sweet fellowship of all
these perfited spirits of the just and faithful that hes gone before us, even
of sik as was most near and dear to us in the Lord Jesus in this life: the
want whereof, may move us to like the worse of this world, and the mair
earnestly to desire to be dissolved, and to be with them in the Heavens:
Therefore was it, that from their heavens as it were, the noise and sounding of
this blessed company, that that voice came down, quhilk the beloved Apostle of
Christ heard, saying: Blessed are they quhilk dies in the Lord, for that rest
from their labors.

But go to mair particularly, and run throw the ages and occupations of this
life, quhilk when the Philosophers had done, they thought it worthier of the
name of Death than Life: and so has a godly learned man uttered after the
sense and feeling of his soul.

Vita mihi haec mors est, mors haec mihi vita perennis:
In vita exilium, patria est in morte propinqua. That is*
This life to me is death, but death to me is life but blame:

This life to me in bannishment, but death returns me hame.

How soon the Infant comes into the world he greets, and bewailes his case:
when he comes to barne-head, he is under whippes and rods of Schoolmaisters
and craftis-men: In his youth-heid driven in a hundred conceits, by his
unsettled brain, raging in his lust and ryotous excess, ready to cast himself
blind-folde every day in a new sort of danger and shame; wherein he is not
able to be ruled, but be sik rigorous, masters of fools; as poverty,
imprisonement, sickness, and sik other.

Means he to tread the way of virtue? it is rough stay, painful and
sweatie; he man pass the mercy of the stormy sea, of the sword of enemies,
of the fire, and of the water, and of a thousand sorts of dangers; yea, of
very deaths: or he can taste of the sweit fruit thereof in any honor or ease?
through the quhilk, gif he fall happen to escape and come to man-heid, then is
he moved to marriage, esteemed of all at the first, merry age, but soon
after, myred age, and at last clean marred: for then vnbesets at once
squadrons of cares for house, for moyen of life, for wife, for children, for
honesty in the world: thereabout are pleyis, feides, quarrels, contentions,
running, ryding, sailing, fighting, flyting without ease or end: whereby
dolorous deaths, murders, burnings, heirships, shipwracks, pilleries; and sik
like falls out every day: wherewith the perfect age of man is consumed in
vanity, vexation, mourning, and mischief; till heavy and burdensome age
overtake him, wherein he can have pleasure of nothing, wherein the puir
conscience is bitten and pyned with remembrance and remorse of the bypast
sins, and all the stresses and surfets of his bypast travels, with the lead
of degenering humors to corruption, so vnbesettis the carkas, that there is
nothing but hosting in the bowels, yaking in the bones, ytch in the flesh,
gout, gravel, paralise, and infinite maladies, as so many scourges and
Burreaues tormenting him, till the miserable life in end be pyned away and
expelled.

SOLOMON sought out carefully quhatsoeuer seemed profitable, pleasant, or
might bring any comfort or contentment to the mind of man in this life: so that
none culd be able sensyne to match him, to let be to go beyound him, in that
inquisition, in respect of his moyen and wisdom incomparable, whereby he
searched out, not only the three great continents of the world Asia, Africa,
and Europe: but also these falsely supposed to be new fund lands, to the quhilk
his ships passed from three year to three: for sa long was the voyage; and
brought Gold, Apes, Papingoes, Spyces, Odours and al other precious things in
great abundance, and yet he found nathing but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Quhat vanity, vexation, pain and fasherie is in every estate of life, trade
and occupation, by this ane thing is most evident, that none is content with
their awin estate: but every one esteems his neighbors better: because he
knawis it not so weil as his awin, and conferres ay the fasherie and bitterness
of his, with the pleasures and commodities of his neighbors; so that the only
ignorance of things of the world, maks the estimation of them: but when they
are proven by experience as SOLOMON assayed, they are found to be nothing
less, than they were supposed: so that how meikil the mair men lusted after
them, so meikil the sooner do they loath them, and man confess in the end, all
to be but vanity, labor and grief.

Therefore has experience plainly painted forth the miseries of this life
by diverse similitudes, and the happiness of the exchange thereof, with the
blessed death in the Lord, the quhilk adds on ( In the Lord) is alwais to be
remembered, for who doubts, but it is better to live in the most painesull
estate of life: that is, than to burn in Hell fire for ever: only than tak
heed, that thou die in the Lord: that is, in the mercy and favor of thy God
through JESUS CHRIST, steadfastly believing according to the truth of the word
of God; that death is swallowed up, and devoured by the death of CHRIST, who
therefore by the mouth of his Prophet, insults over death, saying O death, I
shall be thy death. For seeing the sting of death is sin, and the force of
sin (as speaks the Apostle) is the law; certainly CHRIST fulfilling the
law for us, and satisfieng by his suffering for all the transgressions theirof,
he hes so now plucked away that sting, that it can no ways hurt us: as
also he hes broken the force of sin, that it can have no power to condemn
us. And how be it, the decree of God be, that all man die and turn to the
dust, yet properly to speak; this death in the Lord Jesus, is not to be
termed death; but as the Scripture calls it, a sleep. And as Christ said to
his Disciples, that LAZARUS sleeped: And the Apostle speaking of them that were
departed this life, used this form, Concerning them (sayis he) that are a
sleep, etc. This ground then being laid, that thou die in the Lord be
certain, then thou hes made a happy change, from misery temporal, to
everlasting felicity.

For in this mortallife, we are always in Prison and bands, with the stinck
and filth whereof, we are infected and defiled, pyned with hunger and thirst,
dammished with darkness, and demayned with dolours: but by death the bands
are loosed, the prison made patent, wherout of freely we fly unto Heavens,
wherein we are received, clean and pure washen by the laver of that Lambs
blood: and being cled with his white garment of jnnocencie, we are filled
with delights, and finds the fruition of the light inaccessable. The
consideration whereof, made the Apostle PAVLL to exclayme; O miserable man that
I am, who sall deliver me from this body of death. Romans 7. And earnestly
desire to be loosed, and be with Christ. In like manner DAVID, in the
difficulties of this prison, uttered these voices; As the heart brayes for the
streams of Water: so does my soul breath for thee o God: my saul thirsts
for thee o God, even for the living God: O when sall I go and appeir in the
sight of God! Psalm. 42. But again, Psalm. 17. he sweitlie comforts him self in
the end of ane other Psalm, with an assurance of the jnjoying of the blessed
light, as our Poet hes expressed the sam in these verses.

Puritas vitae mihi te tueri,
Corporis vinclis tribuet soluto
Illa lux vere faciet me ab omni,
Part beatum.
Lux voluptatum cumulata cunctis
Gaudijs, cum se sone nube menti,
Pura majestas dabit in tuendam
Lumine puro.
The quhilks, for their pleasand comfort, are maire largely paraphrased in
this Dixiane following.

Cleanes of life sal make me to behold,
Thy schyning face, when lousd ar bodies bands;
That happiness be no tongue can be told:
Quhilk all perfect, into thy presence stands
That loue-some light, out throw those plesand lands,
Spreds out her beams of joy abunda^tly:
Whereby the mind that clearly understands:
But mist or cloud sall see thy majesty,
In glistring gloir, ay glancing with sik light:
As dois obscure the face of Phoebus bright.
This life is but a bannishment, and we are strangers and Pilgrims therein, as
testifies DAVID Psalm. 39.

Lord heir my suit and gif good heed,
Regard my tears that fall:
I soiourne like a stranger heir,
As did my fathers all.
Heaven is our true Country, and dead the returning thereto; for our saul's send
from the Heavens, are put in these earthly Tabernacles and tents, to sojourne
heir for a season, and syne, to return when this messenger death is sent to
call them hame to that heavenly Tabernacle, made without hands. This is very
plane and full of consolation: the 2. Cor. 5 For we know (sayis the Apostle,)
that gif the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God: an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens: for
therefore we sigh, desiring to be clothed with our house quhilk is in heaven,
because that gif we be clothed, we sall not be found naked. But indeid, we
that are in this Tabernacle, sigh and are burdened, because we walde not be
unclothed, but wald be clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life: And he that has created us for this thing is GOD, wha hes given us
the earnest of the spirit: wherefore we are always bold, thought we know that
while we are hame at in the body, we are abse^t from the Lord: for we walk by
faith, and not by sight: Nevertheless we are bold, and love rather to
remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord: Wherefore also we covet,
that both dwelling at hame, and r^mooving from hame, we may be acceptable to
him. And that to the Hebrews 13. We have not a permanent City heir, but
look for ane to come. The quhilk effect also the same our godly Poet, hes
most pleasandlie and sweitlie sung to the glory of God, and comfort of all
the faithful, in these verses.

O magne Rector orbis, indulgentiae
Munera terra, fretum sentit and astra, tuae:
Quaecunque caelum amplectitur, parentia
Legibus orta vigent, lapsa caduntque tuis.
Modus aequitatis and tuae sapientiae,
Cunctaque quae fecit, cunctaque sacta regit*
Long niuosis montium fastigijs
Altior est, vasti gurgitibusque freti:
Humana gens hinc haurit auram and Spiritum:
Nec pecudes curam praeteriere tuam.
Hinc cuncta vitae suppetunt nobis bona,
Dum men's corporeo carcere vincta latet.
Foetus sub alis volueris vt tegit suis.
Praesidij fugimus spe mala cuncta tui.
At exul animus morte libor patrum
Cum repetet lunen sidereamque donum.
Illic egestas and dolores exulant
Nemo feret votis non potiora suis,
Passim voluptas, pura passim gaudia:
Delicias largo flumine rivus agit.
Illic perenni vita font profluit,
Vita, gravis fati non r^^^anda manu:
Illinc fatiscent mentium caligines,
Quae modo sub tenebris pactora nostra premunt:
Vultuque radius purus (...),
Lumine nos purae faelici^^tis alit.
Translated thus to the tune of the CX. Psalm.

Great governor of all the world so wide,
The gudlie graces of thine indulgence:
Ar felt in the earth and Seas at every tide:
And in the starnis heavens influence.
Quhat ever the life so large dois comprehend,
Dois rander to thy laws obedience:
When they grow up, and when they feal in end,
They wax and wayne unto thy reverence.
The measure of thy sapience divyne,
And of thy righteous constant equity:
Dois rightly rewl and dress unto their fine,
What ever thou made, and what is found to be.
The snawie tops of hills so huge and hie,
(...) groundless, gulfes of the Ocean,
Are not so heigh as thy benignity,
Nor deipas is thy gudnes soverane.
Both man and beast heir of dois draw their breath,
Their life, their fude and sustentation:
Their g^ding, and their safety from the death.
(...) evil and danger, preservation.
Even as the foul dois foster tenderly,
Her hale golberts sitting on their nest:
Sik is thy care o father verily,
Of al thy children whom thou lovis best.
What ever neidful for this life is found,
Flowis out from this to us abundantly,
So lang as saul lies in this body bound,
As captive in a prison heavilie.
But when the saul exyled sall return,
Unto her kyndlie countries heavinlie house,
Delivered by the death quhilk men do murne,
But cause, for his relief so precious.
All want and dolor there are far exyld,
No man sal mis mair then his heart can wis,
In every place ar pleasures vndefyld,
Sweet melody in heavenly joy and blis.
There rivers runs on spate with delicats,
And fountans flowis with water there of life:
Abundant store of fresh and freand meats.
There Angels fud, sweit Manna wonder ryfe.
Therewith a constant course dois flow, but end
That everlasting life in perfect joy:
Quhilk dreadful destenies cannot offend:
Nor duleful death in any wise anoy.
The drowsy darkness, terrors and the fears,
And melancholik cogitations,
All heavines, all sorrows, griefs and tears
Ar banished from these heavenly mansions.
Their blessed beams effunded from that face,
Wheirin alone will be our whole delyt:
Sal make in us that happy warke of grace,
In every point for ever mair perfyte.
Now grant us father so to live in Christ,
That we in Christ may end our misery:
Ay watching for his coming to that trist,
And go with him to this felicity.
We are plying in this life ane dangerous voyage, sailing throw a stormy and
tempestuous sea, in ane vntight barge, evell accoutred, ever fearing shalds,
craigs, or sum fore-land, where we may make shipwreck: in continual peril of
Pirates, the devil, the world and sin, ever occupied, either rowing or pumping,
spycing or skayring, wynding or howing sail, weying or letting anchor fall: with
intolerable travel and danger. But death is the calm and chiereful herberie,
the relief of all these labors and pains, and halie city of the Saints,
settled in safety and ease. There is no thing but pleasure rest and merrines.

We wander heir in a wearisome way, throw wood and wilderness, moss and mire,
throw rough craigs and burning sand, ever in danger of limmers and wild beasts,
pined with hot and called, hunger and thirst, creazed, crucked, bruised and
tired, wil-some, in mist and darkness, either gald and mangeid, like Mules with
the weight and burden of the pelf and dirt of this earth, or then stressed
with the want of things neidfull for the necessity of our life. But be death
we put end to our jouruey, and rest from our travel: entering in the house of
our heavenly Father, where there is many mansions, weil prepared and furnished
in all things, according to the promise of our CHRIST.

This life is a perrelous and painful weirfare, wherein we have many sore
combats; not only carnal fighting with men, and striving with the world, and
the fasheries of this life: but spiritual, with principalities, powers, Lords
of the world, rulers of darkness and spiritual evils; from high places, as
witnesses the Apostle; meaning against Beelzebub and legions of his unclean
spirits, most frequent, forceable, crafty and walk-riffe enemies. The quhilks
the surest haldes, and best fortified places cannot hald out. And from whose
assaults and invasions, no place nor time is free: Seeing we carry the most
dangerous friends of them, to wit, our affections about with us in our bosoms,
so long as we are in this body of sin, by that we find them before us
wheresoever we go, and what soever about we be occupied; with these are we
daily wounded, chaste, traquheld, overthrawne, and led away captives: But by
death reporting the last victory in Jesus Christ, we honorably triumph over
all, and obtaines the fruition of that peace of God that passes all
understanding for ever.

And finally, this world is a man-mil, a stane barrowe, a place of fair labor
under rigorous masters of wark, constraining us daily to pay ane unpardonable
exaction of task: even as in Egypt, where the people of God were compelled by
that spiritual Pharaoh, to work tyle in great quantity and number, and yet to
gather straw and stubble themselves, or then to be scourged and demayned, till
we sigh and cry unto God, and he send this death and his Moses for our
deliverance: whereby, bringing us out of the house of labor and bondage, he
sets us down in the liberty of his kingdom, even in that promised Canaa^
with Joshua and Caleb, to feed with these on the plenteous fatnes thereof,
overflowing with milk and honey.

Now then, by recapitulation to abridge the comparisons of the exchange of
this life, with that other quhilk is effectuate by death; we may weill say
with Solomon, Better is the Day of our Death, then the day of our birth: For
man is borne of a woman in travel, to live in misery, but he dies through
Christ in ease to live in foelicitie; incontinent after he comes in the world,
with cries he utters his miserable estate: incontinent after his departure,
with songs he praises God for ever. He is yet scarcely in his cradell, when
a number of deadly enemies assailes him: after his death, no enemy can annoy
him: while he is here he displeases God: when he is dead, he pleases him
perfitlie: In this life, he dies through sin: in that to come, he lives
through righteousness: Be many tribulations here he mortifieth sin: with
infinite joys there he lives in holiness: here he dies every hour, there
he lives continually: here is hatred, there is love: here pain, there
pleasure: here mourning, there melody: here corruption, there immortality:
here time, there aeternitie: here misery, there felicity: and finally, here
can we see nothing but vanity, but there sall we see the Majesty of our God:
with triumphand and unspeakable joy and glory everlasting.

Is death then to be detested? should it be abhorred? or should men immoderatelie
mourn for it? or rather should it not be embraced, welcomed and kissed? Sall
we lament without let, when God calls our nearest and dearest by death to his
life? or contrariwise, have we not occasion as the Thracians, with feasting
and gladness to congratulate. For gif any evil be befalling therein, it is to
us, and not to them: But so it is, as ane Ethnic weill reasons, to bewail our
incommodities, and to be heavilie grieved for any evil betyding to us, it is
self-love, and not the love of a friend: and so to be sad for the safety of a
friend, it is rather the part of ane enuyous person, than of a Brother or
favorer: and gif so the Ethnicks hes ressoned, what should become us, Christians?
Sall we contravene that rule of Christian duty, lamenting for them that
laughes, and mourning for them that singes: fasting for them that feasts: hurt
our health, for them that are perfitelie whole: wear the black doole for them,
quha clothed in white garments does accompany the Lamb with joy wheresoever
he goes? For them, who are always singing with the Angels. Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God of Hosts: Sall we with impatient clamours and plaintes repyne
against the will of God? And finally, for sik as hes the blessed fruition of
the company of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; of the holy Angels,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, and of all the just and
righteous, who hes been gathered before to that triumphant Kirk: Sall we run
like warwolfes to solitary holes and corners, flying the society of the
faithful, and comfort with the congregation of Gods people, quhilk they have
in their holy meetings; namely, for spiritual exercises of godliness, hearing
of the word of consolation, and presenting of prayers and praises unto God,
quhilk sort of exercise and conversation, approches nearest to the holy
occupation of them that are gone before us to the heavens? Na God forbid. But
rather, howbeit by the example of Abraham and vthers, some thing be granted
unto nature to satisfy the weakness, and bewail the frailty thereof: showing,
that we are not stocks nor stanes, but touched with a feeling of the common
misery of mankind: namely, because vtherwise we are so hard hearted, that we
cannot so earnestly as we ought be commoued for our sins: we may weill
finding our hearts mollified at sik occasions, intertaine that constitution
for the exercise of unfeigned repentance. Yet nevertheless, we ought
therewithal to rejoice, and praise God with gladness of spreit; quha hes
vouchsafed in mercy happily and weill to direct the course of sik persons
lives, and give them ane happy end; praying him instantly of his inestimable
grace, so to deal with us also, that following the good example of sik as hes
tread that path before us; we may go fordward rightly and constantly, till
we be gathered with them to that rest, where all together in end, we may
glorify our God and Father eternally.

Now it rests to satisfy such, who fears their great loss and hurt by death;
and first them who heavily regrates the want of their Parents, husbands, wives,
children, brethren, sisters, special friends, and sik vthers: Let sik first
considder that quhilk hes been clearly declared; that they have no cause to
lament for them, that are taken so to their rest in respect of their estate;
unless they wald show them selves envious of their weilfare, and to prefer
our pleasure to their so great profit, or to make mair of doing of our turns
here, nor of their termeles felicity there; it were to show us altogether
addicted to the love of our selves, without consideration of the weilfare of
them to whom we wish most weill unto. Wald thou desire for thy cause, and it
were to effectuate never so good a turn to thee; that ane whom thou love
best should lie in Prison, live in banishment, enter in a barrowis, in a
perrelous voyage, in a dangerous journey, in a pyneful thraldom, and shameful
slaverie? Nay, thou dare not say it, lest thou wald bewray thy self-loue, and
testify that thou caredst not what became of him, so that thy turn were done.
Or gif thou will say, I wish him no worse nor my self; there is yet no token
of love: For gif thou thy self were in misery and continual danger, or in
worse estate than ill enough, wald thou so show thy affection, by wishing thy
friend partaker thereof? gif sik be thy affection, very few wald be feign of
it. Love wishes the weill, and not the woe of the person beloved: yea, gif it
be in sorrow, it finds the samin doubled, to see thy friend involved in the
samin estate with it.

But now I pray thee, quha hes done this to thee? Is it not God that works and
dois all this? Yes certainly, be whatsoever Instrument he works the samin.
Dois thou not daily pray, that his will be done? Why art thou than grieved
because thou hes obtained thy prayer? Or thinks thou indeed that he is thy
Father to whom thou hes prayed? and yet hes done thee that hurt and wrong?
Then man he be in thy judgment ane unnatural and vnloving Father. Or esteems
thou thy self, to wit better what is good for thee, nor he dois that hes made
and redeemed thee? Oh believes thou him not to be all-sufficient, that can be to
thee in steed of all, and furnish thee whatsoever thou wants? Or suspects thou
his fidelity and honesty in keeping his promises? Certainly ane or all of
their man be, or than thou art not in thy right wit, but is transported with
ignorance, infidelity, folly, and blind affections; like unto a beast, a
babe, a fool, or a phrenetick. Therefore, learn to take up and amend thy
self, and turn again unto the faithful tread; enter into the Lords
Sanctuary, cast up the buke of wisdom, learn thereof and be wise; and thou
sall cleirlie see the Almighty hes wroght it and rightly: he hes done his
good will, and for thy weill: he hes played the Father in great favor: he hes
wrought wisely, and thou art fond quha cannot persaue it, in taking from thee
thy leaning stocks that withheld thee fra him, that thou may lean to him
allanerlie, and find in him whatsoever thou wants: he hes taken on him to be a
Father to the fatherless, the husband to the widow, the friend to the
faithful, the brother and sister of them that hears his word and dois it:
Father and mother may leave thee, but he will not leave thee, he will not
forsake thee: The mother may forget the fruit of her womb, the husband the
wife, the Father the son, the brother the sister; but the Lord will never
forget his awin: either sall he stir up means for thy comfort, and make
of fremd men, fathers and friends, and unkind women, mothers, wives, sisters,
etc. gif thou be faithful and patient; or then sall he work, and perfect the
work of his mercy in thee, and make thy saul with full contentment to say,
Thou finds thy self satisfied by his al-sufficiencie, so that thou wald wish
na mair, no nor never could have looked for sa meikill.

Now the doubt quhilk remains behind, dois furnish us the greatest
consolation of all. It wald appear, that not without cause should we fear, for
the dissolving of nature; and separation of the saul from the body, and
justly lament the loss of our bodies; quhilk by death seems to be destroyed
and brought to naught: and thereby either to be made meat to the worms of the
earth, food to the fishes of the Sea, and fowls of the air; ar turned by the
fearful fire, in ashes and smokie air. Let us then consider the loss, but
meikle mair, estima^ and view the commodity and comfor^ that redownd; to us
thereby.

Certainly, gif we look rightly to the matter, we sall find na loss at
all, unless thou wald esteem the loss of thine enemy to be loss: for
indeed, that old man of sin by death is destroyed, and alluterlie mortified
and undone. That poison is put away, and that canker consumed, whereof fainest
thou wald have been free, gif thou be the free child o^ Cod; and for the
quhilk cause, inspecial death ought to be embraced as thy best friend, and
dearly esteemed of, for defacing and slaying of thy deadly enemy. Of whom, by
no other means thou can be clean quite but by death: for Christ our king, by
the death overcome and dantoned death, and made our greatest enemy, to become
our special friend; even as the fire to eat out the fire of the scalded hand:
The Scorpion to heal the Scorpions sting, and the Theryack made of the flesh of
the Viper, to abolish the deadly venom thereof: What loss is there in the ure
cast in the furnace, when be the fire out of the moules of the earth thou
gathers silver and gold? What loss in the casting of the seed in the ground
and scattering in abroad, when for ane thou resaues ten? The same loss, is in
the laying off of this mortal body in the grave: wherefra, again be the
virtue of Christ's resurrection, we sall resaue it immortal, clean, and free
from the seed of sin, and so from all sorrow, meet to be joined with the
immortal saules, to have the fruition of the face and light of the countenance
of the God of immortality.

Then let us repose upon their two chief grounds of consolation against the
fear of death; to wit, the immortality of the saull, and resurrection of the
bodies, warranted to our faith, be the most clear and comfortable passages of
the Scriptures of God. As touching the immortality of the saul, the
Philosophers, Ethnicks, yea, the very American Cannibals this day doubts
nothing off. But lo, we have a stronger consolation, in the blessed hope of
the resurrection of our bodies, and joining of them with the saul in a
glorious immortal, and perfect estate, to the steadfast standing of that wark
of grace, in our whole man, body and saul for ever. Anent the quhilk, we man
speak at mair length; because of the large and accomplished comfort arising
thereupon.

Of innumerable things in nature, the reparation of the body of man in the
resurrection may be easily believed: for any may easily observe, how of the
auld and dead grasshopper, be shaking off of her slouch, the young dois lowpe
out fresh and able: of the swear and decrepit cale-worme enclosed all the
winter in a sort of shell, to fly out a fair painted Butterfly in the
Summer. Or as the learned observes, of nature has left in writ: of the seary
Emmets, become winged flies: of the carrion of a Calfe, the honey Bees: the silk
worms lies dead all the winter, and quickens again in the spring time: the
Phoenix reviving out of her own ashes. Quha is he that espies not the
pleasant Springtime, and the gracious vicissitude of the returning new year:
wherein all herbs, trees, birds, and beasts, begins to show a new force of
nature; and brings forth sik new lusty and goodly shapes, as no natural
wit can give the reason thereof. Seeing then, that nature produces daily so
many things, whereof the mind of man can conceive no cause: quha can deny,
but the workman of the whole world may raise up again the bodies of men, in
a mair bewtiful form, nor ever they were in: seeing his hand that made
nature, works the like dailye, in nurishing and drawing out the putrified and
corrupt seed, and making the samin to grow up in a pleasant herb, or a fair
and great try; and sik like the seed of man and beast; liquid and hin in it
self to grow in flesh, blude, hyde, hair; yea, in hard sennowes and bones.

And so Cyprian dois illustrat the truth of the Resurrection, be the Apostles
Example of the seed. 1. Corinthians. 15. Gif any (sayis he) wald mix together
diverse sorts of seeds, and syne sow or scatter them on the Earth: dois not
every seed in a competent time, according to the kind of the awin nature,
bring forth the blade, flower, and fruit thereof, for the reparation of the
whole substance and beauty of that body that perished of before: So also, the
substance of the flesh of man, albeit it be diverslie dejected; when it sall
please God, it sall be brought again to life; in that same shape, quhilk death
defaced; so that every saul, sall have restored to it, not (...) confused,
sought out, or strange body, but the very awin self body in substance quhilk
it had before, only far altered for the better in qualities. Wherefore, the
Apostle could not choose a mair fit and near figure to represent the
resurrection, than the similitude of the seed sown in the furrows of the
Land: For as in nature the seed is cast in the furrows; so in Christian
burials, is the body laid in the grave: and as the seed after it is corrupt and
rotten, begins again to sprout and grow up in a stalk, or Tree, flourishing
and bringing forth fruit: so dois the body fresh and vigorious rise again
from corruption to life: a body subject to putrefaction is laid in the grave;
but raised again, free from all frailty: it is laid down, expond to wrack
and destruction; but it is raised again, cheerful, quick, lively; clean and
pure, fined from all dross of earthly or elementall alteration: a little
assay whereof, may be ordinarlie remarked in sickness; quhilk is the
forerunner, and messenger of death: for when with a fever, ane is heavilie
vexed, his color grows pale, his body is heavy, his strength is gone; and of
an able man, is turned in a lazy lump of clay; liker to a carrion, than a
living creature: but in some process of time, by help of nature, means of
medicine, and restoratiue food, he reviues, and becomes lusty, gude-like,
and maire pleasant and able, than before his sickness. So in the Resurrection,
the same body arises again; but so purged, so fined, so strengthened and
trimmed, that no blemish nor wamb of the auld corruption or weakness may be
espied.

So then, this separation for a time is no loss at all; but be the contrary,
to the great good of both the parts of man: for the body is laid at rest, free
from all danger; not only of sin and al miseries arising thereupon; but also
from all temptations, peaceable sleeping in the grave, till that pleasant
morning of the joyful Resurrection. For howbeit, it appear void of life, in
so far as the saul being separate, carries with it all sense and moving; so
that at last, it is putrified and turned to dust: yet notwithstanding, for s^
meikle as the power and spirit of God that quickens all things, leaves it not,
i^ cannot be esteemed altogether separate from life; but as the Apostle speaks,
Rom 8. Gif the spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he
that raised Christ from the dead, sall quicken your mortal bodies, by the
spirit that dwells in you: As also in the former similitude of the seed is
evident; the quhilk howbeit it appear to be dead, yet has it life in it self
before thou sow it, and being sown, it seems to be slain and buried; but it
comes contrary wise to pass: for out of very rottenness, it springs up mair
pleasant than it was: so that it is certain, it had life in it, both before it
was sown, and in the midst of the corruption thereof. And when the Lord in his
Law, calls himself the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; saying, he is not
the God of the dead, but of the living: as our Master uses the samin against
the Sadduces for the Resurrection: he means not only of the saul's of these
his servants that were living with him in the heavens, but also of their bodies,
quhilk the Lord had laid up in the earth, with the awin sort of life furnished
thereto, by his power that quickens all creatures, even as the seed lying
under the furrows.

Mairover, we being by faith joined and coupled with Christ as these fathers,
not only in saul for the life and safety thereof; but also in body, that
quickening force of his life, whereby he raised our nature from the death,
never leaves the bodies of the faithful, but with a hid, fectful efficacy,
lurkes for a while, as the seed under the clod, till it spring out in the awin
time. And this is the grace of God that ever accompanies it, even in the midst
of corruption, be the virtue of that everlasting covenant, quhilk is as a
certain spring and vain of life, not to the saules only, but to the bodies
also in the midst of the very grave: For according to that ground of our text,
They that dies in the Lord, are pronounced blessed: Now, the saul is not
properly esteemed to die, but the body; so that this blessing man be on the
body: but so it is, that no blessing can be without life, it follows then of
necessity, that the body is not destitute alluterlie of life, but hes in it,
the awin sort and condition of life, even in the midst of death: and although
through the corruption, it shows no token of life; yet retains it thereof a
certain seed and virtue, quhilk in the day of the Resurrection it shawis
forth, when the spirit of God sall put out his infinite power, to quicken
these bodies, and raise them from the dust, to be decored with that glory
promised to his elect.

Death then affrayes the godly, but as a bowgle that fears bairnes: as a
mother that wald put on a Mask to fear her child; the child behalding her so
disguised, cries and flies away: but how soon the mask is remooved, and the
mother shewis her self as she is: then turns the child again with joye, and
embraces and kisses her. So is it indeed with the death, quhilk in respect of
the new life it brings, may be called our mother, as JOB said to the grave:
Thou art my father, and to corruption, thou art my mother: when we look on it,
as it is masked with the law and rigor of Gods justice and wrath, for the
transgression theirof, then is it most terrible and fearful; But when that
mask is shaken off, and it presence the self unto us, as it is becum to be in
very deed in Christ: than may we run to it and meet it, and embrace it as our
mother, to be brought out thereby unto the estate of a blessed life: sa that
there is no loss by it, but great gain: for like as on that ane part, we can
never be free of the thraldom and vexation of sin, but by death, so are we
never thoroughly put in possession of the rich graces of Christ; but be ye
samin, for we live heir under hope: and that quhilk is seen, is ^ot hoped for:
but that quhilk we look to see and enjoy, when by death we depart from this
vale of misery, unto that Paradise of all pleasure: Namely, after the joyful
resurrection of the just, when that work of Gods grace in us is fully
perfited: We are heir under tutorie, but there sal be free inheritors: here as
Prentises and scholars, but then sall be free men and masters; And as the
damsel under the discipline of her dame, reioyces meikle, and when she hears
of the treaty of her marriage: but mair when she is contracted, and most of
all, in the day of her marriage, when she beginns to have the full enjoying of
all, quhilk she langed for: so we in this life, be the Gospel preached, hears
of that marriage, and believing of the samin, ar firmly hand-fasted; But the
full fruition sall we not have, till be death we be turned to dust, and be the
glorious resurrection, renewed again, and presented to our husband in the
heavens, perfect and comely in body and saul: at quhilk time our marriage is
solemnized in the sight of God, his Angels, and all the glorified Saints, with
whom we sall enter in the wedding chamber, to enjoy the perfection of
unspeakable pleasures for ever: our beautiful bridegroom inviting us with
these words. Arise my love, my fair one; Behold the winter is past, the rain
is changed and gone away, the flowers appeir in the earth, the time of the
singing of Birds is cum, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land: the
Fig Tree has brought forth her young figs, and the vynes with their small
grapes has cast a savor. Arise my love, my fair one, and come away etc.
Cant. 2. Then sall be accomplished the prophecy of the spirit; They who sawis
in sorrow, sal shear with joy; he wha carrying his happer went mourning, sall
return carrying his sheaues with dancing.

Let us then steadfastly repose on Christ Jesus, who in nothing did show forth
the powe and glory of his Godhead, fo meikel as in rising again from the
dead; and tryvmphing over the power of the grave: for the same without
question, is to be effectuat in all his members, any of the quhilk, gif he should
leave vnperfited, be that resurrection, he could not be a perfect Christ and
Savior. Let us therefore certaiuelie believe the Apostle, Phil. 3. and look
for the coming of our Savior from the Heavens at the last day: at quhilk
time, he sall transform our humble and mortal bodies, and make them conform to
his glorious body, be that power, whereby he is able to subdue all things:
and let us mark the exhortation and consolation of the same Apostle. 1. These.
4. I will not have you to be ignorant brethren, concerning them quhilk are a
sleep: that ye be not sorrowful, as those who hes no hope. For gif we believe
that Jesus is dead and risen again, even so them quhilk sleep iu Jesus, will
God bring with him; for this say we unto you by the word of the Lord, that they
quhilk live and are remaining in the cumming of the Lord, sal not prevent them
quhilk sleep: for the Lord himself sal descend from heaven, with a shout and
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God: and the dead in
Christ sall rise first. Then sall they quhilk live and remain, be caught up
with them also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and sall be ever
with the Lord: wherefore, comfort your self (sayis the Apostle) one ane other
with these words.

The reason then, wherefore they that sleeps in the Lord, should not be
immoderatlie lamented, is, because they are to be raised again, (be the word of
God,) to have the fruitio^ of the ages that ends never: As Christ himself hes
assured: Ioh. 5. The hour sall cum, when they that are in the graves, sall
heir his voice, and they sall cum forth: they that hes done good to the
resurrection of life: but they that hes done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation. Now this good doing, is believing in him, and showing of the
fruits theirof, in love and obedience: as he himself answered to the Jews, in
the saxt Chapter theirafter, when they asked him* What sal we do, that we may
work the works of God? This is the work of God, (says or Master) that ye
believe in him whom he hes sent. This is the will of the Father that sent me,
that none of those that he has given me should perish: But that I should raise
them up in the last day; This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever
knowis the Son, and beleeuis in him, sall have eternal life, and I sall
raise him up at the latter day. Whereby our sweet Savior brings solid
consolation, unto all his elect and faithful: to save them from succumbing in
these heavy tentations: wherewith Satan seeks by distrust and infidelity,
grievously to afflict and deiect the minds of Gods children. Like as he left
nothing vnassayd against JOB the pattern of patience: and that in the midst of
all the righteous servands of God, strenthened be his spirit: comforted him
self in the assured hope of this resurrection, saying: O that my words were now
writtin, o that they were written even in a buike, and graven with an Iron pen,
in Lead or in stone for ever: for I am sure that my redeemer lives, and he
sall stand the last on the earth, and thought after my skin, worms destroy
the body; yet sall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self sall see, and mine
eyes sal behold, and none other for me, though my reins be consumed within me.
Seeing then that all the hope and assurance of salvation, and all consolation,
in the utter extremity, is in this belief, of the blessed resurrection: let
us specially open this unto all the assaults and terrors, whereby Satan and
his foul spirits, seeks to subvert our minds, dash us with distrust, and cast
us in most dangerous despair: and let us have ane fixed faith, and unshaken
hope in him, wha is the author and purchaser to us of this last and greatest
benefit, quhilk crowns and perfytes all the rest, the resurrection of our
bodies, to the life everlasting.

Now, gif we wald know farther anent the suertie and manner of the resurrection,
and what sort of bodies sal be brought thereby from the dust, meet and able to
jnioy that spiritual kingdom of glory: Let us for the assurance of our
faith, and full instruction and comfort hear it out of the plain words of the
Apostle, out of the fifteenth Chapter, of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

But some men will say, how are the dead raised up? and with what body, cum
they forth? O fool, that quhilk thou saw is not quickened except it die:
and that quhilk thou saw, thou saw not that body quhilk sall be, but bare
corn: As it falls of wheat or of some other; but God gives it a body at his
pleasure, even to every seed his awin body. All flesh is not the same flesh;
but there is one flesh of of men, and an other flesh of beasts, and another of
fishes, and another of birds, there are also heavenly bodies, and earthly
bodies: but the glory of the heavenly is one, and of the earthly an other.
There is another glory of the Sun, and an other of the Moon, and another of
the Stars: and ane star differs from an other in glory; Sa also is the
resurrection of the dead: the body is sawin in corruption, and is raised in
incorruptio^, it is sawin in dishonor and raised in glory, it is sawin in
weakness and raised in power: It is sawin an natural body, and raised ane
spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body: as
it it also written. The first man ADAM, was made a living saul: and the last
ADAM was made quickening Spirit: how be it, that was not first, quhilk is
spiritual, but that quhilk is natural: and afterward that quhilk is
spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthly: the second man, is of the
Lord from heven: as is the earthly, sik are they that are earthly, and as is
the heavenly, sik are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the
Image of the earthly, so sall we bear the Image of the heavenly. This say I
brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nether does
corruption, inherit incorruption. Behold I show you a secret thing: we sall
not al sleep, but we sal al be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trumpet: for the trumpet sall blow, and the dead sal be raised
up incorruptible, and we sal be changed: for this corruptible, must put on
incorruption: and this mortal, must put on immortality. So when this
corruptible, hes put on incorruption, and this mortal, hes put on
immortality, then sal this saying, that is written be brought to pass, Death
is swallowed up in victory, o death where is thy sting! o grave where is thy
victory! The sting of deatb is sin, and the strength of sin is the law:
but thanks be to God, who hes given victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast and immovable, abound always in
the work of the Lord: for as meikle as ye know, that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

Then to conclude, the verity of this resurrection of Christ hes wrought this
far, that thereby the victory and triumph obtained, over death, in the very
dark and strongest dungeon theirof, the grave; no Christian should doubt of
perfect salvation of body and saull; but may have a firm and unshaken hope,
that all sall be perfited in him, quhilk are expressed and done by his Christ,
for his sake. So here is the stay and solid foundation of our faith, grounded
upon the death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus: whereby he has destroyed
the force of death, and plucked away the sting thereof: quhilk turned us away
from God, and cast us away from utter danger of wrack and destruction. Sen we
have therefore obtained so great and so sure felicity, be the death and
resurrection of our Savior. Let us not suffer our selves to be carried away
with any doubting, or wandering error: but let us with all our maine prease, to
enjoy the use and fruits of so great a good: and let us fix the eyes of our
faith upon hie, wha hes promised us all this in Christ: wha is loving, true,
eternal, and almighty: and therefore, neither can nor will disappoynt us,
seeing that of his singular favor and mercy, be his Christ, raised from the
dead: he hes regenerated us in a lively hope, and hes restored us to a life,
free from all danger of death, and has consigned to us an inheritance
immortal: forgiving us all our sins; and blotting away all handwrits and
obligatories theirof, that was against us.

The remembrance theirof, should always walk before the eyes of our minds;
namely, when we are to enter into this last conflict and battle: wherein
detesting all the sins of our bypast life: Let us open to Satan, death,
sin, and hell, the infinite mercy of God the Father, by faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ: whereby salvation certainly prepared, is set before us with stretched
out arms, to meet and embrace us. So this faith and assurance of the promised
mercy and life: infused in our hearts, be the haly spirit, is to be cherished
and stirred up in us be all means, that throw the merit of the perfect
mediator, we may confidently call upon him, Abba dear Father. Feeling that
spirit of adoption, always assuring our spirit, that he is our Father in
Christ, and we are his dearly redeemed Children, be that ransom of his
precious blood: and that this our father hes given us to his Christ, s^ that no
power is able to take us out of his hand, or stop us from entering into his
rest: persuading us, that neither life nor death, principality nor power:
heigh, nor low, thing present, nor to come: nor na other, is able to separate
us from the love of our gracious father in Jesus: So this spirit, is the
earnest of our inheritance, putting us even presently in possession thereof: be
an assured and unshaken hope: thereby, lifting us up, and conforting us, he
remooues all trembling and terror from our conscience, and makes us to embrace
the favor and merciful presence of our God, for the certain receaving of that
redemption and reconciliatio^, offered always be him unto us in Christ Jesus;
whom he hes proponed, a sure propitiation and atonement be faith in his
blood: whereby, being justified, we find rest and a pacified conscience; a
quiet and secure mind, in sik sort, that all diffidence and desperation being
shaken off, we conceive an assured hope of the resurrection, and glorious
immortality: And doubting nathing of that perfect joye and salvation purchased,
we gladly resolve, and are weil contented to remove and flit from this
misery, to that felicity everlasting, and earnestly desire with all our
hearts, to change this wandering Pilgrimage: with that heavenly and eternal
habitation, where we sall find the unchangeable fruition of euerstanding
pleasures: in the glorious kingdom of our Christ, who hes prepared it for us,
gone and taken possession theirof in our name and nature before us, and sall
send his blessed Angels, to transport and take us thereto. Come Lord Jesus;
Even cum Lord Jesus, hasten Lord and tarry not.

Nomb. 23. 10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be
like his.
FINIS.
COME LORD JESUS.
COme Christ our king, come we thee pray,
Without in any mair delay,
We lang to see thee on that day
appeir in majesty.
When all before thee sall compeir,
That live'd on earth, both far and neir,
Or sall be fund remaining heir
when all deid, sall thee sie.
Send forth thy trumpetters to sound,
Our lands allarum, that may wound,
Thy haters hearts, and sik confound:
As wald thee never know.
And gather hame, thine awin elect,
That na contagion theme infect,
Make joyfully in all respect,
That day for theme to dawe
That man of sin is manifest,
That now thy Kirk hes long oppressed,
Will thou not haist to give her rest,
From cruel violence.
Sall aye the proud blaspheme thy name,
And put thy Gospel unto shame,
Come Lord and render unto them,
Eternal recompense.
And then when thou sall come in glore,
And thine Archangell thee before,
Thins awin Elect for to decore,
With everlasting joy.
When thou our Bridegroom sall appeir,
Convoyed with thy friends sa deir,
And with these Virgins wise and cleir,
That ever sall enjoy.
The prefence of thy shining face,
And drink the living streams of grace,
That flowis through that pleasand place,
Of heavenly Paradise.
Make us our Spouse to be prepart,
Into the Lampis of our heart,
With that may precious oil insart,
Of Faith as Virgins wise.
Array us with that comely weid,
our wedding Garment wonder guide,
Thy Justice conqueist be thy bluid,
And merits every way.
That we may meet thee gracious,
Our Bridegroom and our heavenly Spous,
And in thy Chalmer glorious,
With thee may rest for ay.
Where all kind dainties deirly dight,
All pleasure joy and seemly sight,
Thy countenance that schines sa bright,
As na tongue can record.
Where thy Redeemd makes melody,
Thy Martyrs ane sweit harmony,
Where Angels sings continually,
To thee all praise O Lord.
Even so, Come Lord Jesus.
THE MANNER OF THE sickness and departure, of IEAN D' ALBRET Queen of NAVARR,
wherein every Christian may see and learn the practice of the former doctrine,
that is, the plain and pleasant passage, from this misery to the life
everlasting.
Translated out of French in Scettes.
IN the year of God, 1572. The peace the third time being sworn and concluded
between Charles the nynt, King of France, and the Protestants, for the mair
sure confirmation thereof, that bluddie marriage was appointed to be, betwixt
the Kings sister, and the King of Navarr. After the peace sworn, and all
agreed upon concerning the marriage: In the beginning of May, King Charles
prayed Iean D' Albret Queen of Navarr, and mother to the young King that was
to be married to come to Paris, to advise and provide for sik things, as were
necessary for the marriage, according to the dignity and greatness of the
matter: The quhilk she yielded unto, and taking journey about the sixth of May,
she arrived at Paris the 15. of the same Month, and began to make diverse
walks to and fro, throughout the City, to the houses and booths of the
Merchants and craftismen, to find out sik things as were meet for the day of
the solemnity; als weil concerning the wedding garments, and sik things as
she purposed to propyne, as other things proper and needful.

The Queen, Mother of FRANCE, KATHERINE de Medices, seeing a great fish fanged
in her net, wald not slip the occasioun: She hated extremely the Queen of
Navarr, for she had known long before her notable spirit, and what a Mother
she had been among the Protestants: so she thought gif, she should let her
live, after that all the rest were massacred, she could not eschew a new
hinder of her interprise; and to slay her among the rest that were to be
murdered thereafter, under pretense of the quarrel betwixt the house of Guise
and Chastillion, she saw not a sufficient cause to lay the fault on the
Guisians, quha had no thing to do with the Queen of Navarr: Also she was out
of all hope to make the King of Navar her son in law, so long as his Mother
lived: quha being wise and of a good spirit culd perceive her craft, and make
all to turn in smoke: wherefore she hes recourse to ane Master Renney, her
entertained poysoner, upon set pension and wages; quha had anes of before
presented to the vmquhile Prince of Condie, a perfumed impoysoned apple, quhilk
was discovered to be so, be the experience proven of a dog, and be the
danger that the Princes Surgeon was into, be smelling of the apple over
neir. This Renney, selling his drugs and perfumed colors, and other wares to
the Queen of Navarr; fand the moyen, finely to impoyson her be a pair of
perfumed gloves, quhilk the Queen caught for her awin present use, So manifest
it was, that the same Renney vaunted himself thereafter of his vassaledge, and
durst very weill say, that he held the same Pageant to play to three or four
mo, that feared little sik fashions. So then on wednesday, the 4. of June, she
falls down sick in her bed of a continual fever; the cause whereof, as
Mediciners meined it, was a corruption in her pulmons, whereof be process of
time, a postume had sprung; the quhilks being moved and irritat be the great
heat that then was, and extraordinary travel that she took, kendled up in
her that fever, whereof in five days thereafter she dyed, to the great regrate
of them of the Religion, and joy of the secret bludy counsel: yet in very
deed, the cause of her deadly disease was in her bean, wroght by the force of
the poison, drawn in by her smelling. Now because that in her sickness and
death, she declared by what spirit she was guided; we have thought good to set
down a short discourse thereof, quhilk may be a pattern and example to all
good Christians to follow; that they may happily end this miserable
pilgrimage, and enter into that heavenly habitation.

So then the said Queen of Navarr, finding her self pressed with the evil,
and that so meikle the mair as the Mediciners were diligent to relieve her,
with the quhilks, the Queen mother wanted not her secreet dealing: she
perceived that it behoved her to go into another Cuntrie; and therefore she
prepared her self to receive glaidly at the hands of God, what it pleased him
to dispone, and so resolved her self constantly to die, craving ever
instantly, that she should not be left destitute of that, quhilk all her life
time she had esteemed most precious; to wit, the consolation of the word of
God, with continual prayer; conform to that quhilk James commands, that the
sick should call for the Elders of the Kirk, to the end, they might pray to God
for them; seeing the prayer of the just is of great force and effect.

Following this advertisement, they ceased not thereafter to solist her, to
take good courage; and to put inteirlie her trust and assurance in God, as in
him quha was the author of her life, and had power to preserve the samin. But
namely, on a certain day, the minister quhilk came to comfort her, declared to
her, be many testimonies of scripture, that it behooved Christians in all things
to conform themselves to the will of God; because he is the Father of the
faithful: and for that cause, crosses and chastisements should be suffered
patiently; seeing they are laid on by their Father for their weill and
salvation: howbeit, at some times, the rigor of afflictions, appears to the
flesh to be sik; that we imagine na other thing, but God to be enarmed against
us in wrath utterly to destroy us: yet we man considder, that as he is just,
he dois nothing in that but justly: and being our Father, he hes special
respect to our weilfare: that he is nothing like the Tyrants, that takes
pleasure in tormenting and troubling their subjects without reason; but makes
all to serve for the comfort and edification of his Elect: whereunto she
answered, that she took all things from the hand of God, whom she
acknowledged to be her Father; declaring mairover, that she never feared the
dead, so far was she from murmuring or grudging against God: notwithstanding
the pains quhilk she endured, knowing that he dois nothing but that quhilk is
good and right; so that she was certainly persuaded, that al should work for her
weil and comfort.

The Minister continuing his purpose, adjoined; that it behoved to search out
the cause of sickness some other way than the Mediciners are accustomed to do;
quhilk ever respects, either the corruption of the humors, the hurt or offense
of the noble parts of the body, or some other natural cause: for albeit the
ordinary grounds of sicknesses be there, and sik be the second causes of them;
yet we man go fordward to the first cause, even toward God, quha dispones
upon his creatures according to his good pleasure; quha by striking makes the
wound, and syne applies the plaster thereto: Therefore it was, he to whom she
should address her self by prayer to find relief of her sickness and perfect
deliverance, to whom it were an easy matter to restore her to health again,
gif so it were his good pleasure.

To this she made answer, that she depended on nathing, save on his only
providence, and that she knew very well, that it appertained to him allanerlie,
to dispose on all things; and therefore she earnestly desired his Majesty,
that he wald grant her sa far as he knew to be good and necessary for her,
as well anent her bodily health, as her salvation: and nevertheless sayis she,
This present life for just causes, is very noisome to me; for the miseries that
I have sustained in it sen my young age, and namly, because I live not without
offending my dear Father daily, with whom I wish to be with all my heart.

The minister replied, that the Pagans had taken consolation in death, in that
it was a moyen to be delivered from the evils of this world, but Christians
ought to go farther: to wit, in consideration that by death, we are not only
exemed from their present miseries, but also that thereby, we begin to enter in
possession of a better life, quhilk is the life eternal; where God hes
prepared for us ane unspeakable felicity, by Jesus Christ, his Son: even as
he himself had taught saying: That it is the will of the Father, that
whosoever believes in the Son, should have eternal life: and nevertheless,
lang life for as miserable as it is, ceases not to be a blessing of God,
seeing he had promised it as a testimony of his favor, to the keepers of his
law, and maireover, in sa far as we serve in this life, to his glory: it
should be a singular honor, and taken of his good will, to have it continued: as
in him, whom a Prince wald a lang time employ in his service: because he had
fund him faithful, not for a day or two, but for many yers. For this cause,
she should pray him instantly, that gif it were his will to employ her farther in
this life, for the furtherance and increase of his truth: and it wald please
him to accompany her with health and good disposition; to the end, that
recovering new forces, she might encourage her self to go forward to the end
in her course, meikle mair virtuously then ever of before.

Where upon she protested, that her life was of small avayll in her eyes, for
any particular respect of her awin: in so far as she ceased not continvallie
to offend God in this flesh: But she regarded chiefly the comforts, weilfare,
of the Kirk of God upon earth: Whereunto gif her life may serve, she wald
esteem it somewhat worth the lasting. Also, that she had some regard unto the
tender age of her children, quhilk God had given unto her; fearing to see them
want her presence, in their so base age: yet nevertheles (sayis she,) I am
assured that God will steir up good instruments, for the weil and comfort of his
kirk: and will also be a father and protector to my Children, as he hes been
unto me in my greatest afflictions; in sik sort, that I remit it wholly to his
providence to see thereunto.

The Minister said unto her, that he praised God to see her so assured and
resolved in his providence; praying her to continue therein, as a thing quhilk
was a good and assured mark of her faith, and that the good Patriarchs in
times past had done so, leaving the special care of their posterity in the
hands of God, as might be seen in Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob; and the blessing
quhilk they wished to their awin: always it was very requisite that she should
choose some persons of good life and doctrine, quhilk might continue in these
young Princes, the seed of Piety, quhilk she had sawin in them with so great
travel and cares, hoping that her faith and constancy in the true service of
God, should be unto them an example of perpetual recommendation, to follow and
imitate all the days of their life: like as also it was not liklie, yea almost
incredible, but that they should ever have a feeling remembrance of these good
and halie instructions, quhilk they had so often heard, as weill of her awin
mouth, as of these whom she had employed to fashion and accustom them to
follow honesty and virtue.

And because that thereafter she declared that she had na fear of death;
saying, it was a passage, through the quhilk all flesh should resolve themselves
to go. The Minister proposed unto her, that so far should it be from
Christians to fear death, that they should be assured never to dye, in respect
of the saying of Christ, Whosoever believes in me sall live eternally. In sa
meikle as death, is not properly a death unto the faithful, but a sleep; as it
is often times sa termed in Scripture. Seeing Jesus Christ for them hes
conquessed it, and led it in triumph, so that we may cry out with Saint P A V
L, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? She was also
often admonished by him, to acknowledge and confess her faults before God;
telling her, that sickness was the way to death, and death was the reward of
sin: therefore this chastisement should teach her in earnest, how far she
was detfull to Gods justice; not only by the fall of the first man, in the
quhilk she was involved with vthers; but also by her own proper of sin,
seeing the best in the world is but a pure miserable sinner; and that gif God
wald punish us according to our sins, we culd look for nothing but death and
everlasting condemnation.

At this purpose, she began to lift up her hands, join them together, and
look steadfastly with her eyes toward the Heaven: saying, she confessed in very
truth, that she had committed offenses without number; yea, and more then ane
culd express; but she hoped that God should be merciful to her, through her
Savior Jesus Christ, quha had suffered for her sins, and risen again for
her justification; in whom she had reposed her whole confidence for salvation.

This gave occasion to the Minister, to discourse at greater length, upon the
assurance quhilk she should have to obtain the effect of the mercy of God,
seeing that Jesus Christ had come in the world to save such, as acknowledge
themselves sinners, as he himself had sufficiently protested; saying, that he
did as the mediciners, quha goes not to visit the whole, as not having need of
his help, but the sick and diseased: and in like manner, that he was presented
and offered with all his goodness and benefits to them, that acknowledged
themselves empty and void of all goodness: of the quhilk thing, she should sa
meikle the mair be assured, as she had ane inward testimony of the spirit in
her conscience, causing her to cry Abba, deir Father; as also her faith was no
other thing, but ane assurance of the favor and good will of God, manifested
to her in his Son Jesus Christ; so that she might say with the Apostle, I am
persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, principalities, nor powers,
nor things present, nor things to come, nor heigh, nor deep, nor na other
creature, should be able to separate us from the love of God, quhilk is in Christ
Jesus the Lord.

Now because, that after this, the Minister kept silence, fearing to annoy
her with over long discourse, because the Mediciners had not thought it good
that she should speak meikle; she on the contrary, prayed him earnestly to
insist in talking to her of salvation and the life eternal, adding thereunto,
that sen she came to Paris, she had been negligent enough of her duty, in
hearing of the word of God, for the quhilk she was grieved: yet for the
present, sayis she, I find my self greatly eased and comforted be the same,
in this great extremity.

Upon the quhilk desire, the Minister set forth the felicity of these happy
people, quha in the hevens enjoyed the presence of their God, and of all good
everlasting: the quhilk was so greatly excellent, that the Scripture willing to
painte it forth unto us, says: That the eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard, neither could it enter into the heart of man, to considder what God has
laid up for his own. There he added thereunto this similitude, that even as a
potent and magnifick rich King, willing to honor greatly some stranger, he
shows him his Court, his Princes, his Estates, his storehouses, and his most
precious Jewels, he intertaines him delicately, he feeds his eyes with
pleasant spectacles, his ears with sweet music, his taste and smelling with
fragrant odours, etc. Even so, God wald some day display and lay open his
Glory and Majesty; yea, even all his treasures unto his Elect and Faithful:
even then, when he sall retire them from this misery unto himself, in his
heavenly Kingdom of glory; where he sall highly honor them, and decore them
with Light, incorruption, and immortality. Wherefore, seeing that sik was the
felicity of the happy and glorified, she should not greatly care to quyte the
world, in sa far, as for ane earthly Realm, quhilk she left, she should inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven: and for goods and riches corruptible, she should enjoye
for ever sik, as culd not wither nor pass away: and thereafter he addressed
himself particularly to her, demanding of her, gif she believed that Jesus
Christ was her Savior, quha had by his bluid made a purgation for all her
sins.

To the quhilk she answered; Yes verily, I certainly believe, that he is my
only Savior and Mediator, and hopes for help no where else, but only by him:
knowing that he hes satisfied for my sins abundantly; and I am assured, that
God will be merciful unto me, for my Christ his sake, according to his
promises.

Behold a pairt of the good and holy purposes, quhilk she did use a three or
four days of her sickness: the quhilk also both before and thereafter, she
ceased not continually to utter; sometimes with great sighs and sobbes, in a
most affectionate and mooving manner; testifying the great desire and hope that
she had to go to the Lord: saying oftentimes these words, O my God and Father,
deliver me from this body of sin, and from the miseries of this life, that I
offend thee no mair; and that I may enjoy the felicity quhilk thou hes
promised.

Now not only did she daily declare the godliness of her heart, be sa good
purposes: but also therewithal, did show a face and countenance, resolved,
assured, and joyful, according as the rigor of her sickness might suffer,
quhilk testified sufficiently, that the fear of death did no wise shake or
brangill the firmness of her faith. At the end of all the conferences for
consolation, they were ever accustomed to make a Prayer to God, that it walde
please his Majesty to accompany him with a constant patience, and to show his
mercy and truth upon her; of the quhilk prayer, it is not by purpose to
insert, heir the sum.

O Lord our Cod, we acknowledge before thy face, that we are unworthy of thy
great mercy, because of our jniquities: and yet we merit not only not to be
heard, but also to be cast away from thy face in utter confusion: nevertheles,
seeing thou hes promised to hear us: we humbly beseech thee to forgive us
freely all our sins, and to cloth us with the obedience and justice of thy
Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that in him, we may be acceptable in
thy sight. O Lord, we acknowledge, that all our afflictions cum fra thine hand,
wha art a righteous Judge, and whom we have continvallie provoked to wrath,
by infinite vices, and rebellious, quhilk ar in us: whose life answers nawise to
the perfect obedience, quhilk thou requires of us, be the right of the law, the
quhilk, alas we cease not always to transgress: And this is it, quhilk makes
us to cast down our selves at this present, to be humbled before thy
majesty, and to acknowledge in earnest, from the very bottom of our hearts,
our perverse misery: and that all the evil, quhilk we endure in this vale of
sorrow, proceeds of this spring; that we have not given unto thee a right and
true obedience: but hes gone astray from thy paths; Yet so it is Lord, that
there is mercy with thee, seeing thou art our father: and that thou will not the
death of a sinner: but that he should turn to thee and live. This is the cause,
why we present our selves, before the throne of thy grace: with confidence to
obtain this great mercy: whereof, thou hes at all times made promise to our
fathers, that it may please thee to accept the merit of Jesus Christ, thy Son
our Lord, for entire and perfect satisfaction of our iniquities: and thou
thereby, being appeased, we may find some relief of our evils. The quhilk
request, as thou art God of all mercy and compassion, we make specially, for
them that are under the correction of thy wand, assaulted with diverse
calamities; and namely, for the Queen here present, stricken with a very great
Malady: to the intent, that as it hes pleased thee to afflict her justly for
her faults, as she dois acknowledge with us: sa it wald please thee, in
forgiueing the same to her, for the love of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ: to
make this chastisement profitable for her amendment and ours: Above all, to
give unto her a taste and certain assurance of these heavenly gudis: to the end
she may mair easily bear and endure the bitterness of that cup, quhilk thou
hes powered out to her: and that we only desire thy presence may swallow up
all the torments of this misery: and make her to forget all the greatness and
magnificence of the world: knowing that they are nothing in respect of these,
quhilk thou hes prepared for her. In the mean time, give her patience in her
sickness, in sa far as thou knowis: that howbeit, the spirit be ready, yet the
flesh is heavy, fragill, and full of incredulity, to the end, that she
receiving it, as from the hand of her Father, she may the mair cherafullie,
conform her self to thy holy will. And for sameikle, Lord, as thou hes used
her hither-tils, for the advancement of thy glory, and for the defense of thy
pure people, we earnestly beseik thee to restore her again to her former
health: to the intent, that by this default, the warke, that thou hes sa
excellently begun be her, remain not vnperfited: but that this deliverance
may make her hereafter to take new courage, and employ her self in the samin
better, especially, for the education and instruction of the Children, quhilk
thou hes given her. But Lord, gif so it sal please thee to call upon her, we
will not repine against thy haly will: but we pray thee to confirm her mair
and mair, in the knawledge and profession of thy halie Evangell: and of the
assurance of that salvation, quhilk thou hes given her, be faith in Jesus
Christ, showing the samin be the in-calling and sanctifying of thy haly name,
unto her last birth. And as to us that are hear about her in health, make us to
understand the shortness and incertude of this life: to the end, we may look as
becoms us, in this mirror: and see how the greatest in this world, are subject
to the same calamities, that the pure-anis ar to the end, that hereafter we may
bestow the rest of our days, on nothing else, but on thy honor and service:
knawing that nothing remayns steadfast save only that, and the recompense quhilk
thou in mercy hes bestowed thereupon: and that through the only merits, death,
and Passion of thy Son, Jesus Christ, our Advocate and Mediator. Amen.

Now, this is almost the sum of the Prayer: the time whereof, while it was
directed to God, she ceased not to lift up her eyes firmly to the heavens:
joining some times her hands togeither, and oftentimes sighing: Namely, when
mension made of the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ, shown to poor
sinners; in sik sort, that there was none present, but might perceive plainly,
that she followed in her heart, the words quhilk wear pronounced in her
hearing. And sa did constantly continue in this resolution, to go to God all the time that she lay bedfast: taking great pleasure in the haly and Christian
declaration, quhilk was ordinarily made before her, be many godly men, quhilk
came to visit her, giving a manifest and solemn testification of the assurance
to come, and hope quhilk she had to be saved: and that be the good and haly
purposes, quhilk she did often hald and interteine, quhilk for shortness sake
are omitted.

And albeit, the dolours quhilk she felt were vehement: yet so was it, that
none ever heard an impatient word escape out of her mouth: yea, not sa meikle,
as be the manner of a complaynt: like as, beside and attowre her domestickes,
the Queen mother her self, the Mounsieur, and Madame, the brother and sister
of the King, quhilk came sometime to visit her, can bear witness.

Now, gif God in the midst of her greatest travels and pains, had made her
to feel an new life: as there is no malady so cruel, quhilk hes not some
intermission and vexation: she gave plainly to understand, that she was not
unwilling to recover her former health, gif it wald please God to grant it.
Refused nothing that the mediciners appointed her to take for that effect: and
again, when her sickness did increase, she brake no thing off of her
courage, but showed her self to be armed with an invincible constancy, to
sustain the proof of the last combat, in preparing her self joyfullie to the
death.

And when she saw her women, and and mayden-servants weiping about her bed,
she rebuked them incontinent, showing them that they should not mourn nor lament
for her, but thank God, wha was calling her to a better life: and to that
heaven of health and salvation, whereunto she had contended: only regarding
that she had no time to recompense them, and many others of her domestikes,
that had awayted faithfully, and weil on her service: excusing her self at
their hands thereanent, that it was not for lack of good will, but for want of
time, being taken from them in that Malady, yet nevertheless, she sulde take
the best order therewith, that she might.

As to the rest, it were lang to recite, all the good and haly advertiseme^ts,
instructions, and admonitions, quhilk she gave to her Dame of honor,
Governor to Madam the Princess: that she should repeat the samin again to
her, and hald her in remembrance thereof, when she should come to age, exhorting
her by the said Dame of honor, to show her self firm and constant, in the
true service of God; and that she should insist with her incessantly for the
samin effect, taking heed to the good Counsel of Mounsieur the Prince of
Navarre her brother, as also of the woman quhilk she had appointed for her
governor: And to follow the good examples and instructions, quhilk had been
given her in time bypast, committing, and resigning her over in the protection
of God: with many informatio^s quhilk needs not be exte^ded any farther

In the end, feeling her self grown weak, she caused make her last testament
and latter will: in the quhilk, she recommended above all things unto her
Children, the fear and honor of God, exhorting them to persevere constantly
in the profession of the Evangell, in the quhilk they were instructed from
their birth. Appointing namely, that Madame the Princes her daughter, should be
ever nurished and instructed in the samin: by the four Dames quhilk she had
appointed her for this effect; And that into the Country of Bearne, till she
cumming to age; God should raise up some Prince of the samin Religion, to take
her in Marriage, and that be the Counsel and conduct of Mounsieur, the
Cardinal of Bourbone,and Mounsieur GASPAR Count of Colignie, Admiral of
France: the quhilk she nominated and established executors of her said
testament, This Testament received by the notars, and red over twice before
her, on Sunday the 8. of June, quhilk was the day before her death; a little
after she caused the Minister be called to her, and having mair viuely
apprehended the feeling of death, then of before, she commanded him to speak
at length, of the tentations, be the quhilk Satan is accustomed to assault the
faith of the chosen of God, at the extreamitie of death. So then the Minister
began and show, that in very deed, that was the hour in the quhilk Satan
the adversary of man's salvation, layis to the most rude and vehement
assaults: but even then, and at that time, inspecial dois the Lord increse and
redouble the virtue and force of his Spirit in his awin, to make the^ victorious
in that combat: and as to the tentations whereby he preases to bring them in
despair, he lays before their eyes the innumerable multitude of their sins
committed, and presents the samin discovered before them, that they may see the
turpitude, filthiness and pollution quhilk is therein. And on the other part, he
sets the justice of God, before the quhilk na thing can stand that is spoted or
unclean; whereof he inferres, that there is nathing to be looked for be the
sinner, but a horrible judgment and condemnation, but thereunto she should
oppone in the first part, even as DAVID dois in the 51. Psalm. In the multitude
of Gods mercies and compassions, quhilk in number exceeds far the multitude of
our sins. And howbeit, in respect of his justice, and the rygorous trial of
the samin: we confess that no Creature defiled with sin, can suffer the
samin, gif he sall be called to an account; Yet he knows, that God will not
enter into judgment with them quhilk beleues in his Son: but imputes and
allows unto them the justice and obedience, perfited and accomplished be him,
the quhilk only is able to answer to his justice-Court: therefore also, in
the samin only, his elect hopes to stand before his face: and not be their awin
dignity or merit; For gif they sulde compeir before the throne of God, to
receive the judgment deserved, they should have no occasion, but wholilie to be
swallowed up in despair, so often as they looked to the justice of God: but when
they cast their eye on him, wha being the eternal Son of God, took the
nature of man upon him: and the same buir the pain quhilk was due to us: and
to discharge and free us therefra; then the justice of God not only affrayes
us nothing, but rather comforts and assures us; by this certain reason, that
seeing God is just, he will not receive nor crave the pains of an debt twice:
wherefore having received a perfect satisfaction of him, wha became our
cautioner and debtor, and wha hes made full payment for all our faults: he can
no-wise of his justice require the samin fra us of new again; and for the
strenthening of her faith therein, she should remember their sentences* Esa. 53.
That Christ's hes borne our sickness and dolours, that the correction of our
peace was laid on him, that by his wounds, we have health: we have erred and
failed: but the Lord hes laid on him the iniquity of us all. That he hes
paid that quhilk he took not: that he is our peace and appointment toward
God: that he is that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.
And many other sentences quhilk the Ministers added here unto; continving the
purpose lang enough, for satisfying of the said victorious Princess demand,
and craving strength against the tentation of Satan, whereby he preasses in
time of extremity to bring and turn vpside-down the faith of the faithful: and
in the end he concluded, that the justice of God should no wise be fearful, to
sik to whom Christ is made be God, justice, sanctification and redemption, and
wha acknowledges the same Jesus Christ, wha knew no sin, was made sin: that
is to say, an oblation for sin for us, that we might be the righteousness of
God in him.

He added thereunto, that these things were not spoken of all men
jndifferently, but of them only wha believed in the Son of God, wha reposes
themselves wholly on the merit of his death, unto whom the merit is
sufficient, for all the mean of their salvation; And wha contented them selves
with that only. And upon that he asked her, gif she had altogether her
confidence reposed on Jesus Christ, Crucified for her sins, and raised again
for her justification. To the quhilk, the Princess having answered, that she
looked not for health, justice or life, by any other way or mean: but
allanerlie, by her savior Jesus Christ: and was assured that his merit was
abundantly sufficient for the satisfaction and ransom of her sins: although
they were innumerable. The Minister there assured her that she could not enter
in condemnation: but was already passed from death to life; and took occasion
thereof, to enter again on that purpose, that she had no cause now to fear the
throne of of Gods justice, quhilk was become to her a throne of grace and
mercy: and that the hour of death should be greatumly wissed and desired be her,
seeing in culd be no other thing unto her, but an entresse of a better life:
and the hour wherein the Lord stretching out his arms, should embrace her with
the samin, that she should continually meditate this excellent saying. Blessed
are they that dies in the Lord, so sayis the spirit, for they rest from their
labors That that was the hour whereunto she should enjoy the visible society
of Christ her spouse, and should be in company with the Angels and heavenly
spirits: with the haly Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, with our godly
brethren, friends, and acquayntance: with whom she had comfort and joy in her
life time, to posses with them the same felicity and glory.

Yet the Minister going forward, and willing yet to sound nearer, gif she was
willing to leave this life without grudge or regrate: He spoke their words unto
her, weil then Madame, gif it sall please God to put an end by this sickness,
unto your earthly Pilgrimage, and call you unto himself, as there is great
appearance, wald ye not gladly go to him. To the quhilk, this excellent
Princess, with great courage and magnanimity: but any astonishment, answered;
yea that I assure you: The Minister then said, look up then Madame, with the
eyes of faith, on Jesus Christ, the great Savior, that sitting at the right
hand of the Father, stretching forth his arm to receive you thither: Will you
not go unto him? Yes I assure you (sayis she) with a very good will: and a far
better then ever I remained in the world; wherein I have seen nothing but
vanity. The Minister continued, not that purpose any langer, but demanded on
that, if she wald that prayer should be made, that many good folks quhilk were
there, might conjoyne their Prayers with hers: She answered, do so, and God
stre^then me to continue in prayer with you to the last breath. The Minister
then continved the Prayer lang enough: all the quhilk space, this Noble godly
Princess, declared a burning and vehement affection and service in calling to
God.

Wherefore, the Minister after the prayer, said unto her; that seeing in her so
many good and sure testimonies of Repentance and displeasure, quhilk she had of
the offenses committed by her against God, together with the assurance she had
of his mercy in Christ Jesus: he as Minister of the Evangell, and Ambassador
of the Son of God, in the name and authority of him, quha had put in his
mouth the word of reconciliation, assured her, that her sins were forgiven by
God, that she had obtained free pardone of them all from him, and that they
should never come again in count and reckoning before his judgment seat;
whereof she needed na mair to doubt, then gif the Son of God present in his
awin person said unto her, Daughter thy sins are forgiven thee: And for to
rander in this case, the puir affrayed conscience mair assured, Christ had
given to the Ministers of his word that authority, that unto all them to whom
they should forgive sins in the Earth, they should be forgiven in the Heavens;
and where they should lowse heir below, it should be lowsed above; and that
because the word whereby they utter the samin, is not the word of man, but of
God; having the same force, as if he had pronounced it himself: for so Christ
had said, They who hears you, hears me: whereupon he demanded the Princess,
gif she resaved gladly this so gracious a message of remission of al her
sins, and perfect reconciliation quhilk he brought unto her from God? Yea,
sayis she, with all my heart and saull I assure you; so that I find na hink nor
doubt thereof in my conscience, my gracious father be thanked quha sa hes
wroght in me by his good spirit. A little after these exhortations, the
Admiral being come to visit her, and with him ane other Minister, she heard
also this other a space lang enough, the Exhortation whereof, tended to the same
mark with the former, who also at the end of his Exhortation joined a prayer,
the quhilk also she heard with great zeal and affection, and requested the said
two Ministers to remain with her all that night in the Chamber, and not to go
away from her. The greatest part of that night was spent in comfortable
remembrances, encouragements, and consolations, quhilk was made be these two
Ministers ane after ane other: after the quhilk, she commanded to read unto
her some good and comfortable places of Scripture: Ane of the two Ministers
read unto her, from the 14. Chapter of JOHN, to the 18. That being done, the
prayer was made; after the quhilk, the Queen desired to repose a little, but
incontine^t thereafter, she commanded again to read. So the other Minister red
the 8. to the Romans. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 4. chap. verse. 16. to the 11. verse
of the 5. Chapter, and Psalms, 3. 16. 17. 18. 23. 25. 31. 39. 143. and last,
142. with other comfortable, and ardent prayers, meet for the affliction
wherein the Princess was: And having at last red the 31. Psalm, where DAVID
commended his spirit in the hands of God, protesting the assurance quhilk he
had, to be redeemed by the most true God; she commanded upon that to make the
prayer; and so she passed as is said, the greatest part of the night: during
all the quhilk time, and purposes, there culd none perceive, that she had any
regrate of this life: And that quhilk is mair, howbeit some days before she
fell sick, she had been very earnest to prepare some pompes and magnificences
to the Marriage of the King of Navarr her son, sik as she esteemed meet and
proper for the greatness of that alliance, whereinto she was entering: yet
nevertheles, (quhilk is a thing marvelous) fra the time that she fell sick, unto
the hour of her death; God made her so to forget sik things, that she never
appeared anes to mean and declare any thought or care of sik matters. This
night being sa employed and spent, by this godly Princess; on the Morn,
having always persevered to show and utter notable signs of godliness and
ardent faith, she passed from this misery to the life eternal; randring most
sweetly her spirit in the hand of the Lord Jesus, betwixt aucht and nine
hours in the morning, the 9. of June, the year. 1572. In the 44. year of her
age, the 6. day after she took sickness: She spoke very intelligiblie to the
utter hour of her death, and showed not only in these things quhilk concerned
the salvation of her saull, but also in all other affairs, a spirit and
courage as whole as ever she had in her life time.

FINIS.
CHRISTIANVS EGO.
Non ego sum men's, at Christi sum corpore servus*
Atque animo; seu fas vivere, sive moti.
Vitam morte sua mihi dat; mea crimina delens:
Et levat hostili libera colla jugo.
Servat ita, vt pilus haud pereat sine Patre volente;
Nil obsit, prosint omnia; vt inde salus
Stet mihi certa, Dei sic dictat Spiritus vltro,
Illi hinc dulce mihi vivere, dulce mori.
A. M.

The comfort of a Christian.
I Am not mine, but I am Christ's, in body and in spreit,
Gif that I live, or that I dye, his mercy thinks it meit:
For by his death he gives me life, and dois my sins deface,
And frees my neck from bondage yoke, of al my foes by grace:
He keeps me sa, that never a hair, can perish by his will,
That nathing hurts, but all dois help, and sa in safety still
I stand full sure: this dytes he spreit of God into my heart,
Therefore in Christ I sweetly live, and sweetly sall depart.
I. M.

The xxiij. Psalm to the tune of Solsequium.
THE Lord most high, I know will be, ane hird to me,
I cannot long have stresse, nor stand in need:
He makes my leare, in fields sa fear, that I but ceare,
Repose and at my pleasure safely feed.
He sweetly me convoyes, to pleasant Springs,
Where na thing me annoyes, but pleasure brings:
He gives my mind, peace in sik kind
That fear of foes, nor force, cannot me reaue,
By him I am lead, in perfect tread,
And for his name, he will me never leave.
Though I should stray, even day be day* in deadly way,
Yet wald I be aslurd, and fear none ill.
For why thy grace, in every place, dois me embrace,
Thy rod and Sheep hirds cruik, comforts me still.
In despite of my foe, my table grows*
Thou balmes my head with joye, my cup overflowes*
Kindness and grace, mercy and peace,
Sall follow me, for all my wretched days
Then endless joy, sall me convoy,
To heaven where I with thee sall be always.
I. M.

The Cxxi. Psalm paraphrased.
WHen I behold, These Montaines cold, Can I be bold,
To take my journey through this wilderness,
Wherein dois stand, on either hand, a bludy band.
To cut one off, with cruel craftines:
Here subtle Satan's slight, dois me assaill,
There his proud warldly might, thinks to prevaill:
In every place, with pleasant face,
The snares of sin besets me round about,
With poison sweit, to slay the spreit*
Conspyrit all to take my life but doubt.
Bot God is he, will succor me, and let me see,
His saving health, ay ready at command:
Even IEHOVA, that create a, both great and sma,
In Heaven and Air, and in the sea and Land,
Frette not then fearful heart, my breist within,
This God will take thy part, thy course to rinne:
He will thee guide, Thou sall not slide,
Thy feet sall steadfast stand in the right way,
He will thee keep, he will not sleep:
Nor suffer foes to catch thee as a pray.
The Lord dois keep, Israel his sheep, and will not sleep,
Beneath his shadow, thou sall safely ly,
Right sure and ferme, with his right arm, save thee from harm,
He sall, and all thy fearful foes defy:
The day hot, Suns offense, sall not thee grieve,
Nor cold Moons influence, by night thee mieue:
God of his grace, from his high place,
Sall save thee from all ill. In every way,
Thou goes about, both in and out,
He sall thee bless, and prosper now and ay.
I. M.

A Sonnet sounding a warning to die well.
SEN sa it is, that quhasoever tuik life,
Man be the death unto the same put end:
To pass thy course, out through this vale of strife
In holiness*. O Christian contend,
Stand still in awe, thy God for till offend.
Clieaue to thy Christ, with faith unfeignedly.
Repent thy sins, thy wicked life amend,
And daily think on death. That thou man die.
Set not thy heart on worldly vanity.
Whose pleasures are with pain sa dearly bought,
Yet press to play thy part with honesty,
And use this world, as gif thou used it naught.
Let ay this precept be thy Preacher plain,
Live heir to die, and die to live again.
I. M.

FINIS.

